<doc id="125320" wikidata="Q974693" url="?curid=125320" title="Italian Americans">
<text>Italian Americans () are Americans who have full or partial Italian ancestry. The largest concentrations of Italian Americans are in the urban Northeast and industrial Midwestern metropolitan areas, with significant communities also residing in many other major U.S. metropolitan areas.

Between 1820 and 2004, approximately 5.5 million Italians migrated to the United States during the Italian diaspora, in several distinct waves, with the greatest number arriving in the 20th century from Southern Italy. Initially, most single men, so-called birds of passage, sent remittance back to their families in Italy and then returned to Italy.

Immigration began to increase during the 1880s, when more than twice as many Italians immigrated than had in the five previous decades combined. Continuing from 1880 to 1914, the greatest surge of immigration brought more than 4 million Italians to the United States. The largest number of this wave came from Southern Italy, which at that time was largely agricultural and where much of the populace had been impoverished by centuries of foreign rule and heavy tax burdens. This period of large-scale immigration ended abruptly with the onset of World War I in August 1914. In the 1920s, 455,315 immigrants arrived. They came under the terms of the new quota-based immigration restrictions created by the Immigration Act of 1924. Italian-Americans had a significant influence to American visual arts, literature, cuisine, politics, sports, and music.

==History==
===Before 1880===

Italians in the United States before 1880 included a number of explorers, starting with Christopher Columbus, and a few small settlements.

====Age of Discovery and early settlement====
Italian navigators and explorers played a key role in the exploration and settlement of the Americas by Europeans. Genoese explorer Christopher Columbus ( ) completed four voyages across the Atlantic Ocean for the Catholic monarchs of Spain, opening the way for the widespread European exploration and colonization of the Americas.

Another Italian, John Cabot ( ), together with his son Sebastian, explored the eastern seaboard of North America for Henry VII in the early 16th century. In 1524, the Florentine explorer Giovanni da Verrazzano () was the first European to explore the Atlantic coast of North America between Florida and New Brunswick in 1524. The Italian explorer Amerigo Vespucci () first demonstrated in about 1501 that the New World was not Asia as initially conjectured but a different continent (America is named after him).

A number of Italian navigators and explorers in the employ of Spain and France were involved in exploring and mapping their territories and in establishing settlements, but their work did not lead to the permanent presence of Italians in America. In 1539, Marco da Nizza explored the territory that later became the states of Arizona and New Mexico.


The first Italian to be registered as residing in the area corresponding to the current United States was Pietro Cesare Alberti, commonly regarded as the first Italian American. Alberti was a Venetian seaman who, in 1635, settled in the Dutch colony of New Amsterdam, which would eventually become New York City.

A small wave of Protestants, known as Waldensians, immigrated during the 17th century. They were of French and northern Italian heritage (specifically Piedmontese), The first Waldensians began arriving around 1640, with the majority coming between 1654 and 1663. They spread out across what was then called New Netherland and what would become New York, New Jersey, and the Lower Delaware River regions. The total American Waldensian population that immigrated to New Netherland is currently unknown; however, a 1671 Dutch record indicates that in 1656 alone the Duchy of Savoy near Turin, Italy, had exiled 300 Waldensians because of their Protestant faith.

Enrico Tonti (Henri de Tonti), together with the French explorer René-Robert Cavelier, Sieur de La Salle, explored the Great Lakes region. De Tonti founded the first European settlement in Illinois in 1679 and in Arkansas in 1683, known as &quot;Poste de Arkansea&quot;, making him &quot;The Father of Arkansas.&quot; With LaSalle, he co-founded New Orleans and was governor of the Louisiana Territory for the next 20 years. His brother Alphonse de Tonty (Alfonso de Tonti), with French explorer Antoine de la Mothe Cadillac, was the co-founder of Detroit in 1701, and was its acting colonial governor for 12 years.

Spain and France were Catholic countries and sent many missionaries to convert the native American population. Included among these missionaries were numerous Italians. In 1519–25, Alessandro Geraldini was the first Catholic bishop in the Americas, at Santo Domingo. Father François-Joseph Bressani (Francesco Giuseppe Bressani) labored among the Algonquin and Huron peoples in the early 17th century. The southwest and California were explored and mapped by Italian Jesuit priest Eusebio Kino (Chino) in the late 17th and early 18th centuries. His statue, commissioned by the state of Arizona, is displayed in the United States Capitol Visitor Center.

The Taliaferro family (originally ), believed to have roots in Venice, was one of the First Families to settle Virginia. The Wythe House, a historic Georgian home built in Williamsburg, Virginia, in 1754, was designed by architect Richard Taliaferro for his son-in-law, American Founding Father George Wythe, who married Richard&#x27;s daughter Elizabeth Taliaferro. The elder Taliaferro designed much of Colonial Williamsburg, including the Governor&#x27;s Palace, the Capitol of the Colony of Virginia, and the President&#x27;s House at the College of William &amp; Mary.

Francesco Maria de Reggio, an Italian nobleman of the House of Este who served under the French as François Marie, Chevalier de Reggio, came to Louisiana in 1747 where King Louis XV appointed him Captain General of French Louisiana, until 1763. Scion of the de Reggios, a Louisiana Creole first family of St. Bernard Parish, Louisiana, Francesco Maria&#x27;s granddaughter Hélène Judith de Reggio would give birth to famed Confederate General P. G. T. Beauregard.

A colonial merchant, Francis Ferrari of Genoa, was naturalized as a citizen of Rhode Island in 1752. He died in 1753, and in his will speaks of Genoa, his ownership of three ships, a cargo of wine, and his wife Mary, who went on to own one of the oldest coffee houses in America, the Merchant Coffee House of New York on Wall Street at Water Street. Her Merchant Coffee House moved across Wall Street in 1772, retaining the same name and patronage.

====1776 to 1880====
This period saw a small stream of new arrivals from Italy. Some brought skills in agriculture and the making of glass, silk and wine, while others brought skills as musicians.

In 1773–1785, Filippo Mazzei, a physician, philosopher, diplomat, promoter of liberty, and author, was a close friend and confidant of Thomas Jefferson. He published a pamphlet containing the phrase, &quot;All men are by nature equally free and independent,&quot; which Jefferson incorporated essentially intact into the Declaration of Independence.

Italian Americans served in the American Revolutionary War both as soldiers and officers. Francesco Vigo aided the colonial forces of George Rogers Clark by serving as one of the foremost financiers of the Revolution in the frontier Northwest. Later, he was a co-founder of Vincennes University in Indiana.

After American independence, numerous political refugees arrived, most notably Giuseppe Avezzana, Alessandro Gavazzi, Silvio Pellico, Federico Confalonieri, and Eleuterio Felice Foresti. Giuseppe Garibaldi resided in the United States in 1850–51. At the invitation of Thomas Jefferson, Carlo Bellini became the first professor of modern languages at the College of William &amp; Mary, in the years 1779–1803.

In 1801, Philip Trajetta (Filippo Traetta) established the nation&#x27;s first conservatory of music in Boston, where, in the first half of the century, organist Charles Nolcini and conductor Louis Ostinelli were also active. In 1805, Thomas Jefferson recruited a group of musicians from Sicily to form a military band, later to become the nucleus of the U.S. Marine Band. The musicians included the young Venerando Pulizzi, who became the first Italian director of the band and served in this capacity from 1816 to 1827. Francesco Maria Scala, an Italian-born naturalized American citizen, was one of the most important and influential directors of the U.S. Marine Band, from 1855 to 1871, and was credited with the instrumental organization the band still maintains. Joseph Lucchesi, the third Italian leader of the U.S. Marine Band, served from 1844 to 1846. The first opera house in the country opened in 1833 in New York through the efforts of Lorenzo Da Ponte, Mozart&#x27;s former librettist, who had immigrated to America and had become the first professor of Italian at Columbia College in 1825.

During this period, Italian explorers continued to be active in the West. In 1789–91, Alessandro Malaspina mapped much of the west coast of the Americas, from Cape Horn to the Gulf of Alaska. In 1822–23, the headwater region of the Mississippi was explored by Giacomo Beltrami in the territory that was later to become Minnesota, which named a county in his honor.

Joseph Rosati was named the first Catholic bishop of St. Louis in 1824. In 1830–64, Samuel Mazzuchelli, a missionary and expert in Indian languages, ministered to European colonists and Native Americans in Wisconsin and Iowa for 34 years and, after his death, was declared Venerable by the Catholic Church. Father Charles Constantine Pise, a Jesuit, served as Chaplain of the Senate from 1832 to 1833, the only Catholic priest ever chosen to serve in this capacity.

In 1833, Lorenzo Da Ponte, formerly Mozart&#x27;s librettist and a naturalized U.S. citizen, founded the first opera house in the United States, the Italian Opera House in New York City, which was the predecessor of the New York Academy of Music and of the New York Metropolitan Opera. Missionaries of the Jesuit and Franciscan orders were active in many parts of America. Italian Jesuits founded numerous missions, schools, and two colleges in the west. Giovanni Nobili founded the Santa Clara College (now Santa Clara University) in 1851. The St. Ignatius Academy (now University of San Francisco) was established by Anthony Maraschi in 1855. The Italian Jesuits also laid the foundation for the winemaking industry that would later flourish in California. In the east, the Italian Franciscans founded hospitals, orphanages, schools, and St. Bonaventure College (now St. Bonaventure University), established by Pamfilo da Magliano in 1858.

In 1837, John Phinizy (Finizzi) became the mayor of Augusta, Georgia. Samuel Wilds Trotti of South Carolina was the first Italian American to serve in the U.S. Congress (a partial term, from December 17, 1842, to March 3, 1843). In 1849, Francesco de Casale began publishing the Italian American newspaper &quot;L&#x27;Eco d&#x27;Italia&quot; in New York, the first of many to eventually follow. In 1848, Francis Ramacciotti, piano string inventor and manufacturer, immigrated to the U.S. from Tuscany.

Beginning in 1863, Italian immigrants were one of the principal groups of unskilled laborers, along with the Irish, that built the Transcontinental Railroad west from Omaha, Nebraska. In 1866, Constantino Brumidi completed the frescoed interior of the United States Capitol dome in Washington, D.C., and spent the rest of his life executing still other artworks to beautify the Capitol. The first Columbus Day celebration was organized by Italian Americans in New York City on October 12, 1866.
Giovanni Martino or Giovanni Martini, also known as John Martin, was a soldier and trumpeter who served both in Italy with Giuseppe Garibaldi and in the United States Army, famously in the 7th Cavalry Regiment under George Armstrong Custer. He was the only survivor from Custer&#x27;s company at the Battle of the Little Bighorn.

An immigrant, Antonio Meucci, brought with him a concept for the telephone. He is credited by many researchers with being the first to demonstrate the principle of the telephone in a patent caveat he submitted to the U.S. Patent Office in 1871; however, considerable controversy existed relative to the priority of invention, with Alexander Graham Bell also being accorded this distinction. (In 2002, the U.S. House of Representatives passed a resolution on Meucci (H.R. 269) declaring that &quot;his work in the invention of the telephone should be acknowledged.&quot;)

During this period, Italian Americans established a number of institutions of higher learning. Las Vegas College (now Regis University) was established by a group of exiled Italian Jesuits in 1877 in Las Vegas, New Mexico. The Jesuit Giuseppe Cataldo, founded Gonzaga College (now Gonzaga University) in Spokane, Washington in 1887. In 1886, Rabbi Sabato Morais, a Jewish Italian immigrant, was one of the founders and first president of the Jewish Theological Seminary of America in New York. Also during this period, there was a growing presence of Italian Americans in higher education. Vincenzo Botta was a distinguished professor of Italian at New York University from 1856 to 1894, and Gaetano Lanza was a professor of mechanical engineering at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology for over 40 years, beginning in 1871.

Anthony Ghio became the mayor of Texarkana, Texas in 1880. Francis B. Spinola, the first Italian American to be elected to the United States House of Representatives, served as a representative from New York from 1887 to 1891. He also served as a general in the Union Army during the American Civil War. Following the war, Spinola was a banker and insurance agent and became an influential figure among the rapidly growing Italian immigrant community in the New York City area. He was again a member of the State Assembly (New York Co., 16th D.) in 1877, 1881, and 1883.

====Civil War ====
 
Between 5,000 and 10,000 Italian Americans fought in the American Civil War. The great majority of Italian Americans, for both demographic and ideological reasons, served in the Union Army (including generals Edward Ferrero and Francis B. Spinola). Some Americans of Italian descent from the disbanded Army of the Two Sicilies, which was defeated by Giuseppe Garibaldi after the Expedition of the Thousand, fought in the Confederate Army. They included Confederate generals William B. Taliaferro (of English-American and Anglo-Italian descent) and P. G. T. Beauregard. Six Italian Americans received the Medal of Honor during the war, including Colonel Luigi Palma di Cesnola, who later became the first director of the Metropolitan Museum of Arts in New York (1879–1904). 

The Garibaldi Guard recruited volunteers for the Union Army from Italy and other European countries to form the 39th New York Infantry. At the outbreak of the American Civil War, Giuseppe Garibaldi was a very popular figure. The 39th New York Volunteer Infantry Regiment, with 350 Italian members, was nicknamed Garibaldi Guard in his honor. The unit wore red shirts and &quot;bersaglieri plumes.&quot; They carried with them both a Union Flag and an Italian flag with the words &quot;Dio e popolo,&quot; meaning &quot;God and people.&quot; In 1861, Garibaldi himself volunteered his services to President Abraham Lincoln. Garibaldi was offered a major general&#x27;s commission in the U.S. Army through the letter from Secretary of State William H. Seward to H. S. Sanford, the U.S. minister at Brussels, July 17, 1861.

===The great Italian diaspora (1880–1914)===



From 1880 to 1914, 13 million Italians migrated out of Italy, making Italy the scene of one of the largest voluntary emigrations in recorded world history. During this period of mass migration, 4 million Italians arrived in the United States, 3 million of them between 1900 and 1914. They came for the most part from southern Italy (the regions of Abruzzo, Campania, Apulia, Basilicata, and Calabria) and from the island of Sicily. Most planned to stay a few years, then take their earnings and return home. According to historian Thomas J. Archdeacon, 46 percent of the Italians who entered the United States between 1899 and 1924 permanently returned home.

====Padrone system====
Immigrants without industrial skills found employment in low-wage manual labor jobs. Instead of finding jobs on their own, most used the padrone system whereby Italian middlemen (&quot;padroni&quot;) found jobs for groups of men and controlled their wages, transportation, and living conditions for a fee.

According to historian Alfred T. Banfield:
:Criticized by many as slave traders who preyed upon poor, bewildered peasants, the &quot;padroni&quot; often served as travel agents, with fees reimbursed from paychecks, as landlords who rented out shacks and boxcars, and as storekeepers who extended exorbitant credit to their Italian laborer clientele. Despite such abuse, not all &quot;padroni&quot; were dastardly and most Italian immigrants reached out to their &quot;padroni&quot; for economic salvation, considering them either as godsends or necessary evils. The Italians whom the &quot;padroni&quot; brought to Maine generally had no intention of settling there, and most were sojourners who either returned to Italy or moved on to another job somewhere else. Nevertheless, thousands of Italians did settle in Maine, creating &quot;Little Italies&quot; in Portland, Millinocket, Rumford, and other towns where the &quot;padroni&quot; remained as strong shaping forces in the new communities.

====Push and pull====
In terms of the push-pull model of immigration, America provided the pull factor by the prospect of jobs that unskilled and uneducated Italian peasant farmers could do. Peasant farmers accustomed to hard work in the Mezzogiorno, for example, took jobs building railroads and constructing buildings, while others took factory jobs that required little or no skill.

=====The push from southern Italy=====
The push factor came primarily from the harsh economic conditions in southern Italy. Major factors that contributed to the large exodus included political and social unrest, the weak agricultural economy of the South modeled on the outdated latifundist system dating back to the feudal period, a high tax burden, soil exhaustion and erosion, and military conscription lasting seven years. The poor economic situation in the 19th century became untenable for many sharecroppers, tenant farmers, and small business and land owners. Multitudes chose to emigrate rather than face the prospect of a deepening poverty. A large number of these were attracted to the United States, which at the time was actively recruiting workers from Italy and elsewhere to fill the labor shortage that existed in the years following the Civil War. Often the father and older sons would go first, leaving the mother and the rest of the family behind until the male members could afford their passage.

=====The pull of high wages=====
By far the strongest &quot;pull&quot; factor was money. Migrants expected to make large sums in a few years of work, enabling them to live much better when they returned home, especially by buying a farm. Real life was never so golden: the Italians earned well below average rates. Their weekly earnings in manufacturing and mining in 1909 came to $9.61, compared to $13.63 for German immigrants and $11.06 for Poles. The result was a sense of alienation from most of American culture and a lack of interest in learning English or otherwise assimilating. Not many women came, but those who did became devoted to traditional Italian religious customs. When the World War I broke out, European migrants could not go home. Wages shot up, and the Italians benefited greatly. Most decided to stay permanently, and they flourished in the 1920s.

=====&quot;Little Italys&quot;=====
Many sought housing in the older sections of the large Northeastern cities—districts that became known as &quot;Little Italys.&quot; Such housing was frequently in overcrowded, substandard tenements, which were often dimly lit and had poor heating and ventilation. Tuberculosis and other communicable diseases were a constant health threat for the immigrant families that were compelled by economic circumstances to live in these dwellings. Other immigrant families lived in single-family abodes, which was more typical in areas outside of the enclaves of the large northeastern cities and other parts of the country as well.

=====&quot;Birds of passage&quot; return to Italy=====
An estimated 49 percent of Italians who migrated to the Americas between 1905 (when return migration statistics began) and 1920 did not remain in the United States. These so-called birds of passage intended to stay in the United States for only a limited time, followed by a return to Italy with enough in savings to reestablish themselves there. While many did return to Italy, others chose to stay or were prevented from returning by the outbreak of World War I in 1914.

=====Employment opportunities=====
The Italian male immigrants in the Little Italys were most often employed in manual labor and were heavily involved in public works, such as the construction of roads, railroad tracks, sewers, subways, bridges, and the first skyscrapers in the northeastern cities. As early as 1890, it was estimated that around 90 percent of New York City&#x27;s and 99 percent of Chicago&#x27;s public works employees were Italians. The women most frequently worked as seamstresses in the garment industry or in their homes. Many established small businesses in the Little Italys to satisfy the day-to-day needs of fellow immigrants.

A &quot;New York Times&quot; article from 1895 provides a glimpse into the status of Italian immigration at the turn of the century:

:Of the half million Italians that are in the United States, about 100,000 live in the city, and including those who live in Brooklyn, Jersey City, and the other suburbs the total number in the vicinity is estimated at about 160,000. After learning our ways they become good, industrious citizens.

&quot;The New York Times&quot; in May 1896 sent its reporters to characterize the Little Italy/Mulberry neighborhood:
:They are laborers; toilers in all grades of manual work; they are artisans, they are junkmen, and here, too, dwell the rag pickers. . . . There is a monster colony of Italians who might be termed the commercial or shop keeping community of the Latins. Here are all sorts of stores, pensions, groceries, fruit emporiums, tailors, shoemakers, wine merchants, importers, musical instrument makers. . . . There are notaries, lawyers, doctors, apothecaries, undertakers. . . . There are more bankers among the Italians than among any other foreigners except the Germans in the city.

The masses of Italian immigrants that entered the United States (1890–1900) posed a change in the labor market, prompting Fr. Michael J. Henry to write a letter in October 1900 to the Bishop John J. Clancy of Sligo, Ireland, warning

:[that unskilled young Irishmen] would have to enter into competition with their pick-axe and shovel against other nationalities—Italians, Poles etc. to eke out bare existence. The Italians are more economic, can live on poor fare and consequently can afford to work for less wages than the ordinary Irishman.

The &quot;Brooklyn Eagle,&quot; in a 1900 article, addressed the same reality:

:The day of the Irish hod-carrier has long been past. . . . But it is the Italian now that does the work. Then came the Italian carpenter and finally the mason and the bricklayer.

In spite of the economic hardship of the immigrants, civil and social life flourished in the Italian American neighborhoods of the large northeastern cities. Italian theater, band concerts, choral recitals, puppet shows, mutual aid societies, and social clubs were available to the immigrants. An important event, the &quot;festa&quot;, became for many an important connection to the traditions of their ancestral villages in Italy. The festa involved an elaborate procession through the streets in honor of a patron saint or the Virgin Mary in which a large statue was carried by a team of men, with musicians marching behind. Followed by food, fireworks, and general merriment, the festa became an important occasion that helped give the immigrants a sense of unity and common identity.

=====Pull of California and the South=====
The destinations of many of the Italian immigrants were not only the large cities of the East Coast, but also more remote regions of the country, such as Florida and California. They were drawn there by opportunities in agriculture, fishing, mining, railroad construction, lumbering, and other activities under way at the time. Often the immigrants contracted to work in these areas of the country as a condition for payment of their passage. It was not uncommon, especially in the South, for the immigrants to be subjected to economic exploitation, hostility, and sometimes even violence. The Italian laborers who went to these areas were in many cases later joined by wives and children, which resulted in the establishment of permanent Italian American settlements in diverse parts of the country. A number of towns, such as Roseto, Pennsylvania, Tontitown, Arkansas, and Valdese, North Carolina, were founded by Italian immigrants during this era.

=====Pull of business opportunities=====
A number of major business ventures were founded by Italian Americans. Amadeo Giannini originated the concept of branch banking to serve the Italian American community in San Francisco. He founded the Bank of Italy, which later became the Bank of America. His bank also provided financing to the film industry developing on the West Coast at the time, including the financing for Walt Disney&#x27;s 1937 film &quot;Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs&quot;, the first full-length animated motion picture to be made in the United States. Other companies founded by Italian Americans—such as Ghirardelli Chocolate Company, Progresso, Planters Peanuts, Contadina, Chef Boyardee, Italian Swiss Colony wines, and Jacuzzi—became nationally known brand names in time. An Italian immigrant, Italo Marciony (Marcioni), is credited with inventing the earliest version of an ice cream cone in 1898. Another Italian immigrant, Giuseppe Bellanca, brought with him in 1912 an advanced aircraft design, which he began producing. One of Bellanca&#x27;s planes, piloted by Cesare Sabelli and George Pond, made one of the first nonstop trans-Atlantic flights in 1934. Several families, including the Grucci, Zambelli, and Vitale families, brought with them expertise in fireworks displays, and their preeminence in this field has continued to the present day.

=====Pull of artistic opportunity=====
Following in the footsteps of Constantino Brumidi, others were commissioned to help create Washington&#x27;s impressive monuments. An Italian immigrant, Attilio Piccirilli, and his five brothers carved the Lincoln Memorial, which they began in 1911 and completed in 1922. Italian construction workers helped build Washington&#x27;s Union Station, considered one of the most beautiful stations in the country. Work on Union Station began in 1905 and was completed in 1908. The six statues that decorate the station&#x27;s facade were carved by Andrew Bernasconi between 1909 and 1911. Two Italian American master stone carvers, Roger Morigi and Vincent Palumbo, spent decades creating the sculptural works that embellish Washington National Cathedral.

Italian conductors contributed to the early success of the Metropolitan Opera of New York (founded in 1880), but it was the arrival of impresario Giulio Gatti-Casazza in 1908, who brought with him conductor Arturo Toscanini, that made the Met internationally known. Many Italian operatic singers and conductors were invited to perform for American audiences, most notably, tenor Enrico Caruso. The premiere of the opera La Fanciulla del West on December 10, 1910, with conductor Toscanini and tenor Caruso, and with the composer Giacomo Puccini in attendance, was a major international success as well as an historic event for the entire Italian American community. Francesco Fanciulli (1853–1915) succeeded John Philip Sousa as the director of United States Marine Band, serving in this capacity from 1892 to 1897.

Italian Americans became involved in entertainment and sports. Rudolph Valentino was one of the first great film icons. Dixieland jazz music had a number of important Italian American innovators, the most famous being Nick LaRocca of New Orleans, whose quintet made the first jazz recording in 1917. The first Italian American professional baseball player, Ping Bodie (Francesco Pizzoli), began playing for the Chicago White Sox in 1912. Ralph DePalma won the Indianapolis 500 in 1915.

=====Public roles=====
Italian Americans became increasingly involved in politics, government, and the labor movement. Andrew Longino was elected governor of Mississippi in 1900. Charles Bonaparte was secretary of the Navy and later attorney general in the Theodore Roosevelt administration, and he founded the Federal Bureau of Investigation.

Joe Petrosino was a New York City Police Department (NYPD) officer who was a pioneer in the fight against organized crime. Crime-fighting techniques that Petrosino pioneered are still practiced by law enforcement agencies. Salvatore A. Cotillo was the first Italian American to serve in both houses of the New York State Legislature and the first who served as Justice of the New York State Supreme Court.

Fiorello La Guardia was elected to Congress from New York in 1916. He served as mayor of New York City from 1934 to 1946 as a Republican. A 1993 survey of historians, political scientists and urban experts conducted by Melvin G. Holli of the University of Illinois at Chicago saw La Guardia ranked as the best American big-city mayor to serve between the years 1820 and 1993.

Numerous Italian Americans were at the forefront in fighting for worker&#x27;s rights in industries such as the mining, textiles, and garment industries, the most notable among these being Arturo Giovannitti, Carlo Tresca, and Joseph Ettor.

====Society for the Protection of Italian Immigrants====

An American teacher who had studied in Italy, Sarah Wool Moore, was so concerned with grifters luring immigrants into rooming houses or employment contracts in which the bosses got kickbacks that she pressed for the founding of the Society for the Protection of Italian Immigrants (often called the Society for Italian Immigrants). The society published lists of approved living quarters and employers. Later, the organization began establishing schools in work camps to help adult immigrants learn English. Wool Moore and the society began organizing schools in the labor camps that employed Italian workers on various dam and quarry projects in Pennsylvania and New York. The schools focused on teaching phrases that workers needed in their everyday tasks. Because of its success in helping immigrants, the society received a commendation from the commissioner of emigration for the Italian Ministry of Foreign Affairs in 1907.

=== World War I and interwar period ===
The United States entered World War I in 1917. The Italian American community wholeheartedly supported the war effort and its young men, both American born and Italian born, enlisted in large numbers in the American Army. It was estimated that during the two years of the war (1917–18) Italian American servicemen made up approximately 12 percent of the total American forces, a disproportionately high percentage of the total. An Italian-born American infantryman, Michael Valente, was awarded the Medal of Honor for his service. Another 103 Italian Americans (83 Italian born) were awarded the Distinguished Service Cross, the second highest decoration. Italian Americans also accounted for more than 10 percent of war casualties World War I, despite making up less than 4 percent of the U.S. population.

====Restricted immigration====
The war, together with the restrictive Emergency Quota Act of 1921 and Immigration Act of 1924, heavily curtailed Italian immigration. Total annual immigration was capped at 357,000 in 1921 and lowered to 150,000 in 1924. Quotas were allotted on a national basis in proportion to a nationality&#x27;s existing share of the population. The National Origins Formula, which sought to preserve the existing demographic makeup of the United States and generally favored northwestern European immigration, computed Italians to be the fifth-largest national origin of the U.S. population in 1920, to be assigned 3.87 percent of annual quota immigrant spots. Despite implementation of the quota, the inflow of Italian immigrants remained between 6 or 7 percent of all immigrants. And when the restrictive quota system was abolished by the Immigration and Nationality Act of 1965, Italians had already grown to be the second largest immigrant group in America, with 5,067,717 immigrants from Italy admitted between 1820 and 1966—constituting 12 percent of all immigrants to the United States—more than from Great Britain (4,711,711) and from Ireland (4,706,854).


====Employment and unemployment====
In the interwar period, jobs as policemen, firemen, and civil servants became increasingly available to Italian Americans. Others found employment as plumbers, electricians, mechanics, and carpenters. Women found jobs as civil servants, secretaries, dressmakers, and clerks. With better-paying jobs, Italian Americans moved to more affluent neighborhoods outside of the Italian enclaves. The Great Depression (1929–1939) had a major impact on the Italian American community and temporarily reversed some of the earlier gains made. Many unemployed men and some women found jobs on President Franklin Roosevelt&#x27;s New Deal work programs, such as the Works Progress Administration and the Civilian Conservation Corp.

====Politics====
By 1920, numerous Little Italys had stabilized and grown considerably more prosperous as workers were able to obtain higher-paying jobs, often in skilled trades. In the 1920s and 1930s, Italian Americans contributed significantly to American life and culture, politics, music, film, the arts, sports, the labor movement, and business.

In politics, Al Smith (Anglicized form of the Italian surname Ferraro) became the first governor of New York of Italian ancestry—although the media characterized him as an Irish. He was the first Catholic to receive a major party presidential nomination, as Democratic candidate for president in 1928. He lost Protestant strongholds in the South but energized the Democratic vote in immigrant centers across the entire North. Angelo Rossi was mayor of San Francisco from 1931 to 1944. In 1933–34, Ferdinand Pecora led a Senate investigation of the Wall Street Crash of 1929, which exposed major financial abuses, and spurred Congress to rein in the banking industry. Pecora&#x27;s work later inspired a play, &quot;The Reckoning: Pecora for the Public&quot;. Liberal leader Fiorello La Guardia served as Republican and Fusion mayor of New York City from 1934 to 1945. On the far left, Vito Marcantonio was first elected to Congress in 1934 from New York. Robert Maestri was mayor of New Orleans from 1936 to 1946.

====Music, Hollywood, and arts====
The Metropolitan Opera continued to flourish under the leadership of Giulio Gatti-Casazza, whose tenure continued until 1935. Rosa Ponselle and Dusolina Giannini, daughters of Italian immigrants, performed regularly at the Metropolitan Opera and became internationally known. Arturo Toscanini returned in the United States as the main conductor of the New York Philharmonic Orchestra (1926–1936) and introduced many Americans to classical music through his NBC Symphony Orchestra radio broadcasts (1937–1954). Ruggiero Ricci, a child prodigy born of Italian immigrant parents, gave his first public performance in 1928 at the age of 10 and had a long international career as a concert violinist.

Popular singers of the period included Russ Columbo, who established a new singing style that influenced Frank Sinatra and other singers that followed. On Broadway, Harry Warren (Salvatore Guaragna) wrote the music for &quot;42nd Street&quot;, and received three Academy Awards for his compositions. Other Italian American musicians and performers, such as Jimmy Durante, who later achieved fame in movies and television, were active in vaudeville. Guy Lombardo formed a popular dance band, which played annually on New Year&#x27;s Eve in New York City&#x27;s Times Square.

The film industry of this era included Frank Capra, who received three Academy Awards for directing and Frank Borzage, who received two Academy Awards for directing. Italian American cartoonists were responsible for some of the most popular animated characters: Donald Duck was created by Al Taliaferro, Woody Woodpecker was a creation of Walter Lantz (Lanza), Casper the Friendly Ghost was co-created by Joseph Oriolo, and Tom and Jerry were co-created by Joseph Barbera. The voice of Snow White was provided by Adriana Caselotti, a 21-year-old soprano.

In public art, Luigi Del Bianco was the chief stone carver at Mount Rushmore from 1933 to 1940. Simon Rodia, an immigrant construction worker, built the Watts Towers over a period of 33 years, from 1921 to 1954.

====Sports====

In sports, Gene Sarazen (Eugenio Saraceni) won both the Professional Golf Association and U.S. Open Tournaments in 1922. Pete DePaolo won the Indianapolis 500 in 1925. Tony Lazzeri and Frank Crosetti started playing for the New York Yankees in 1926. Tony Canzoneri won the lightweight boxing championship in 1930, and Rocky Marciano is the only undefeated heavyweight champion in history. Lou Little (Luigi Piccolo) began coaching the Columbia University football team in 1930. Joe DiMaggio, who was destined to become one of the most famous players in baseball history, began playing for the New York Yankees in 1936. Hank Luisetti was a three time All-American basketball player at Stanford University from 1936 to 1940. Louis Zamperini, the American distance runner, competed in the 1936 Olympics and later became the subject of the bestselling book &quot;&quot; by Laura Hillenbrand, published in 2010 and a 2014 movie of the same title.

====Economy====
Italian American businessmen specialized in growing and selling fresh fruits and vegetables, which were cultivated on small tracts of land in the suburban parts of many cities. The produce was trucked into the nearby cities and often sold directly to the consumer through farmers&#x27; markets. In California, the DiGiorgio Corporation was founded, which grew to become a national supplier of fresh produce in the United States. Italian Americans in California were leading growers of grapes and producers of wine. Many well known wine brands, such as Mondavi, Carlo Rossi, Petri, Sebastiani, and Gallo emerged from these early enterprises. Italian American companies were major importers of Italian wines, processed foods, textiles, marble, and manufactured goods. 

Italian Americans continued their significant involvement in the labor movement during this period. Well-known labor organizers included Carlo Tresca, Luigi Antonini, James Petrillo, and Angela Bambace.

====Organized crime ====

Italian organized crime emerged in the late 19th century in New York as an offshoot of the Sicilian Mafia. It evolved into a separate entity partially independent of the original Mafia in Sicily, and it eventually encompassed or absorbed other Italian gangsters and crime groups (such as the American Camorra) active in the United States and Canada that were not of Sicilian origin.

Al Capone was the nation&#x27;s most infamous organized crime boss in the 1920s. He attained notoriety during the Prohibition era as the co-founder and boss of the Chicago Outfit. Their most famous single crime was the Saint Valentine&#x27;s Day Massacre of 1929, when Capone&#x27;s men, dressed as policemen, massacred seven members of a rival gang. Capone&#x27;s seven-year reign as a crime boss ended when he went to federal prison at the age of 33. Some ethnic Americans viewed him a hero, seeing him as the epitome of self-made success, a defender of American ideals, a family man, and a philanthropist. His stature helped them justify their own violations of the prohibition laws against liquor.

====Mussolini for and against====

Benito Mussolini&#x27;s Fascist regime in Italy sought to build a base of popular support in the United States, focusing on the Italian community. His supporters far outnumbered his opponents, both inside the Italian American community and among all Catholics, as well as among the wider American leadership.)
According to Stefano Luconi, in the 1920s and 1930s &quot;numerous Italian Americans became US citizens, registered for the vote, and cast their ballots in order to lobby Congress and the Presidency on behalf of fascism and to support Mussolini&#x27;s goals in foreign policy.&quot;

According to Fraser Ottanelli, Rome also worked to enhance Italy&#x27;s reputation through a series of highly visible moves. They included participating in the Century of Progress (1933–1934) world fair in Chicago; supporting Italo Balbo&#x27;s dramatic transatlantic flights; and donating a statue to Chicago. A small minority of Italian Americans who fervently opposed fascism did not support Rome&#x27;s moves. They promoted an unsuccessful measure in Congress that condemned Italy&#x27;s meddling in U.S. internal affairs and called for the revocation of U.S. citizenship from people who swore allegiance to Mussolini. Alberto Tarchiani, Italy&#x27;s first ambassador to the United States after World War II, requested the removal of any displays that honored the fascist regime, but with little success. Many memorials remain in the 21st century.

=== World War II ===


As a member of the Axis powers, fascist Italy declared war on the United States on December 11, 1941, four days after Japan attacked Pearl Harbor. As a consequence, Executive Order 9066 called for the compulsory relocation of more than 10,000 Italian Americans and restricted the movements of more than 600,000 Italian Americans nationwide. They were targeted despite a lack of evidence that Italians were conducting spy or sabotage operations in the United States.

Although the great majority of Italian Americans admired Mussolini in the 1930s, very few if any demonstrated any desire to transfer fascist ideology to America. When Italy entered the war on the side of Nazi Germany in 1940, &quot;most Italian Americans distanced themselves from Fascism.&quot;

Anti-fascist Italian expatriates in the United States founded the Mazzini Society in Northampton, Massachusetts, in September 1939 to work toward ending fascist rule in Italy. These political refugees from Mussolini&#x27;s regime disagreed among themselves whether to ally with communists and anarchists or to exclude them. The Mazzini Society joined with other anti-fascist Italian expatriates in the Americas at a conference in Montevideo, Uruguay in 1942. They unsuccessfully promoted one of their members, Carlo Sforza, to become the post-fascist leader of a republican Italy. The Mazzini Society dispersed after the fall of Mussolini as most of its members returned to Italy.

Between 750,000 and 1.5 million people of Italian descent are thought to have served in the U.S. armed forces during the war, about 10 percent of the total, and 14 Italian Americans received the Medal of Honor for their service. Among these was Sgt. John Basilone, one of the most decorated and famous servicemen in World War II, who was later featured in the HBO series &quot;The Pacific&quot;. Army Ranger Colonel Henry Mucci led one of the most successful rescue missions in U.S. history—the 1945 mission that freed 511 survivors of the Bataan Death March from a Japanese prison camp in the Philippines. In the air, Capt. Don Gentile became one of the war&#x27;s leading aces, with 25 German planes destroyed. Film director, producer, and writer Frank Capra made a series of wartime documentaries known as &quot;Why We Fight&quot;, for which he received the U.S. Distinguished Service Medal in 1945 and the Order of the British Empire Medal in 1962.

Biagio (Max) Corvo, an agent of the U.S. Office of Strategic Services (OSS), drew up plans for the invasion of Sicily and organized operations behind enemy lines in the Mediterranean region during World War II. He led the Italian Secret Intelligence branch of the OSS, which was able to smuggle hundreds of agents behind enemy lines, supply Italian partisan fighters, and maintain a liaison between Allied field commands and Italy&#x27;s first post-fascist Government. Corvo was awarded the Legion of Merit for his efforts during the war. Other Italian Americans such as Edward E. Boccia ≤https://ghostarmy.org/roster/Edward-Eugene-Boccia/≥ served in the Ghost Army ≤https://ghostarmy.org/≥. The Headquarters Special Troops and the 3133rd Signal Company Special, composed of visual arts students, architects, designers, and other creatives, carried out 25 battlefield deceptions in France, Luxembourg, Belgium, Germany, and Italy and were all awarded the Congressional Medal of Honor. 

The work of Enrico Fermi was crucial in developing the atom bomb. Fermi, a Nobel Prize laureate nuclear physicist, who immigrated to the United States from Italy in 1938, led a research team at the University of Chicago that achieved the world&#x27;s first sustained nuclear chain reaction, which clearly demonstrated the feasibility of an atom bomb. Fermi later became a key member of the team at Los Alamos Laboratory that developed the first atom bomb. He was subsequently joined at Los Alamos by Emilio Segrè, one of his colleagues from Italy, who was also destined to receive the Nobel Prize in physics.

Three United States World War II destroyers were named after Italian Americans: was named for Sgt. John Basilone; was named for Corporal Anthony P. Damato, who was awarded the Medal of Honor posthumously for his valor during World War II; and was named for Rear Admiral Bancroft Gherardi, who served during the Mexican–American War and the American Civil War.

World War II ended the mass unemployment and relief programs that characterized the 1930s, opening up new employment opportunities for large numbers of Italian Americans, who significantly contributed to the nation&#x27;s war effort. Much of the Italian American population was concentrated in urban areas where the new war materiel plants were located. Many Italian American women took war jobs, such as Rose Bonavita, who was recognized by President Franklin D. Roosevelt with a personal letter commending her for her performance as an aircraft riveter. She, together with a number of other women workers, provided the basis of the name, &quot;Rosie the Riveter&quot;, which came to symbolize the millions of American women workers in the war industries. Chef Boyardee, the company founded by Ettore Boiardi, was one of the largest suppliers of rations for U.S. and allied forces during World War II. For his contribution to the war effort, Boiardi was awarded a gold star order of excellence from the United States War Department.

==== Wartime violation of Italian-American civil liberties ====
From the onset of the Second World War, and particularly following Pearl Harbor attack, Italian Americans were increasingly placed under suspicion. Groups such as The Los Angeles Council of California Women&#x27;s Clubs petitioned General John L. DeWitt to place all enemy aliens in concentration camps immediately, and the Young Democratic Club of Los Angeles went a step further, demanding the removal of American-born Italians and Germans—U.S. citizens—from the Pacific Coast. These calls, along with substantial political pressure from Congress, resulted in President Franklin D. Roosevelt issuing Executive Order No. 9066, as well as the Department of Justice classifying unnaturalized Italian Americans as &quot;enemy aliens&quot; under the Alien and Sedition Act. Thousands of Italians were arrested, and hundreds of Italians were interned in military camps, some for up to two years. As many as 600,000 others were required to carry identity cards identifying them as &quot;resident aliens.&quot; Thousands more on the West Coast were required to move inland, often losing their homes and businesses in the process. A number of Italian-language newspapers were forced to close. Two books, &quot;Una Storia Segreta&quot; by Lawrence Di Stasi and Uncivil Liberties by Stephen Fox, as well as a movie, &quot;Prisoners Among Us&quot;, document these World War II developments.

On November 7, 2000, Bill Clinton signed the Wartime Violation of Italian American Civil Liberties Act. This act ordered a comprehensive review by the attorney general of the United States of the treatment of Italian Americans during the Second World War. The findings concluded that
# The freedom of more than 600,000 Italian-born immigrants in the United States and their families was restricted during World War II by government measures that branded them &quot;enemy aliens&quot; and included requirements to carry identification cards, travel restrictions, and seizure of personal property.
# During World War II, more than 10,000 Italian Americans living on the West Coast were forced to leave their homes and prohibited from entering coastal zones. More than 50,000 were subjected to curfews.
# During World War II, thousands of Italian American immigrants were arrested, and hundreds were interned in military camps.
# Hundreds of thousands of Italian Americans performed exemplary service and thousands sacrificed their lives in defense of the United States.
# At the time, Italians were the largest foreign-born group in the United States, and today they are the fifth-largest immigrant group in the United States, numbering approximately 15 million.
# The impact of the wartime experience was devastating to Italian American communities in the United States, and its effects are still being felt.
# A deliberate policy kept these measures from the public during the war. Even today much information is still classified, the full story remains unknown to the public, and it has never been acknowledged in any official capacity by the United States government.
In 2010, California officially issued an apology to the Italian Americans whose civil liberties had been violated.

===Post–World War II period===

Italians continued to immigrate to the United States, and an estimated 600,000 arrived in the decades following the war. Many of the new arrivals had professional training or were skilled in various trades. After the end of World War II, a small number of Istrian Italians and Dalmatian Italians also emigrated to the United States during the Istrian-Dalmatian exodus, leaving their homelands, which were lost by Italy and annexed by Yugoslavia after the Treaty of Peace with Italy, 1947. Notable Istrian-Dalmatian exiles who emigrated to the United States are Mario Andretti and Lidia Bastianich.

The post-war period was a time of great social change for Italian Americans. Many aspired to a college education, which became possible for returning veterans through the GI Bill. Since the 1960s, a lot of people left Italy and went to North America (mostly), South America, and Europe. European migration was seasonal and permanent. With better job opportunities and better educated, Italian Americans entered mainstream American life in great numbers. The Italian enclaves were abandoned by many who chose to live in other urban areas and in the suburbs. Many married outside of their ethnic group, most frequently with other ethnic Catholics, but increasingly also with those of diverse religious and ethnic backgrounds. According to Dr. Richard D. Alba, director of the Center for Social and Demographic Analysis at the State University of New York at Albany, 8 percent of Americans of Italian descent born before 1920 had mixed ancestry, but 70 percent of them born after 1970 were the children of intermarriage. In 1985, among Americans of Italian descent under the age of 30, 72 percent of men and 64 percent of women married someone with no Italian background. Numerous Italian Americans are people of color, including many people of mixed African-African and white Italian ancestry. Notable Black Italian-Americans include Pittsburgh Steeler running back Franco Harris.

Italian Americans took advantage of the new opportunities that generally became available to all in the post-war decades. They made many significant contributions to American life and culture. 
Numerous Italian Americans became involved in politics at the local, state, and national levels in the post-war decades. Those who became U.S. senators included John Pastore of Rhode Island, who was the first Italian American elected to the Senate in 1950; Pete Domenici, who was elected to the U.S. Senate from New Mexico in 1972 and served six terms; Patrick Leahy, who was elected to the U.S. Senate from Vermont in 1974 and served until 2023; and Alfonse D&#x27;Amato, who served as U.S. senator from New York from 1981 to 1999. Nancy Pelosi was both the first woman and the first Italian American Speaker of the House. Anthony Celebrezze served for five two-year terms as mayor of Cleveland, from 1953 to 1962 and, in 1962, President John F. Kennedy appointed him as United States Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare (now the Department of Health and Human Services). Benjamin Civiletti served as the United States Attorney General during the last year and a half of the Carter administration, from 1979 to 1981. Frank Carlucci served as the United States Secretary of Defense from 1987 to 1989 in the administration of President Ronald Reagan.
Scores of Italian Americans became well known singers in the post-war period, including Frank Sinatra, Mario Lanza, Perry Como, Dean Martin, Tony Bennett, Frankie Laine, Bobby Darin, Julius La Rosa, Connie Francis, and Madonna. Italian Americans who hosted popular musical/variety TV shows in the post-war decades included Perry Como (1949–1967), piano virtuoso Liberace (1952–1956), Jimmy Durante (1954–1956), Frank Sinatra (1957–1958), and Dean Martin (1965–1974). Broadway, musical stars included Rose Marie, Carol Lawrence, Anna Maria Alberghetti, Sergio Franchi, Patti LuPone, Ezio Pinza, and Liza Minnelli.

In music composition, Henry Mancini and Bill Conti received numerous Academy Awards for their songs and film scores. Classical and operatic composers John Corigliano, Norman Dello Joio, David Del Tredici, Paul Creston, Dominick Argento, Gian Carlo Menotti, and Donald Martino were honored with Pulitzer Prizes and Grammy Awards.

Numerous Italian Americans became well known in movies, both as actors and directors, and many were Academy Award recipients. Movie directors included Frank Capra, Francis Ford Coppola, Michael Cimino, Vincente Minnelli, Martin Scorsese, and Brian De Palma.

Italian Americans were active in professional sports as players, coaches, and commissioners. Well-known professional baseball coaches in the post-war decades included Yogi Berra, Billy Martin, Tony La Russa, Tommy Lasorda, and Joe Torre. In professional football, Vince Lombardi set the standard of excellence for all coaches to follow. A. Bartlett Giamatti became president of the National Baseball League in 1986 and commissioner of Baseball in 1989. Paul Tagliabue was commissioner of the National Football League from 1989 to 2006.

In college football, Joe Paterno became one of the most successful coaches ever. Seven Italian American players won the Heisman Trophy: Angelo Bertelli of Notre Dame, Alan Ameche of Wisconsin, Gary Beban of UCLA, Joe Bellino of Navy, John Cappelletti of Penn State, Gino Torretta, and Vinny Testaverde of Miami.

In college basketball, a number of Italian Americans became well-known coaches in the post-war decades, including John Calipari, Lou Carnesecca, Rollie Massimino, Rick Pitino, Jim Valvano, Dick Vitale, Tom Izzo, Mike Fratello, Ben Carnevale, and Geno Auriemma. 

Italian Americans became nationally known in other diverse sports. Rocky Marciano was the undefeated heavyweight boxing champion from 1952 to 1956; Ken Venturi won both the British and U.S. Open golf championships in 1956; Donna Caponi won the U.S. Women&#x27;s Open golf championships in 1969 and 1970; Linda Frattianne was the woman&#x27;s U.S. figure skating champion four years in a row, from 1975 to 1978, and world champion in 1976 and 1978; Willie Mosconi was a 15-time World Billiard champion; Eddie Arcaro was a 5-time Kentucky Derby winner; Mario Andretti was a 3-time national race car champion; Mary Lou Retton won the all-around gold medal in Olympic woman&#x27;s gymnastics; Matt Biondi won a total of 8 gold medals in Olympic swimming; and Brian Boitano won a gold medal in Olympic men&#x27;s singles figure skating.

Italian Americans founded many successful enterprises, both small and large, in the post-war decades, including Barnes &amp; Noble, Tropicana Products, Zamboni, Transamerica, Subway, Mr. Coffee, and Conair Corporation. Other enterprises founded by Italian Americans were Fairleigh Dickinson University, the Eternal Word Television Network, and the Syracuse Nationals basketball team – later to become the Philadelphia 76ers. Robert Panara was a co-founder of the National Technical Institute for the Deaf and founder of the National Theater of the Deaf. Recognized as a pioneer in deaf culture studies in the United States, he was honored with a commemorative U.S. stamp in 2017.

Eight Italian Americans became Nobel Prize laureates in the post-war decades: Mario Capecchi, Renato Dulbecco, Riccardo Giacconi, Salvatore Luria, Franco Modigliani, Rita Levi Montalcini, Emilio G. Segrè, and Carolyn Bertozzi.

Italian Americans continued to serve with distinction in the military, with 4 Medal of Honor recipients in the Korean War and 11 in the Vietnam War, including Vincent R. Capodanno, a Catholic chaplain.

At the close of the 20th century, 31 men and women of Italian descent were serving in the U.S. House and Senate, 82 of the 1,000 largest U.S. cities had mayors of Italian descent, and 166 college and university presidents were of Italian descent. An Italian American, Antonin Scalia, was serving as a U.S. Supreme Court justice, who was later joined by Samuel Alito in 2006. More than two dozen Italian Americans were serving in the Catholic Church as bishops. Four—Joseph Bernardin, Justin Rigali, Anthony Bevilacqua, and Daniel DiNardo—had been elevated to Cardinals. 

Italian Americans have served with distinction in all of America&#x27;s wars, and over 30 have been awarded the Medal of Honor. A number of Italian Americans have served as top-ranking generals in the military, including Anthony Zinni, Raymond Odierno, Carl Vuono, and Peter Pace, the latter three having also been appointed Chief of Staff of their respective services. Over two dozen of Italian descent have been elected as state governors including, most recently, Paul Cellucci of Massachusetts, John Baldacci of Maine, Janet Napolitano of Arizona, and Donald Carcieri of Rhode Island.
== Influence on American culture and society ==

Italian Americans have influenced the American culture and society in a variety of ways, such as foods, coffees, and desserts; wine production (in California and elsewhere in the United States); popular music, starting in the 1940s and 1950s and continuing into the present; operatic, classical, and instrumental music; jazz; fashion and design; cinema, literature, and Italianate architecture, in homes, churches, and public buildings; Montessori schools; Christmas crèches; fireworks displays; and sports (e.g., bocce and beach tennis).

The historical figure of Christopher Columbus is commemorated on Columbus Day and is reflected in numerous monuments, city names, names of institutions, and the poetic name, &quot;Columbia,&quot; for the United States itself. Italian American identification with the Genoese explorer, whose fame lay in his grand voyages departing Europe and crossing the Atlantic Ocean to make discoveries in the New World, playing an important role in American history and identity, but was of negligible significance to the history of Italy—typifying Italian Americans&#x27; limited sense of nationalism and generally loose attachment to Italy itself as a foreign country. This identification contrasts, for example, to the preoccupations of Irish Americans with the political situation in Ireland throughout the 20th century and American Jews&#x27; deep personal investment in the fate of Israel.

===Politics===
In the 1930s, Italian Americans voted heavily Democratic. Carmine DeSapio in the late 1940s became the first to break the Irish Catholic hold on Tammany Hall since the 1870s. By 1951, more than twice as many Italian American legislators as in 1936 served in the six states with the most Italian Americans. Since 1968, voters have split about evenly between the Democratic (37 percent) and the Republican (36 percent) parties. The U.S. Congress includes Italian Americans who are leaders in both the Republican and Democratic parties. In 2007, Nancy Pelosi (D-CA) became the first woman and Italian American Speaker of the United States House of Representatives. Former Republican New York City mayor Rudy Giuliani was a candidate for the U.S. presidency in the 2008 election, as was Colorado Congressman Tom Tancredo. Rick Santorum won many primaries in his candidacy for the 2012 Republican presidential nomination. In the 2016 election, Santorum and New Jersey governor Chris Christie ran for the Republican nomination, as did Ted Cruz and George Pataki, who both have a smaller amount of Italian ancestry. Mike Pompeo, American politician, diplomat, businessman, and attorney, served as the 70th United States secretary of state from 2018 to 2021. Ron DeSantis, governor of Florida since 2019, is of Italian ancestry.

Geraldine Ferraro was the first woman on a major party ticket, running for vice president as a Democrat in 1984. Two justices of the Supreme Court have been Italian Americans, Antonin Scalia and Samuel Alito. Both were appointed by Republican presidents, Scalia by Ronald Reagan and Alito by George W. Bush.

The Italian American Congressional Delegation currently includes 30 members of Congress who are of Italian descent. They are joined by more than 150 associate members, who are not Italian American but have large Italian American constituencies. Since its founding in 1975, the National Italian American Foundation (NIAF) has worked closely with the bicameral and bipartisan Italian American Congressional Delegation, which is led by co-chairs Rep. Bill Pascrell of New Jersey and Rep. Pat Tiberi of Ohio.

The NIAF hosts a variety of public policy programs, contributing to public discourse on timely policy issues facing the nation and the world. These events are held on Capitol Hill and other locations under the auspices of NIAF&#x27;s Frank J. Guarini Public Policy Forum and its sister program, the NIAF Public Policy Lecture Series. NIAF&#x27;s 2009 public policy programs on Capitol Hill featured prominent Italians and Italian Americans as keynote speakers, including Leon Panetta, director of the CIA, and Franco Frattini, minister of foreign affairs for the Republic of Italy.

By the 1890s, Italian Americans in New York City were mobilizing as a political force. They helped elect Fiorello La Guardia (a Republican) as mayor in 1933, and helped reelect him in 1937 and 1941. They rallied for Vincent R. Impellitteri (a Democrat) in 1950, and Rudolph W. Giuliani (a Republican) in 1989 (when he lost), and in 1993 and 1997 (when he won). All three Italian Americans aggressively fought to reduce crime in the city; each was known for his good relations with the city&#x27;s powerful labor unions. La Guardia and Giuliani have had the reputation among specialists on urban politics as two of the best mayors in American history. Democrat Bill de Blasio, the third mayor of Italian ancestry, served as the 109th mayor of New York City for two terms, from 2014 to 2021. Mario Cuomo (a Democrat) served as the 52nd governor of New York for three terms, from 1983 to 1995. His son Andrew Cuomo was the 56th governor of New York and previously served as secretary of housing and urban development from 1997 to 2001 and as the attorney general of New York from 2007 to 2010.

However, in contrast to other ethnic groups, Italian Americans demonstrate a marked lack of ethnocentrism and long history of political individualism, eschewing ethnic bloc voting, preferring to vote on the basis of individual candidates and issues, embracing maverick political candidates over ethnic loyalties. Popular New York Mayor Fiorello La Guardia in fact underperformed among his own demographic; in 1941, La Guardia even lost the Italian vote to his Irish opponent William O&#x27;Dwyer. In 1965, when New York Democrats backed Mario Procaccino, an Italian-born candidate for city comptroller, Procaccino lost the Italian vote and won his election only because of support in Jewish voter precincts. In the 1973 New York City mayoral election, the son of Italian immigrants Mario Biaggi failed to unite Italian voters as an ethnic bloc the way his Jewish opponent Abraham Beame could do to win the Democratic primary.

In the 1962 Massachusetts gubernatorial election, incumbent Italian American Governor John Volpe lost his re-election campaign by a razor-thin 0.2 percent—a final margin that could be more than sufficiently explained by Volpe polling only 51 percent among the state&#x27;s significant population of Italian Americans, roughly half of whom voted for old-line Anglo-Saxon Protestant Endicott Peabody over a fellow ethnic.

The pragmatic maverick streak of Italian American voters, reacting to individual candidates and circumstances, emerged clearly amid the urban race riots of the 1960s. Black Republican Edward Brooke won more than 40 percent of the Italian vote running for the U.S. Senate from Massachusetts. And a majority of Italian voters living in mostly white rural Upstate New York backed black Democratic nominee Basil A. Paterson for lieutenant governor of New York in 1970—but &quot;not&quot; Italian voters who lived in racially diverse metro New York City. In urban environments, race relations deteriorated severely over Italian American support for law and order policies against urban riots and crime. In the 1968 presidential election, independent George Wallace won 21 percent of the Italian vote in Newark, New Jersey, 29 percent of the Italian vote in Cleveland, Ohio, and more than 10 percent of the Italian American vote nationwide—compared to 8 percent among non-Southern Whites as a whole—presaging the rightward shift of Italian Americans away from the Democratic Party, first as Reagan Democrats, then ultimately realigning with the Republican Party.

=== Economy ===

Italian Americans have played a prominent role in the economy of the United States, and have founded companies of great national importance, such as Bank of America (by Amadeo Giannini in 1904), Qualcomm, Subway, Home Depot, and Airbnb among many others. Italian Americans have also made important contributions to the growth of the U.S. economy through their business expertise. Italian Americans have served as CEO&#x27;s of numerous major corporations, such as the Ford Motor Company and Chrysler Corporation by Lee Iacocca, IBM Corporation by Samuel Palmisano, Lucent Technologies by Patricia Russo, the New York Stock Exchange by Richard Grasso, Honeywell Incorporated by Michael Bonsignore, and Intel by Paul Otellini. Economist Franco Modigliani was awarded the Nobel Prize in Economics &quot;for his pioneering analyses of saving and of financial markets.&quot; Economist Eugene Fama was awarded the Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences in 2013 for his contribution to the empirical analysis of portfolio theory, asset pricing, and the efficient-market hypothesis.

====Social and economic conditions of Italian Americans====

About two-thirds of America&#x27;s Italian immigrants arrived during 1900–1914. Many were of agrarian backgrounds, with little formal education and industrial skills, who became manual laborers heavily concentrated in the cities. Others came with traditional Italian skills as tailors; barbers; bricklayers; stonemasons and stone cutters; marble, tile, and terrazzo workers; fishermen; musicians; singers; shoemakers and shoe repairers; cooks and bakers; carpenters; grape growers; wine makers; silk makers; and dressmakers and seamstresses. Others came to provide for the needs of the immigrant communities, notably doctors, dentists, midwives, lawyers, teachers, morticians, priests, nuns, and brothers. Many of the skilled workers found work in their specialty, first in the Italian enclaves and eventually in the broader society. Traditional skills were often passed down from father to son and from mother to daughter.

By the second generation, approximately 70 percent of the men had blue-collar jobs, and the proportion was down to approximately 50 percent in the third generation, according to surveys in 1963. By 1987, the level of Italian American income exceeded the national average, and since the 1950s, it grew faster than any other ethnic group except the Jews. By 1990, according to the U.S. census, more than 65 percent of Italian Americans were employed as managerial, professional, or white-collar workers. In 1999, the median annual income of Italian-American families was $61,300, while the median annual income of all American families was $50,000.

A University of Chicago study of 15 ethnic groups showed that Italian Americans were among those groups having the lowest percentages of divorced people, unemployed people, people on welfare, and people incarcerated. On the other hand, they were among those groups with the highest percentages of two-parent families, elderly family members still living at home, and families who eat together on a regular basis.

=== Science ===

Italian Americans have been responsible for major breakthroughs in virtually all fields of science, including engineering, medicine, and physics. Physicist and Nobel Prize laureate Enrico Fermi was the creator of the world&#x27;s first nuclear reactor, the Chicago Pile-1, and among the leading scientists involved in the Manhattan Project during World War II. One of Fermi&#x27;s main collaborators, Franco Rasetti, was awarded the Charles Doolittle Walcott Medal by the National Academy of Sciences for his contributions to Cambrian paleontology. Federico Faggin developed the first microchip and microprocessor. Robert Gallo led research that identified a cancer-causing virus. Anthony Fauci in 2008 was awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom for his work on the AIDS relief program PEPFAR. Astrophysicist Riccardo Giacconi was awarded the 2002 Nobel Prize in Physics for his contributions to the discovery of cosmic X-ray sources. Virologist Renato Dulbecco won the 1975 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine for his work on oncoviruses. Pharmacologist Louis Ignarro was co-recipient of the 1998 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine for demonstrating the signaling properties of nitric oxide. Microbiologist Salvador Luria won the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 1969 for his contribution to major discoveries on the replication mechanism and the genetic structure of viruses. Physicist William Daniel Phillips in 1997 won the Nobel Prize in Physics for his contributions to laser cooling. Physicist Emilio Segrè discovered the elements technetium and astatine, and the antiproton, a subatomic antiparticle, for which he was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1959. Nine Italian Americans, including a woman, have gone into space as astronauts: Wally Schirra, Dominic Antonelli, Charles Camarda, Mike Massimino, Richard Mastracchio, Ronald Parise, Mario Runco, Albert Sacco, and Nicole Marie Passonno Stott. Rocco Petrone was the third director of the NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, from 1973 to 1974.

===Women===


Italian women who arrived during the period of mass immigration had to adapt to new and unfamiliar social and economic conditions. Mothers, who had the task of raising the children and providing for the welfare of the family, commonly demonstrated great courage and resourcefulness in meeting those obligations, often under adverse living conditions. Their cultural traditions, which placed the highest priority on the family, remained strong as Italian immigrant women adapted to these new circumstances.

To assist the immigrants in the Little Italys, who were overwhelmingly Catholic, Pope Leo XIII dispatched a contingent of priests, nuns, and brothers of the Missionaries of St. Charles Borromeo and other orders. Among these was Sister Francesca Cabrini, who founded dozens of schools, hospitals, and orphanages. She was canonized as the first American saint in 1946.

Married women typically avoided factory work and chose home-based economic activities such as dressmaking, taking in boarders, and operating small shops in their homes or neighborhoods. Italian neighborhoods also proved attractive to midwives, women who trained in Italy before coming to America. Many single women were employed in the garment industry as seamstresses, often in unsafe working environments. Many of the 146 who died in the Triangle Shirtwaist Factory fire in 1911 were Italian American women. Angela Bambace was an 18-year-old Italian American organizer for the International Ladies Garment Workers Union in New York who worked to secure better working conditions and shorter hours for women workers in the garment industry.

The American scene in the 1920s featured a widespread expansion of women&#x27;s roles, starting with the vote in 1920 and including new standards of education and employment for women and control of their own sexuality. &quot;Flappers&quot; raised the hemline and lowered the old restrictions in women&#x27;s fashion. The Italian American media disapproved. It demanded the holding of the line regarding traditional gender roles in which men controlled their families. Many traditional patriarchal values prevailed among Southern European male immigrants, although some practices, such as the dowry, were left behind in Europe. The community spokesmen were shocked at the notion of a woman marking her secret ballot. They ridiculed flappers and proclaimed that feminism was immoral. They idealized an old male model of Italian womanhood. Mussolini was popular with readers and subsidized some papers, so when he expanded the electorate to include some women voting at the local level, the Italian American editorialists applauded him, arguing that the true Italian woman was, above all, a mother and a wife and, therefore, would be reliable as a voter on local matters, but only in Italy. Feminist organizations in Italy were ignored, as the editors purposely associated emancipation with Americanism and transformed the debate over women&#x27;s rights into a defense of the Italian American community to set its own boundaries and rules. The ethnic papers featured a woman&#x27;s page that updated readers on the latest fabrics, color combinations, and accessories such as hats, shoes, handbags, and jewelry. Food was a major concern, and recipes were presented that adjusted to the availability of ingredients in the American market. Food supplies, which were limited in Italy by poverty and strict import controls, were abundant in America, so new recipes were needed.

In the second and third generations, opportunities expanded as women were gradually accepted in the workplace and as entrepreneurs. Women also had much better job opportunities because they had a high school or sometimes college education and because they were willing to leave the Little Italys and commute to work. During World War II, large numbers of Italian American women entered the workforce in factories providing war materiel, while others served as auxiliaries or nurses in the military services.

After World War II, Italian American women acquired an increasing degree of freedom in choosing a career and seeking higher levels of education. Consequently, the second half of the 20th century was a period in which Italian American women excelled in virtually all fields of endeavor. In politics, Geraldine Ferraro was the first woman vice presidential candidate, Ella Grasso was the first woman elected as a state governor, and Nancy Pelosi was the first woman Speaker of the House. In 1980, Mother Angelica (Rita Rizzo), a Franciscan nun, founded the Eternal Word Television Network (EWTN), a network viewed regularly by millions of Catholics. JoAnn Falletta was the first woman to become a permanent conductor of a major symphony orchestra (with both the Virginia Symphony Orchestra and the Buffalo Philharmonic Orchestra). Penny Marshall (Masciarelli) was one of the first women directors in Hollywood. Catherine DeAngelis, M.D., was the first woman editor of the &quot;Journal of the American Medical Association&quot;. Patricia Fili-Krushel was the first woman president of ABC Television. Bonnie Tiburzi was the first woman pilot in commercial aviation history. Patricia Russo was the first woman to become CEO of Lucent Technologies. Karen Ignagni has, since 1993, been the CEO of American Health Insurance Plans, an umbrella organization representing all major HMOs in the country. Nicole Marie Passonno Stott was one of the first women to go into space as an astronaut. Carolyn Porco, a world recognized expert in planetary probes, is the leader of the imaging science team for the &quot;Cassini&quot; probe, which orbited Saturn.

The National Organization of Italian American Women (NOIAW), founded in 1980, is an organization for women of Italian heritage committed to preserving Italian heritage, language, and culture by promoting and supporting the advancement of women of Italian ancestry.

===Literature===


The works of a number of Italian American authors and poets, born of immigrant parents, were published in the first half of the 20th century. Pietro Di Donato, born in 1911, was a writer best known for his novel, &quot;Christ in Concrete&quot;, which was hailed by critics in the United States and abroad as a metaphor for the immigrant experience in America. Frances Winwar, born Francesca Vinciguerra in 1907 in Sicily, came to the United States at age 10. She is best known for her series of biographies of 19th-century English writers. She was also a frequent translator of classic Italian works into English and published several romantic novels set during historical events. John Ciardi, born in 1916, was primarily a poet. Among his works is a highly respected English-language rendition of Dante Alighieri&#x27;s &quot;Divine Comedy&quot;. John Fante, born in 1909, was a novelist, short story writer, and screenwriter.

Later in the century, a growing number of books by recognized Italian American authors, such as Don DeLillo, Paul Gallico (&quot;Poseidon Adventure&quot;), Gilbert Sorrentino, Gay Talese, Camille Paglia, and Mario Puzo (&quot;The Fortunate Pilgrim&quot;) found a place in mainstream American literature. Other notable 20th-century authors included Dana Gioia, executive director of the National Endowment for the Arts; John Fusco, author of &quot;Paradise Salvage&quot;; Tina DeRosa; and Daniela Gioseffi, winner of the John Ciardi Award for Lifetime Achievement in Poetry, and The American Book Award; and Josephine Gattuso Hendin (&quot;The Right Thing to Do&quot;). Poets Sandra (Mortola) Gilbert and Kim Addonizio were also winners of the John Ciardi Award for Lifetime Achievement in Poetry from &quot;Italian Americana&quot;, as was writer Helen Barolini and poet Maria Mazziotti Gillan. These women have authored many books depicting Italian American women in a new light. Helen Barolini&#x27;s &quot;The Dream Book: An Anthology of Writings by Italian American Women&quot; (1985) was the first anthology that pulled together the historic range of writing from the late 19th century to the 1980s. It exhibited the wealth of fiction, poetry, essays, and letters and paid special attention to the interaction of Italian American women with American social activism. Italian American poets Lawrence Ferlinghetti and Gregory Corso played a prominent role in the Beat Generation. Ferlinghetti was also the co-founder of City Lights Bookstore, a San Francisco bookstore and publishing company that published much of the work of other Beat Generation writers. Many of these authors&#x27; books and writings are easily found on the internet, as, for example, on an archive of contemporary Italian American authors, as well as in bibliographies online at Stonybrook University&#x27;s Italian American Studies Department in New York or at the Italian American Writers Association website.

A scholarly literature has also emerged that critiques the literary output. Common themes include conflicts between marginal Italian American and mainstream culture, and tradition-bound immigrant parents opposed by their more assimilated children. Mary Jo Bona provided the first full-length scholarly analysis of the literary tradition. She is especially interested in showing how authors portrayed the many configurations of family relationships, from the early immigrant narratives of journeying to a new world, through novels that stress intergenerational conflicts, to contemporary works about the struggle of modern women to form nontraditional gender roles.

Among the scholars who have led the renaissance in Italian American literature are professors Richard Gambino, Anthony Julian Tamburri, Paolo Giordano, and Fred Gardaphé. The latter three founded Bordighera Press and edited &quot;From the Margin: An Anthology of Italian American Writing&quot; (Purdue University Press). At Brooklyn College, Dr. Robert Viscusi founded the Italian American Writers Association and is an author and American Book Award winner himself. As a result of the efforts of magazines like &quot;Voices in Italian Americana&quot;; &quot;Ambassador&quot;, a publication of the National Italian American Foundation; and &quot;Italian Americana&quot;, edited by Carla Simonini, Italian Americans have been reading more works of their own writers. A supplemental website at www.italianamericana.com to the journal &quot;Italian Americana&quot;, edited by novelist Christine Palamidessi Moore, also offers historical articles, stories, memoirs, poetry, and book reviews. Dana Gioia, was poetry editor of &quot;Italian Americana&quot; from 1993 to 2003, followed by poet Michael Palma, who also selects poems for &quot;Italian Americana&quot;″s webpage supplement. Lawrence Ferlinghetti, Daniela Gioseffi, and Paul Mariani, are among the internationally known authors who have been awarded the John Ciardi Award for Lifetime Achievement in Poetry during Michael Palma&#x27;s tenure as poetry editor. Daniela Gioseffi, with Alfredo de Palchi, founded the Annual $2,000 Bordighera Poetry Prize to further the names of Italian American poets in American literature. As of 1997, 12 books have been published in the bilingual series from Bordighera Press.

In the field of academic cinema studies, Peter Bondanella, Peter Brunette, and Frank P. Tomasulo have made significant contributions to film scholarship as authors, editors, and educators.

Italian Americans have written not only about the Italian American experience but, indeed, the human experience. Some of the most popular inspirational books have been authored by Italian Americans—notably, those of Og Mandino, Leo Buscaglia, and Antoinette Bosco. A series of inspirational books for children has been written by Tomie dePaola. Contemporary best-selling fiction writers include David Baldacci, Kate DiCamillo, Richard Russo, Adriana Trigiani, and Lisa Scottoline.

===Religion===
The majority of Italian Americans are Catholics, although Catholic affiliation among Italian American adults has fallen from 89 percent in 1972 to 56 percent in 2010 (-33 percentage points). By 1910, Italian Americans had founded 219 Catholic churches and 41 parochial schools, served by 315 priests and 254 nuns, 2 Catholic seminaries, and 3 orphanages. Four hundred Italian Jesuit priests left Italy for the American West between 1848 and 1919. Most of these Jesuits left their homeland involuntarily, expelled by Italian nationalists in the successive waves of Italian unification that dominated Italy. When they came to the West, they ministered to Native Americans in the Northwest, Irish-Americans in San Francisco, and Mexican Americans in the Southwest. They also ran the nation&#x27;s most influential Catholic seminary, in Woodstock, Maryland. In addition to their pastoral work, they founded numerous high schools and colleges, including Regis University, Santa Clara University, the University of San Francisco, and Gonzaga University.

In some Sicilian American communities, primarily Buffalo and New Orleans, Saint Joseph&#x27;s Day (March 19) is marked by parades and celebrations, including traditional &quot;St. Joseph&#x27;s tables,&quot; where meatless dishes are served for the benefit of the communities&#x27; poor. Columbus Day is also widely celebrated, as are the feasts of some regional Italian patron saints. In Boston&#x27;s North End, the Italian immigrants celebrate the &quot;Feast of all Feasts,&quot; Saint Anthony&#x27;s Feast. Started in 1919 by Italian immigrants from Montefalcione, a small town near Naples, Italy, the feast is widely considered the largest and most authentic Italian religious festival in the United States. More than 100 vendors and 300,000 people attend the feast over a three-day period in August. San Gennaro (September 19) is another popular saint, especially among Neapolitans. Santa Rosalia (September 4), is celebrated by immigrants from Sicily. Immigrants from Potenza celebrate the San Rocco&#x27;s Day (August 16) feast at the Potenza Lodge in Denver the third weekend of August. San Rocco is the patron saint of Potenza, as is San Gerardo. Many still celebrate the Christmas season with a Feast of the Seven Fishes. The Feast of the Assumption is celebrated in Cleveland&#x27;s Little Italy on August 15. On this feast day, people will pin money on a Blessed Virgin Mary statue as a symbol of prosperity. The statue is then paraded through Little Italy to Holy Rosary Church. For almost 25 years, Cleveland Bishop Anthony Pilla participated in the parade and mass to celebrate his Italian heritage. Bishop Pilla retired in April 2006.

While most Italian American families have a Catholic background, about 19 percent self-identified as Protestant in 2010. In the early 20th century, about 300 Protestant missionaries worked in urban Italian American neighborhoods. Some have joined the Episcopal Church, which still retains much of the Catholic liturgical form. Some have converted to evangelical churches. Fiorello La Guardia was raised Episcopalian; his father was Catholic, and his mother was from the small but significant community of Italian Jews. There is a small charismatic denomination, known as the Christian Church of North America, which is rooted in the Italian Pentecostal Movement that originated in Chicago in the early 20th century. A group of Italian immigrants in Trenton, New Jersey, and Wakefield, Massachusetts, built their own small Baptist chapel and converted to the Baptist denomination. The Church of Jesus Christ (Bickertonite), a denomination of the Latter Day Saint movement, which is headquartered in Monongahela, Pennsylvania, counts significant numbers of Italian Americans in its leadership and membership. The town of Valdese, North Carolina, was founded in 1893 by a group of Italians of Waldensian religion, originally from the Cottian Alps in Italy.

==== Italian Jews ====


The Jewish emigration from Italy was never of a magnitude that resulted in the formation of Italian Jewish communities in the United States. Religious Italian Jews integrated into existing Jewish communities without difficulty, especially in Sephardic communities, and those who were secular found Jewish secular institutions in the United States ready to welcome them. Despite their small numbers, Italian American Jews have had a great influence on American life, starting with Lorenzo Da Ponte (born &quot;Emanuele Conegliano&quot;), Mozart&#x27;s former librettist, opera impresario and the first professor of Italian at Columbia College in New York, where he lived from 1805 to his death in 1838.

From a religious point of view, the figure of greatest influence is Rabbi Sabato Morais, who, at the end of the 19th century, was the leader of the large Sephardic community of Philadelphia. In 1886, he became one of the founders of the Jewish Theological Seminary of America in New York, where he became its first dean. Two other Italian Jews achieved prominence in the United States in the first half of the 20th century: Giorgio Polacco was the principal conductor of the Metropolitan Opera House (1915–1917) and the Chicago Civic Opera (1921–1930), and Fiorello La Guardia was a member of the U.S. Congress (1917–1919 and 1923–1933) and a popular mayor of New York (1934–1945). A descendant on his mother&#x27;s side of the great Italian rabbi Samuel David Luzzatto, La Guardia could address his constituency in both Italian and Yiddish.

Under Mussolini&#x27;s Racial Laws of 1938, Italian Jews, who had lived in Italy for over two millennia, were stripped of most of their civil liberties. Finding refuge in the United States as a result of the fascist persecutions during the 1930s and 1940s, roughly 2,000 Italian Jews landed in America and continued their work in a wide range of fields. Many achieved international importance, including Giorgio Levi Della Vida, Mario Castelnuovo-Tedesco, Vittorio Rieti, Bruno Rossi, Emilio Segre, Giorgio Cavaglieri, Ugo Fano, Robert Fano, Guido Fubini, Eugene Fubini, and Silvano Arieti. Of particular importance also are the contributions of the Italian Jewish women Maria Bianca Finzi-Contini, Bianca Ara Artom, and Giuliana Tesoro, who opened the fields of university and scientific research to Italian American women. After the war, four Italian American Jews received the Nobel Prize: Franco Modigliani, Emilio Segre, Salvador Luria, and Rita Levi Montalcini. Also of significance are the contributions of communication specialist Andrew Viterbi, journalist and writer Ken Auletta, and economist Guido Calabresi. The international recognition of the work of Primo Levi and other Italian-Jewish authors, such as Giorgio Bassani and Carlo Levi, has increased the interest in the United States in Italian Judaism, as demonstrated by the opening in 1998 of the Primo Levi Center of New York.

===Education===

During the era of mass immigration, rural families in Italy did not place a high value on formal education since they needed their children to help with chores as soon as they were old enough. For many, this attitude did not change upon arriving in America, where children were expected to help support the family as soon as possible. This view toward education steadily changed with each successive generation. The 1970 census revealed that those under age 45 had achieved a level of education comparable to the national average, and within six decades of their peak immigration year, Italian Americans as a whole had equaled the national average in educational attainment. Presently, according to Census Bureau data, Italian Americans have an average high school graduation rate, and a higher rate of advanced degrees compared to the national average. Italian Americans throughout the United States are well represented in a wide variety of occupations and professions, from skilled trades, to the arts, to engineering, science, mathematics, law, and medicine, and include a number of Nobel prize winners.

There are two Italian international schools in the United States, La Scuola International in San Francisco, and La Scuola d&#x27;Italia Guglielmo Marconi in New York City.

===Language===
According to the Sons of Italy News Bureau, from 1998 to 2002 the enrollment in college Italian language courses grew by 30%, faster than the enrollment rates for French and German. Italian is the fourth most commonly taught foreign language in U.S. colleges and universities behind Spanish, French, and German. According to the U.S. 2000 Census, Italian (including Sicilian) is the sixth most spoken language in the United States (tied with Vietnamese) after English with over 1 million speakers.

As a result of the large wave of Italian immigration to the United States in the late 19th and early 20th centuries, Italian and Sicilian were once widely spoken in much of the U.S., especially in northeastern and Great Lakes area cities like Buffalo, Rochester, Detroit, Chicago, Cleveland and Milwaukee, as well as San Francisco, St. Louis and New Orleans. Italian-language newspapers exist in many American cities, especially New York City, and Italian-language movie theatres existed in the U.S. as late as the 1950s. &quot;L&#x27;Idea&quot; is a bilingual quarterly published in Brooklyn since 1974. &quot;Arba Sicula&quot; (Sicilian Dawn) is a semiannual publication of the society of the same name, dedicated to preserving the Sicilian language. The magazine and a periodic newsletter offer prose, poetry and comment in Sicilian, with adjacent English translations.

Today, prizes like the Bordighera Annual Poetry Prize, founded by Daniela Gioseffi, Pietro Mastrandrea and Alfredo di Palchi, with support from the Sonia Rraiziss-Giop Foundation and Bordighera Press, which publishes the winners in bilingual editions, have helped to encourage writers of the diaspora to write in Italian. Chelsea Books in New York City and Gradiva Press on Long Island have published many bilingual books due to the efforts of bilingual writers of the diaspora like Paolo Valesio, Alfredo de Palchi, and Luigi Fontanella. Dr. Luigi Bonaffini of the City University of New York, publisher of &quot;The Journal of Italian Translation&quot; at Brooklyn College, has fostered Italian dialectic poetry throughout Italy and the U.S. Joseph Tusiani of New York and New York University, a distinguished linguist and prize-winning poet born in Italy, paved the way for Italian works of literature in English and has published many bilingual books and Italian classics for the American audience, among them the first complete works of Michelangelo&#x27;s poems in English to be published in the United States. All of this literary endeavor has helped to foster the Italian language, along with Italian opera, of course, in the United States. Many of these authors and their bilingual books are located throughout the internet.
Author Lawrence Distasi argues that the loss of spoken Italian among the Italian American population can be tied to U.S. government pressures during World War II. During World War II, in various parts of the country, the U.S. government displayed signs that read, &quot;Don&#x27;t Speak the Enemy&#x27;s Language&quot;. Such signs designated the languages of the Axis powers, German, Japanese and Italian, as &quot;enemy languages&quot;. Shortly after the Axis powers declared war on the U.S., many Italian, Japanese and German citizens were interned. Among the Italian Americans, those who spoke Italian, who had never become citizens and who belonged to groups that praised Benito Mussolini, were most likely to become candidates for internment. Distasi claims that many Italian language schools closed down in the San Francisco Bay Area within a week of the U.S. declaration of war on the Axis powers. Such closures were inevitable since most of the teachers in Italian languages were interned.

Despite previous decline, Italian and Sicilian are still spoken and studied by those of Italian American descent and it can be heard in various American communities, especially among older Italian Americans. The official Italian taught in schools is Standard Italian, which is based on 14th century literary Florentine. However, the &quot;Italian&quot; with which Italian Americans are generally acquainted is often rooted in the Regional Italian and Italo-Dalmatian languages their immigrant ancestors brought from Italy to American, primarily southern Italian and Sicilian dialects of pre-unification Italy.
Despite it being the fifth most studied language in higher education (college and graduate) settings throughout America, the Italian language has struggled to maintain being an AP course of study in high schools nationwide. It was only in 2006 that AP Italian classes were first introduced, and they were soon dropped from the national curricula after the spring of 2009. The organization which manages such curricula, the College Board, ended the AP Italian program because it was &quot;losing money&quot; and had failed to add 5,000 new students each year. Since the program&#x27;s termination in the spring of 2009, various Italian organizations and activists have attempted to revive the course of study. Most notable in the effort is Margaret Cuomo, sister of New York Governor Andrew Cuomo. She provided the impetus for the program&#x27;s birth in 2006 and is currently attempting to secure funding and teachers to reinstate the program. It is also worth noting that Italian organizations have begun fundraisers to revive AP Italian. Organizations such as the NIAF and Order Sons of Italy in America have made strides in collecting money, and are prepared to aid in the monetary responsibility any new AP Italian program would bring with it.

Web-based Italian organizations, such as ItalianAware, have begun book donation campaigns to improve the status and representation of Italian and Italian American literature in the New York public libraries. According to ItalianAware, the Brooklyn Public Library is the worst offender in New York City. It has 11 books pertaining to the Italian immigrant experience available for checkout, spread across 60 branches. That amounts to one book for every six branches in Brooklyn, which (according to ItalianAware) cannot supply the large Italian/Italian American community in the borough. ItalianAware aimed to donate 100 books to the Brooklyn Public Library by the end of 2010.

=== Italian American pidgin ===
Italian American pidgin or Italian American slang is a pidgin language thought to have developed in the early 1900s in American cities with a large Italian population, primarily New York and New Jersey. It soon spread to many Italian communities across cities and metropolitan areas in both the U.S. and Canada. It is not a language in its own right but is a mix of the various Italian dialects and American English.

=== Cuisine ===

Italian Americans have profoundly influenced the eating habits of America. Italian American TV personalities, such as Mario Batali, Giada DeLaurentiis, Rachael Ray, Lidia Bastianich, and Guy Fieri have hosted popular cooking shows featuring Italian cuisine.

While heavily influenced by and sharing common dishes with Italian cuisine, especially the Neapolitan and Sicilian traditions of typical Italian immigrants to the United States, Italian American cuisine differs in several respects. The greater availability of meat in quantity led to new staples such as spaghetti and meatballs, while pizza evolved regionally into styles as diverse as Chicago-style deep dish and New York thin crust.

===Folklore===
One of the most characteristic and popular of Italian American cultural contributions has been their feasts. Throughout the United States, wherever one may find an &quot;Italian neighborhood&quot; (often referred to as &quot;Little Italy&quot;), one can find festive celebrations such as the well-known Feast of San Gennaro in New York City, the unique Our Lady of Mount Carmel &quot;Giglio&quot; Feast in the Williamsburg section of Brooklyn, New York, Italian feasts involve elaborate displays of devotion to Jesus Christ and patron saints. On the weekend of the last Sunday in August, the residents of Boston&#x27;s North End celebrate the &quot;Feast of all Feasts&quot; in honor of St. Anthony of Padua, which was started over 300 years ago in Montefalcione, Italy. Perhaps the most widely known is Saint Joseph&#x27;s feast day on March 19. These feasts are much more than simply isolated events within the year. Feast (&quot;Festa&quot; in Italian) is an umbrella term for the various secular and religious, indoor and outdoor activities surrounding a religious holiday. Typically, Italian feasts consist of festive communal meals, religious services, games of chance and skill and elaborate outdoor processions consisting of statues resplendent in jewels and donations. The celebration usually takes place over the course of several days, and is communally prepared by a church community or a religious organization over the course of several months.

Currently, there are more than 300 Italian feasts celebrated throughout the United States. Notable is Festa Italiana, held in Milwaukee every summer. These feasts are visited each year by millions of Americans from various backgrounds who come together to enjoy Italian music and food delicacies. In the past, as to this day, an important part of Italian American culture centers around music and cuisine.

=== TV and press===

Numerous American television personalities are of Italian descent. Talk-show hosts include Jay Leno, Jimmy Kimmel, Kelly Ripa, Maria Bartiromo, Adam Carolla, Neil Cavuto, Kelly Monaco, Jai Rodriguez, Annette Funicello, Victoria Gotti, Tony Danza, Giuliana DePandi, Giuliana Rancic, Bruno Cipriani.

====Italian American newspapers ====
Generoso Pope (1891–1950), the owner of a chain of Italian language newspapers in major cities, stands out as the epitome of the Italian American ethnic political broker. He bought &quot;Il Progresso Italo-Americano&quot; in 1928 for $2 million; he doubled its circulation to 200,000 in New York City, making it the largest Italian-language paper in the country. He purchased additional papers in New York and Philadelphia, which became the chief source of political, social, and cultural information for the community. Pope encouraged his readers to learn English, become citizens, and vote; his goal was to instill pride and ambition to succeed in modern America. A conservative Democrat who ran the Columbus Day parade and admired Mussolini, Pope was the most powerful enemy of anti-Fascism among Italian Americans. Closely associated with Tammany Hall politics in New York, Pope and his newspapers played a vital role in securing the Italian vote for Franklin D. Roosevelt&#x27;s Democratic tickets. He served as chairman of the Italian Division of the Democratic National Committee in 1936, and helped persuade the president to take a neutral attitude over Italy&#x27;s invasion of Ethiopia. He broke with Mussolini in 1941 and enthusiastically supported the American war effort. In the late 1940s Pope supported the election of William O&#x27;Dwyer as mayor in 1945 and Harry S. Truman as president. His business concerns continued to prosper under New York&#x27;s Democratic administrations, and in 1946 he added the Italian-language radio station WHOM to his media holdings. In the early years of the Cold War, Pope was a leading anti-Communist and orchestrated a letter-writing campaign by his subscribers to stop the Communists from winning the Italian elections in 1948.

Voters did not always vote the way editorials dictated, but they depended on the news coverage. At many smaller papers, support for Mussolini, short-sighted opportunism, deference to political patrons who were not members of the Italian-American communities, and the necessity of making a living through periodicals with a small circulation, generally weakened the owners of Italian-language newspapers when they tried to become political brokers of the Italian American vote.

James V. Donnaruma purchased Boston&#x27;s &quot;La Gazzetta del Massachusetts&quot; in 1905. &quot;La Gazzetta&quot; enjoyed a wide readership in Boston&#x27;s Italian community because it emphasized detailed coverage of local ethnic events and explained how events in Europe affected the community. Donnaruma&#x27;s editorial positions, however, were frequently at odds with the sentiments of his readership. Donnaruma&#x27;s conservative views and desire for greater advertising revenue prompted him to court the favor of Boston&#x27;s Republican elite, to whom he pledged editorial support in return for the purchase of advertising space for political campaigns. &quot;La Gazzetta&quot; consistently supported Republican candidates and policy positions, even when the party was proposing and passing laws to restrict Italian immigration. Nevertheless, voting records from the 1920s–1930s show that Boston&#x27;s Italian Americans voted heavily for Democratic candidates.

Carmelo Zito took over the San Francisco newspaper &quot;Il Corriere del Popolo&quot; in 1935. Under Zito, it became one of the fiercest foes of Mussolini&#x27;s fascism on the West Coast. It vigorously attacked Italy&#x27;s 1935 invasion of Ethiopia and its intervention in the Spanish Civil War. Zito helped form the Italian-American Anti-Fascist League and often attacked certain Italian prominenti like Ettore Patrizi, publisher of &quot;L&#x27;Italia&quot; and &quot;La Voce del Popolo&quot;. Zito&#x27;s paper campaigned against alleged Italian pro-Fascist language schools of San Francisco.

In 1909, Vincenzo Giuliano, an immigrant from Calabria, Italy and his wife Maria Oliva founded &quot;La Tribune Italiana d&#x27;America&quot;, known today as &quot;The Italian Tribune&quot;, which circulates throughout southeastern Michigan. A second newspaper founded by a Catholic order of priests, &quot; La Voce del Popolo&quot; also served the Metro Detroit community until the 1920s, when that newspaper merged with &quot;La Tribuna Italiana d&#x27;America&quot;. Upon Giuliano&#x27;s death in the 1960s, his family continued the paper.

=== Organizations ===

Italian-American organizations include:

*Alpha Phi Delta
*American Italian Anti-Defamation League
*Columbus Citizens Foundation
*Italian American Congressional Delegation
*Italian American One Voice Coalition
*Italian-American Civil Rights League
*Italian-American National Union
*Italy–USA Foundation
*National Organization of Italian American Women
*Order Sons of Italy in America
*Unico National
*The Columbian Foundation
* American Relief for Italy, Inc (ARI)

In 1944, the creation of the American Relief for Italy, Inc (ARI) functioned as an umbrella organization until 1946. The ARI collected, shipped, and distributed over $10 million of relief materials donated by other Italian organizations and individuals from all over Italy. Catholic charities, labor unions, cultural clubs, and fraternal organizations all responded in helping to raise money for the ARI. These relief materials were donated to Italians in need and helped to provide humanitarian assistance. All remaining donations were distributed to Italian soldiers at war. This organization was one of the first steps in the lengthy process of political and economic stabilizations in postwar Italy.

* American Committee on Italian Migration (ACIM)

Throughout the 1950s and the 1960s, the American Committee on Italian Migration (ACIM) was one of the largest, most active Italian American organizations in the United States. They gave assistance to Italian immigrants living in the United States threatened by political instability and provided recovery for those in need. Frequently, money and supplies were sent back home to those who were unable to migrate or were in the process of migrating to the United States. Most of these people were the women and children Italian men left behind in hopes of starting a new life in America. The ACIM grew rapidly with hundreds of thousands of members being both donors and beneficiaries.

* National Catholic Welfare Conference (NCWC)

The National Catholic Welfare Conference (NCWC) worked with ACIM on legislative campaigns and immigration projects. In 1951, members from NCWC, ACIM, as well as other Italian Americans joined in efforts to create an organization that specifically benefited and focused on assisting Italian immigrants. After a vast effort in 1953, the Refugee Relief Act (RRA) was passed allowing the entrance of over two hundred thousand Italian immigrants into the United States. The RRA provided these Italian immigrants with many opportunities to start their new life in America. Job opportunities, a place to live, and proper education for immigrants children were provided.

The National Italian American Foundation (NIAF) – a nonpartisan, nonprofit organization headquartered in Washington, D.C. – works to represent Italian Americans, spread knowledge of the Italian language, foster U.S./Italy relations and connect the greater Italian American community. Additionally, two major Italian American fraternal and service organizations, Order Sons of Italy in America and Unico National, actively promote knowledge of Italian American history and culture.

The Italian Heritage and Culture Committee – NY, Inc. was founded in 1976, and has organized special events, concerts, exhibits and lectures celebrating Italian culture in New York City. Each year it focuses on a theme representative of the history and culture of Italy and Italian Americans.

The Italic Institute of America is dedicated to fostering and preserving knowledge of the classical Italian heritage of American society, through the Latin language and Greco-Roman-Etruscan civilization, as well as five centuries of contributions to American society by Italians and their descendants.

===Museums===
There are several museums in the United States, dedicated to Italian American culture:
*San Francisco, California: Museo ItaloAmericano
*Los Angeles, California: Italian American Museum of Los Angeles
*Chicago, Illinois: Casa Italia Chicago
*New Orleans, Louisiana: American Italian Cultural Center
*Albany, New York: American Italian Heritage Association and Museum 
*New York, New York: Italian American Museum
*Philadelphia, Pennsylvania: History of Italian Immigration Museum (Filitalia Foundation)

==Discrimination and stereotyping==

During the period of mass immigration to the United States, they were often victims of prejudice, economic exploitation, and sometimes even violence, particularly in the South. In the 1890s, more than 20 Italians were lynched. The hostility was often directed toward the Southern Italians and Sicilians who began immigrating to the United States in large numbers after 1880.

A journalist asked a West Coast construction boss if the Italian was a white man, to which the boss replied: &quot;No sir, an Italian is a Dago&quot;. This response reflected the xenophobic attitude of the time defining the idea of Whiteness in the United States. There was a social hierarchy within the various white American communities in which a different degrees of &quot;whiteness&quot; was associated with each group. Some European immigrants, such as Italians, were considered less white than the early European settlers and, therefore, were less accepted in American society. 

Italian stereotypes abounded as a means of justifying the maltreatment of the immigrants. The print media greatly contributed to the stereotyping of Italians with lurid accounts of secret societies and criminality. Between 1890 and 1920, Italian neighborhoods were often depicted as violent and controlled by criminal networks. Two highly publicized cases illustrate the impact of these negative stereotypes:

In 1891, eleven Italian immigrants in New Orleans were lynched due to their alleged role in the murder of the police chief David Hennessy. This was one of the largest mass lynchings in U.S. history. The lynching took place after nine of the immigrants were tried for the murder and acquitted. Subsequently, a mob broke into the jail where they were being held and dragged them out to be lynched, together with two other Italians who were being held in the jail at the time, but had not been accused in the killing.

In 1920, two Italian immigrants, Nicola Sacco and Bartolomeo Vanzetti, were accused of robbery and murder in Braintree, Massachusetts. Many historians agree that they were given a very unfair and biased trial because of their anarchistic political beliefs and their Italian immigrant status. During the next few years, sporadic protests were held in major cities all around the world calling for their release, especially after Portuguese migrant Celestino Madeiros confessed to committing the crime absolving them of participation. The Supreme Court refused to upset the verdict, and Massachusetts Governor Alvan T. Fuller denied the men clemency. In spite of worldwide protests, Sacco and Vanzetti were eventually executed in 1927.

While the vast majority of Italian immigrants brought with them a tradition of hard work and were law-abiding citizens, as documented by police statistics of the early 20th century in Boston and New York City which show that Italian immigrants had an arrest rate no greater than that of other major immigrant groups, a very small minority brought a very different custom. This criminal element preyed on the immigrants of the Little Italies, using intimidation and threats to extract protection money from the wealthier immigrants and shop owners, and were also involved in a multitude of other illegal activities. When the Fascists came to power in Italy, they made the destruction of the Mafia in Sicily a high priority. Hundreds fled to America in the 1920s and 1930s to avoid prosecution.

Prohibition, which went into effect in 1920, proved to be an economic windfall for those in the Italian American community already involved in illegal activities, and those who had fled from Sicily. This entailed smuggling liquor into the country, wholesaling it, and then selling it through a network of outlets. While other ethnic groups were also deeply involved in these illegal ventures, and the associated violence, Chicago mobster Al Capone became the most notorious figure of the Prohibition era. Though eventually repealed, Prohibition had a long-term effect as the spawning ground for later criminal activities.

In the 1950s, the scope of Italian American organized crime became well known though a number of highly publicized congressional hearings that followed a police raid on a top-level meeting of racketeers in Apalachin, New York. With advanced surveillance techniques, the Witness Protection Program, the Racketeer Influenced &amp; Corrupt Organizations Act, and vigorous and sustained prosecution the power and influence of organized crime were greatly diminished in the decades that followed. Two Italian American prosecutors, Rudy Giuliani and Louis Freeh, were instrumental in bringing this about. Freeh was later appointed director of the FBI, while Giuliani would serve two terms as Mayor of New York City.
From the earliest days of the movie industry, Italians have been portrayed as violent criminals and sociopaths. This trend has continued to the present day. The stereotype of Italian Americans is the standardized mental image which has been fostered by the entertainment industry, especially through commercially successful movies like &quot;The Godfather&quot;, &quot;Goodfellas&quot;, and &quot;Casino&quot;; and TV programs such as &quot;The Sopranos&quot;. This follows a known pattern in which it is possible for the mass media to effectively create universally recognized, and sometimes accepted, stereotypes.

A highly publicized protest from the Italian-American community came in 2001 when the Chicago-based organization AIDA (American Italian Defamation Association) unsuccessfully sued Time Warner for distribution of HBO&#x27;s series &quot;The Sopranos&quot;.

The DreamWorks animated film, &quot;Shark Tale&quot;, was widely protested by virtually all major Italian-American organizations as introducing the mob genre and negative stereotyping into a children&#x27;s movie. In spite of the protests, which started during its early production, the movie was produced and released in 2004.

In 2009, MTV launched a reality show, &quot;Jersey Shore&quot;, which prompted severe criticism from Italian American organizations such as the National Italian American Foundation, Order Sons of Italy in America, and Unico National for its stereotypical portrayal of Italian Americans.

In 2019, &quot;Made in Staten Island&quot; lasted just three episodes, also on MTV, before a public outcry from residents of the borough in general, and Italian-American residents therein in particular, forced the show&#x27;s cancellation.

The effective stereotyping of Italian Americans as being associated with organized crime was shown by a comprehensive study of Italian American culture on film, conducted from 1996 to 2001 by the Italic Institute of America. The findings showed that over two-thirds of the more than 2,000 films studied portray Italian Americans in a negative light. Further, close to 300 movies featuring Italian Americans as criminals have been produced since &quot;The Godfather&quot;, an average of nine per year. According to the Italic Institute of America:
: The mass media has consistently ignored five centuries of Italian American history, and has elevated what was never more than a minute subculture to the dominant Italian American culture.

In actuality, according to recent FBI statistics, Italian American organized crime members and associates number approximately 3,000; and, given an Italian American population estimated to be approximately 18 million, the study concludes that only one in 6,000 is active in organized crime (0.007% of Italian-Americans).

==Communities==


Little Italies were, to a considerable extent, the result of Italophobia. The ethnocentrism and anti-Catholicism exhibited by the earlier Anglo-Saxon and northern European settlers helped to create an ideological foundation for fixing foreignness on urban spaces occupied by immigrants. Communities of Italian Americans were established in most major industrial cities of the early 20th century. New Orleans, Louisiana was the first site of immigration of Italians into America in the 19th century, before Italy was a unified nation-state. This was before New York Harbor and Baltimore became the preferred destinations for Italian immigrants. In sharp contrast to the Northeast, most of the Southern states (with the exception of Central and South Florida and the New Orleans area) have relatively few Italian-American residents. During the labor shortage in the 19th and early 20th centuries, planters in the Deep South did attract some Italian immigrants to work as sharecroppers, but they soon left the extreme anti-Italian discrimination and strict regimen of the rural areas for the cities or other states. The state of California has had Italian-American residents since the 1850s. By the 1970s, gentrification of inner city neighborhoods and the arrival of new immigrant groups caused a sharp decline in the old Italian-American and other ethnic enclaves. Many Italian Americans moved to the rapidly growing Western states. Today, New York and New Jersey have the largest numbers of Italian Americans in the U.S. while smaller Northeastern cities such as Pittsburgh, Providence and Hartford have the highest percentage of Italian Americans in their metropolitan areas.

The New York-based daily newspaper &quot;Il Progresso Italo-Americano&quot; had a national audience and reflected the views of the leadership of the community. It was published 1880–1988.

===New York City===

New York City is home to the largest Italian-American population in the country and the second-largest Italian population outside of Italy. Several Little Italy enclaves exist in New York City, including Little Italy, Manhattan; the Lower East Side in general; Italian Harlem, Morris Park, Belmont, Bensonhurst, Howard Beach, Ozone Park, Carroll Gardens, Greenwich Village, Middle Village, Italian Williamsburg, Bay Ridge, and the South Shore of Staten Island. Historically, Little Italy on Mulberry Street in Manhattan extends as far south as Canal Street, as far north as Bleecker, as far west as Lafayette and as far east as the Bowery. The neighborhood was once known for its large population of Italians. Today, it consists of Italian stores and restaurants. The Italian immigrants congregated along Mulberry Street in Manhattan&#x27;s &quot;Little Italy&quot; to celebrate San Gennaro with a large street fair, lasting 11 days, that takes place every September. Today, much of the neighborhood has been absorbed and engulfed by Chinatown, as immigrants from China moved to the area.

Arthur Avenue in the Belmont section of New York City&#x27;s northernmost borough, The Bronx, is one of the many neighborhoods considered the Bronx&#x27;s &quot;Little Italy&quot;, with Morris Park, Pelham Bay, Throggs Neck, and other Bronx neighborhoods also serving as centers of Italian-American culture.

Bensonhurst used to be heavily Italian-American, and it used to be considered the main &quot;Little Italy&quot; of Brooklyn. Since the late 1990s, most Italians have moved to Staten Island. The Italian-speaking community remains over 20,000 strong, according to the census of 2000. However, the Italian-speaking community is becoming &quot;increasingly elderly and isolated, with the small, tight-knit enclaves they built around the city slowly disappearing as they give way to demographic changes&quot;. Its main thoroughfare, 18th Avenue (also known as Cristoforo Colombo Boulevard) between roughly 60th Street and Shore Parkway, is lined with predominantly small, Italian family-owned businesses—many of which have remained in the same family for several generations. 86th Street is another popular local thoroughfare, lined by the arches of the elevated BMT West End Subway Line. The 18th Avenue Station was popularized in opening credits of &quot;Welcome Back, Kotter&quot;. Rosebank in Staten Island was another one of NYC&#x27;s main areas of Italian immigrants since the 1880s, and their descendants have continued as its predominant ethnic group, exemplified by the location of the Garibaldi Memorial in the community. In recent years, the town has experienced an influx of other ethnic groups, including Eastern Europeans, various Latin nationalities as well as Asians, particularly from the Philippines. Today, the South Shore of Staten Island is the most heavily populated Italian area in the City of New York. Over 95% of the South Shore is Italian. The neighborhoods of the South Shore with large percentages of Italians are Huguenot, Annadale, Eltingville, and Tottenville. Howard Beach in the Queens is also home to a large Italian population.

During the beginning of the Cold War, immigration into the United States from Italy was almost impossible. The American government did not want foreigners entering during an intense period of history, especially those immigrating to New York City. Americas were frightened that these immigrants could be terrorists, thus preventing Italians from gaining citizenship. As the Cold War continued, organization groups such as the Italian American Organization and the American Committee on Italian Migration (ACIM) started to form. They created vast efforts to provide assistance and aid to Italian immigrants coming into the United States. Throughout the Cold War, these organizations increased rapidly with many American Italian members as well as many new coming Italians. ACIM also took a leading role in directing the efforts of other Italian American and Catholic organizations that helped contribute to Italian immigration. These organizations provided new migrants with housing, clothing, access to job interviews, and education for children. Immediately after the Cold War period, Italian Americans further consolidated and solidified their status as members of the American mainstream.

===Philadelphia===
Philadelphia&#x27;s Italian American community is the second-largest in the United States. Italian Americans compose 21% of South Philadelphia&#x27;s 163,000 people, and the area has numerous Italian stores and restaurants. Philadelphia is well known for its Italian Market in South Philadelphia. The Italian Market is the popular name for the South 9th Street Curb Market, an area of Philadelphia featuring many grocery shops, cafes, restaurants, bakeries, cheese shops, and butcher shops, many with an Italian influence.

===Boston===
The North End in Boston since the early 20th century became the center of the Italian community of Boston. It is still largely residential and well known for its small, authentic Italian restaurants and for the first Italian cafe, Caffe Vittoria. The influx of Italian inhabitants has left a lasting mark on the area; many seminal Italian American. The Italians peaked at over 44,000.

===Newark===
In its heyday, Seventh Avenue in Newark was one of the largest Little Italy neighborhoods in the U.S., with a population of 30,000, in an area of less than a square mile. The center of life in the neighborhood was St. Lucy&#x27;s Church, founded by Italian immigrants in 1891. Throughout the year, St. Lucy&#x27;s and other churches sponsored processions in honor of saints that became community events. The most famous procession was the Feast of St. Gerard, but there were also great feasts for Our Lady of Mt. Carmel, Our Lady of Snow, the Assumption, and St. Rocco. One of the nation&#x27;s largest Italian newspapers, &quot;The Italian Tribune&quot;, was founded on Seventh Avenue. Seventh Avenue was notoriously devastated by urban renewal efforts during the 1950s. Eighth Avenue was obliterated by the city council, scattering the Italian American residents. Most of its businesses never recovered. The construction of Interstate 280 also served to cut the neighborhood off from the rest of the city. After the devastating urban renewal, some of the First Ward&#x27;s Italians stayed in the neighborhood, while others migrated to other Newark neighborhoods like Broadway, Roseville and the Ironbound. 
===Chicago===
The neighborhood around Chicago&#x27;s Taylor Street has been called the port of call for Chicago&#x27;s Italian American immigrants. Taylor Street&#x27;s Little Italy was home to Hull House, an early settlement house, founded by Jane Addams and Ellen Starr in 1889. Chicago&#x27;s Italian American experience begins with the mass migration from the shores of southern Italy, the Hull House experiment, the Great Depression, World War II, and the machinations behind the physical demise of a neighborhood by the University of Illinois in 1963.

Italian Americans dominated the inner core of the Hull House neighborhood, 1890s–1930s. One of the first newspaper articles about Hull House (&quot;Chicago Tribune&quot;, May 19, 1890) is an invitation, written in Italian, to the residents of the Hull House neighborhood signed, &quot;Le Signorine, Jane Addams and Ellen Starr&quot;.

As suburbs grew in the post-World War II era, Chicago&#x27;s Italian American population spread from the central city, such as to Elmwood Park. Harlem Avenue, &quot;La Corsa Italia&quot;, is lined with Italian stores, bakeries, clubs and organizations. The Feast of our Lady of Mount Carmel, in nearby Melrose Park, has been a regular event in the area for more than one hundred years. The near-west suburbs of Melrose Park, Schiller Park, Franklin Park, River Grove, Norridge, Chicago Heights, and Harwood Heights are also home to many Italian Americans. West suburban Stone Park is home of Casa Italia, an Italian American cultural center.

Northwest of Chicago, the city of Rockford has a large population of Italian Americans. Other historical Italian American communities in Illinois include Peoria, Ottawa, Herrin, Quad Cities and the Metro East suburbs of Saint Louis, Missouri.

===Milwaukee===
Italians first came to Milwaukee, Wisconsin, in the late 19th century. Then in the 19th and 20th centuries large numbers of Italian immigrants began to come in mainly from Sicily and southern Italy. Brady Street, the historic Third Ward and the east side of Milwaukee is considered the heart of Italian immigration to the city, where as many as 20 Italian grocery stores once existed on Brady Street alone. Every year the largest Italian American festival in the United States, Festa Italiana, takes place in Milwaukee. Italian Americans number at around 16,992 in the city, but in Milwaukee County they number at 38,286. There is also an Italian newspaper called &quot;The Italian Times&quot; printed by the Italian Community Center (ICC).

===St. Louis===
Italian immigrants from the northern Italian region of Lombardy came to St. Louis in the late 19th century and settled in the region called The Hill. As the city grew, immigrants from Southern Italy settled in a different neighborhood north of Downtown St Louis. As of 2021 there are approximately 2,000 native born Italians living in St. Louis, few of whom live in The Hill neighborhood. Italians today live mostly throughout the St. Louis metropolitan region. The Italian Community of St. Louis (Comunita&#x27; Italiana di St. Louis), an organization that promotes the Italian language and culture, has several popular events which include Carnevale which occurs every February and Ferragosto which occurs each August. The St. Louis Italian Language Program also exists on the Hill at Gateway Science Academy on Fyler Avenue.

===Los Angeles===
Los Angeles is home to the largest Italian American community in California (and on the West Coast), with 95,300 people identifying as Italian American. San Pedro is Los Angeles&#x27;s Little Italy, which is estimated to contain some 45,000 Italian-Americans. Most worked as fisherman during the first half of the 20th century. The traditional center of Los Angeles&#x27; Italian American community was the area north of the historic Los Angeles Plaza. It survived somewhat intact until the construction of Los Angeles Union Station, in 1939. The station was built in the center of Los Angeles&#x27; Old Chinatown, displacing half of the total Chinese community. The Chinese were allowed to relocate to Little Italy, where they quickly outnumbered the Italian community. Only a few relic-businesses survive, such as San Antonio Winery (the only winery, out of 92, to survive prohibition). The Italian American Museum of Los Angeles opened in 2016 in the historic Italian Hall. Lincoln Heights, northeast of Little Italy, also was a center of the Italian-American population in Los Angeles.

===San Francisco===
According to the 1940 census, 18.5% of all European immigrants were Italian, the largest in the city. North Beach is San Francisco&#x27;s Little Italy, and has historically been home to a large Italian American population. The American Planning Association (APA) has named North Beach as one of ten &#x27;Great Neighborhoods in America&#x27;.

=== Detroit ===

The first ethnic Italian in Detroit was Alphonse Tonty (Italian name: Alfonso Tonti), a Frenchman with an Italian immigrant father. He was the second-in-command of Antoine de la Mothe Cadillac, who established Detroit in 1701. Tonti&#x27;s child, born in 1703, was the first ethnic European child born in Detroit. In order to preserve the fur trade, the French administrators and the British administrators discouraged immigration, so the Italian population had slow growth. Growth in immigration increased after Detroit became a part of the United States and the Erie Canal had been constructed. Armando Delicato, author of &quot;Italians in Detroit&quot;, wrote that Italian immigration to Detroit &quot;lagged behind other cities in the East&quot;.

In 1904 the City of Detroit had 900 Italians. In Metro Detroit there were several thousand ethnic Italians by 1900. The concentrations of the population lived in Eastern Market and east of the area presently known as Greektown. Of those Italians in 1900 most originated from Genoa, Lombardy, and Sicily. Some Italians stayed in Detroit temporarily before traveling onwards to mines in northern Michigan.

The increase in the automobile industry resulted in the increase of the Italian population in the 20th century. By 1925, the number of Italians in the City of Detroit increased to 42,000. The historical center of Detroit&#x27;s Italian-American community was in an area along Gratiot Avenue, east of Downtown Detroit. During that period, Italian immigrants and their children lived throughout the City of Detroit, and several neighborhoods had concentrations of Italian immigrants. There were larger numbers of southern Italians than those from the north. Armando Delicato, author of &quot;Italians in Detroit&quot;, wrote that &quot;Unlike many other American cities, no region of Italy was totally dominant in this area&quot;. Steve Babson, author of &quot;Working Detroit: The Making of a Union Town&quot;, wrote that &quot;Many northern Italians, coming from an urban and industrialized society, had little in common with local Sicilians, who came from the rural and clannish south.&quot; In Detroit&#x27;s history, within the crafts Italians concentrated on tileworking.

During World War II, Fort Wayne (Detroit) served as home to Italian prisoners of war (POWs) captured during the North African campaign. After Italy&#x27;s surrender in September 1943, the POWs were given the opportunity to work as servants, cooks, and janitors. At the end of the war many chose to remain and settle in Detroit.

As of 1951, Detroit had about 150,000 Italians.

The National Italian American Foundation estimated that in 1990, Metro Detroit had 280,000 ethnic Italians. As of 2005 the closest remaining large Little Italy near Detroit was Via Italia in Windsor, Ontario and there was a group of remaining Italian shops and restaurants along Garfield Road in Clinton Township. In 2005 Delicato wrote that &quot;Unlike some other national groups, like the Poles, who still look to Hamtramck, or the Mexicans, who have Mexicantown, Italian Detroiters no longer have a geographical center&quot;.

===Cleveland===
Cleveland&#x27;s Little Italy, also known as Murray Hill, is the epicenter of Italian culture in Northeast Ohio, a combined statistical area reporting 285,000 (9.9%) Italian Americans. Little Italy took root when Joseph Carabelli, immigrating in 1880, saw the opportunity for monument work in Cleveland&#x27;s Lake View Cemetery and established what soon became the city&#x27;s leading marble and granite works. Most fresco and mosaic work in Cleveland was accomplished by Italian artist immigrants. Local Cleveland industrial billionaire John D. Rockefeller took a special liking to the Italian immigrants of the neighborhood and commissioned the building of the community center, Alta House, in 1900.

Ohio&#x27;s largest outdoor Italian American street festival, the Feast of the Assumption (&quot;Festa dell&#x27;assunzione&quot;), takes place the weekend of August 15 every year and draws over 100,000 people to the Little Italy neighborhood. The festival is sponsored by the congregation of Holy Rosary Church, which was founded in 1892 with the current church built in 1905.

===Kansas City===
Attracted by employment in its growing railroad and meat packing industries, Italians primarily from Calabria and Sicily immigrated to Kansas City in the late 19th and early 20th centuries. Kansas City&#x27;s Calabrese mainly passed through the port of New York, sometimes stopping in industrial cities like Pittsburgh along the way, en route to their final destination in the Midwest. Meanwhile, Kansas City&#x27;s Sicilian community generally came through the port of New Orleans, staying there for a decade or more before bringing their families north. In Kansas City, these communities settled close to one another, often overlapping: the Sicilians taking root in what is now known as the River Market and Columbus Park neighborhoods, and the Calabrese mainly settling in the adjacent &quot;Old Northeast&quot; area.

=== New Orleans ===
Economics in Louisiana and Sicily combined to bring about what became known as the Great Migration of thousands of Sicilians. The end of the Civil War allowed the freed men the choice to stay or to go, many chose to leave for higher paying jobs, which in turn led to a perceived scarcity of labor resources for the planters. Northern Italy enjoyed the fruits of modern industrialization, while southern Italy and Sicily suffered destitute conditions under the system of absentee landowners. The peasant was still essentially the serf in the system. Emigration not only offered peasants a chance to move beyond subsistence living, it also offered them a chance to pursue their own dreams of proprietorship as farmers or other business owners. On March 17, 1866, the Louisiana Bureau of Immigration was formed and planters began to look to Sicily as a possible solution to their labor needs. Steamship companies advertisements were very effective in recruiting potential workers. Three steamships per month were running between New Orleans and Sicily by September 1881 at a cost of only forty dollars per person.

In 1890 the ethnic Irish chief of police, David Hennessy was assassinated. Suspicion fell on Italians, whose growing numbers in the city made other whites nervous. The March 14, 1891 New Orleans lynchings were the largest ever mass lynchings in Louisiana history. The use of the term &quot;mafia&quot; by local media in relation to the murder is the first-known usage of the word in print.

===Syracuse===

Italian immigrants first came to the area around Syracuse, New York (a city named for Siracusa, Sicily) in 1883 after providing labor for the construction of the West Shore Railroad. At first, they were quite transient and came and went, but eventually settled down on the Northside. By 1899, the Italian immigrants were living on the Northside of the city in the area centered around Pearl Street. The Italians all but supplanted the Germans in that area of the city and had their own business district along North State and North Salina Streets. By September 2009, Syracuse&#x27;s Little Italy district received millions of dollars of public and private investment for new sidewalks, streetscapes, landscaping, lighting and to set up a &quot;Green Train&quot; program, which trains men to work in green construction and renovation industries. In recent years, the neighborhood is a mix of Italian shops, restaurants and businesses that cater to the area&#x27;s South Asian and African population. Although the neighborhood is far less Italian than in past years, banners throughout the district still read &quot;Little Italy&quot;. By 2010, demographics showed that 14.1% of the population in Syracuse was Italian descent.

===Providence===
Federal Hill in Providence, Rhode Island, is best known for its Italian American community and abundance of restaurants. The first two decades of the 20th century witnessed heavy Italian American immigration into Federal Hill. Though the area today is more diverse, Federal Hill still retains its status as the traditional center for the city&#x27;s Italian American community. The neighborhood features a huge square dedicated to Giuseppe Garibaldi, a monumental gateway arch decorated with La Pigna sculpture (a traditional Italian symbol of welcome, abundance, and quality) and a DePasquale Plaza used for outdoor dining. Providence&#x27;s annual Columbus Day parade marches down Atwells Avenue.

===Tampa-Ybor City===
The community of Ybor City in Tampa, Florida is a cigar-centric company town founded in 1885 and originally populated by a unique mix of Spanish, Cuban, Jewish, and Italian immigrants, with most of the Italians coming from a small group of villages in southwestern Sicily. At first, Italians found it difficult to find employment in the insular and guild-like cigar industry, which had moved to Tampa from Cuba and Key West and was dominated by Hispanic workers. Many founded businesses to serve cigar workers, most notably small grocery stores in the neighborhood&#x27;s commercial district supplied by Italian-owned vegetable and dairy farms located on open land east of Tampa&#x27;s city limits. The immigrant cultures in town became better integrated as time went by; eventually, approximately 20% of the workers in the cigar industry were Italian Americans. The tradition of local Italian-owned groceries continued, however, and a handful of such businesses founded in the late 1800s were still operating into the 21st century.

===Birmingham===
Birmingham, Alabama, was representative of smaller industrial centers. Most Italians in the early 20th century came to work in the burgeoning iron and coal industries. Dorothy L. Crim founded the Ensley Community House in the Italian district in 1912 at the behest of the Birmingham City Mission Board. From 1912 to 1969, Ensley House eased the often difficult transition to American life by providing direct assistance.

===San Diego===

Historically, Little Italy in San Diego was the home to Italian fishermen and their families. Many Italians moved to San Diego from San Francisco after the 1906 San Francisco earthquake in search of tuna and other deep-sea sport and commercial fish. When Interstate 5 was constructed through Little Italy in the early 1970s, 35% of the neighborhood was destroyed and during the same time the California tuna industry was declining, which caused the neighborhood to suffer nearly 30 years of decline. With the creation of the Little Italy Association in 1996, the neighborhood has gone through gentrification and has seen a renaissance as Community Benefit District specializing in Italian food, boutique shopping and maintenance that makes this shopping district the place to live in Downtown San Diego. Prior to gentrification, the neighborhood was mainly composed of low-density commercial businesses and single-family detached homes. Currently, the neighborhood is mainly composed of residential units, mostly mid-rises, high-rises, and lofts, with ground floor retail stores and a few commercial buildings.

===West Virginia===
Tens of thousands of Italians came to West Virginia during the late 1800s and early 1900s to work in the coal camps. As pick-and-shovel miners, Italians hold most of the state&#x27;s coal production records. One Carmine Pellegrino mined 66 tons of coal by hand in a 24-hour period. Many of these immigrants left for larger cities once they earned enough money, but some of their descendants remain, particularly in the north central counties. The communities of Clarksburg, Wheeling, and Bluefield each hold their own annual Italian Heritage Festival. Fairmont puts on a street festival every December that pays homage to the Feast of the Seven Fishes, an Italian tradition of eating seafood dishes on Christmas Eve instead of meat.

=== Arkansas ===
There was a historical trend of immigration of Italians into the U.S. state of Arkansas in the 19th and 20th centuries.

Austin Corbin, the owner of the Sunnyside Plantation in Chicot County, within the Arkansas Delta region, decided to employ Italians there during the post-Reconstruction period. 98 families boarded the &quot;Chateau Yquem&quot; in Genoa with New Orleans as the destination. In November 1895, the ship docked in the United States, and the surviving passengers traveled onward to Sunnyside. The climate and drinking water conditions were difficult. A descendant of these Italians, Libby Borgognoni, stated that 125 of them died during the first year of operations. Corbin had misrepresented the nature of the plantation to the potential employees. Italians came to Sunnyside even after Corbin&#x27;s death in 1896.

Italians later moved from the Arkansas Delta to the Ozarks, establishing Tontitown.

=== Baltimore ===
Italians began to settle in Baltimore during the late 1800s. Some Italian immigrants came to the Port of Baltimore by boat. The earliest Italian settlers in Baltimore were sailors from Genoa, the capital city of the Italian region of Liguria, who arrived during the 1840s and 1850s. Later immigrants came from Naples, Abruzzo, Cefalù, and Palermo. These immigrants created the monument to Christopher Columbus in Druid Hill Park. Many other Italians came by train after entering the country through New York City&#x27;s Ellis Island. Italian immigrants who arrived by train would enter the city through the President Street Station. Because of this, Italians largely settled in a nearby neighborhood that is now known as Little Italy.

Little Italy comprises six blocks bounded by Pratt Street to the North, the Inner Harbor to the South, Eden Street to the East, and President Street to the West. Other neighborhoods where large numbers of Italians settled include Lexington, Belair-Edison, and Cross Street. Many settled along Lombard Street, which was named after the Italian town of Guardia Lombardi. The Italian community, overwhelmingly Roman Catholic, established a number of Italian American parishes such as St. Leo&#x27;s Church and Our Lady of Pompeii Church. The Our Lady of Pompeii Church holds the annual Highlandtown Wine Festival, which celebrates Italian-American culture and benefits the Highlandtown community association.

=== Mississippi ===
Italians have settled in the state of Mississippi since colonial times, although numbers have increased over the years. Since the 18th and mainly the 19th century, Italian settlers have been located in cities and towns across Mississippi. In 1554, Mississippi began to have a real Italian presence, because of the Hernando de Soto expedition. The first Italians who visited Mississippi came in explorations conducted by the French and Spanish governments.

In the 19th century, many Italians entered the United States in New Orleans and traveled onwards to Mississippi. Over 100 immigrants lived in Mississippi as the American Civil War started. In the late 19th century, Italian immigration increased in the United States, which made a tremendous impact on the area. Some of them went to work in the so-called &quot;Mississippi Delta&quot; in the cotton plantations, and even helped the development of the blues music with their mandolins.The late 19th century saw the arrival of larger numbers of Italian immigrants who left Italy seeking economic opportunities. Some Italians from Sicily settled as families along the Mississippi Gulf Coast in Biloxi, Ocean Springs, and Gulfport, preserving close ties with those in their homeland. They worked in the fishing and canning industries. Others were merchants, operating grocery stores, liquor stores, and tobacco shops. Biloxi&#x27;s prosperous tourist industry in the early 20th century created opportunities for ambitious young (Italian) men ... Italians also settled in the Mississippi Delta. The first immigrants came there in the 1880s, working to repair levees and staying as hired farm laborers on plantations. Some of these families became peddlers selling goods to farmers. In 1895, the first Italians came to the Sunnyside Plantation, across the Mississippi River in the Arkansas Delta. That plantation would become the stopping off place for many Italian settlers along both sides of the river. They were mostly from central Italy and experienced in farm work.

— Charles Reagan Wilson (University of Mississippi)

=== Denver ===
Large numbers of Italians first came to Colorado in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. Some settled in industrial Pueblo or in Welby, which was then a farming community, but the largest Italian community in twentieth century Colorado was in Northwest Denver, or as it was known at the time, &quot;the North Side&quot; or &quot;North Denver.&quot;

Italians first put down roots there because St. Patrick&#x27;s Catholic Church, a largely Irish-descended congregation, already existed in the neighborhood. In 1894, the Italian community on the North Side formed its own Catholic church called Our Lady of Mt. Carmel. The community remained strong through the early twentieth century, but in the decades after World War II, many Italian-Americans left Denver proper. Today, descendants of the old North Side Italian-American community are spread across metro Denver, particularly in its inner northwestern suburbs like Wheat Ridge, Westminster and Arvada. The Many Italian Americans without deep roots in Colorado have also settled in the Denver area and other parts of the state throughout the last decades of the twentieth century and in the new millennium.

Reminders of the old Italian community in Northwest Denver are few and far between today. Many of the remaining landmarks are on 38th Avenue. One is Gaetano&#x27;s, a storied Italian American eatery on 38th Avenue and Tejon Street once owned by the Smaldone family, which was involved in bootlegging in Denver. Many members of the Italian-American community in Northwest Denver could trace their roots to Potenza, a comune in Basilicata. A fraternal organization called the Potenza Lodge was founded in 1899 and still exists today on the corner of Shoshone Street and 38th Avenue.

=== Las Vegas ===
There is a significant Italian American community in Las Vegas.
==Demographics==
In the 2000 U.S. census, Italian Americans constituted the fifth largest ancestry group in America with about 15.6 million people, 5.6% of the total U.S. population. As of 2006, the U.S. census estimated the Italian American population at 17.8 million persons, or 6% of the population, constituting a 14% increase over the six-year period.

In 2010, the American Community Survey enumerated Americans reporting Italian ancestry at nearly 17.6 million, 5.8% of the U.S. population; in 2015, 17.3 million, 5.5% of the population. A decade thereafter, in 2020, the U.S. Census Bureau recorded slightly more than 16.5 million Americans reporting full or partial Italian ancestry, about 5.1% of the U.S. population. As ancestry is self-reported, the decline in Italian identification in the 21st century may merely reflect growing Americanization and cultural assimilation of Italian Americans into the broader identity of White Americans, with younger generations increasingly intermixed with other European Americans: the number of Americans who reported being solely of Italian ancestry alone fell by 928,044—from 7,183,882 in 2010 to 6,652,806 in 2015 to 5,724,762 in 2020. However, by contrast, the number of Americans who reported being of Italian ancestry mixed with another ancestry grew by 436,334—from 10,387,926 in 2010 to 10,632,691 in 2015 to 10,824,260 in 2020.

U.S. states number and percentage Italian American in 2020
===U.S. communities with the most residents of Italian ancestry===
The top 20 U.S. communities with the highest percentage of people claiming Italian ancestry are:

# Fairfield, New Jersey 50.3%
# Johnston, Rhode Island 49.5%
# North Branford, Connecticut 43.9%
# East Haven, Connecticut 43.6%
# Hammonton, New Jersey 43.2%
# Ocean Gate, New Jersey 42.6%
# East Hanover, New Jersey 41.3%
# North Haven, Connecticut 41.2%
# Cedar Grove, New Jersey 40.8%
# Wood-Ridge, New Jersey 40.6%
# North Providence, Rhode Island 38.9%
# Dunmore, Pennsylvania 38.9%
# Newfield, New Jersey 38.8%
# Saugus, Massachusetts 38.5%
# Jenkins, Pennsylvania 38.4%
# West Pittston, Pennsylvania 37.9%
# Old Forge, Pennsylvania 37.8%
# Lowellville, Ohio 37.5%
# Hughestown, Pennsylvania 37.5%
# Prospect, Connecticut 37.5%

===U.S. places named for Italian Americans===

* Busti, New York (Town and village name)

=== Socioeconomic Status/Demographics ===
52.1% of Italian Americans work in management, business, science, and arts occupations, but the community also has a large population working in sales and office occupations.

==Notable people==
==See also==

* Sicilian Americans
* List of Italian-American neighborhoods
** Little Italys in the United States
** History of Italians in Baltimore
** History of Italian Americans in Boston
** History of Italian Americans in Metro Detroit
** History of Italians in Mississippi
** Italians in New Orleans
** Italians in New York City
** History of Italian Americans in Philadelphia
** Utah Italians
** Tontitown, Arkansas
** Valdese, North Carolina
* List of Italian-American actors
* List of Italian Americans in sports
* Order Sons of Italy in America
* Italian-American cuisine
* American Mafia
** Italian-American Civil Rights League
* Italy–USA Foundation, based in Rome
* Italy–United States relations, 
* Italian diaspora, worldwide
** Anti-Italianism, worldwide
** Italophilia

==References and notes==
==Bibliography==

* Alba, Richard D. &quot;Italian Americans: Into the twilight of ethnicity&quot; (Prentice Hall, 1985) online
* Bona, Mary Jo. &quot;Claiming a Tradition: Italian American Women Writers&quot; (1999) 

* Bonomo Albright, Carol and Christine Palamidessi Moore, ed. &quot;American Woman, Italian Style&quot; (Fordham Press, 2011).

* Chiaricati, Federico. &quot;Sons of our race! Help your motherland! Buy Italian! Italian propaganda through food ads among Italian American ethnic communities at the turn of the century.&quot; &quot;History of Retailing and Consumption&quot; 8.1 (2022): 49-68. online

* Connell, William J. and Fred Gardaphé, eds., &quot;Anti-Italianism: Essays on a Prejudice&quot; (2010)
* Connell, William J. and Stanislao Pugliese, eds., &quot;The Routledge History of Italian Americans&quot; (2018)
* Cordasco, Francesco. &quot;The Italians; social backgrounds of an American group&quot; (1974)online
* Cosco, Joseph P. &quot;Imagining Italians: The Clash of Romance and Race in American Perceptions, 1880-1910&quot; (State University of New York Press, 2012) online.
* Krajewski, Andrew T., Daniel DellaPosta, and Diane Felmlee. &quot;Vertical organizations, flat networks: Centrality and criminal collaboration in the Italian-American Mafia.&quot; &quot;Social Networks&quot; 68 (2022): 127-138.

* D&#x27;Acierno, Pellegrino A., ed. &quot;The Italian American Heritage: A Companion to Literature and Arts&quot; (Routledge, 2021) online.

* D&#x27;Agostino, Peter R. &quot;Rome in America: Transnational Catholic Ideology from the Risorgimento to Fascism&quot; (2004).
* Dainotto, Roberto M. &quot;The Mafia: A Cultural History&quot; (2015)
* De Ville, John. &quot;Italians in the United States.&quot; &quot;The Catholic Encyclopedia&quot; (1910) vol 8 online
* Diggins, John P. &quot;Mussolini and Fascism: The View from America&quot; (1972)
* Dore, Grazia. &quot;Some Social and Historical Aspects of Italian Emigration to America&quot; &quot;Journal of Social History,&quot; 2#2 (1968), pp. 95–122 online
* Diner, Hasia R. &quot;Hungering for America: Italian, Irish, and Jewish Foodways in the Age of Migration&quot; (2001). 292 pp.
* Fox, Stephen, &quot;The unknown internment: an oral history of the relocation of Italian Americans during World War II&quot;, (1990).
* Gallo, Patrick. &quot;Old Bread, New Wine: A Portrait of the Italian-Americans&quot; (1981)
* Gans, Herbert J. &quot;Urban Villagers&quot; (1982), sociological study online
* Gems, Gerald R. &quot;Sport and the Shaping of Italian-American Identity.&quot; (Syracuse University Press, 2013) 312 pp.
* Giordano, Paolo A. and Anthony Julian Tamburri, eds. &quot;Italian Americans in the Third Millennium : Social Histories and Cultural Representations.&quot; New York: American Italian Historical Association, 2009.
* Giordano, Ralph G. &quot;Italian Culture in America The Immigrants 1880 to 1930 From Discrimination to Assimilation&quot; (Academica Press 2023).
* Giordano, Ralph G., &quot;Italian Culture in America How a Founding Father Introduced Italian Art, Architecture, Food, Wine, and Liberty to the American People&quot; (Academica 2020).
* Giovinazzo, William, Italianità: The Essence of Being Italian and Italian-American&quot; Dark River, an imprint of Bennion Kearny, 2018. Italianità: The Essence of Being Italian and Italian-American | Book
* Glynn, Irial: Emigration Across the Atlantic: Irish, Italians and Swedes compared, 1800-1950 , European History Online, Mainz: Institute of European History, 2011, retrieved: June 16, 2011.
* Gardaphe, Fred L. &quot;Italian Signs, American Streets: The Evolution of Italian American Narrative&quot; (1996)
* Johnson, Colleen Leahy, and Colleen L. Johnson. &quot;Growing up and growing old in Italian-American families&quot; (Rutgers University Press, 1985)
* Lagumina, Salvatore J. et al. eds. &quot;The Italian American Experience: An Encyclopedia&quot; (2000) [
* Landry, Harral, ed. &quot;To See the Past More Clearly: The Enrichment of the Italian Heritage, 1890-1990&quot; (1994) Austin: Nortex Press
* Leone, Castaldo. &quot;Italians in America&quot; (2001) Milanostampa, S.p.A.: Mockingbird Press
* Lombardo, Robert M. &quot;Chicago&#x27;s Little Sicily&quot;, &quot;Journal of the Illinois State Historical Society&quot; Volume: 100. Issue: 1. 2007.
* Luconi, Stefano. &quot;From Paesani to White Ethnics: The Italian Experience in Philadelphia&quot; (2001)
* Luconi, Stefano. &quot;Food as a Terrain for Identity Construction and Ethnic Confrontation among Italian Americans in the United States.&quot; &quot;Journal of American Studies of Turkey&quot; 60 (2023): 17-42. online

* Maddalena, Marinari. &quot;Unwanted: Italian and Jewish Mobilization against Restrictive Immigration Laws, 1882–1965&quot; (2020) excerpt
* Mangione, Jerre and Ben Morreale, &quot;La Storia: Five Centuries of the Italian American Experience.&quot; New York: Harper Perennial, 1992.
* Martone, Eric, ed. &quot;Italian Americans: the history and culture of a people&quot; (ABC-CLIO, 2016) online
* Nelli, Humbert S. &quot;From immigrants to ethnics : the Italian Americans&quot; (Oxford University Press, 1983) online
* Nelli, Humbert S. &quot;Italians&quot;, in Stephan Thernstrom, ed. &quot;Harvard Encyclopedia of American Ethnic Groups&quot;. (Harvard University Press, 1980). . pp 545–60.
* Nelli, Humbert S. &quot;The Business of Crime: Italians and Syndicate Crime in the United States&quot; (1981) online
* Nelli, Humbert S. &quot;The Italian padrone system in the United States&quot; &quot;Labor History&quot; (1964) 5:2, 153–167, DOI: 10.1080/00236566408583942
* Parati, Graziella, and Anthony Julian Tamburri, eds. &quot;The Cultures of Italian Migration: Diverse Trajectories and Discrete Perspectives.&quot; Cranberry, NJ: Fairleigh Dickinson University Press; 2011.
* Pozzetta, George. &quot;Italian Americans.&quot; in &quot;Gale Encyclopedia of Multicultural America,&quot; edited by Thomas Riggs, (3rd ed., vol. 2, Gale, 2014), pp. 505–522. online
*Reppetto, Thomas A. &quot;American Mafia : a history of its rise to power&quot; (2004), scholarly history online
* Rolle, Andrew F. &quot;The immigrant upraised: Italian adventurers and colonists in an expanding America&quot; (Oklahoma UP, 1968) 
* Rolle, Andrew. &quot;The Italian Americans&quot; (1980) psychohistory
* Ruberto, Laura E. and Joseph Sciorra, eds. &quot;New Italian Migrations to the United States: Vol. 1: Politics and History since 1945&quot; (University of Illinois Press, 2017). xvi, 201 pp
* Seguin, Charles, and Sabrina Nardin. (2022) &quot;The Lynching of Italians and the Rise of Antilynching Politics in the United States.&quot; &quot;Social Science History&quot; 46.1 (2022): 65-91. online 

* Serra, Ilaria. &quot;The Imagined Immigrant: Images of Italian Emigration to the United States Between 1890 and 1924&quot; (2009)
* Soresina, Marco. &quot;Italian emigration policy during the Great Migration Age, 1888–1919: the interaction of emigration and foreign policy.&quot; &quot;Journal of Modern Italian Studies&quot; 21.5 (2016): 723–746.
* Sterba, Christopher M. &quot;Good Americans: Italian and Jewish Immigrants During the First World&quot; (2003)
* Thomas, Teresa Fava. &quot;Arresting the Padroni problem and Rescuing the White Slaves in America: Italian Diplomats, Immigration Restrictionists &amp; the Italian bureau 1881-1901.&quot; &quot;Altreitalia&quot; Riviste 192 Tesi 194 (2010) 40: 57–82. online
* Tommasi, L.F. (ed.), &quot;Italian Americans: New perspectives in Italian emigration and ethnicity&quot; (1985)
* Vecchio, Diane C. &quot;Merchants, Midwives, and Laboring Women: Italian Migrants in Urban America&quot; (2006).

===Localities===

* Barton, Josef J. &quot;Peasants and Strangers: Italians, Rumanians, and Slovaks in an American City, 1890-1950&quot; (1975). about Cleveland, Ohio online
* Briggs, John W. &quot;An Italian Passage: Immigrants to Three American Cities&quot; (Yale UP, 1978) on Utica NY, Rochester NY, and Kansas City, MO, 1890–1930. online
* Candeloro, Dominic. &quot;Suburban Italians&quot; in Melvin G. Holli and Peter Jones, eds. &quot;Ethnic Chicago&quot; (1984) pp 239–68 online
* Candeloro, Dominic. &quot;Chicago&#x27;s Italians: Immigrants, Ethnics, Americans.&quot; (Arcadia Publishing, 2003).
* Cinel, Dino. &quot;From Italy to San Francisco: The Immigrant Experience&quot; (1982)
* Cinotto, Simone. &quot;The Italian American Table: Food, Family, and Community in New York City.&quot; (University of Illinois Press, 2013)
* Cinotto, Simone. &quot;Soft Soil, Black Grapes: The Birth of Italian Winemaking in California,&quot; (New York University Press, 2012)
* Critchley, David F. &quot;The origin of organized crime in America: The New York City Mafia, 1891–1931&quot; (Routledge, 2008).
* DeBlasio, Donna M., and Martha I. Pallante. &quot;Becoming Italian American in the Nation&#x27;s Heartland: The Immigrant Experience in Ohio&#x27;s Mahoning Valley.&quot; &quot;Italian Americana&quot; 40.2 (2022): 99–125.
* Delicato, Armando, &quot;Italians in Detroit.&quot; (2005).
* Demarco, William M. &quot;Ethnics and Enclaves: Boston&#x27;s Italian North End&quot; (1981)
* Fichera, Sebastian. &quot;Italy on the Pacific: San Francisco&#x27;s Italian Americans.&quot; New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2012.
* Guglielmo, Thomas A. &quot;White on Arrival: Italians, Race, Color, and Power in Chicago, 1890-1945&quot; (2003) 
* Jackson, Jessica Barbata. &quot;Before the Lynching: Reconsidering the Experience of Italians and Sicilians in Louisiana, 1870s-1890s&quot;. &quot;Louisiana History&quot; (2017). 58#3: 300–338. online
* Juliani, Richard N. &quot;The Social Organization of Immigration: The Italians in Philadelphia&quot; (1980) excerpt and text search
* Juliani, Richard N. &quot;Priest, Parish, and People: Saving the Faith in Philadelphia&#x27;s Little Italy&quot; (2007)
* Lassonde, Stephen. &quot;Learning and earning: Schooling, juvenile employment, and the early life course in late nineteenth-century New Haven.&quot; &quot;Journal of Social History&quot; (1996): 839-870. online
* Lassonde, Stephen. &quot;Learning to Forget: Schooling and Family Life in New Haven&#x27;s Working Class, 1870-1940&quot; (Yale UP 2005) a major scholarly study focused on Italian Americans
** ProQuest Dissertations Publishing,  1994. 9523192; PhD dissertation version of Lassonde, online, 1994)
* Luconi, Stefano. &quot;The Italian-American Vote in Providence, R.I., 1916-1948&quot; (2005)
* Luconi, Stefano. &quot;From paesani to white ethnics: The Italian experience in Philadelphia&quot; (SUNY Press, 2001) online.
* Kobler, John. &quot;Capone: the life and world of Al Capone&quot; (1971) online, on Chicago.
* Mormino, Gary. &quot;The Immigrant World of Ybor City: Italians and Their Latin Neighbors in Tampa, 1885–1985&quot;. Gainesville: University Press of Florida. (1987)
* Nelli, Humbert S. &quot;Italians in Chicago, 1880–1930: A Study in Ethnic Mobility&quot; (2005) online
* Orsi, Robert A. &quot; The Madonna of 115th Street: Faith and Community in Italian Harlem, 1880–1950.&quot; (Yale UP, 1985) online 3rd ed. 2010
* Ottanelli, Fraser M. &quot; &#x27;Mussolini&#x27;s Column&#x27;: Fascist Memorials and the Politics of Italian American Identity in Chicago.&quot; &quot;Italian American Review&quot; 12.1 (2022): 86–107.
* Puleo, Stephen (2007). The Boston Italians: A Story of Pride, Perseverance, and Paesani, from the Years of the Great Immigration to the Present Day. Boston: Beacon Press. .
* Smith, Tom. &quot;The Crescent City Lynchings: The Murder of Chief Hennessy, the New Orleans &#x27;Mafia&#x27; Trials, and the Parish Prison Mob&quot; (The Lyons Press, 2007). online
* Stanger-Ross, Jordan. &quot;Staying Italian: Urban Change and Ethnic Life in Postwar Toronto and Philadelphia&quot; (2010).
* Vecoli, Rudolph J. &quot;The Formation of Chicago&#x27;s&quot; Little Italies&quot;.&quot; &quot;Journal of American Ethnic History&quot; 2.2 (1983): 5-20. online
* Veronesi, Gene. &quot;Italian Americans and Their Communities of Cleveland&quot; (1977) Ohio city; online
* Whyte, William Foote. &quot;Street Corner Society: The Social Structure of an Italian Slum&quot; (University of
Chicago Press, 1943) focus on gangs in &quot;Cornerville&quot; (Boston&#x27;s North End).

* Yans-McLaughlin, Virginia. &quot;Family and Community: Italian Immigrants in Buffalo, 1880–1930.&quot; (1982) online.

===Memory and historiography===
* Agnoletto, Stefano. &quot;Ethnicity Versus Structural Factors in North American History: The Case Study of the Italian Economic Niches.&quot; &quot;Studia Migracyjne-Przeglad Polonijny&quot; 40.1 (151) (2014): 161–181. online
* Alba, Richard D. &quot;The twilight of ethnicity among Americans of European ancestry: The case of Italians.&quot; in &quot;Celebrating 40 Years of Ethnic and Racial Studies&quot; (Routledge, 2019). 50-74. online
* Alba, Richard D. &quot;Italian Americans: Into the twilight of ethnicity&quot; (2023) online.

* Bushman, Claudia L. &quot;America discovers Columbus: how an Italian explorer became an American hero&quot; (1992) online
* Cannistraro, Philip, and Richard Juliani, ed. &quot;Italian-Americans: The Search for a Usable Past.&quot; (The American Italian Historical Association, 1989).
* Cordasco, Francesco. &quot;Italians in the United States : an annotated bibliography of doctoral dissertations completed at American universities, with a handlist of selected published bibliographies, related reference materials, and guide books for Italian emigrants&quot; (1981) online
* Cordasco, Francesco. &quot;Italian Americans : a guide to information sources&quot; (Gale 1978) online

* D&#x27;acierno, Pellegrino. &quot;Cinema Paradiso: The Italian American Presence in American Cinema.&quot; in &quot;The Italian American Heritage&quot; (Routledge, 2021). 563-690. abstract

* Friedman-Kasaba, Kathie. &quot;Memories of migration: Gender, ethnicity, and work in the lives of Jewish and Italian women in New York, 1870-1924&quot; (State University of New York Press, 2012).
* Gabaccia, Donna. &quot;Italian American Women: A Review Essay,&quot; &quot;Italian Americana&quot; 12#1 (1993): 38–61.
* Gabaccia, Donna R. &quot;Italian Immigrant Women in Comparative Perspective.&quot; &quot;The Review of Italian American Studies&quot; (2000): 391-405 online.
* Gardaphe, Fred. L. &quot;The Art of Reading Italian Americana&quot;, New York: Bordighera Press, 2011.
* Gardaphe, Fred L. &quot;Leaving Little Italy: Essaying Italian American Culture&quot; (SUNY Press, 2003).
* Giordano, Paolo A. and Anthony Julian Tamburri, eds. &quot;Beyond the Margin: Essays on Italian Americana&quot; (1998).

* Gravano, Alan J., and Alexandra de Luise. &quot;The Italian American Studies Association at Fifty-Five: 1966–2021.&quot; &quot;Diasporic Italy&quot; 1 (2021): 103-123. online

* Hobbie, Margaret. &quot;Italian American Material Culture: A Directory of Collections, Sites, and Festivals in the United States and Canada&quot; (1992).
* Kosta, Ervin B. &quot;Becoming Italian, becoming American: Ethnic affinity as a strategy of boundary making.&quot; &quot;Ethnic and Racial Studies&quot; 42.5 (2019): 801-819.

* Krase, Jerome, ed. &quot;The Status of Interpretation in Italian American Studies&quot; (Forum Italicum, (2011) online.
* Luconi, Stefano, &quot;Is Italian-American History an Account of the Immigrant Experience with the Politics Left Out? Some Thoughts on the Political Historiography about Italian Americans&quot;, in &quot;Italian Americans in the Third Millennium: Social Histories and Cultural Representations&quot;, ed. Paolo A. Giordano and Anthony Julian Tamburri, 55–72. (New York: American Italian Historical Association, 2009).d=103874809
* Luconi, Stefano. &quot;Whiteness and Ethnicity in Italian-American Historiography.&quot; in &quot;The Status of Interpretation in Italian American Studies: Proceedings of the first Forum in Italian American Criticism [FIAC]&quot; (Forum Italicum Publishing, 2011). Online
* Meyer, Gerald. &quot;Theorizing Italian American History: The Search for an Historiographical Paradigm.&quot; in &quot;The Status of Interpretation in Italian American Studies&quot; (2011): 164+. Online
* Ottanelli, Fraser M. &quot; &#x27;Mussolini&#x27;s Column&#x27;: Fascist Memorials and the Politics of Italian American Identity in Chicago.&quot; &quot;Italian American Review&quot; 12.1 (2022): 86–107.
* Pozzetta, George E. &quot;From Immigrants to Ethnics: The State of Italian-American Historiography.&quot; &quot;Journal of American Ethnic History&quot; 9#1 (1989): 67–95. Online
* Rossi, Guido. &quot;Il progresso Italo-Americano and its portrayal of Italian-American Servicemen (1941-1945).&quot; &quot;Nuova Rivista Storica&quot; (2023), 107#2 pp. 759–787.

* Simms, Norman. &quot;The Italian-American Image During the Twentieth Century.&quot; &quot;The Histories&quot; 5.1 (2019): 4+ online
* Tamburri, Anthony Julian, Paolo A. Giordano, Fred L. Gardaphé, eds. &quot;From the Margin: Writings in Italian Americana&quot; (2000, 2nd ed.)
* Tamburri, Anthony Julian. &quot;To Hyphenate or not to Hyphenate: the Italian/American Writer: Or, An &quot;Other&quot; American?&quot; (1991)
* Tamburri, Anthony Julian. &quot;Re-viewing Italian Americana: Generalities and Specificities on Cinema&quot; (2011)
* Tamburri, Anthony Julian. &quot;Re-reading Italian Americana: Specificities and Generalities on Literature and Criticism&quot; (2014)
* Wirth, Christa. &quot;Memories of Belonging: Descendants of Italian Migrants to the United States, 1884-Present&quot; (Brill, 2015) online review

===Primary sources===
* Albright, Carol Bonomo, and Christine Palamidessi Moore, eds. &quot;American Woman, Italian Style: Italian Americana&#x27;s Best Writings on Women&quot; (Fordham Univ Press, 2011) online.
* Bonomo Albright, Carol and Joanna Clapps Herman, eds. &quot;Wild Dreams&quot; (Fordham Press, 2008). Stories, memoirs, poems by and about Italian Americans. online
* Ciongoli, A. Kenneth, and Jay Parini, eds. &quot;Beyond The Godfather: Italian American Writers on the Real Italian American Experience&quot; (University Press of New England, 1997) online
* Gesualdi, Louis J. ed. &quot;The Italian/American Experience: A Collection of Writings&quot; (2012) online
* Moquin, Wayne, ed. &quot;A Documentary History of Italian Americans&quot; (1974) online

==External links==
* La Gazzetta Italiana - The Italian American Voice
* Italian American Digital Project 
* National Italian American Foundation
* &quot;Immigration -&gt; Italian.&quot; Library of Congress.
* &quot;Italian Immigration.&quot; &quot;Digital History&quot;, University of Houston
* Italian American Museum, New York 
* Italy Revisited (photo archives)
* Taylor Street Archives
* ItalianImmigrants.org 1855 through 1900
* (Selected short newspaper articles, translated into English, 1855–1938).
* The Italian Americans - PBS documentary
* 
* Immigration History Research Center (IHRC), University of Minnesota</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q974693" start="0" end="17" title="Italian Americans" label="Italian Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q846570" start="25" end="34" title="Americans" label="Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q24460" start="143" end="152" title="Northeastern United States" label="Northeast"/>
<link wikidata="Q186545" start="168" end="178" title="Midwestern United States" label="Midwestern"/>
<link wikidata="Q702492" start="179" end="197" title="urban areas" label="metropolitan areas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1675084" start="387" end="403" title="Italian diaspora" label="Italian diaspora"/>
<link wikidata="Q207989" start="491" end="505" title="Southern Italy" label="Southern Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351807" start="568" end="578" title="remittance" label="remittance"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="1187" end="1198" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434492" start="1346" end="1369" title="Immigration Act of 1924" label="Immigration Act of 1924"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1395" end="1416" title="#Influence on American culture and society" label="significant influence"/>
<link wikidata="Q120999088" start="1524" end="1565" title="Italians in the United States before 1880" label="Italians in the United States before 1880"/>
<link wikidata="Q7322" start="1612" end="1632" title="Christopher Columbus" label="Christopher Columbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464982" start="1814" end="1823" title="Europeans" label="Europeans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1449" start="1825" end="1832" title="Genoa" label="Genoese"/>
<link wikidata="Q7322" start="1842" end="1862" title="Christopher Columbus" label="Christopher Columbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q18578423" start="1877" end="1915" title="Voyages of Christopher Columbus" label="four voyages across the Atlantic Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q186851" start="1924" end="1950" title="Catholic Monarchs of Spain" label="Catholic monarchs of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q133641" start="1996" end="2007" title="Age of Discovery" label="exploration"/>
<link wikidata="Q184716" start="2012" end="2024" title="European colonization of the Americas" label="colonization"/>
<link wikidata="Q85642" start="2060" end="2070" title="John Cabot" label="John Cabot"/>
<link wikidata="Q348340" start="2098" end="2107" title="Sebastian Cabot (explorer)" label="Sebastian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4268" start="2122" end="2155" title="East Coast of the United States" label="eastern seaboard of North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q675493" start="2160" end="2169" title="Henry VII of England" label="Henry VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044" start="2210" end="2220" title="Florence" label="Florentine"/>
<link wikidata="Q147676" start="2230" end="2252" title="Giovanni da Verrazzano" label="Giovanni da Verrazzano"/>
<link wikidata="Q47674" start="2390" end="2406" title="Amerigo Vespucci" label="Amerigo Vespucci"/>
<link wikidata="Q23467020" start="2527" end="2534" title="Naming of the Americas" label="America"/>
<link wikidata="Q690830" start="2813" end="2827" title="Marcos de Niza" label="Marco da Nizza"/>
<link wikidata="Q816" start="2883" end="2890" title="Arizona" label="Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522" start="2895" end="2905" title="New Mexico" label="New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q3903778" start="3015" end="3036" title="Pietro Cesare Alberti" label="Pietro Cesare Alberti"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="3146" end="3151" title="Netherlands" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q223308" start="3162" end="3175" title="New Amsterdam" label="New Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="3207" end="3220" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q201620" start="3261" end="3272" title="Waldensians" label="Waldensians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216" start="3374" end="3382" title="Piedmont" label="Piedmont"/>
<link wikidata="Q382593" start="3530" end="3544" title="New Netherland" label="New Netherland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="3567" end="3575" title="New York (state)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="3577" end="3587" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q426025" start="3786" end="3800" title="Duchy of Savoy" label="Duchy of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q495" start="3806" end="3811" title="Turin" label="Turin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2711731" start="3883" end="3895" title="Enrico Tonti" label="Enrico Tonti"/>
<link wikidata="Q298156" start="3948" end="3987" title="René-Robert Cavelier, Sieur de La Salle" label="René-Robert Cavelier, Sieur de La Salle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548416" start="4002" end="4013" title="Great Lakes region" label="Great Lakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204" start="4072" end="4080" title="Illinois" label="Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q1612" start="4096" end="4104" title="Arkansas" label="Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q672913" start="4129" end="4146" title="Arkansas Post" label="Poste de Arkansea"/>
<link wikidata="Q34404" start="4229" end="4240" title="New Orleans" label="New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500063" start="4265" end="4284" title="Louisiana Territory" label="Louisiana Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2840035" start="4320" end="4337" title="Alphonse de Tonty" label="Alphonse de Tonty"/>
<link wikidata="Q586595" start="4379" end="4407" title="Antoine de la Mothe Cadillac" label="Antoine de la Mothe Cadillac"/>
<link wikidata="Q12439" start="4431" end="4438" title="Detroit" label="Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3610043" start="4681" end="4701" title="Alessandro Geraldini" label="Alessandro Geraldini"/>
<link wikidata="Q34820" start="4752" end="4765" title="Santo Domingo" label="Santo Domingo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3083438" start="4774" end="4798" title="François-Joseph Bressani" label="François-Joseph Bressani"/>
<link wikidata="Q135863" start="4847" end="4856" title="Algonquin people" label="Algonquin"/>
<link wikidata="Q213396" start="4861" end="4866" title="Wyandot people" label="Huron"/>
<link wikidata="Q45185" start="4981" end="4993" title="Eusebio Kino" label="Eusebio Kino"/>
<link wikidata="Q41544614" start="5045" end="5055" title="Statue of Eusebio Kino" label="His statue"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495308" start="5115" end="5151" title="United States Capitol Visitor Center" label="United States Capitol Visitor Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q7679474" start="5158" end="5168" title="Taliaferro" label="Taliaferro"/>
<link wikidata="Q641" start="5217" end="5223" title="Venice" label="Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q5452987" start="5240" end="5254" title="First Families of Virginia" label="First Families"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="5265" end="5273" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8040653" start="5279" end="5290" title="Wythe House" label="Wythe House"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125300" start="5303" end="5311" title="Georgian architecture" label="Georgian"/>
<link wikidata="Q492346" start="5326" end="5348" title="Williamsburg, Virginia" label="Williamsburg, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7329387" start="5385" end="5403" title="Richard Taliaferro" label="Richard Taliaferro"/>
<link wikidata="Q186539" start="5424" end="5448" title="Founding Fathers of the United States" label="American Founding Father"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397321" start="5449" end="5461" title="George Wythe" label="George Wythe"/>
<link wikidata="Q841700" start="5559" end="5580" title="Colonial Williamsburg" label="Colonial Williamsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q378819" start="5596" end="5618" title="Governor&amp;#x27;s Palace (Williamsburg, Virginia)" label="Governor&amp;#x27;s Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q2357190" start="5624" end="5631" title="Capitol (Williamsburg, Virginia)" label="Capitol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070529" start="5639" end="5657" title="Colony of Virginia" label="Colony of Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q875637" start="5697" end="5726" title="College of William &amp;amp; Mary" label="College of William &amp;amp; Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q134737" start="5767" end="5775" title="Nobility" label="nobleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q677173" start="5783" end="5796" title="House of Este" label="House of Este"/>
<link wikidata="Q70972" start="5818" end="5824" title="Kingdom of France" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q5484655" start="5828" end="5863" title="François Marie, Chevalier de Reggio" label="François Marie, Chevalier de Reggio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588" start="5873" end="5882" title="Louisiana" label="Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q7738" start="5902" end="5910" title="Louis XV" label="Louis XV"/>
<link wikidata="Q56923" start="5925" end="5940" title="Captain general" label="Captain General"/>
<link wikidata="Q658054" start="5944" end="5960" title="Louisiana (New France)" label="French Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q4386404" start="6001" end="6017" title="Louisiana Creole people" label="Louisiana Creole"/>
<link wikidata="Q503883" start="6034" end="6063" title="St. Bernard Parish, Louisiana" label="St. Bernard Parish, Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q4135313" start="6152" end="6171" title="Confederate General" label="Confederate General"/>
<link wikidata="Q313976" start="6172" end="6191" title="P. G. T. Beauregard" label="P. G. T. Beauregard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387" start="6273" end="6285" title="Rhode Island" label="Rhode Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1449" start="6338" end="6343" title="Genoa" label="Genoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1306964" start="6856" end="6870" title="Filippo Mazzei" label="Filippo Mazzei"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812" start="6977" end="6993" title="Thomas Jefferson" label="Thomas Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q127912" start="7163" end="7190" title="United States Declaration of Independence" label="Declaration of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="7225" end="7251" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5482656" start="7283" end="7297" title="Francesco Vigo" label="Francesco Vigo"/>
<link wikidata="Q918990" start="7327" end="7346" title="George Rogers Clark" label="George Rogers Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q2526468" start="7467" end="7487" title="Vincennes University" label="Vincennes University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415" start="7491" end="7498" title="Indiana" label="Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q322041" start="7580" end="7597" title="Giuseppe Avezzana" label="Giuseppe Avezzana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1380765" start="7599" end="7617" title="Alessandro Gavazzi" label="Alessandro Gavazzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q435151" start="7619" end="7633" title="Silvio Pellico" label="Silvio Pellico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065303" start="7635" end="7656" title="Federico Confalonieri" label="Federico Confalonieri"/>
<link wikidata="Q3722016" start="7662" end="7686" title="Eleuterio Felice Foresti" label="Eleuterio Felice Foresti"/>
<link wikidata="Q539" start="7688" end="7706" title="Giuseppe Garibaldi" label="Giuseppe Garibaldi"/>
<link wikidata="Q875637" start="7855" end="7884" title="College of William &amp;amp; Mary" label="College of William &amp;amp; Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q15070040" start="7920" end="7935" title="Philip Trajetta" label="Philip Trajetta"/>
<link wikidata="Q16539329" start="8073" end="8088" title="Charles Nolcini" label="Charles Nolcini"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="8199" end="8205" title="Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q3550743" start="8266" end="8282" title="U.S. Marine Band" label="U.S. Marine Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q15097902" start="8317" end="8334" title="Venerando Pulizzi" label="Venerando Pulizzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1873463" start="8433" end="8454" title="Francesco Maria Scala" label="Francesco Maria Scala"/>
<link wikidata="Q268166" start="8860" end="8876" title="Lorenzo Da Ponte" label="Lorenzo Da Ponte"/>
<link wikidata="Q49088" start="8990" end="9006" title="Columbia University" label="Columbia College"/>
<link wikidata="Q459906" start="9103" end="9123" title="Alessandro Malaspina" label="Alessandro Malaspina"/>
<link wikidata="Q12606" start="9143" end="9169" title="West Coast of the United States" label="west coast of the Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4078" start="9176" end="9185" title="Cape Horn" label="Cape Horn"/>
<link wikidata="Q180531" start="9193" end="9207" title="Gulf of Alaska" label="Gulf of Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497" start="9249" end="9260" title="Mississippi River" label="Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246091" start="9277" end="9293" title="Giacomo Beltrami" label="Giacomo Beltrami"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527" start="9336" end="9345" title="Minnesota" label="Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q110491" start="9361" end="9367" title="Beltrami County, Minnesota" label="county"/>
<link wikidata="Q1707912" start="9383" end="9396" title="Joseph Rosati" label="Joseph Rosati"/>
<link wikidata="Q3946673" start="9467" end="9485" title="Samuel Mazzuchelli" label="Samuel Mazzuchelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537" start="9589" end="9598" title="Wisconsin" label="Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546" start="9603" end="9607" title="Iowa" label="Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5076429" start="9697" end="9721" title="Charles Constantine Pise" label="Charles Constantine Pise"/>
<link wikidata="Q5073205" start="9743" end="9765" title="Chaplain of the Senate" label="Chaplain of the Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q268166" start="9859" end="9875" title="Lorenzo Da Ponte" label="Lorenzo Da Ponte"/>
<link wikidata="Q10583424" start="10107" end="10134" title="Metropolitan Opera" label="New York Metropolitan Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="10156" end="10162" title="Jesuit" label="Jesuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q165005" start="10167" end="10177" title="Franciscan" label="Franciscan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6250552" start="10305" end="10320" title="John Nobili" label="Giovanni Nobili"/>
<link wikidata="Q992830" start="10358" end="10380" title="Santa Clara University" label="Santa Clara University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1887879" start="10421" end="10448" title="University of San Francisco" label="University of San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q4773007" start="10469" end="10485" title="Anthony Maraschi" label="Anthony Maraschi"/>
<link wikidata="Q213376" start="10548" end="10558" title="winemaking" label="winemaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="10597" end="10607" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q93662" start="10719" end="10745" title="St. Bonaventure University" label="St. Bonaventure University"/>
<link wikidata="Q19409055" start="10763" end="10782" title="Pamfilo of Magliano" label="Pamfilo da Magliano"/>
<link wikidata="Q181962" start="10845" end="10852" title="Augusta, Georgia" label="Augusta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2218935" start="10863" end="10882" title="Samuel Wilds Trotti" label="Samuel Wilds Trotti"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="10948" end="10961" title="United States Congress" label="U.S. Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q5482257" start="11198" end="11217" title="Francis Ramacciotti" label="Francis Ramacciotti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273" start="11287" end="11294" title="Tuscany" label="Tuscany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064041" start="11428" end="11453" title="Transcontinental railroad" label="Transcontinental Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q43199" start="11464" end="11469" title="Omaha, Nebraska" label="Omaha"/>
<link wikidata="Q983643" start="11490" end="11509" title="Constantino Brumidi" label="Constantino Brumidi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889597" start="11549" end="11575" title="United States Capitol dome" label="United States Capitol dome"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="11579" end="11595" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q367523" start="11694" end="11706" title="Columbus Day" label="Columbus Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q3767700" start="11792" end="11808" title="Giovanni Martino" label="Giovanni Martino"/>
<link wikidata="Q539" start="11915" end="11933" title="Giuseppe Garibaldi" label="Giuseppe Garibaldi"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="11945" end="11963" title="United States Army" label="United States Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q269574" start="11981" end="12001" title="7th Cavalry Regiment" label="7th Cavalry Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q188205" start="12008" end="12031" title="George Armstrong Custer" label="George Armstrong Custer"/>
<link wikidata="Q102538" start="12077" end="12084" title="company (military unit)" label="company"/>
<link wikidata="Q205422" start="12092" end="12120" title="Battle of the Little Bighorn" label="Battle of the Little Bighorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q273314" start="12137" end="12151" title="Antonio Meucci" label="Antonio Meucci"/>
<link wikidata="Q3663964" start="12306" end="12319" title="patent caveat" label="patent caveat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1459541" start="12340" end="12358" title="U.S. Patent Office" label="U.S. Patent Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q34286" start="12454" end="12475" title="Alexander Graham Bell" label="Alexander Graham Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="12528" end="12557" title="United States House of Representatives" label="U.S. House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q649299" start="12813" end="12829" title="Regis University" label="Regis University"/>
<link wikidata="Q23768" start="12895" end="12904" title="Las Vegas" label="Las Vegas"/>
<link wikidata="Q15485729" start="12929" end="12945" title="Joseph Cataldo" label="Giuseppe Cataldo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537303" start="12976" end="12994" title="Gonzaga University" label="Gonzaga University"/>
<link wikidata="Q187805" start="12999" end="13006" title="Spokane, Washington" label="Spokane"/>
<link wikidata="Q3460489" start="13043" end="13056" title="Sabato Morais" label="Sabato Morais"/>
<link wikidata="Q1688743" start="13137" end="13175" title="Jewish Theological Seminary of America" label="Jewish Theological Seminary of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q5583399" start="13285" end="13299" title="Vincenzo Botta" label="Vincenzo Botta"/>
<link wikidata="Q49210" start="13344" end="13363" title="New York University" label="New York University"/>
<link wikidata="Q49108" start="13450" end="13487" title="Massachusetts Institute of Technology" label="Massachusetts Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q844020" start="13560" end="13569" title="Texarkana, Texas" label="Texarkana"/>
<link wikidata="Q5480087" start="13586" end="13604" title="Francis B. Spinola" label="Francis B. Spinola"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="13654" end="13692" title="United States House of Representatives" label="United States House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752901" start="13789" end="13799" title="Union Army" label="Union Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="13811" end="13829" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4546238" start="14076" end="14080" title="100th New York State Legislature" label="1877"/>
<link wikidata="Q4546541" start="14082" end="14086" title="104th New York State Legislature" label="1881"/>
<link wikidata="Q4546675" start="14092" end="14096" title="106th New York State Legislature" label="1883"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="14177" end="14195" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752901" start="14298" end="14308" title="Union Army" label="Union Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719956" start="14329" end="14343" title="Edward Ferrero" label="Edward Ferrero"/>
<link wikidata="Q5480087" start="14348" end="14366" title="Francis B. Spinola" label="Francis B. Spinola"/>
<link wikidata="Q3732933" start="14422" end="14446" title="Army of the Two Sicilies" label="Army of the Two Sicilies"/>
<link wikidata="Q539" start="14470" end="14488" title="Giuseppe Garibaldi" label="Giuseppe Garibaldi"/>
<link wikidata="Q228284" start="14499" end="14525" title="Expedition of the Thousand" label="Expedition of the Thousand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125021" start="14541" end="14558" title="Confederate States Army" label="Confederate Army."/>
<link wikidata="Q1523033" start="14594" end="14615" title="William B. Taliaferro" label="William B. Taliaferro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344183" start="14620" end="14636" title="English-American" label="English-American"/>
<link wikidata="Q3804346" start="14641" end="14654" title="Italians in the United Kingdom" label="Anglo-Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q313976" start="14668" end="14687" title="P. G. T. Beauregard" label="P. G. T. Beauregard"/>
<link wikidata="Q203535" start="14724" end="14738" title="Medal of Honor" label="Medal of Honor"/>
<link wikidata="Q528099" start="14773" end="14795" title="Luigi Palma di Cesnola" label="Luigi Palma di Cesnola"/>
<link wikidata="Q160236" start="14840" end="14867" title="Metropolitan Museum of Arts" label="Metropolitan Museum of Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q3598978" start="14899" end="14914" title="Garibaldi Guard" label="Garibaldi Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3598978" start="15007" end="15029" title="39th New York Volunteer Infantry Regiment" label="39th New York Infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q539" start="15074" end="15092" title="Giuseppe Garibaldi" label="Giuseppe Garibaldi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3598978" start="15124" end="15165" title="39th New York Volunteer Infantry Regiment" label="39th New York Volunteer Infantry Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q827218" start="15272" end="15290" title="Bersaglieri" label="bersaglieri plumes"/>
<link wikidata="Q42876" start="15346" end="15358" title="Italian flag" label="Italian flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q91" start="15501" end="15516" title="Abraham Lincoln" label="Abraham Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q297308" start="15634" end="15651" title="William H. Seward" label="William H. Seward"/>
<link wikidata="Q3133070" start="15655" end="15668" title="Henry Sanford" label="H. S. Sanford"/>
<link wikidata="Q240" start="15691" end="15699" title="Brussels" label="Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1675084" start="15795" end="15825" title="Italian diaspora" label="Italians migrated out of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284" start="16113" end="16120" title="Abruzzo" label="Abruzzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438" start="16122" end="16130" title="Campania" label="Campania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1447" start="16132" end="16138" title="Apulia" label="Apulia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1452" start="16140" end="16150" title="Basilicata" label="Basilicata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458" start="16156" end="16164" title="Calabria" label="Calabria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="16189" end="16195" title="Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q67083330" start="16296" end="16316" title="Thomas J. Archdeacon" label="Thomas J. Archdeacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7123955" start="16585" end="16599" title="padrone system" label="padrone system"/>
<link wikidata="Q428382" start="18419" end="18430" title="latifundia" label="latifundist"/>
<link wikidata="Q37739" start="18457" end="18463" title="feudal system" label="feudal"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="19851" end="19862" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q61729985" start="20179" end="20192" title="Little Italy" label="Little Italys"/>
<link wikidata="Q627364" start="21377" end="21389" title="public works" label="public works"/>
<link wikidata="Q24460" start="21502" end="21514" title="Northeastern United States (U.S. Census Bureau)" label="northeastern"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="21886" end="21900" title="New York Times" label="New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="22317" end="22335" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934308" start="22389" end="22428" title="Mulberry Street (Manhattan)" label="the Little Italy/Mulberry neighborhood:"/>
<link wikidata="Q190002" start="23218" end="23223" title="Sligo" label="Sligo"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="23225" end="23232" title="Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4974820" start="23564" end="23578" title="Brooklyn Eagle" label="Brooklyn Eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4268" start="24737" end="24747" title="East Coast of the United States" label="East Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q934971" start="25476" end="25496" title="Roseto, Pennsylvania" label="Roseto, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q79616" start="25498" end="25517" title="Tontitown, Arkansas" label="Tontitown, Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2022432" start="25523" end="25546" title="Valdese, North Carolina" label="Valdese, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2637693" start="25713" end="25728" title="Amadeo Giannini" label="Amadeo Giannini"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="25813" end="25826" title="San Francisco" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q487907" start="25881" end="25896" title="Bank of America" label="Bank of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q134430" start="26057" end="26088" title="Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs (1937 film)" label="Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134349" start="26228" end="26257" title="Ghirardelli Chocolate Company" label="Ghirardelli Chocolate Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q88900689" start="26259" end="26268" title="Progresso" label="Progresso"/>
<link wikidata="Q7201637" start="26270" end="26286" title="Planters" label="Planters Peanuts"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164861" start="26288" end="26297" title="Contadina" label="Contadina"/>
<link wikidata="Q17079048" start="26299" end="26312" title="Chef Boyardee" label="Chef Boyardee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122179" start="26346" end="26353" title="Jacuzzi" label="Jacuzzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156634" start="26502" end="26516" title="ice cream cone" label="ice cream cone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402650" start="26553" end="26570" title="Giuseppe Bellanca" label="Giuseppe Bellanca"/>
<link wikidata="Q5452064" start="26820" end="26826" title="Fireworks by Grucci" label="Grucci"/>
<link wikidata="Q16821940" start="26828" end="26836" title="Zambelli Fireworks" label="Zambelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q7263726" start="26842" end="26848" title="Pyrotecnico" label="Vitale"/>
<link wikidata="Q983643" start="27050" end="27069" title="Constantino Brumidi" label="Constantino Brumidi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7190583" start="27173" end="27191" title="Piccirilli Brothers" label="Attilio Piccirilli"/>
<link wikidata="Q213559" start="27226" end="27242" title="Lincoln Memorial" label="Lincoln Memorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q37802006" start="27647" end="27659" title="Roger Morigi" label="Roger Morigi"/>
<link wikidata="Q668710" start="27740" end="27769" title="Washington National Cathedral" label="Washington National Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q10583424" start="27831" end="27849" title="Metropolitan Opera" label="Metropolitan Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371424" start="27918" end="27938" title="Giulio Gatti-Casazza" label="Giulio Gatti-Casazza"/>
<link wikidata="Q13003" start="27979" end="27995" title="Arturo Toscanini" label="Arturo Toscanini"/>
<link wikidata="Q170726" start="28151" end="28164" title="Enrico Caruso" label="Enrico Caruso"/>
<link wikidata="Q460319" start="28192" end="28213" title="La Fanciulla del West" label="La Fanciulla del West"/>
<link wikidata="Q7311" start="28301" end="28316" title="Giacomo Puccini" label="Giacomo Puccini"/>
<link wikidata="Q3749952" start="28438" end="28457" title="Francesco Fanciulli" label="Francesco Fanciulli"/>
<link wikidata="Q295935" start="28480" end="28497" title="John Philip Sousa" label="John Philip Sousa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3550743" start="28517" end="28542" title="United States Marine Band" label="United States Marine Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q188692" start="28652" end="28669" title="Rudolph Valentino" label="Rudolph Valentino"/>
<link wikidata="Q906647" start="28709" end="28718" title="Dixieland" label="Dixieland"/>
<link wikidata="Q737521" start="28807" end="28819" title="Nick LaRocca" label="Nick LaRocca"/>
<link wikidata="Q34404" start="28823" end="28834" title="New Orleans" label="New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q15999558" start="28946" end="28956" title="Ping Bodie" label="Ping Bodie"/>
<link wikidata="Q335169" start="29000" end="29017" title="Chicago White Sox" label="Chicago White Sox"/>
<link wikidata="Q1388628" start="29027" end="29040" title="Ralph DePalma" label="Ralph DePalma"/>
<link wikidata="Q8032" start="29049" end="29065" title="Indianapolis 500" label="Indianapolis 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q505003" start="29195" end="29209" title="Andrew Longino" label="Andrew Longino"/>
<link wikidata="Q919015" start="29255" end="29272" title="Charles Joseph Bonaparte" label="Charles Bonaparte"/>
<link wikidata="Q33866" start="29333" end="29351" title="Theodore Roosevelt" label="Theodore Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q8333" start="29387" end="29418" title="Federal Bureau of Investigation" label="Federal Bureau of Investigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361956" start="29421" end="29434" title="Joe Petrosino" label="Joe Petrosino"/>
<link wikidata="Q328473" start="29441" end="29472" title="New York City Police Department" label="New York City Police Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q46952" start="29527" end="29542" title="organized crime" label="organized crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q7406639" start="29644" end="29664" title="Salvatore A. Cotillo" label="Salvatore A. Cotillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q312502" start="29828" end="29847" title="Fiorello La Guardia" label="Fiorello La Guardia"/>
<link wikidata="Q955764" start="30070" end="30103" title="University of Illinois at Chicago" label="University of Illinois at Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q3624553" start="30394" end="30412" title="Arturo Giovannitti" label="Arturo Giovannitti"/>
<link wikidata="Q133877" start="30414" end="30426" title="Carlo Tresca" label="Carlo Tresca"/>
<link wikidata="Q3810200" start="30432" end="30444" title="Joseph Ettor" label="Joseph Ettor"/>
<link wikidata="Q28555362" start="30551" end="30567" title="Sarah Wool Moore" label="Sarah Wool Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q7023752" start="30591" end="30599" title="Confidence trick" label="grifters"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="31502" end="31513" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q3856290" start="31942" end="31957" title="Michael Valente" label="Michael Valente"/>
<link wikidata="Q203535" start="31975" end="31989" title="Medal of Honor" label="Medal of Honor"/>
<link wikidata="Q833376" start="32072" end="32099" title="Distinguished Service Cross (United States)" label="Distinguished Service Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335451" start="32354" end="32373" title="Emergency Quota Act" label="Emergency Quota Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434492" start="32386" end="32409" title="Immigration Act of 1924" label="Immigration Act of 1924"/>
<link wikidata="Q6974702" start="32654" end="32678" title="National Origins Formula" label="National Origins Formula"/>
<link wikidata="Q505311" start="33146" end="33185" title="Immigration and Nationality Act of 1965" label="Immigration and Nationality Act of 1965"/>
<link wikidata="Q23666" start="33413" end="33426" title="Great Britain" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="33448" end="33455" title="Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="33899" end="33915" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q186356" start="34123" end="34131" title="New Deal" label="New Deal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200079" start="34159" end="34188" title="Works Progress Administration" label="Works Progress Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094508" start="34197" end="34223" title="Civilian Conservation Corp" label="Civilian Conservation Corp"/>
<link wikidata="Q430714" start="34592" end="34600" title="Al Smith" label="Al Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q4762896" start="35005" end="35017" title="Angelo Joseph Rossi" label="Angelo Rossi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3068643" start="35076" end="35092" title="Ferdinand Pecora" label="Ferdinand Pecora"/>
<link wikidata="Q201684" start="35127" end="35152" title="Wall Street Crash of 1929" label="Wall Street Crash of 1929"/>
<link wikidata="Q312502" start="35353" end="35372" title="Fiorello La Guardia" label="Fiorello La Guardia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4015105" start="35464" end="35480" title="Vito Marcantonio" label="Vito Marcantonio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7347276" start="35534" end="35548" title="Robert Maestri" label="Robert Maestri"/>
<link wikidata="Q34404" start="35562" end="35573" title="New Orleans" label="New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q10583424" start="35633" end="35651" title="Metropolitan Opera" label="Metropolitan Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371424" start="35698" end="35718" title="Giulio Gatti-Casazza" label="Giulio Gatti-Casazza"/>
<link wikidata="Q260264" start="35755" end="35768" title="Rosa Ponselle" label="Rosa Ponselle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1101353" start="35773" end="35790" title="Dusolina Giannini" label="Dusolina Giannini"/>
<link wikidata="Q13003" start="35905" end="35921" title="Arturo Toscanini" label="Arturo Toscanini"/>
<link wikidata="Q471154" start="35981" end="36012" title="New York Philharmonic Orchestra" label="New York Philharmonic Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777060" start="36086" end="36108" title="NBC Symphony Orchestra" label="NBC Symphony Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q718368" start="36139" end="36153" title="Ruggiero Ricci" label="Ruggiero Ricci"/>
<link wikidata="Q5679402" start="36365" end="36377" title="Russ Columbo" label="Russ Columbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q40912" start="36431" end="36444" title="Frank Sinatra" label="Frank Sinatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q938810" start="36491" end="36503" title="Harry Warren" label="Harry Warren"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="36589" end="36602" title="Academy Award" label="Academy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q471023" start="36683" end="36696" title="Jimmy Durante" label="Jimmy Durante"/>
<link wikidata="Q186286" start="36763" end="36773" title="vaudeville" label="vaudeville"/>
<link wikidata="Q467087" start="36775" end="36787" title="Guy Lombardo" label="Guy Lombardo"/>
<link wikidata="Q11269" start="36842" end="36861" title="New Year&amp;#x27;s Eve" label="New Year&amp;#x27;s Eve"/>
<link wikidata="Q11259" start="36886" end="36898" title="Times Square" label="Times Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q51492" start="36940" end="36951" title="Frank Capra" label="Frank Capra"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="36972" end="36986" title="Academy Awards" label="Academy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q369190" start="37005" end="37018" title="Frank Borzage" label="Frank Borzage"/>
<link wikidata="Q6550" start="37163" end="37174" title="Donald Duck" label="Donald Duck"/>
<link wikidata="Q438610" start="37190" end="37203" title="Al Taliaferro" label="Al Taliaferro"/>
<link wikidata="Q741321" start="37205" end="37221" title="Woody Woodpecker" label="Woody Woodpecker"/>
<link wikidata="Q703759" start="37240" end="37252" title="Walter Lantz" label="Walter Lantz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1442531" start="37262" end="37287" title="Casper the Friendly Ghost" label="Casper the Friendly Ghost"/>
<link wikidata="Q4336463" start="37306" end="37319" title="Joseph Oriolo" label="Joseph Oriolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q131144" start="37325" end="37338" title="Tom and Jerry" label="Tom and Jerry"/>
<link wikidata="Q190373" start="37358" end="37372" title="Joseph Barbera" label="Joseph Barbera"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739228" start="37387" end="37397" title="Snow White (Disney character)" label="Snow White"/>
<link wikidata="Q272143" start="37414" end="37431" title="Adriana Caselotti" label="Adriana Caselotti"/>
<link wikidata="Q21207803" start="37472" end="37488" title="Luigi Del Bianco" label="Luigi Del Bianco"/>
<link wikidata="Q83497" start="37519" end="37533" title="Mount Rushmore" label="Mount Rushmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q445256" start="37553" end="37564" title="Simon Rodia" label="Simon Rodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q445256" start="37610" end="37622" title="Watts Towers" label="Watts Towers"/>
<link wikidata="Q723707" start="37697" end="37709" title="Gene Sarazen" label="Gene Sarazen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363321" start="37742" end="37771" title="Professional Golfers&amp;#x27; Association of America" label="Professional Golf Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q259776" start="37776" end="37797" title="U.S. Open (golf)" label="U.S. Open Tournaments"/>
<link wikidata="Q908052" start="37807" end="37819" title="Pete DePaolo" label="Pete DePaolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355622" start="37854" end="37866" title="Tony Lazzeri" label="Tony Lazzeri"/>
<link wikidata="Q5490943" start="37871" end="37885" title="Frank Crosetti" label="Frank Crosetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q213417" start="37910" end="37926" title="New York Yankees" label="New York Yankees"/>
<link wikidata="Q712833" start="37936" end="37950" title="Tony Canzoneri" label="Tony Canzoneri"/>
<link wikidata="Q188362" start="38004" end="38018" title="Rocky Marciano" label="Rocky Marciano"/>
<link wikidata="Q6685611" start="38075" end="38085" title="Lou Little" label="Lou Little"/>
<link wikidata="Q49088" start="38121" end="38140" title="Columbia University" label="Columbia University"/>
<link wikidata="Q297142" start="38164" end="38176" title="Joe DiMaggio" label="Joe DiMaggio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1575566" start="38305" end="38318" title="Hank Luisetti" label="Hank Luisetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q762853" start="38336" end="38347" title="All-America" label="All-America"/>
<link wikidata="Q41506" start="38370" end="38389" title="Stanford University" label="Stanford University"/>
<link wikidata="Q11762840" start="38409" end="38424" title="Louis Zamperini" label="Louis Zamperini"/>
<link wikidata="Q917206" start="38439" end="38454" title="distance runner" label="distance runner"/>
<link wikidata="Q8150" start="38472" end="38485" title="1936 Summer Olympics" label="1936 Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q311602" start="38555" end="38572" title="Laura Hillenbrand" label="Laura Hillenbrand"/>
<link wikidata="Q5269991" start="38959" end="38980" title="DiGiorgio Corporation" label="DiGiorgio Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344336" start="39197" end="39204" title="Robert Mondavi" label="Mondavi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5324773" start="39206" end="39217" title="Carlo Rossi (wine)" label="Carlo Rossi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5324773" start="39242" end="39247" title="E &amp;amp; J Gallo Winery" label="Gallo"/>
<link wikidata="Q133877" start="39550" end="39562" title="Carlo Tresca" label="Carlo Tresca"/>
<link wikidata="Q6699941" start="39564" end="39578" title="Luigi Antonini" label="Luigi Antonini"/>
<link wikidata="Q6141202" start="39580" end="39594" title="James Petrillo" label="James Petrillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4762367" start="39600" end="39614" title="Angela Bambace" label="Angela Bambace"/>
<link wikidata="Q46952" start="39651" end="39666" title="organized crime" label="organized crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458155" start="39734" end="39748" title="Sicilian Mafia" label="Sicilian Mafia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5026905" start="39935" end="39951" title="Camorra in New York City" label="American Camorra"/>
<link wikidata="Q40554819" start="40009" end="40017" title="Sicilian people" label="Sicilian"/>
<link wikidata="Q80048" start="40027" end="40036" title="Al Capone" label="Al Capone"/>
<link wikidata="Q399999" start="40141" end="40156" title="Prohibition in the United States" label="Prohibition era"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071976" start="40191" end="40205" title="Chicago Outfit" label="Chicago Outfit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164263" start="40246" end="40281" title="Saint Valentine&amp;#x27;s Day Massacre" label="Saint Valentine&amp;#x27;s Day Massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q4947495" start="40414" end="40424" title="crime boss" label="crime boss"/>
<link wikidata="Q23559" start="40765" end="40788" title="Benito Mussolini" label="Benito Mussolini&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q747081" start="40789" end="40812" title="Italian fascism" label="Fascist regime in Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q300347" start="41519" end="41538" title="Century of Progress" label="Century of Progress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056" start="41585" end="41603" title="Italo Balbo" label="Italo Balbo&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q3608605" start="41982" end="41999" title="Alberto Tarchiani" label="Alberto Tarchiani"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="42058" end="42070" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q43056" start="42254" end="42265" title="Axis powers" label="Axis powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q48742118" start="42267" end="42280" title="Fascist Italy (1922–1943)" label="fascist Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q18164126" start="42281" end="42293" title="Italian declaration of war on the United States" label="declared war"/>
<link wikidata="Q188712" start="42353" end="42358" title="Empire of Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q52418" start="42359" end="42380" title="Attack on Pearl Harbor" label="attacked Pearl Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2159918" start="42400" end="42420" title="Eo 9066" label="Executive Order 9066"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="42906" end="42918" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q3853286" start="43065" end="43080" title="Mazzini Society" label="Mazzini Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q49186" start="43084" end="43110" title="Northampton, Massachusetts" label="Northampton, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335" start="43429" end="43439" title="Montevideo" label="Montevideo"/>
<link wikidata="Q463243" start="43509" end="43521" title="Carlo Sforza" label="Carlo Sforza"/>
<link wikidata="Q3885257" start="43620" end="43637" title="fall of Mussolini" label="fall of Mussolini"/>
<link wikidata="Q366725" start="43931" end="43944" title="John Basilone" label="John Basilone"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="43997" end="44009" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q5726125" start="44097" end="44108" title="Henry Mucci" label="Henry Mucci"/>
<link wikidata="Q555797" start="44221" end="44239" title="Bataan Death March" label="Bataan Death March"/>
<link wikidata="Q2394283" start="44306" end="44317" title="Don Gentile" label="Don Gentile"/>
<link wikidata="Q51492" start="44430" end="44441" title="Frank Capra" label="Frank Capra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771928" start="44496" end="44508" title="Why We Fight" label="Why We Fight"/>
<link wikidata="Q724443" start="45126" end="45141" title="Legion of Merit" label="Legion of Merit"/>
<link wikidata="Q203535" start="45590" end="45618" title="Medal of Honor" label="Congressional Medal of Honor"/>
<link wikidata="Q8753" start="45634" end="45646" title="Enrico Fermi" label="Enrico Fermi"/>
<link wikidata="Q12802" start="45677" end="45686" title="atom bomb" label="atom bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q7191" start="45697" end="45708" title="Nobel Prize" label="Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q131252" start="45820" end="45841" title="University of Chicago" label="University of Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q1219068" start="45889" end="45911" title="nuclear chain reaction" label="nuclear chain reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q27832090" start="46020" end="46041" title="Los Alamos Laboratory" label="Los Alamos Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q173028" start="46122" end="46134" title="Emilio G. Segrè" label="Emilio Segrè"/>
<link wikidata="Q4773234" start="46369" end="46386" title="Anthony P. Damato" label="Anthony P. Damato"/>
<link wikidata="Q203535" start="46408" end="46422" title="Medal of Honor" label="Medal of Honor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4854154" start="46502" end="46519" title="Bancroft Gherardi" label="Bancroft Gherardi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6683" start="46543" end="46563" title="Mexican–American War" label="Mexican–American War"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="46572" end="46590" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="46593" end="46605" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650639" start="47239" end="47256" title="Rosie the Riveter" label="Rosie the Riveter"/>
<link wikidata="Q17079048" start="47350" end="47363" title="Chef Boyardee" label="Chef Boyardee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2961974" start="47388" end="47402" title="Ettore Boiardi" label="Ettore Boiardi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143596" start="47597" end="47625" title="United States War Department" label="United States War Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q52418" start="47759" end="47778" title="Attack on Pearl Harbor" label="Pearl Harbor attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q1700829" start="47923" end="47945" title="General DeWitt" label="General John L. DeWitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="48264" end="48285" title="Franklin D. Roosevelt" label="Franklin D. Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2159918" start="48294" end="48318" title="Executive Order 9066" label="Executive Order No. 9066"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553390" start="48335" end="48356" title="United States Department of Justice" label="Department of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341127" start="48410" end="48421" title="enemy alien" label="enemy alien"/>
<link wikidata="Q1118757" start="48439" end="48461" title="Alien and Sedition Act" label="Alien and Sedition Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124" start="49095" end="49107" title="Bill Clinton" label="Bill Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q636207" start="49225" end="49241" title="United States Attorney General" label="attorney general"/>
<link wikidata="Q6089050" start="51148" end="51164" title="Istrian Italians" label="Istrian Italians"/>
<link wikidata="Q2533689" start="51169" end="51187" title="Dalmatian Italians" label="Dalmatian Italians"/>
<link wikidata="Q2714904" start="51235" end="51259" title="Istrian-Dalmatian exodus" label="Istrian-Dalmatian exodus"/>
<link wikidata="Q83286" start="51326" end="51336" title="Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia" label="Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2314717" start="51347" end="51379" title="Treaty of Peace with Italy, 1947" label="Treaty of Peace with Italy, 1947"/>
<link wikidata="Q171312" start="51453" end="51467" title="Mario Andretti" label="Mario Andretti"/>
<link wikidata="Q3446248" start="51472" end="51488" title="Lidia Bastianich" label="Lidia Bastianich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1484269" start="51662" end="51669" title="GI Bill" label="GI Bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q16002370" start="52232" end="52247" title="Richard Alba" label="Richard D. Alba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780816" start="52265" end="52353" title="University at Albany, SUNY" label="Center for Social and Demographic Analysis at the State University of New York at Albany"/>
<link wikidata="Q2072081" start="52691" end="52706" title="Person of color" label="people of color"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333547" start="52855" end="52868" title="Franco Harris" label="Franco Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q881113" start="53226" end="53238" title="John Pastore" label="John Pastore"/>
<link wikidata="Q964959" start="53322" end="53335" title="Pete Domenici" label="Pete Domenici"/>
<link wikidata="Q59315" start="53418" end="53431" title="Patrick Leahy" label="Patrick Leahy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064037" start="53516" end="53536" title="Alfonse D&amp;#x27;Amato" label="Alfonse D&amp;#x27;Amato"/>
<link wikidata="Q170581" start="53598" end="53610" title="Nancy Pelosi" label="Nancy Pelosi"/>
<link wikidata="Q359333" start="53689" end="53707" title="Anthony Celebrezze" label="Anthony Celebrezze"/>
<link wikidata="Q9696" start="53804" end="53819" title="John F. Kennedy" label="John F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q351552" start="53946" end="53964" title="Benjamin Civiletti" label="Benjamin Civiletti"/>
<link wikidata="Q518861" start="54091" end="54105" title="Frank Carlucci" label="Frank Carlucci"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="54208" end="54221" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q40912" start="54311" end="54324" title="Frank Sinatra" label="Frank Sinatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q299331" start="54326" end="54337" title="Mario Lanza" label="Mario Lanza"/>
<link wikidata="Q333405" start="54339" end="54349" title="Perry Como" label="Perry Como"/>
<link wikidata="Q215359" start="54351" end="54362" title="Dean Martin" label="Dean Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q296729" start="54364" end="54376" title="Tony Bennett" label="Tony Bennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q342774" start="54378" end="54391" title="Frankie Laine" label="Frankie Laine"/>
<link wikidata="Q311267" start="54393" end="54404" title="Bobby Darin" label="Bobby Darin"/>
<link wikidata="Q13640107" start="54406" end="54420" title="Julius La Rosa" label="Julius La Rosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q216341" start="54422" end="54436" title="Connie Francis" label="Connie Francis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1744" start="54442" end="54449" title="Madonna" label="Madonna"/>
<link wikidata="Q347528" start="54585" end="54593" title="Liberace" label="Liberace"/>
<link wikidata="Q94487" start="54723" end="54733" title="Rose Marie" label="Rose Marie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2340378" start="54735" end="54749" title="Carol Lawrence" label="Carol Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q4767285" start="54751" end="54773" title="Anna Maria Alberghetti" label="Anna Maria Alberghetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q782020" start="54775" end="54789" title="Sergio Franchi" label="Sergio Franchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q270324" start="54791" end="54803" title="Patti LuPone" label="Patti LuPone"/>
<link wikidata="Q543293" start="54805" end="54815" title="Ezio Pinza" label="Ezio Pinza"/>
<link wikidata="Q14441" start="54821" end="54834" title="Liza Minnelli" label="Liza Minnelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q185928" start="54859" end="54872" title="Henry Mancini" label="Henry Mancini"/>
<link wikidata="Q367084" start="54877" end="54887" title="Bill Conti" label="Bill Conti"/>
<link wikidata="Q450620" start="54987" end="55002" title="John Corigliano" label="John Corigliano"/>
<link wikidata="Q724145" start="55004" end="55021" title="Norman Dello Joio" label="Norman Dello Joio"/>
<link wikidata="Q560635" start="55023" end="55040" title="David Del Tredici" label="David Del Tredici"/>
<link wikidata="Q922278" start="55042" end="55054" title="Paul Creston" label="Paul Creston"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630943" start="55056" end="55072" title="Dominick Argento" label="Dominick Argento"/>
<link wikidata="Q270662" start="55074" end="55092" title="Gian Carlo Menotti" label="Gian Carlo Menotti"/>
<link wikidata="Q357171" start="55098" end="55112" title="Donald Martino" label="Donald Martino"/>
<link wikidata="Q46525" start="55131" end="55145" title="Pulitzer Prize" label="Pulitzer Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="55151" end="55163" title="Grammy Award" label="Grammy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q51492" start="55318" end="55329" title="Frank Capra" label="Frank Capra"/>
<link wikidata="Q56094" start="55331" end="55351" title="Francis Ford Coppola" label="Francis Ford Coppola"/>
<link wikidata="Q59129" start="55353" end="55367" title="Michael Cimino" label="Michael Cimino"/>
<link wikidata="Q51535" start="55369" end="55386" title="Vincente Minnelli" label="Vincente Minnelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q41148" start="55388" end="55403" title="Martin Scorsese" label="Martin Scorsese"/>
<link wikidata="Q189526" start="55409" end="55423" title="Brian De Palma" label="Brian De Palma"/>
<link wikidata="Q367566" start="55593" end="55603" title="Yogi Berra" label="Yogi Berra"/>
<link wikidata="Q863184" start="55605" end="55617" title="Billy Martin" label="Billy Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2696934" start="55619" end="55632" title="Tony La Russa" label="Tony La Russa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071896" start="55634" end="55647" title="Tommy Lasorda" label="Tommy Lasorda"/>
<link wikidata="Q707804" start="55653" end="55662" title="Joe Torre" label="Joe Torre"/>
<link wikidata="Q553321" start="55690" end="55704" title="Vince Lombardi" label="Vince Lombardi"/>
<link wikidata="Q278559" start="55763" end="55783" title="A. Bartlett Giamatti" label="A. Bartlett Giamatti"/>
<link wikidata="Q935259" start="55879" end="55893" title="Paul Tagliabue" label="Paul Tagliabue"/>
<link wikidata="Q546591" start="55984" end="55995" title="Joe Paterno" label="Joe Paterno"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035067" start="56083" end="56097" title="Heisman Trophy" label="Heisman Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q535640" start="56099" end="56114" title="Angelo Bertelli" label="Angelo Bertelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q16147495" start="56118" end="56128" title="Notre Dame Fighting Irish football" label="Notre Dame"/>
<link wikidata="Q2636612" start="56130" end="56141" title="Alan Ameche" label="Alan Ameche"/>
<link wikidata="Q838330" start="56145" end="56154" title="University of Wisconsin–Madison" label="Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5524678" start="56156" end="56166" title="Gary Beban" label="Gary Beban"/>
<link wikidata="Q7864004" start="56170" end="56174" title="UCLA Bruins football" label="UCLA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1691335" start="56176" end="56187" title="Joe Bellino" label="Joe Bellino"/>
<link wikidata="Q6982660" start="56191" end="56195" title="Navy Midshipmen football" label="Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3181191" start="56197" end="56213" title="John Cappelletti" label="John Cappelletti"/>
<link wikidata="Q7163267" start="56217" end="56227" title="Penn State football" label="Penn State"/>
<link wikidata="Q716376" start="56229" end="56242" title="Gino Torretta" label="Gino Torretta"/>
<link wikidata="Q584532" start="56248" end="56264" title="Vinny Testaverde" label="Vinny Testaverde"/>
<link wikidata="Q6827329" start="56268" end="56273" title="Miami Hurricanes football" label="Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q629973" start="56390" end="56403" title="John Calipari" label="John Calipari"/>
<link wikidata="Q321367" start="56405" end="56419" title="Lou Carnesecca" label="Lou Carnesecca"/>
<link wikidata="Q16095752" start="56421" end="56437" title="Rollie Massimino" label="Rollie Massimino"/>
<link wikidata="Q686052" start="56439" end="56450" title="Rick Pitino" label="Rick Pitino"/>
<link wikidata="Q321392" start="56452" end="56463" title="Jim Valvano" label="Jim Valvano"/>
<link wikidata="Q321280" start="56465" end="56476" title="Dick Vitale" label="Dick Vitale"/>
<link wikidata="Q3992490" start="56478" end="56486" title="Tom Izzo" label="Tom Izzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564987" start="56488" end="56501" title="Mike Fratello" label="Mike Fratello"/>
<link wikidata="Q321833" start="56503" end="56516" title="Ben Carnevale" label="Ben Carnevale"/>
<link wikidata="Q373491" start="56522" end="56535" title="Geno Auriemma" label="Geno Auriemma"/>
<link wikidata="Q188362" start="56606" end="56620" title="Rocky Marciano" label="Rocky Marciano"/>
<link wikidata="Q2271334" start="56687" end="56698" title="Ken Venturi" label="Ken Venturi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4941768" start="56762" end="56774" title="Donna Caponi" label="Donna Caponi"/>
<link wikidata="Q448618" start="56843" end="56859" title="Linda Frattianne" label="Linda Frattianne"/>
<link wikidata="Q743625" start="56987" end="57001" title="Willie Mosconi" label="Willie Mosconi"/>
<link wikidata="Q28824" start="57041" end="57053" title="Eddie Arcaro" label="Eddie Arcaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q171312" start="57090" end="57104" title="Mario Andretti" label="Mario Andretti"/>
<link wikidata="Q235975" start="57146" end="57161" title="Mary Lou Retton" label="Mary Lou Retton"/>
<link wikidata="Q177969" start="57228" end="57239" title="Matt Biondi" label="Matt Biondi"/>
<link wikidata="Q451095" start="57294" end="57307" title="Brian Boitano" label="Brian Boitano"/>
<link wikidata="Q795454" start="57484" end="57502" title="Barnes &amp;amp; Noble" label="Barnes &amp;amp; Noble"/>
<link wikidata="Q1846049" start="57504" end="57522" title="Tropicana Products" label="Tropicana Products"/>
<link wikidata="Q1287174" start="57524" end="57531" title="Frank Zamboni" label="Zamboni"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567477" start="57533" end="57545" title="Transamerica Corporation" label="Transamerica"/>
<link wikidata="Q244457" start="57547" end="57553" title="Subway (restaurant)" label="Subway"/>
<link wikidata="Q16998229" start="57555" end="57565" title="Mr. Coffee" label="Mr. Coffee"/>
<link wikidata="Q5158063" start="57571" end="57589" title="Conair Corporation" label="Conair Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393301" start="57643" end="57673" title="Fairleigh Dickinson University" label="Fairleigh Dickinson University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276539" start="57679" end="57710" title="Eternal Word Television Network" label="Eternal Word Television Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q138089" start="57720" end="57738" title="Philadelphia 76ers" label="Syracuse Nationals"/>
<link wikidata="Q138089" start="57777" end="57795" title="Philadelphia 76ers" label="Philadelphia 76ers"/>
<link wikidata="Q29018852" start="57797" end="57810" title="Robert Panara" label="Robert Panara"/>
<link wikidata="Q4117039" start="57835" end="57876" title="National Technical Institute for the Deaf" label="National Technical Institute for the Deaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967764" start="57896" end="57924" title="National Theater of the Deaf" label="National Theater of the Deaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q215574" start="58131" end="58145" title="Mario Capecchi" label="Mario Capecchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q109553" start="58147" end="58162" title="Renato Dulbecco" label="Renato Dulbecco"/>
<link wikidata="Q186481" start="58164" end="58181" title="Riccardo Giacconi" label="Riccardo Giacconi"/>
<link wikidata="Q205667" start="58183" end="58198" title="Salvatore Luria" label="Salvatore Luria"/>
<link wikidata="Q205850" start="58200" end="58217" title="Franco Modigliani" label="Franco Modigliani"/>
<link wikidata="Q185007" start="58219" end="58239" title="Rita Levi Montalcini" label="Rita Levi Montalcini"/>
<link wikidata="Q173028" start="58241" end="58256" title="Emilio G. Segrè" label="Emilio G. Segrè"/>
<link wikidata="Q7442" start="58262" end="58278" title="Carolyn Bertozzi" label="Carolyn Bertozzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q8663" start="58392" end="58402" title="Korean War" label="Korean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="58417" end="58428" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2949487" start="58440" end="58460" title="Vincent R. Capodanno" label="Vincent R. Capodanno"/>
<link wikidata="Q11156" start="58752" end="58766" title="Antonin Scalia" label="Antonin Scalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="58785" end="58803" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="U.S. Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q11138" start="58837" end="58849" title="Samuel Alito" label="Samuel Alito"/>
<link wikidata="Q744108" start="58950" end="58966" title="Joseph Bernardin" label="Joseph Bernardin"/>
<link wikidata="Q503833" start="58968" end="58981" title="Justin Rigali" label="Justin Rigali"/>
<link wikidata="Q546978" start="58983" end="59001" title="Anthony Bevilacqua" label="Anthony Bevilacqua"/>
<link wikidata="Q703802" start="59007" end="59021" title="Daniel DiNardo" label="Daniel DiNardo"/>
<link wikidata="Q572954" start="59277" end="59290" title="Anthony Zinni" label="Anthony Zinni"/>
<link wikidata="Q719941" start="59292" end="59307" title="Raymond Odierno" label="Raymond Odierno"/>
<link wikidata="Q5040076" start="59309" end="59319" title="Carl Vuono" label="Carl Vuono"/>
<link wikidata="Q540453" start="59325" end="59335" title="Peter Pace" label="Peter Pace"/>
<link wikidata="Q609474" start="59381" end="59395" title="Joint Chiefs of Staff" label="Chief of Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q718335" start="59523" end="59536" title="Paul Cellucci" label="Paul Cellucci"/>
<link wikidata="Q502949" start="59555" end="59568" title="John Baldacci" label="John Baldacci"/>
<link wikidata="Q229032" start="59579" end="59595" title="Janet Napolitano" label="Janet Napolitano"/>
<link wikidata="Q523783" start="59612" end="59627" title="Donald Carcieri" label="Donald Carcieri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044835" start="59732" end="59748" title="American culture" label="American culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q3699131" start="59791" end="59796" title="Italian-American cuisine" label="foods"/>
<link wikidata="Q615196" start="60064" end="60087" title="Italianate architecture" label="Italianate architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q190218" start="60131" end="60149" title="Montessori education" label="Montessori schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q31732" start="60151" end="60168" title="Nativity scene" label="Christmas crèches"/>
<link wikidata="Q33135384" start="60208" end="60213" title="bocce" label="bocce"/>
<link wikidata="Q1618467" start="60218" end="60230" title="beach tennis" label="beach tennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7322" start="60259" end="60279" title="Christopher Columbus" label="Christopher Columbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q367523" start="60299" end="60311" title="Columbus Day" label="Columbus Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112443" start="60414" end="60429" title="Columbia (personification)" label="Columbia,&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="60565" end="60571" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="60589" end="60603" title="Atlantic Ocean" label="Atlantic Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q127834" start="60631" end="60640" title="New World" label="New World"/>
<link wikidata="Q131110" start="60671" end="60687" title="History of the United States" label="American history"/>
<link wikidata="Q7791" start="60744" end="60760" title="history of Italy" label="history of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="60858" end="60863" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075293" start="60962" end="60977" title="Irish Americans" label="Irish Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q27" start="61010" end="61017" title="Republic of Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q678551" start="61050" end="61063" title="American Jews" label="American Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="61110" end="61116" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="61180" end="61190" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043687" start="61192" end="61207" title="Carmine DeSapio" label="Carmine DeSapio"/>
<link wikidata="Q432139" start="61279" end="61291" title="Tammany Hall" label="Tammany Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="61527" end="61537" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="61564" end="61577" title="United States Congress" label="U.S. Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q170581" start="61677" end="61689" title="Nancy Pelosi" label="Nancy Pelosi"/>
<link wikidata="Q912994" start="61741" end="61794" title="Speaker of the United States House of Representatives" label="Speaker of the United States House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="61803" end="61813" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q212648" start="61834" end="61847" title="Rudy Giuliani" label="Rudy Giuliani"/>
<link wikidata="Q45578" start="61895" end="61908" title="2008 United States presidential election" label="2008 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q159720" start="61938" end="61950" title="Tom Tancredo" label="Tom Tancredo"/>
<link wikidata="Q155985" start="61952" end="61965" title="Rick Santorum" label="Rick Santorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q699872" start="62058" end="62071" title="2016 United States presidential election" label="2016 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q63879" start="62106" end="62120" title="Chris Christie" label="Chris Christie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2036942" start="62163" end="62171" title="Ted Cruz" label="Ted Cruz"/>
<link wikidata="Q11676" start="62176" end="62189" title="George Pataki" label="George Pataki"/>
<link wikidata="Q473239" start="62243" end="62254" title="Mike Pompeo" label="Mike Pompeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q14213" start="62333" end="62365" title="United States secretary of state" label="United States secretary of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q3105215" start="62385" end="62397" title="Ron DeSantis" label="Ron DeSantis"/>
<link wikidata="Q229141" start="62456" end="62473" title="Geraldine Ferraro" label="Geraldine Ferraro"/>
<link wikidata="Q11699" start="62531" end="62545" title="Vice President of the United States" label="vice president"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="62589" end="62602" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q11156" start="62632" end="62646" title="Antonin Scalia" label="Antonin Scalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11138" start="62651" end="62663" title="Samuel Alito" label="Samuel Alito"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="62721" end="62734" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="62748" end="62762" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q15121180" start="62769" end="62810" title="Italian American Congressional Delegation" label="Italian American Congressional Delegation"/>
<link wikidata="Q15121180" start="63139" end="63180" title="Italian American Congressional Delegation" label="Italian American Congressional Delegation"/>
<link wikidata="Q529090" start="63213" end="63226" title="Bill Pascrell" label="Bill Pascrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q603467" start="63250" end="63260" title="Pat Tiberi" label="Pat Tiberi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2305815" start="63438" end="63450" title="Capitol Hill" label="Capitol Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q244631" start="63742" end="63754" title="Leon Panetta" label="Leon Panetta"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="63772" end="63775" title="Central Intelligence Agency" label="CIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q333833" start="63781" end="63796" title="Franco Frattini" label="Franco Frattini"/>
<link wikidata="Q16151376" start="63868" end="63902" title="Italian Americans in New York City" label="Italian Americans in New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q312502" start="63959" end="63978" title="Fiorello La Guardia" label="Fiorello La Guardia"/>
<link wikidata="Q939458" start="64070" end="64093" title="Vincent R. Impellitteri" label="Vincent R. Impellitteri"/>
<link wikidata="Q212648" start="64120" end="64139" title="Rudolph W. Giuliani" label="Rudolph W. Giuliani"/>
<link wikidata="Q4911497" start="64514" end="64528" title="Bill de Blasio" label="Bill de Blasio"/>
<link wikidata="Q785304" start="64587" end="64609" title="mayor of New York City" label="mayor of New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q521145" start="64644" end="64655" title="Mario Cuomo" label="Mario Cuomo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2347975" start="64688" end="64708" title="governor of New York" label="governor of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q11673" start="64753" end="64765" title="Andrew Cuomo" label="Andrew Cuomo"/>
<link wikidata="Q189049" start="65038" end="65051" title="ethnocentrism" label="ethnocentrism"/>
<link wikidata="Q171995" start="65082" end="65095" title="individualism" label="individualism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3640988" start="65114" end="65125" title="Voting bloc" label="bloc voting"/>
<link wikidata="Q441554" start="65421" end="65441" title="William O&amp;#x27;Dwyer" label="William O&amp;#x27;Dwyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3849007" start="65483" end="65499" title="Mario Procaccino" label="Mario Procaccino"/>
<link wikidata="Q16971647" start="65661" end="65696" title="1973 New York City mayoral election" label="1973 New York City mayoral election"/>
<link wikidata="Q11880937" start="65728" end="65740" title="Mario Biaggi" label="Mario Biaggi"/>
<link wikidata="Q329910" start="65818" end="65831" title="Abraham Beame" label="Abraham Beame"/>
<link wikidata="Q6784424" start="65880" end="65921" title="1962 Massachusetts gubernatorial election" label="1962 Massachusetts gubernatorial election"/>
<link wikidata="Q368192" start="65959" end="65969" title="John Volpe" label="John Volpe"/>
<link wikidata="Q23018301" start="66158" end="66189" title="History of Italian Americans in Boston" label="population of Italian Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q256898" start="66231" end="66253" title="White Anglo-Saxon Protestants" label="Anglo-Saxon Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q388103" start="66254" end="66270" title="Endicott Peabody" label="Endicott Peabody"/>
<link wikidata="Q96418472" start="66430" end="66459" title="Ghetto riots (1964–1969)" label="urban race riots of the 1960s"/>
<link wikidata="Q3276635" start="66478" end="66491" title="Edward Brooke" label="Edward Brooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="66553" end="66564" title="U.S. Senate" label="U.S. Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="66570" end="66583" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2018923" start="66647" end="66663" title="Upstate New York" label="Upstate New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q2886807" start="66696" end="66713" title="Basil A. Paterson" label="Basil A. Paterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="66741" end="66749" title="New York (state)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q7015121" start="66753" end="66757" title="1970 New York state election" label="1970"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="66829" end="66842" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1797815" start="66938" end="66951" title="Law and order (politics)" label="law and order"/>
<link wikidata="Q7900161" start="66969" end="66979" title="urban riot" label="urban riot"/>
<link wikidata="Q693742" start="66999" end="67025" title="1968 United States presidential election" label="1968 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q465099" start="67027" end="67038" title="American Independent Party" label="independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q313776" start="67039" end="67053" title="George Wallace" label="George Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q25395" start="67092" end="67110" title="Newark, New Jersey" label="Newark, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q37320" start="67146" end="67161" title="Cleveland, Ohio" label="Cleveland, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q49042" start="67260" end="67268" title="Southern United States" label="Southern"/>
<link wikidata="Q235155" start="67269" end="67275" title="Whites" label="Whites"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="67352" end="67368" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2276626" start="67379" end="67394" title="Reagan Democrat" label="Reagan Democrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="67433" end="67449" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican Party"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="67618" end="67633" title="Bank of America#Bank of Italy" label="Bank of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q2637693" start="67638" end="67653" title="Amadeo Giannini" label="Amadeo Giannini"/>
<link wikidata="Q544847" start="67664" end="67672" title="Qualcomm" label="Qualcomm"/>
<link wikidata="Q244457" start="67674" end="67680" title="Subway (restaurant)" label="Subway"/>
<link wikidata="Q864407" start="67682" end="67692" title="Home Depot" label="Home Depot"/>
<link wikidata="Q63327" start="67698" end="67704" title="Airbnb" label="Airbnb"/>
<link wikidata="Q6574690" start="67711" end="67722" title="List of Italian American business people" label="many others"/>
<link wikidata="Q281847" start="67984" end="67995" title="Lee Iacocca" label="Lee Iacocca"/>
<link wikidata="Q782805" start="68016" end="68032" title="Samuel Palmisano" label="Samuel Palmisano"/>
<link wikidata="Q533750" start="68057" end="68071" title="Patricia Russo" label="Patricia Russo"/>
<link wikidata="Q176202" start="68104" end="68118" title="Richard Grasso" label="Richard Grasso"/>
<link wikidata="Q16727580" start="68146" end="68164" title="Michael Bonsignore" label="Michael Bonsignore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148995" start="68179" end="68192" title="Paul Otellini" label="Paul Otellini"/>
<link wikidata="Q205850" start="68204" end="68221" title="Franco Modigliani" label="Franco Modigliani"/>
<link wikidata="Q47170" start="68238" end="68262" title="Nobel Prize in Economics" label="Nobel Prize in Economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q319622" start="68300" end="68306" title="saving" label="saving"/>
<link wikidata="Q208697" start="68314" end="68330" title="financial market" label="financial market"/>
<link wikidata="Q359317" start="68349" end="68360" title="Eugene Fama" label="Eugene Fama"/>
<link wikidata="Q724931" start="68518" end="68545" title="efficient-market hypothesis" label="efficient-market hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191714" start="69600" end="69611" title="blue-collar worker" label="blue-collar"/>
<link wikidata="Q255274" start="70014" end="70026" title="White-collar worker" label="white-collar"/>
<link wikidata="Q131252" start="70184" end="70205" title="University of Chicago" label="University of Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q8753" start="70794" end="70806" title="Enrico Fermi" label="Enrico Fermi"/>
<link wikidata="Q284681" start="70870" end="70884" title="Chicago Pile-1" label="Chicago Pile-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q127050" start="70935" end="70952" title="Manhattan Project" label="Manhattan Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249138" start="71014" end="71028" title="Franco Rasetti" label="Franco Rasetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064147" start="71046" end="71077" title="Charles Doolittle Walcott Medal" label="Charles Doolittle Walcott Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q270794" start="71085" end="71113" title="National Academy of Sciences" label="National Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q667095" start="71162" end="71177" title="Federico Faggin" label="Federico Faggin"/>
<link wikidata="Q469904" start="71228" end="71240" title="Robert Gallo" label="Robert Gallo"/>
<link wikidata="Q573246" start="71294" end="71307" title="Anthony Fauci" label="Anthony Fauci"/>
<link wikidata="Q17144" start="71332" end="71361" title="Presidential Medal of Freedom" label="Presidential Medal of Freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q12199" start="71382" end="71386" title="AIDS" label="AIDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q3402412" start="71402" end="71408" title="President&amp;#x27;s Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief" label="PEPFAR"/>
<link wikidata="Q186481" start="71425" end="71442" title="Riccardo Giacconi" label="Riccardo Giacconi"/>
<link wikidata="Q109553" start="71562" end="71577" title="Renato Dulbecco" label="Renato Dulbecco"/>
<link wikidata="Q80061" start="71591" end="71628" title="Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine" label="Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q604261" start="71645" end="71654" title="oncovirus" label="oncovirus"/>
<link wikidata="Q309820" start="71673" end="71686" title="Louis Ignarro" label="Louis Ignarro"/>
<link wikidata="Q205667" start="71829" end="71843" title="Salvador Luria" label="Salvador Luria"/>
<link wikidata="Q190756" start="72017" end="72040" title="William Daniel Phillips" label="William Daniel Phillips"/>
<link wikidata="Q163117" start="72105" end="72118" title="laser cooling" label="laser cooling"/>
<link wikidata="Q173028" start="72130" end="72142" title="Emilio Segrè" label="Emilio Segrè"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054" start="72167" end="72177" title="technetium" label="technetium"/>
<link wikidata="Q999" start="72182" end="72190" title="astatine" label="astatine"/>
<link wikidata="Q107575" start="72200" end="72210" title="antiproton" label="antiproton"/>
<link wikidata="Q110450" start="72378" end="72391" title="Wally Schirra" label="Wally Schirra"/>
<link wikidata="Q440266" start="72393" end="72410" title="Dominic A. Antonelli" label="Dominic Antonelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q45080" start="72412" end="72427" title="Charles Camarda" label="Charles Camarda"/>
<link wikidata="Q32295" start="72429" end="72443" title="Mike Massimino" label="Mike Massimino"/>
<link wikidata="Q536777" start="72445" end="72464" title="Richard Mastracchio" label="Richard Mastracchio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1385274" start="72466" end="72479" title="Ronald Parise" label="Ronald Parise"/>
<link wikidata="Q1899032" start="72481" end="72492" title="Mario Runco" label="Mario Runco"/>
<link wikidata="Q2036814" start="72494" end="72506" title="Albert Sacco" label="Albert Sacco"/>
<link wikidata="Q235567" start="72512" end="72539" title="Nicole Marie Passonno Stott" label="Nicole Marie Passonno Stott"/>
<link wikidata="Q328110" start="72541" end="72554" title="Rocco Petrone" label="Rocco Petrone"/>
<link wikidata="Q618696" start="72590" end="72618" title="Marshall Space Flight Center" label="Marshall Space Flight Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q43922" start="73247" end="73255" title="Leo XIII" label="Leo XIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q15141148" start="73318" end="73354" title="Missionaries of St. Charles Borromeo" label="Missionaries of St. Charles Borromeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q238983" start="73396" end="73413" title="Francesca Cabrini" label="Francesca Cabrini"/>
<link wikidata="Q20862341" start="73763" end="73771" title="midwifery" label="midwives"/>
<link wikidata="Q867316" start="73969" end="74001" title="Triangle Shirtwaist Factory fire" label="Triangle Shirtwaist Factory fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q4762367" start="74039" end="74053" title="Angela Bambace" label="Angela Bambace"/>
<link wikidata="Q3227087" start="74108" end="74150" title="International Ladies Garment Workers Union" label="International Ladies Garment Workers Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1483126" start="74498" end="74506" title="Flappers" label="Flappers"/>
<link wikidata="Q229141" start="76953" end="76970" title="Geraldine Ferraro" label="Geraldine Ferraro"/>
<link wikidata="Q451912" start="77020" end="77031" title="Ella Grasso" label="Ella Grasso"/>
<link wikidata="Q170581" start="77085" end="77097" title="Nancy Pelosi" label="Nancy Pelosi"/>
<link wikidata="Q465684" start="77149" end="77164" title="Mother Angelica" label="Mother Angelica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276539" start="77209" end="77240" title="EWTN" label="Eternal Word Television Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916097" start="77302" end="77316" title="JoAnn Falletta" label="JoAnn Falletta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2906122" start="77414" end="77441" title="Virginia Symphony Orchestra" label="Virginia Symphony Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2465430" start="77450" end="77480" title="Buffalo Philharmonic Orchestra" label="Buffalo Philharmonic Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q237659" start="77483" end="77497" title="Penny Marshall" label="Penny Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q5052622" start="77563" end="77582" title="Catherine DeAngelis" label="Catherine DeAngelis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470970" start="77630" end="77673" title="JAMA" label="Journal of the American Medical Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q21228767" start="77681" end="77702" title="Patricia Fili-Krushel" label="Patricia Fili-Krushel"/>
<link wikidata="Q19668569" start="77752" end="77766" title="Bonnie Tiburzi" label="Bonnie Tiburzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q533750" start="77825" end="77839" title="Patricia Russo" label="Patricia Russo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1873176" start="77877" end="77896" title="Lucent Technologies" label="Lucent Technologies"/>
<link wikidata="Q6369728" start="77898" end="77911" title="Karen Ignagni" label="Karen Ignagni"/>
<link wikidata="Q20035455" start="78026" end="78030" title="Health maintenance organization" label="HMOs"/>
<link wikidata="Q235567" start="78047" end="78074" title="Nicole Marie Passonno Stott" label="Nicole Marie Passonno Stott"/>
<link wikidata="Q257420" start="78136" end="78149" title="Carolyn Porco" label="Carolyn Porco"/>
<link wikidata="Q165585" start="78248" end="78273" title="Cassini–Huygens" label="&amp;quot;Cassini&amp;quot; probe"/>
<link wikidata="Q193" start="78289" end="78295" title="Saturn" label="Saturn"/>
<link wikidata="Q3885669" start="78298" end="78349" title="The National Organization of Italian American Women" label="The National Organization of Italian American Women"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094545" start="78725" end="78741" title="Pietro Di Donato" label="Pietro Di Donato"/>
<link wikidata="Q5108949" start="78802" end="78820" title="Christ in Concrete" label="Christ in Concrete"/>
<link wikidata="Q13563222" start="78943" end="78957" title="Frances Winwar" label="Frances Winwar"/>
<link wikidata="Q947519" start="79264" end="79275" title="John Ciardi" label="John Ciardi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067" start="79381" end="79396" title="Dante Alighieri" label="Dante Alighieri"/>
<link wikidata="Q40185" start="79410" end="79423" title="Divine Comedy" label="Divine Comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q319746" start="79431" end="79441" title="John Fante" label="John Fante"/>
<link wikidata="Q310048" start="79608" end="79619" title="Don DeLillo" label="Don DeLillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q709751" start="79621" end="79633" title="Paul Gallico" label="Paul Gallico"/>
<link wikidata="Q326773" start="79668" end="79686" title="Gilbert Sorrentino" label="Gilbert Sorrentino"/>
<link wikidata="Q607325" start="79688" end="79698" title="Gay Talese" label="Gay Talese"/>
<link wikidata="Q255463" start="79700" end="79714" title="Camille Paglia" label="Camille Paglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q182870" start="79720" end="79730" title="Mario Puzo" label="Mario Puzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5214728" start="79860" end="79870" title="Dana Gioia" label="Dana Gioia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967116" start="79898" end="79929" title="National Endowment for the Arts" label="National Endowment for the Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q577234" start="79931" end="79941" title="John Fusco" label="John Fusco"/>
<link wikidata="Q5219218" start="80000" end="80016" title="Daniela Gioseffi" label="Daniela Gioseffi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6288366" start="80119" end="80143" title="Josephine Gattuso Hendin" label="Josephine Gattuso Hendin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6408320" start="80216" end="80229" title="Kim Addonizio" label="Kim Addonizio"/>
<link wikidata="Q544412" start="80358" end="80372" title="Helen Barolini" label="Helen Barolini"/>
<link wikidata="Q6761420" start="80382" end="80397" title="Maria Mazziotti Gillan" label="Maria Mazziotti"/>
<link wikidata="Q314269" start="80906" end="80927" title="Lawrence Ferlinghetti" label="Lawrence Ferlinghetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q470871" start="80932" end="80945" title="Gregory Corso" label="Gregory Corso"/>
<link wikidata="Q213457" start="80977" end="80992" title="Beat Generation" label="Beat Generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2394278" start="81034" end="81055" title="City Lights Bookstore" label="City Lights Bookstore"/>
<link wikidata="Q43316774" start="81747" end="81759" title="Mary Jo Bona" label="Mary Jo Bona"/>
<link wikidata="Q41795786" start="82259" end="82274" title="Richard Gambino" label="Richard Gambino"/>
<link wikidata="Q4772863" start="82276" end="82299" title="Anthony Julian Tamburri" label="Anthony Julian Tamburri"/>
<link wikidata="Q469656" start="82301" end="82315" title="Paolo Giordano" label="Paolo Giordano"/>
<link wikidata="Q28229561" start="82321" end="82334" title="Fred Gardaphé" label="Fred Gardaphé"/>
<link wikidata="Q21410992" start="82361" end="82377" title="Bordighera Press" label="Bordighera Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q48783974" start="82811" end="82828" title="Italian Americana" label="Italian Americana"/>
<link wikidata="Q5111141" start="83047" end="83074" title="Christine Palamidessi Moore" label="Christine Palamidessi Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q5214728" start="83153" end="83163" title="Dana Gioia" label="Dana Gioia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6833347" start="83252" end="83265" title="Michael Palma" label="Michael Palma"/>
<link wikidata="Q314269" start="83346" end="83367" title="Lawrence Ferlinghetti" label="Lawrence Ferlinghetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q5219218" start="83369" end="83385" title="Daniela Gioseffi" label="Daniela Gioseffi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7152198" start="83391" end="83403" title="Paul Mariani" label="Paul Mariani"/>
<link wikidata="Q4723898" start="83604" end="83621" title="Alfredo de Palchi" label="Alfredo de Palchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q15430440" start="83874" end="83890" title="Peter Bondanella" label="Peter Bondanella"/>
<link wikidata="Q7173017" start="83892" end="83906" title="Peter Brunette" label="Peter Brunette"/>
<link wikidata="Q5488851" start="83912" end="83929" title="Frank P. Tomasulo" label="Frank P. Tomasulo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2500222" start="84239" end="84249" title="Og Mandino" label="Og Mandino"/>
<link wikidata="Q2535504" start="84251" end="84264" title="Leo Buscaglia" label="Leo Buscaglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4566686" start="84353" end="84366" title="Tomie dePaola" label="Tomie dePaola"/>
<link wikidata="Q495420" start="84418" end="84432" title="David Baldacci" label="David Baldacci"/>
<link wikidata="Q467066" start="84434" end="84448" title="Kate DiCamillo" label="Kate DiCamillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q558430" start="84450" end="84463" title="Richard Russo" label="Richard Russo"/>
<link wikidata="Q375217" start="84465" end="84481" title="Adriana Trigiani" label="Adriana Trigiani"/>
<link wikidata="Q3242442" start="84487" end="84502" title="Lisa Scottoline" label="Lisa Scottoline"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="84558" end="84567" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholics"/>
<link wikidata="Q649299" start="85469" end="85485" title="Regis University" label="Regis University"/>
<link wikidata="Q992830" start="85487" end="85509" title="Santa Clara University" label="Santa Clara University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1887879" start="85515" end="85542" title="University of San Francisco" label="University of San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537303" start="85548" end="85566" title="Gonzaga University" label="Gonzaga University"/>
<link wikidata="Q40435" start="85618" end="85625" title="Buffalo, New York" label="Buffalo"/>
<link wikidata="Q34404" start="85630" end="85641" title="New Orleans" label="New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1038328" start="85643" end="85666" title="Saint Joseph&amp;#x27;s Day" label="Saint Joseph&amp;#x27;s Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q367523" start="85857" end="85869" title="Columbus Day" label="Columbus Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q28914" start="85940" end="85952" title="patron saint" label="patron saint"/>
<link wikidata="Q773538" start="85958" end="85981" title="North End, Boston" label="Boston&amp;#x27;s North End"/>
<link wikidata="Q5439541" start="86053" end="86079" title="Feast of St. Anthony" label="Saint Anthony&amp;#x27;s Feast"/>
<link wikidata="Q315312" start="86376" end="86387" title="Saint Januarius" label="San Gennaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q254402" start="86459" end="86472" title="Saint Rosalia" label="Santa Rosalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="86521" end="86527" title="Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q3543" start="86545" end="86552" title="Potenza" label="Potenza"/>
<link wikidata="Q152457" start="86567" end="86576" title="Saint Roch" label="San Rocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q16554" start="86630" end="86636" title="Denver" label="Denver"/>
<link wikidata="Q562233" start="86714" end="86725" title="Gerard Majella" label="San Gerardo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5439557" start="86776" end="86801" title="Feast of the Seven Fishes" label="Feast of the Seven Fishes"/>
<link wikidata="Q162691" start="86807" end="86830" title="Feast of the Assumption" label="Feast of the Assumption"/>
<link wikidata="Q37320" start="86848" end="86857" title="Cleveland" label="Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q345" start="86938" end="86957" title="Blessed Virgin Mary" label="Blessed Virgin Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q573627" start="87101" end="87114" title="Anthony Pilla" label="Anthony Pilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="87324" end="87334" title="Protestant" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q682443" start="87474" end="87490" title="Episcopal Church (United States)" label="Episcopal Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q172331" start="87533" end="87543" title="liturgy" label="liturgical"/>
<link wikidata="Q194253" start="87573" end="87584" title="evangelicalism" label="evangelical"/>
<link wikidata="Q312502" start="87595" end="87614" title="Fiorello La Guardia" label="Fiorello La Guardia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2605053" start="87728" end="87740" title="Italian Jews" label="Italian Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q324640" start="87759" end="87770" title="Charismatic Movement" label="charismatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6050496" start="87798" end="87831" title="Christian Church of North America" label="Christian Church of North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q483978" start="87864" end="87884" title="Pentecostalism" label="Pentecostal Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="87904" end="87911" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q25330" start="87972" end="87991" title="Trenton, New Jersey" label="Trenton, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2426909" start="87997" end="88021" title="Wakefield, Massachusetts" label="Wakefield, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q93191" start="88081" end="88088" title="Baptists" label="Baptist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304090" start="88103" end="88144" title="The Church of Jesus Christ (Bickertonite)" label="The Church of Jesus Christ (Bickertonite)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097673" start="88168" end="88193" title="Latter Day Saint movement" label="Latter Day Saint movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q267927" start="88221" end="88246" title="Monongahela, Pennsylvania" label="Monongahela, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q2022432" start="88342" end="88365" title="Valdese, North Carolina" label="Valdese, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q201620" start="88413" end="88423" title="Waldensian" label="Waldensian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251" start="88454" end="88466" title="Cottian Alps" label="Cottian Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q102251" start="88745" end="88754" title="Sephardi Jews" label="Sephardic"/>
<link wikidata="Q268166" start="88983" end="88999" title="Lorenzo Da Ponte" label="Lorenzo Da Ponte"/>
<link wikidata="Q49088" start="89128" end="89144" title="Columbia University" label="Columbia College"/>
<link wikidata="Q3460489" start="89280" end="89293" title="Sabato Morais" label="Sabato Morais"/>
<link wikidata="Q1688743" start="89443" end="89481" title="Jewish Theological Seminary of America" label="Jewish Theological Seminary of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q16559574" start="89630" end="89645" title="Giorgio Polacco" label="Giorgio Polacco"/>
<link wikidata="Q188031" start="89681" end="89705" title="Metropolitan Opera House (Lincoln Center)" label="Metropolitan Opera House"/>
<link wikidata="Q4515835" start="89726" end="89745" title="Chicago Civic Opera" label="Chicago Civic Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q312502" start="89763" end="89782" title="Fiorello La Guardia" label="Fiorello La Guardia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391533" start="89954" end="89975" title="Samuel David Luzzatto" label="Samuel David Luzzatto"/>
<link wikidata="Q8641" start="90039" end="90046" title="Yiddish" label="Yiddish"/>
<link wikidata="Q23559" start="90055" end="90064" title="Mussolini" label="Mussolini"/>
<link wikidata="Q541880" start="90072" end="90083" title="Italian Racial Laws" label="Racial Laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q387029" start="90453" end="90476" title="Giorgio Levi Della Vida" label="Giorgio Levi Della Vida"/>
<link wikidata="Q377558" start="90478" end="90503" title="Mario Castelnuovo-Tedesco" label="Mario Castelnuovo-Tedesco"/>
<link wikidata="Q3561375" start="90505" end="90519" title="Vittorio Rieti" label="Vittorio Rieti"/>
<link wikidata="Q993725" start="90521" end="90532" title="Bruno Rossi" label="Bruno Rossi"/>
<link wikidata="Q173028" start="90534" end="90546" title="Emilio Segre" label="Emilio Segre"/>
<link wikidata="Q3765354" start="90548" end="90566" title="Giorgio Cavaglieri" label="Giorgio Cavaglieri"/>
<link wikidata="Q709148" start="90568" end="90576" title="Ugo Fano" label="Ugo Fano"/>
<link wikidata="Q93052" start="90578" end="90589" title="Robert Fano" label="Robert Fano"/>
<link wikidata="Q289206" start="90591" end="90603" title="Guido Fubini" label="Guido Fubini"/>
<link wikidata="Q5407263" start="90605" end="90618" title="Eugene Fubini" label="Eugene Fubini"/>
<link wikidata="Q2259896" start="90624" end="90638" title="Silvano Arieti" label="Silvano Arieti"/>
<link wikidata="Q15077451" start="90770" end="90785" title="Giuliana Tesoro" label="Giuliana Tesoro"/>
<link wikidata="Q205850" start="90942" end="90959" title="Franco Modigliani" label="Franco Modigliani"/>
<link wikidata="Q173028" start="90961" end="90973" title="Emilio Segre" label="Emilio Segre"/>
<link wikidata="Q205667" start="90975" end="90989" title="Salvador Luria" label="Salvador Luria"/>
<link wikidata="Q185007" start="90995" end="91015" title="Rita Levi Montalcini" label="Rita Levi Montalcini"/>
<link wikidata="Q505358" start="91088" end="91102" title="Andrew Viterbi" label="Andrew Viterbi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719401" start="91126" end="91137" title="Ken Auletta" label="Ken Auletta"/>
<link wikidata="Q121995" start="91153" end="91168" title="Guido Calabresi" label="Guido Calabresi"/>
<link wikidata="Q153670" start="91215" end="91225" title="Primo Levi" label="Primo Levi"/>
<link wikidata="Q318309" start="91268" end="91283" title="Giorgio Bassani" label="Giorgio Bassani"/>
<link wikidata="Q312628" start="91288" end="91298" title="Carlo Levi" label="Carlo Levi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2867281" start="91414" end="91431" title="Primo Levi Center" label="Primo Levi Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q7191" start="92550" end="92561" title="Nobel prize" label="Nobel prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q339619" start="92562" end="92569" title="List of Nobel laureates" label="winners"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="92638" end="92661" title="La Scuola International" label="La Scuola International"/>
<link wikidata="Q19864879" start="92684" end="92725" title="La Scuola d&amp;#x27;Italia Guglielmo Marconi" label="La Scuola d&amp;#x27;Italia Guglielmo Marconi"/>
<link wikidata="Q652" start="92848" end="92864" title="Italian language" label="Italian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="92923" end="92929" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="92934" end="92940" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q7347" start="93473" end="93484" title="Great Lakes" label="Great Lakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q40435" start="93502" end="93509" title="Buffalo, New York" label="Buffalo"/>
<link wikidata="Q49218" start="93511" end="93520" title="Rochester, New York" label="Rochester"/>
<link wikidata="Q12439" start="93522" end="93529" title="Detroit" label="Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="93531" end="93538" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q37320" start="93540" end="93549" title="Cleveland" label="Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q37836" start="93554" end="93563" title="Milwaukee" label="Milwaukee"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="93576" end="93589" title="San Francisco" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q38022" start="93591" end="93600" title="St. Louis" label="St. Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q34404" start="93605" end="93616" title="New Orleans" label="New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q6455761" start="93787" end="93798" title="L&amp;#x27;Idea" label="L&amp;#x27;Idea"/>
<link wikidata="Q4784589" start="93870" end="93881" title="Arba Sicula" label="Arba Sicula"/>
<link wikidata="Q33973" start="93993" end="94010" title="Sicilian language" label="Sicilian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q18438" start="94507" end="94518" title="Long Island" label="Long Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q3810279" start="94877" end="94891" title="Joseph Tusiani" label="Joseph Tusiani"/>
<link wikidata="Q5592" start="95175" end="95187" title="Michelangelo" label="Michelangelo"/>
<link wikidata="Q43056" start="95830" end="95841" title="Axis powers" label="Axis powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q23559" start="96143" end="96159" title="Benito Mussolini" label="Benito Mussolini"/>
<link wikidata="Q213205" start="96284" end="96306" title="San Francisco Bay Area" label="San Francisco Bay Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q652" start="96716" end="96732" title="Italian language" label="Standard Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5460907" start="96774" end="96784" title="Florentine dialect" label="Florentine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1098467" start="96896" end="96912" title="Regional Italian" label="Regional Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3313381" start="96917" end="96942" title="Italo-Dalmatian languages" label="Italo-Dalmatian languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q33845" start="97011" end="97027" title="Neapolitan language" label="southern Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q33973" start="97032" end="97049" title="Sicilian language" label="Sicilian dialects"/>
<link wikidata="Q379676" start="97253" end="97271" title="Advanced Placement" label="AP course of study"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109023" start="97499" end="97512" title="College Board" label="College Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q2347975" start="97841" end="97858" title="Governor of New York" label="New York Governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q11673" start="97859" end="97871" title="Andrew Cuomo" label="Andrew Cuomo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3885149" start="98151" end="98181" title="Order Sons of Italy in America" label="Order Sons of Italy in America"/>
<link wikidata="Q219555" start="98506" end="98531" title="New York Public Library" label="New York public libraries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198796" start="98564" end="98587" title="Brooklyn Public Library" label="Brooklyn Public Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q18419" start="98793" end="98801" title="Brooklyn" label="Brooklyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q33831" start="99090" end="99105" title="pidgin language" label="pidgin language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="99213" end="99221" title="New York (state)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="99226" end="99236" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q61729985" start="99261" end="99280" title="Little Italy" label="Italian communities"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="99330" end="99334" title="United States" label="U.S."/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="99339" end="99345" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2085198" start="99413" end="99429" title="Languages of Italy" label="Italian dialects"/>
<link wikidata="Q7976" start="99434" end="99450" title="American English" label="American English"/>
<link wikidata="Q2640705" start="99588" end="99600" title="Mario Batali" label="Mario Batali"/>
<link wikidata="Q166216" start="99602" end="99620" title="Giada DeLaurentiis" label="Giada DeLaurentiis"/>
<link wikidata="Q257943" start="99622" end="99633" title="Rachael Ray" label="Rachael Ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q3446248" start="99635" end="99651" title="Lidia Bastianich" label="Lidia Bastianich"/>
<link wikidata="Q12057690" start="99657" end="99666" title="Guy Fieri" label="Guy Fieri"/>
<link wikidata="Q192786" start="99788" end="99803" title="Italian cuisine" label="Italian cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q966423" start="99820" end="99830" title="Neapolitan cuisine" label="Neapolitan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1859351" start="99835" end="99843" title="Sicilian cuisine" label="Sicilian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7572829" start="100033" end="100056" title="spaghetti and meatballs" label="spaghetti and meatballs"/>
<link wikidata="Q177" start="100064" end="100069" title="pizza" label="pizza"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071808" start="100115" end="100138" title="Chicago-style pizza" label="Chicago-style deep dish"/>
<link wikidata="Q3844992" start="100143" end="100162" title="New York-style pizza" label="New York thin crust"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130684" start="100483" end="100503" title="Feast of San Gennaro" label="Feast of San Gennaro"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="100533" end="100582" title="Williamsburg, Brooklyn#Feast of St. Paulinus and Our Lady of Mount Carmel" label="Our Lady of Mount Carmel &amp;quot;Giglio&amp;quot; Feast"/>
<link wikidata="Q771572" start="100590" end="100602" title="Williamsburg, Brooklyn" label="Williamsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q18419" start="100614" end="100622" title="Brooklyn" label="Brooklyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q28914" start="100708" end="100720" title="patron saint" label="patron saint"/>
<link wikidata="Q773538" start="100799" end="100808" title="North End, Boston" label="North End"/>
<link wikidata="Q167477" start="100867" end="100887" title="St. Anthony of Padua" label="St. Anthony of Padua"/>
<link wikidata="Q55057" start="100929" end="100942" title="Montefalcione" label="Montefalcione"/>
<link wikidata="Q128267" start="100984" end="100996" title="Saint Joseph" label="Saint Joseph"/>
<link wikidata="Q37836" start="101766" end="101775" title="Milwaukee" label="Milwaukee"/>
<link wikidata="Q218718" start="102159" end="102167" title="Jay Leno" label="Jay Leno"/>
<link wikidata="Q4914" start="102169" end="102181" title="Jimmy Kimmel" label="Jimmy Kimmel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148035" start="102183" end="102193" title="Kelly Ripa" label="Kelly Ripa"/>
<link wikidata="Q687428" start="102195" end="102210" title="Maria Bartiromo" label="Maria Bartiromo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4119" start="102212" end="102224" title="Adam Carolla" label="Adam Carolla"/>
<link wikidata="Q459102" start="102226" end="102237" title="Neil Cavuto" label="Neil Cavuto"/>
<link wikidata="Q451861" start="102239" end="102251" title="Kelly Monaco" label="Kelly Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q3496382" start="102253" end="102266" title="Jai Rodriguez" label="Jai Rodriguez"/>
<link wikidata="Q292081" start="102268" end="102285" title="Annette Funicello" label="Annette Funicello"/>
<link wikidata="Q7926735" start="102287" end="102301" title="Victoria Gotti" label="Victoria Gotti"/>
<link wikidata="Q721963" start="102303" end="102313" title="Tony Danza" label="Tony Danza"/>
<link wikidata="Q1281335" start="102315" end="102331" title="Giuliana DePandi" label="Giuliana DePandi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1281335" start="102333" end="102348" title="Giuliana Rancic" label="Giuliana Rancic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5532688" start="102404" end="102417" title="Generoso Pope" label="Generoso Pope"/>
<link wikidata="Q5996615" start="102591" end="102619" title="Il Progresso Italo-Americano" label="Il Progresso Italo-Americano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="102814" end="102826" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q432139" start="103247" end="103259" title="Tammany Hall" label="Tammany Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q15975718" start="103359" end="103406" title="New Deal Coalition" label="Franklin D. Roosevelt&amp;#x27;s Democratic tickets"/>
<link wikidata="Q94916" start="103566" end="103599" title="Second Italo-Ethiopian War" label="Italy&amp;#x27;s invasion of Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q441554" start="103738" end="103758" title="William O&amp;#x27;Dwyer" label="William O&amp;#x27;Dwyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q11613" start="103780" end="103795" title="Harry S. Truman" label="Harry S. Truman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7950328" start="103959" end="103963" title="WHOM" label="WHOM"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="104013" end="104021" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q182121" start="104042" end="104056" title="anti-Communist" label="anti-Communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q632933" start="104159" end="104184" title="Italian elections in 1948" label="Italian elections in 1948"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="105204" end="105214" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q16009422" start="105641" end="105653" title="Carmelo Zito" label="Carmelo Zito"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="105668" end="105681" title="San Francisco" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859" start="105920" end="105937" title="Spanish Civil War" label="Spanish Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4735094" start="106849" end="106864" title="Alpha Phi Delta" label="Alpha Phi Delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q4744209" start="106866" end="106905" title="American Italian Anti-Defamation League" label="American Italian Anti-Defamation League"/>
<link wikidata="Q25040733" start="106907" end="106935" title="Columbus Citizens Foundation" label="Columbus Citizens Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q15121180" start="106937" end="106978" title="Italian American Congressional Delegation" label="Italian American Congressional Delegation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6092618" start="106980" end="107016" title="Italian American One Voice Coalition" label="Italian American One Voice Coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q13386549" start="107018" end="107054" title="Italian-American Civil Rights League" label="Italian-American Civil Rights League"/>
<link wikidata="Q2494837" start="107056" end="107087" title="Italian-American National Union" label="Italian-American National Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q967681" start="107089" end="107109" title="Italy–USA Foundation" label="Italy–USA Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3885669" start="107111" end="107158" title="National Organization of Italian American Women" label="National Organization of Italian American Women"/>
<link wikidata="Q3885149" start="107160" end="107190" title="Order Sons of Italy in America" label="Order Sons of Italy in America"/>
<link wikidata="Q7884735" start="107192" end="107206" title="Unico National" label="Unico National"/>
<link wikidata="Q3885149" start="109785" end="109815" title="Order Sons of Italy in America" label="Order Sons of Italy in America"/>
<link wikidata="Q7884735" start="109820" end="109834" title="Unico National" label="Unico National"/>
<link wikidata="Q11073602" start="110631" end="110651" title="Museo ItaloAmericano" label="Museo ItaloAmericano"/>
<link wikidata="Q6092614" start="110678" end="110716" title="Italian American Museum of Los Angeles" label="Italian American Museum of Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q486775" start="111275" end="111282" title="Lynching" label="lynched"/>
<link wikidata="Q18151379" start="112439" end="112464" title="March 14, 1891 lynchings" label="eleven Italian immigrants"/>
<link wikidata="Q34404" start="112468" end="112479" title="New Orleans" label="New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q5234909" start="112553" end="112567" title="David Hennessy" label="David Hennessy"/>
<link wikidata="Q486775" start="112602" end="112610" title="lynching" label="lynching"/>
<link wikidata="Q833926" start="112979" end="113015" title="Sacco and Vanzetti" label="Nicola Sacco and Bartolomeo Vanzetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q16101" start="113055" end="113064" title="Braintree, Massachusetts" label="Braintree"/>
<link wikidata="Q6199" start="113172" end="113181" title="anarchist" label="anarchist"/>
<link wikidata="Q441524" start="113554" end="113569" title="Alvan T. Fuller" label="Alvan T. Fuller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458155" start="114367" end="114386" title="Sicilian Mafia" label="the Mafia in Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q399999" start="114475" end="114486" title="Prohibition in the United States" label="Prohibition"/>
<link wikidata="Q80048" start="114913" end="114922" title="Al Capone" label="Al Capone"/>
<link wikidata="Q125752" start="115125" end="115157" title="American Mafia" label="Italian American organized crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q617411" start="115279" end="115300" title="Apalachin Meeting" label="meeting of racketeers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3462062" start="115304" end="115313" title="Apalachin, New York" label="Apalachin"/>
<link wikidata="Q13584039" start="115368" end="115394" title="United States Federal Witness Protection Program" label="Witness Protection Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418478" start="115400" end="115452" title="Racketeer Influenced &amp;amp; Corrupt Organizations Act" label="Racketeer Influenced &amp;amp; Corrupt Organizations Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q212648" start="115624" end="115637" title="Rudy Giuliani" label="Rudy Giuliani"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110029" start="115642" end="115653" title="Louis Freeh" label="Louis Freeh"/>
<link wikidata="Q47703" start="116150" end="116163" title="The Godfather" label="The Godfather"/>
<link wikidata="Q42047" start="116177" end="116187" title="Goodfellas" label="Goodfellas"/>
<link wikidata="Q220910" start="116205" end="116211" title="Casino (1995 film)" label="Casino"/>
<link wikidata="Q23628" start="116249" end="116261" title="The Sopranos" label="The Sopranos"/>
<link wikidata="Q191715" start="116605" end="116616" title="Time Warner" label="Time Warner"/>
<link wikidata="Q23633" start="116637" end="116640" title="HBO" label="HBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q23628" start="116661" end="116673" title="The Sopranos" label="The Sopranos"/>
<link wikidata="Q192557" start="116686" end="116696" title="DreamWorks Pictures" label="DreamWorks"/>
<link wikidata="Q120367" start="116718" end="116728" title="Shark Tale" label="Shark Tale"/>
<link wikidata="Q43359" start="117020" end="117023" title="MTV" label="MTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165712" start="117055" end="117067" title="Jersey Shore (TV series)" label="Jersey Shore"/>
<link wikidata="Q5166016" start="117090" end="117106" title="Reactions to Jersey Shore" label="severe criticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q60772139" start="117314" end="117335" title="Made in Staten Island" label="Made in Staten Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q43359" start="117378" end="117381" title="MTV" label="MTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q5256086" start="117411" end="117435" title="Demographics of Staten Island" label="residents of the borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q61729985" start="118618" end="118632" title="Little Italy" label="Little Italies"/>
<link wikidata="Q377805" start="118679" end="118690" title="Anti-Italianism" label="Italophobia"/>
<link wikidata="Q189049" start="118696" end="118709" title="ethnocentrism" label="ethnocentrism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063123" start="118714" end="118730" title="anti-Catholicism" label="anti-Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q34404" start="119014" end="119025" title="New Orleans" label="New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138301" start="119174" end="119189" title="New York Harbor" label="New York Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q24460" start="119287" end="119296" title="Northeastern United States" label="Northeast"/>
<link wikidata="Q49042" start="119310" end="119325" title="Southern United States" label="Southern states"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920358" start="119349" end="119356" title="Central Florida" label="Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q7567226" start="119361" end="119374" title="South Florida" label="South Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q7010868" start="119383" end="119399" title="New Orleans metropolitan area" label="New Orleans area"/>
<link wikidata="Q864007" start="119529" end="119539" title="Deep South" label="Deep South"/>
<link wikidata="Q2098047" start="119587" end="119600" title="Sharecropping" label="sharecroppers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1739536" start="119839" end="119849" title="inner city" label="inner city"/>
<link wikidata="Q3610510" start="119965" end="119979" title="ethnic enclave" label="ethnic enclave"/>
<link wikidata="Q5996615" start="120337" end="120365" title="Il Progresso Italo-Americano" label="Il Progresso Italo-Americano"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="120685" end="120698" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q201462" start="120710" end="120733" title="Little Italy, Manhattan" label="Little Italy, Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511813" start="120739" end="120754" title="Lower East Side" label="Lower East Side"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069687" start="120767" end="120781" title="Italian Harlem" label="Italian Harlem"/>
<link wikidata="Q6913846" start="120783" end="120794" title="Morris Park, Bronx" label="Morris Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q4884287" start="120796" end="120803" title="Belmont, Bronx" label="Belmont"/>
<link wikidata="Q818193" start="120805" end="120816" title="Bensonhurst, Brooklyn" label="Bensonhurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q58981" start="120818" end="120830" title="Howard Beach, Queens" label="Howard Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q59030" start="120832" end="120842" title="Ozone Park" label="Ozone Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5046569" start="120844" end="120859" title="Carroll Gardens" label="Carroll Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q205380" start="120861" end="120878" title="Greenwich Village" label="Greenwich Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q6841642" start="120880" end="120894" title="Middle Village, Queens" label="Middle Village"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="120896" end="120916" title="Williamsburg, Brooklyn#Italian-American community and Our Lady of Mount Carmel" label="Italian Williamsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2892166" start="120918" end="120927" title="Bay Ridge" label="Bay Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7568430" start="120937" end="120948" title="South Shore, Staten Island" label="South Shore"/>
<link wikidata="Q18432" start="120952" end="120965" title="Staten Island" label="Staten Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q2724557" start="121080" end="121088" title="Bleecker Street" label="Bleecker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1592949" start="121105" end="121114" title="Lafayette Street" label="Lafayette"/>
<link wikidata="Q785788" start="121138" end="121144" title="Bowery" label="Bowery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934308" start="121311" end="121326" title="Mulberry Street (Manhattan)" label="Mulberry Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q315312" start="121385" end="121396" title="San Gennaro" label="San Gennaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q866332" start="121540" end="121549" title="Chinatown, Manhattan" label="Chinatown"/>
<link wikidata="Q4797872" start="121596" end="121609" title="Arthur Avenue" label="Arthur Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q4884287" start="121617" end="121624" title="Belmont, Bronx" label="Belmont"/>
<link wikidata="Q408804" start="121670" end="121677" title="borough (New York City)" label="borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q18426" start="121679" end="121688" title="The Bronx" label="The Bronx"/>
<link wikidata="Q6913846" start="121782" end="121793" title="Morris Park, Bronx" label="Morris Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915654" start="121795" end="121805" title="Pelham Bay" label="Pelham Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421611" start="121807" end="121819" title="Throggs Neck" label="Throggs Neck"/>
<link wikidata="Q166998" start="122171" end="122185" title="United States Census, 2000" label="census of 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421950" start="122857" end="122877" title="Welcome Back, Kotter" label="Welcome Back, Kotter"/>
<link wikidata="Q18432" start="122897" end="122910" title="Staten Island" label="Staten Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q3758341" start="123096" end="123114" title="Garibaldi Memorial" label="Garibaldi Memorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="124878" end="124890" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6092834" start="125137" end="125151" title="Italian Market, Philadelphia" label="Italian Market"/>
<link wikidata="Q773538" start="125419" end="125428" title="North End, Boston" label="North End"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="125432" end="125438" title="Boston, Massachusetts" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q974693" start="125493" end="125500" title="Italian-American" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5017152" start="125646" end="125660" title="Caffe Vittoria" label="Caffe Vittoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q7457686" start="125829" end="125843" title="Seventh Avenue, Newark, New Jersey" label="Seventh Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q25395" start="125847" end="125853" title="Newark, New Jersey" label="Newark"/>
<link wikidata="Q7589744" start="126028" end="126050" title="St. Lucy&amp;#x27;s Church (Newark, New Jersey)" label="St. Lucy&amp;#x27;s Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q920600" start="126546" end="126559" title="urban renewal" label="urban renewal"/>
<link wikidata="Q811249" start="126740" end="126754" title="Interstate 280 (New Jersey)" label="Interstate 280"/>
<link wikidata="Q4972363" start="126983" end="126991" title="Broadway, Newark, New Jersey" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7368716" start="126993" end="127002" title="Roseville, Newark, New Jersey" label="Roseville"/>
<link wikidata="Q6073090" start="127007" end="127020" title="Ironbound" label="the Ironbound"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="127110" end="127122" title="Port#Port of call" label="port of call"/>
<link wikidata="Q1582905" start="127217" end="127227" title="Hull House" label="Hull House"/>
<link wikidata="Q3114001" start="127238" end="127254" title="settlement house" label="settlement house"/>
<link wikidata="Q180989" start="127267" end="127278" title="Jane Addams" label="Jane Addams"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331815" start="127283" end="127294" title="Ellen Starr" label="Ellen Starr"/>
<link wikidata="Q955764" start="127549" end="127571" title="University of Illinois at Chicago" label="University of Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q47596" start="127730" end="127745" title="Chicago Tribune" label="Chicago Tribune"/>
<link wikidata="Q1013490" start="128047" end="128059" title="Elmwood Park, Illinois" label="Elmwood Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5658519" start="128061" end="128074" title="Harlem Avenue" label="Harlem Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020714" start="128219" end="128231" title="Melrose Park, Illinois" label="Melrose Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q2229136" start="128342" end="128355" title="Schiller Park, Illinois" label="Schiller Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q2671244" start="128357" end="128370" title="Franklin Park, Illinois" label="Franklin Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q783421" start="128372" end="128383" title="River Grove, Illinois" label="River Grove"/>
<link wikidata="Q2666488" start="128385" end="128393" title="Norridge, Illinois" label="Norridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q578277" start="128395" end="128410" title="Chicago Heights" label="Chicago Heights"/>
<link wikidata="Q1976009" start="128416" end="128431" title="Harwood Heights, Illinois" label="Harwood Heights"/>
<link wikidata="Q1970830" start="128487" end="128497" title="Stone Park, Illinois" label="Stone Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q37836" start="128843" end="128852" title="Milwaukee" label="Milwaukee"/>
<link wikidata="Q5725381" start="129298" end="129312" title="Festa Italiana" label="Festa Italiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q502294" start="129402" end="129418" title="Milwaukee County, Wisconsin" label="Milwaukee County"/>
<link wikidata="Q7739677" start="129718" end="129726" title="The Hill, St. Louis" label="The Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q4618" start="130220" end="130229" title="Carnival" label="Carnevale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262719" start="130262" end="130272" title="Ferragosto" label="Ferragosto"/>
<link wikidata="Q290356" start="130578" end="130587" title="San Pedro, California" label="San Pedro"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="130591" end="130602" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q61729985" start="130610" end="130622" title="Little Italy" label="Little Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q18151303" start="130859" end="130876" title="Los Angeles Plaza" label="Los Angeles Plaza"/>
<link wikidata="Q198019" start="130932" end="130957" title="Union Station (Los Angeles)" label="Los Angeles Union Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q115821456" start="131025" end="131038" title="Old Chinatown, Los Angeles" label="Old Chinatown"/>
<link wikidata="Q7413369" start="131241" end="131259" title="San Antonio Winery" label="San Antonio Winery"/>
<link wikidata="Q6092614" start="131318" end="131356" title="Italian American Museum of Los Angeles" label="Italian American Museum of Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1825736" start="131402" end="131417" title="Lincoln Heights, Los Angeles" label="Lincoln Heights"/>
<link wikidata="Q286590" start="131553" end="131564" title="1940 United States census" label="1940 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000502" start="131638" end="131649" title="North Beach, San Francisco" label="North Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="131653" end="131666" title="San Francisco" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q4744684" start="131763" end="131798" title="American Planning Association" label="American Planning Association (APA)"/>
<link wikidata="Q586595" start="132061" end="132089" title="Antoine de la Mothe Cadillac" label="Antoine de la Mothe Cadillac"/>
<link wikidata="Q459578" start="132461" end="132471" title="Erie Canal" label="Erie Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5330280" start="132812" end="132826" title="Eastern Market, Detroit" label="Eastern Market"/>
<link wikidata="Q5602126" start="132867" end="132876" title="Greektown, Detroit" label="Greektown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1449" start="132925" end="132930" title="Genoa" label="Genoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210" start="132932" end="132940" title="Lombardy" label="Lombardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="132946" end="132952" title="Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q5303416" start="133355" end="133371" title="Downtown Detroit" label="Downtown Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5472269" start="134153" end="134173" title="Fort Wayne (Detroit)" label="Fort Wayne (Detroit)"/>
<link wikidata="Q179637" start="134200" end="134223" title="Prisoner of war" label="prisoners of war (POWs)"/>
<link wikidata="Q218678" start="134244" end="134266" title="North African campaign" label="North African campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q1925718" start="134575" end="134588" title="Metro Detroit" label="Metro Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q61729985" start="134657" end="134669" title="Little Italy" label="Little Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q182625" start="134701" end="134717" title="Windsor, Ontario" label="Windsor, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q2550281" start="134806" end="134822" title="Clinton Township, Macomb County, Michigan" label="Clinton Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q63430907" start="134927" end="134936" title="Hamtramck" label="Hamtramck"/>
<link wikidata="Q6826129" start="134964" end="134975" title="Mexicantown" label="Mexicantown"/>
<link wikidata="Q37320" start="135057" end="135066" title="Cleveland" label="Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7894574" start="135074" end="135086" title="University Circle" label="Little Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7057945" start="135154" end="135168" title="Northeast Ohio" label="Northeast Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2985090" start="135172" end="135197" title="combined statistical area" label="combined statistical area"/>
<link wikidata="Q3372820" start="135367" end="135385" title="Lake View Cemetery" label="Lake View Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q160278" start="135596" end="135615" title="John D. Rockefeller" label="John D. Rockefeller"/>
<link wikidata="Q5132133" start="135827" end="135850" title="Cleveland Feast of the Assumption Festival" label="Feast of the Assumption"/>
<link wikidata="Q14716457" start="136054" end="136072" title="Holy Rosary Church (Cleveland, Ohio)" label="Holy Rosary Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565868" start="136197" end="136205" title="Rail transport" label="railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q955043" start="136210" end="136222" title="Meat-packing industry" label="meat packing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458" start="136259" end="136267" title="Calabria" label="Calabria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="136272" end="136278" title="Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458" start="136367" end="136376" title="Calabria" label="Calabrese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342" start="136466" end="136476" title="Pittsburgh" label="Pittsburgh"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="136868" end="136881" title="Columbus Park (Kansas City)" label="Columbus Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5234909" start="138154" end="138168" title="David Hennessy" label="David Hennessy"/>
<link wikidata="Q18151379" start="138280" end="138316" title="March 14, 1891 New Orleans lynchings" label="March 14, 1891 New Orleans lynchings"/>
<link wikidata="Q18550" start="138402" end="138407" title="mafia" label="mafia"/>
<link wikidata="Q128069" start="138568" end="138586" title="Syracuse, New York" label="Syracuse, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q13670" start="138605" end="138621" title="Siracusa, Sicily" label="Siracusa, Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q7986481" start="138681" end="138700" title="West Shore Railroad" label="West Shore Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q7059724" start="138792" end="138801" title="Northside, Syracuse" label="Northside"/>
<link wikidata="Q7059724" start="138854" end="138863" title="Northside, Syracuse" label="Northside"/>
<link wikidata="Q6650479" start="139086" end="139114" title="Little Italy, Syracuse" label="Syracuse&amp;#x27;s Little Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440245" start="139762" end="139774" title="Federal Hill, Providence, Rhode Island" label="Federal Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q18383" start="139778" end="139788" title="Providence, Rhode Island" label="Providence"/>
<link wikidata="Q367523" start="140412" end="140424" title="Columbus Day" label="Columbus Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q5867289" start="140501" end="140510" title="History of Ybor City" label="Ybor City"/>
<link wikidata="Q49255" start="140514" end="140528" title="Tampa, Florida" label="Tampa, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q1576" start="140534" end="140547" title="Cigar" label="cigar-centric"/>
<link wikidata="Q627236" start="140548" end="140560" title="company town" label="company town"/>
<link wikidata="Q653884" start="140621" end="140628" title="Spanish Americas" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790886" start="140630" end="140635" title="Cuban Americans" label="Cuban"/>
<link wikidata="Q678551" start="140637" end="140643" title="American Jews" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q939871" start="140833" end="140843" title="Guild" label="guild-like"/>
<link wikidata="Q79867" start="141535" end="141554" title="Birmingham, Alabama" label="Birmingham, Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q963087" start="141988" end="142000" title="Little Italy, San Diego" label="Little Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q16552" start="142004" end="142013" title="San Diego" label="San Diego"/>
<link wikidata="Q331432" start="142038" end="142047" title="fishermen" label="fishermen"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="142106" end="142119" title="San Francisco, California" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q211386" start="142130" end="142159" title="1906 San Francisco earthquake" label="1906 San Francisco earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q6146274" start="142173" end="142177" title="tuna" label="tuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q54725" start="142229" end="142241" title="Interstate 5" label="Interstate 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q119380" start="142567" end="142581" title="gentrification" label="gentrification"/>
<link wikidata="Q1307276" start="142881" end="142908" title="single-family detached home" label="single-family detached home"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371" start="143144" end="143157" title="West Virginia" label="West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010199" start="143568" end="143578" title="Clarksburg, West Virginia" label="Clarksburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q838112" start="143580" end="143588" title="Wheeling, West Virginia" label="Wheeling"/>
<link wikidata="Q885991" start="143594" end="143603" title="Bluefield, West Virginia" label="Bluefield"/>
<link wikidata="Q5439557" start="143732" end="143757" title="Feast of the Seven Fishes" label="Feast of the Seven Fishes"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="143922" end="143932" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1612" start="143936" end="143944" title="Arkansas" label="Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4823040" start="143978" end="143991" title="Austin Corbin" label="Austin Corbin"/>
<link wikidata="Q20713498" start="144010" end="144030" title="Sunnyside Plantation" label="Sunnyside Plantation"/>
<link wikidata="Q61458" start="144034" end="144047" title="Chicot County, Arkansas" label="Chicot County"/>
<link wikidata="Q4791762" start="144060" end="144074" title="Arkansas Delta" label="Arkansas Delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q623429" start="144132" end="144146" title="Reconstruction Era" label="Reconstruction"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="144185" end="144198" title="Chateau Yquem" label="Chateau Yquem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1449" start="144208" end="144213" title="Genoa" label="Genoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q34404" start="144219" end="144230" title="New Orleans" label="New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321468" start="144743" end="144749" title="Ozarks" label="Ozarks"/>
<link wikidata="Q79616" start="144764" end="144773" title="Tontitown, Arkansas" label="Tontitown"/>
<link wikidata="Q377595" start="144891" end="144908" title="Port of Baltimore" label="Port of Baltimore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1449" start="144979" end="144984" title="Genoa" label="Genoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256" start="145028" end="145035" title="Liguria" label="Liguria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634" start="145104" end="145110" title="Naples" label="Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284" start="145112" end="145119" title="Abruzzo" label="Abruzzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q235163" start="145121" end="145127" title="Cefalù" label="Cefalù"/>
<link wikidata="Q16227" start="145133" end="145140" title="Province of Palermo" label="Palermo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7322" start="145183" end="145203" title="Christopher Columbus" label="Christopher Columbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5308980" start="145207" end="145222" title="Druid Hill Park" label="Druid Hill Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="145293" end="145306" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q202175" start="145314" end="145326" title="Ellis Island" label="Ellis Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241244" start="145401" end="145425" title="President Street Station" label="President Street Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q3256694" start="145515" end="145527" title="Little Italy, Baltimore" label="Little Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2470296" start="145606" end="145618" title="Inner Harbor" label="Inner Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6537749" start="145760" end="145769" title="Lexington, Baltimore" label="Lexington"/>
<link wikidata="Q4881871" start="145771" end="145784" title="Belair-Edison, Baltimore" label="Belair-Edison"/>
<link wikidata="Q6669363" start="145823" end="145837" title="Lombard Street (Baltimore)" label="Lombard Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q55042" start="145881" end="145897" title="Guardia Lombardi" label="Guardia Lombardi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201891" start="145937" end="145951" title="Catholic Church in Italy" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7589513" start="146011" end="146032" title="St. Leo&amp;#x27;s Church (Baltimore, Maryland)" label="St. Leo&amp;#x27;s Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q34404" start="146778" end="146789" title="New Orleans, Louisiana" label="New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="146875" end="146893" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426203" start="147074" end="147091" title="Mississippi Delta" label="Mississippi Delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127539" start="147164" end="147169" title="Delta blues" label="blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q302497" start="147187" end="147196" title="mandolins" label="mandolins"/>
<link wikidata="Q20713498" start="148030" end="148050" title="Sunnyside Plantation" label="Sunnyside Plantation"/>
<link wikidata="Q675576" start="148478" end="148484" title="Pueblo, Colorado" label="Pueblo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2161532" start="148491" end="148496" title="Welby, Colorado" label="Welby"/>
<link wikidata="Q7057317" start="148605" end="148621" title="North West Side (Denver)" label="Northwest Denver"/>
<link wikidata="Q2750084" start="149215" end="149227" title="Denver metropolitan area" label="metro Denver"/>
<link wikidata="Q994465" start="149281" end="149292" title="Wheat Ridge, Colorado" label="Wheat Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q948129" start="149294" end="149305" title="Westminster, Colorado" label="Westminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q590849" start="149310" end="149316" title="Arvada, Colorado" label="Arvada"/>
<link wikidata="Q5259813" start="149772" end="149787" title="Denver crime family" label="Smaldone family"/>
<link wikidata="Q3543" start="149928" end="149935" title="Potenza" label="Potenza"/>
<link wikidata="Q1452" start="149949" end="149959" title="Basilicata" label="Basilicata"/>
<link wikidata="Q23768" start="150176" end="150185" title="Las Vegas" label="Las Vegas"/>
<link wikidata="Q166998" start="150211" end="150227" title="2000 United States census" label="2000 U.S. census"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="150277" end="150291" title="Racial demographics of the United States#Racial makeup of the U.S. population" label="ancestry group"/>
<link wikidata="Q463769" start="150558" end="150583" title="American Community Survey" label="American Community Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="150766" end="150784" title="United States Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q4745593" start="151030" end="151045" title="Americanization (immigration)" label="Americanization"/>
<link wikidata="Q193579" start="151050" end="151071" title="cultural assimilation" label="cultural assimilation"/>
<link wikidata="Q49078" start="151122" end="151137" title="White Americans" label="White Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q43103" start="151199" end="151217" title="European Americans" label="European Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085028" start="151802" end="151823" title="Fairfield Township, Essex County, New Jersey" label="Fairfield, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q368233" start="151832" end="151854" title="Johnston, Rhode Island" label="Johnston, Rhode Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898680" start="151863" end="151890" title="North Branford, Connecticut" label="North Branford, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q755413" start="151899" end="151922" title="East Haven, Connecticut" label="East Haven, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084539" start="151931" end="151952" title="Hammonton, New Jersey" label="Hammonton, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083342" start="151961" end="151983" title="Ocean Gate, New Jersey" label="Ocean Gate, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073947" start="151992" end="152016" title="East Hanover Township, New Jersey" label="East Hanover, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q754769" start="152025" end="152049" title="North Haven, Connecticut" label="North Haven, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052498" start="152058" end="152081" title="Cedar Grove, New Jersey" label="Cedar Grove, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089305" start="152090" end="152112" title="Wood-Ridge, New Jersey" label="Wood-Ridge, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1625652" start="152121" end="152151" title="North Providence, Rhode Island" label="North Providence, Rhode Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q954774" start="152160" end="152181" title="Dunmore, Pennsylvania" label="Dunmore, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q931145" start="152190" end="152210" title="Newfield, New Jersey" label="Newfield, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q257438" start="152219" end="152240" title="Saugus, Massachusetts" label="Saugus, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q6177621" start="152249" end="152270" title="Jenkins Township, Luzerne County, Pennsylvania" label="Jenkins, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q743383" start="152279" end="152306" title="West Pittston, Pennsylvania" label="West Pittston, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1184872" start="152315" end="152338" title="Old Forge, Lackawanna County, Pennsylvania" label="Old Forge, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q2460456" start="152347" end="152364" title="Lowellville, Ohio" label="Lowellville, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1180925" start="152373" end="152397" title="Hughestown, Pennsylvania" label="Hughestown, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q2113350" start="152406" end="152427" title="Prospect, Connecticut" label="Prospect, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q3708544" start="152484" end="152499" title="Busti, New York" label="Busti, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q7507476" start="152778" end="152796" title="Sicilian Americans" label="Sicilian Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q6574695" start="152799" end="152837" title="List of Italian-American neighborhoods" label="List of Italian-American neighborhoods"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="152841" end="152875" title="Little Italy#United States" label="Little Italys in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q20709191" start="152879" end="152911" title="History of Italians in Baltimore" label="History of Italians in Baltimore"/>
<link wikidata="Q23018301" start="152915" end="152953" title="History of Italian Americans in Boston" label="History of Italian Americans in Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q16997454" start="152957" end="153002" title="History of Italian Americans in Metro Detroit" label="History of Italian Americans in Metro Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q16843841" start="153006" end="153040" title="History of Italians in Mississippi" label="History of Italians in Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q17642903" start="153044" end="153067" title="Italians in New Orleans" label="Italians in New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q16151376" start="153071" end="153096" title="Italians in New York City" label="Italians in New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q16995565" start="153100" end="153144" title="History of Italian Americans in Philadelphia" label="History of Italian Americans in Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3804299" start="153148" end="153161" title="Utah Italians" label="Utah Italians"/>
<link wikidata="Q79616" start="153165" end="153184" title="Tontitown, Arkansas" label="Tontitown, Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2022432" start="153188" end="153211" title="Valdese, North Carolina" label="Valdese, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q6574689" start="153214" end="153245" title="List of Italian-American actors" label="List of Italian-American actors"/>
<link wikidata="Q6574701" start="153248" end="153283" title="List of Italian Americans in sports" label="List of Italian Americans in sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q3885149" start="153286" end="153316" title="Order Sons of Italy in America" label="Order Sons of Italy in America"/>
<link wikidata="Q3699131" start="153319" end="153343" title="Italian-American cuisine" label="Italian-American cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q125752" start="153346" end="153360" title="American Mafia" label="American Mafia"/>
<link wikidata="Q13386549" start="153364" end="153400" title="Italian-American Civil Rights League" label="Italian-American Civil Rights League"/>
<link wikidata="Q967681" start="153403" end="153423" title="Italy–USA Foundation" label="Italy–USA Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6093904" start="153441" end="153470" title="Italy–United States relations" label="Italy–United States relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1675084" start="153475" end="153491" title="Italian diaspora" label="Italian diaspora"/>
<link wikidata="Q377805" start="153506" end="153521" title="Anti-Italianism" label="Anti-Italianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q573777" start="153536" end="153547" title="Italophilia" label="Italophilia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165207" start="157040" end="157063" title="European History Online" label="European History Online"/>
<link wikidata="Q327772" start="157072" end="157101" title="Institute of European History" label="Institute of European History"/>
<link wikidata="Q37320" start="161421" end="161430" title="Cleveland" label="Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216538" start="165703" end="165724" title="Street Corner Society" label="Street Corner Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q87750581" start="167766" end="167784" title="Donna Gabaccia" label="Gabaccia, Donna R."/>
<link wikidata="Q131454" start="172154" end="172173" title="Library of Congress" label="Library of Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472358" start="172239" end="172260" title="University of Houston" label="University of Houston"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="125325" wikidata="Q655874" url="?curid=125325" title="Newbury, Berkshire">
<text>Newbury is a market town in West Berkshire, England, in the valley of the River Kennet. It is south of Oxford, north of Winchester, southeast of Swindon and west of Reading. It is also where West Berkshire Council is headquartered.

Newbury lies on the edge of the Berkshire Downs, part of the North Wessex Downs Area of outstanding natural beauty, north of the Hampshire–Berkshire county boundary. In the suburban village of Donnington lies the part-ruined Donnington Castle and the surrounding hills are home to some of the country&#x27;s most famous racehorse training grounds (centred on nearby Lambourn). To the south is a narrower range of hills including Walbury Hill and a few private landscape gardens and mansions, such as Highclere Castle. The local economy is inter-related to that of the eastern M4 corridor, which has most of its industrial, logistical and research businesses close to Newbury, mostly around Reading, Bracknell, Maidenhead and Slough. Together with the adjoining town of Thatcham, distant, Newbury forms the principal part of an urban area of approximately 70,000 people.

Newbury is also home to Newbury Racecourse, as well as being the location of the headquarters of Vodafone and the software company Micro Focus International. The town centres around a large market square and retains a rare medieval Cloth Hall, an adjoining half timbered granary, and the 15th-century St Nicolas Church, along with 17th- and 18th-century listed buildings.

== History ==


There was a Mesolithic settlement at Newbury. Artefacts were recovered from the Greenham Dairy Farm in 1963, and the Faraday Road site in 2002. Additional material was found in excavations along the route of the Newbury Bypass. Newbury was founded late in the 11th century following the Norman conquest as a new borough, hence its name. Although there are references to the borough that predate the Domesday Book it is not mentioned by name in the survey. However, its existence within the manor of Ulvritone is evident from the massive rise in value of that manor at a time when most manors were worth less than in Saxon times. In 1086 the Domesday Book assesses the borough as having land for 12 ploughs, 2 mills, woodland for 25 pigs, 11 villeins (resident farmhands, unfree peasant who owed his lord labour services), 11 bordars (unfree peasants with less land than villans/villeins), and 51 enclosures (private parks) rendering 70s 7d.

Doubt has been cast over the existence of Newbury Castle, but the town did have royal connections and was visited a number of times by King John and Henry III while hunting in the area. The first reference to a bridge on the site of the current Newbury Bridge is an account of its reconstruction in the 14th Century. In 1312, King Edward II directed that its bridge should be kept in good order. By 1623, when the bridge collapsed, it was recorded as being built of wood, being in length and in width, and having shops on it. The bridge was presumably rebuilt, as it is recorded that in 1644 a guard was placed on the bridge.

Historically, the town&#x27;s economic foundation was the cloth trade. This is reflected in the person of the 16th-century cloth magnate, Jack of Newbury, the proprietor of what may well have been the first factory in England, and the later tale of the Newbury Coat. The latter was the outcome of a bet as to whether a gentleman&#x27;s suit could be produced by the end of the day from wool taken from a sheep&#x27;s back at the beginning. The local legend was later immortalized in a humorous novel by Elizabethan writer Thomas Deloney. Newbury was the site of two battles during the English Civil War, the First Battle of Newbury (at Wash Common) in 1643, and the Second Battle of Newbury (at Speen) in 1644. The nearby Donnington Castle was reduced to a ruin in the aftermath of the second battle. The disruption of trade during the civil war, compounded by a collapse of the local cloth trade in the late 16th century, left Newbury impoverished.

The local economy was boosted in the 18th century by the rise of Bath as a popular destination for the wealthy escaping London&#x27;s summer heat and associated stench. Newbury was roughly halfway between London and Bath and an obvious stopping point in the two-day journey. Soon Newbury, and the Speenhamland area in particular, was filled with coaching inns of ever increasing grandeur and size. One inn, the George &amp; Pelican, was reputed to have stabling for 300 horses. A theatre was built to provide the travellers with entertainment featuring the major stars of the age. In 1795 local magistrates, meeting at the George and Pelican Inn in Speenhamland, introduced the Speenhamland System which tied parish poor relief (welfare payments) to the cost of bread.

In 1723, the Kennet Navigation made the River Kennet navigable downstream from Newbury to the River Thames in Reading. Some 70 years later, in 1794, work started on the centre section of the Kennet and Avon Canal, which would extend the Kennet Navigation to Bath, thus providing a through water route between London and Bristol via Newbury. This route was finally completed in 1810. The opening of the Great Western Railway from London to Bath in 1841 effectively killed the canal and coaching trades, and as the line passed some to the north it brought no advantage to the town. had to wait until 1847 to join the railway network, with the opening of the Berks and Hants Railway branch line from to via Newbury, and until 1906 to be on a main line, with the opening of the Reading-Taunton line. As a result, Newbury became something of a backwater market town, with an economy based largely on agriculture and horse-racing. The last use of the stocks in Newbury, and probably the UK, was on 11 June 1872 when Mark Tuck was placed in them for 4 hours. In the 1980s, British electronics firm Racal decided to locate their newly formed telecommunications company Racal Vodafone, later Vodafone UK, in the town. In the subsequent decades Newbury became something of a regional centre for the high-tech industries, and the town has since enjoyed a return to general economic prosperity.

=== Greenham Common ===
A large Royal Air Force station was established during the Second World War at Greenham Common on the edge of the town. In the 1950s, it became home to US Air Force bombers and tankers, for which it was equipped with the longest military runway in the United Kingdom. In the 1980s, it became one of only two USAF bases in the UK equipped with ground-launched nuclear-armed cruise missiles, causing it to become the site of protests by up to 40,000 protesters and the establishment of the Greenham Common Women&#x27;s Peace Camp. With the end of the Cold War, the base was closed, the runway was broken up, much of it used as fill material in building the Newbury bypass, and the area was restored to heathland. This project then saw Greenham and Crookham commons reopened to the public in 2000.

=== 1943 bombing ===
On 10 February 1943, two German bombers, Dornier Do 217s from ll/KG40 Bomber unit in Holland, on a nuisance raid, followed the Great Western Railway line running west from London. One of the bombers headed towards Reading while the other followed the line all the way to Newbury. At 4:43pm the bomber dropped eight high-explosive bombs over the town. There had been no time for a warning siren. The Senior Council School, St. Bartholomew&#x27;s Almshouses, St. John&#x27;s Church (just the altar was left standing) and Southampton Terrace were all destroyed, and another 265 dwellings were damaged, many of which had to be demolished. St John&#x27;s Church was completely rebuilt after the war. 15 people were killed and a further 41 people were injured, 25 seriously.

== Government ==

There are two tiers of local government covering Newbury, at parish (town) and unitary authority level: Newbury Town Council and West Berkshire Council. The town council is based at the Town Hall in the Market Place. West Berkshire Council is also based in the town, having its headquarters on Market Street.

Newbury Town Council currently has 23 councillors, representing seven wards of the town, currently: Brummel Grove, Clay Hill, Falkland, Northcroft, Pyle Hill, Victoria and St Johns. In the 2023 United Kingdom local elections, the Liberal Democrats retained control of the town council, with 21 councillors elected, alongside 2 Green Party councillors.

In the House of Commons, the town is in the Newbury constituency. Since the General Election of July 2024 this constituency has been represented by Lee Dillon, a Liberal Democrat. From 1999 to 2020 Newbury was part of the South East England European Parliament constituency electing MEPs by proportional representation.

===Administrative history===
Newbury was an ancient borough. Its date of incorporation as a borough is unknown; the name implies it was founded as a borough, and the earliest known documentary reference to it explicitly being a borough is from 1189. The earliest known municipal charter was granted in 1596. The borough covered the same area as the parish of Newbury. It was reformed to become a municipal borough in 1836 under the Municipal Corporations Act 1835, which standardised how most boroughs operated across the country.

The municipal borough and parish of Newbury were abolished in 1974 under the Local Government Act 1972, becoming part of the larger Newbury district. The Newbury district councillors who represented the area of the former borough then acted as charter trustees to preserve the town&#x27;s mayoralty and civic traditions, in the absence of the town having its own town council.

In the mid-1990s, the government decided to abolish Berkshire County Council and pass its functions to the county&#x27;s six district councils, including Newbury District Council. Ahead of the change coming into force, the district council decided to establish a new parish of Newbury, and also to change the district&#x27;s name to West Berkshire. The new parish of Newbury and its town council were established in 1997. Newbury District Council took over county-level functions from the abolished county council and was renamed West Berkshire Council on 1 April 1998.

===Twin towns===
The twinning ceremonies were held at the Corn Exchange. Newbury is twinned with the following:
* Braunfels in Germany (1963)
* Bagnols-sur-Cèze in France (1970) 
* Eeklo in Belgium (1974)
* Feltre in Italy (2003)
* Carcaixent in Spain. (2019)

== Geography ==

The Civil Parish of Newbury consists of the town and the suburbs of Wash Common, The City, West Fields, East Fields and Speenhamland. The modern conurbation of Newbury, however, with close bus and road links and almost contiguous development, may be taken to include the surrounding villages of Speen, Donnington, Shaw and Greenham. Speen, which is now a suburb of western Newbury, is roughly equidistant between Bristol and London.

Elevations vary from a minimum of 72 m above mean sea level to 122 m at Wash Common. Elevations reach 150–200 m in the directly adjoining hills. The River Kennet and the Kennet and Avon Canal flow east through the centre of the town to reach the Thames at Reading, while the River Lambourn (beside which is the country&#x27;s largest horse-training paddocks in the Valley of the Lambourn Downs) partly forms its northern boundary, ending in the town. A tributary that is smaller still, the River Enborne, forms the southern boundary (and also the county boundary with Hampshire).

Adjoining the town&#x27;s south-eastern border is Greenham Common and the famous Newbury Racecourse. Newbury is surrounded on three sides (north, west and south) by the North Wessex Downs. The downland to the south rises steeply out of the river valley providing scenic views, including Watership Down (made famous by the novel of the same name), Beacon Hill, the southeast&#x27;s highest point Walbury Hill, and Combe Gibbet.

==Demography==
Newbury has two very narrowly buffered settlements, Thatcham (25,267
inh. as at 2011) and Shaw cum Donnington (1,686 inh. as at 2011) forming an identifiable, informal greater Newbury urban and suburban conglomeration. In major use classes 11% of Newbury&#x27;s land is occupied by roads and as of 2005, 34% of its land was occupied by domestic gardens.


==Economy==

Newbury and its immediate surroundings constitute the major commercial and retail centre of West Berkshire. The local economy is inter-related to that of the eastern M4 corridor which has most of its industrial, logistical and research businesses close to Newbury, Reading and Slough, with smaller industrial estates in the county at Theale, Bracknell and Maidenhead. Newbury is home to the United Kingdoms headquarters of the mobile network operator Vodafone, which is the town&#x27;s largest employer with over 6,000 workers. Before moving to their £129 million headquarters in the outskirts of the town in 2002, Vodafone used 64 buildings spread across the town centre.

As well as Vodafone, Newbury is also home to the United Kingdom headquarters of National Instruments, Micro Focus, Stryker Corporation, Cognito, EValue and Newbury Building Society. The pharmaceutical company Bayer AG are also headquartered in the town, although in October 2015 the company announced their intention to move to the Green Park Business Park near Reading.

== Transport ==
===Rail===
Today, Newbury is served by two railway stations, and , which both are on the Reading to Taunton line. It was also served by the Didcot, Newbury and Southampton Railway until this closed in the 1960s.

===Road===
Following a similar east–west route is the A4 road from London to Bristol, historically the main route west from London. This road has been superseded as a long-distance route by the M4 motorway which runs almost parallel and can be accessed to the north at the Chieveley interchange at Junction 13. At Newbury this east–west route is crossed by a dual-carriageway north–south trunk road, from the major south coast port of Southampton to the industrial centres of the Midlands. Although this route was once served by the Didcot, Newbury and Southampton Railway, today it is only served by the A34 road, which now bypasses Newbury to the west on an alignment partially using the old rail route (see also &#x27;Newbury Bypass&#x27; below).

Until the completion of the bypass, the A34 and A4 met in the town centre at the Robin Hood Roundabout, a complicated gyratory system encompassing 6 approaching roads, a fire station, ambulance station and an exit on the inside of the roundabout, which has a north–south flyover across the roundabout. In 2007, the sculpture &quot;Couple in Conversation&quot; was unveiled on the roundabout, providing a new landmark for one of the major gateways into the town. Other significant roads radiating from Newbury include the A339 which now includes the renumbered part of the old A34 through the town centre and then heads towards Basingstoke and the M3 motorway, the A343 to Andover, the B4000 to Lambourn, the B4494 to Wantage and the B4009 to Streatley.

====Bus services====

Most local bus services were provided by Newbury Buses, a division of Reading Buses until August 2011. Reading buses continue to operate most bus routes around Newbury under the Newbury &amp; District brand 

Stagecoach South operates routes 7 and 7A to Woolton Hill &amp; Andover, and route 32 (formally the &#x27;Link&#x27;) to Basingstoke.

Thames Travel, operates routes X24 and X34 to Harwell Campus and Didcot, funded jointly between the Harwell Campus and West Berkshire Council&#x27;s government-issued Bus Service Improvement Plan funding.

Swindon&#x27;s Bus Company, operates route X20, a once-weekly &quot;shopper&quot; service from Marlborough.

National Express previously served Newbury, most recently route 402 towards Reading&#x27;s Mereoak Park &amp; Ride, Heathrow Airport and London, under contract to Newbury &amp; District.

====Newbury bypass====
The town&#x27;s location at the intersection of the routes from London to Bristol and from Southampton to Birmingham made it, for many years, a transport bottleneck. In 1963 a dual carriageway was built east of the town centre to ease congestion and the opening of the M4 motorway in 1971 moved the intersection of these major trunk routes north of the town, to Chieveley. The ring road around the town still suffered serious congestion and the Newbury bypass was proposed in 1981. The plans were approved in 1990. The road was built and finally opened in 1998. In August 2004, the improved A34-M4 junction was re-opened which allowed north–south traffic on the A34 to completely bypass the earlier roundabout at the M4. This junction continued to be improved, with new road markings and traffic signals completed in 2008.

== Education ==
Newbury has three main secondary schools:

* St. Bartholomew&#x27;s School – one of the oldest schools in Berkshire, founded in 1466.
* Park House School
* Trinity School, formed after the closure of Shaw House School and Turnpike School.

There is also Newbury College, a further and higher education college, funded by a private finance initiative, and Mary Hare School, a residential co-educational community special needs school for deaf pupils.

Independent schools nearby include:

* Horris Hill, an all-boys day and boarding school (from ages 4 to 13; boarding from 7 to 13)
* Downe House School
* Cheam School
* St Gabriel&#x27;s School, a co-ed school (from the ages 3 to 18)
* Thorngrove School, a day co-educational school in nearby Highclere (from the ages 2½ to 13)
* Newbury Hall School, an international high school
* St Michael&#x27;s School, a Roman Catholic school in Burghclere

== Sports and leisure ==
Newbury is home to one of England&#x27;s major racecourses, Newbury Racecourse, which held its first race meeting in 1905. The most prestigious race in the calendar is the Hennessy Gold Cup, which normally takes place in late November. The Racecourse also frequently plays host to a series of concerts on race days during the summer, which has included Olly Murs, Craig David, Tom Jones, Rick Astley and Madness in recent years.

Northcroft Lido in Newbury&#x27;s Northcroft Park is one of the last remaining lidos in the United Kingdom. It was originally built in the 1890s, although the current structure was erected in the 1930s. The pool is still in use today and received a major renovation in summer 2023. It is owned and subsidised by West Berkshire Council but is managed by an external contractor, Parkwood Leisure.

Newbury was home to A.F.C. Newbury, with their home ground situated at Faraday Road near the town centre, but the club collapsed after Vodafone pulled its sponsorship of the team in May 2006. A local pub team from the Old London Apprentice took over the Faraday Road ground temporarily and rebranded itself as Newbury F.C. in 2007, which has played in the Hellenic Football League since 2008. The team were forced to leave their home ground at Faraday Road in 2018, with the site remaining derelict since and the team playing in a number of temporary venues, including in nearby Lambourn. However, work began in May 2023 to restore the football ground at Faraday Road following the election of a new Liberal Democrat-run local council.

Newbury&#x27;s rugby union club Newbury R.F.C., founded in 1928, has been based at a purpose-built ground at Monks Lane since 1996. The town has two cricket teams, including Newbury Cricket Club, founded in 1822 and playing at Northcroft Playing Fields, and Falkland Cricket Club, which in May 2023 hosted the first ever professional cricket match in West Berkshire with a match between the Southern Vipers and South East Stars in the Charlotte Edwards Cup.

Newbury has two athletics clubs, Team Kennet and Newbury Athletics Club, which train at the Crookham Common Athletics Track. The town is also home to numerous golf courses. The most notable is situated at the historic Donnington Grove estate, built in 1763 and where a golf course was opened in 1993.

Victoria Park is the town&#x27;s main park, located near the centre of the town, and includes tennis courts, a boating pond, adventure golf course, skatepark and bowling green. The park is frequently used for local events throughout the year, such as the Newbury Waterways Festival in July. Between 2004 and 2011, the Park&#x27;s bandstand played host to the Keep Off The Grass (KOTG) dance music event. Until 2018, it was also the finish line of the Crafty Craft, an improvised raft race along the canal.
Newbury&#x27;s arts scene is primarily centred around the Corn Exchange, a 400-seat auditorium situated in the Market Place which provides a venue for both professional and amateur live performances as well as hosting an independent cinema. English rock band the Who performed at the Corn Exchange in 1966. The Watermill Theatre, a 220-seat theatre, is located just outside Newbury in Bagnor, and the former Greenham Common air force base is home to The Base, a dedicated arts centre which opened in 2019 in partnership with the Corn Exchange and Greenham Trust.

Since 1979, the Newbury Spring Festival of classical music has brought internationally renowned soloists and ensembles to a variety of venues in and around the town. The Newbury Comedy Festival emerged as a major event in 2004 and played host to comedians such as Alan Carr and Jo Brand, but ended in 2012.

Newbury Showground, located to the north of the town centre in Hermitage, is also a major local events venue. Most notably, it hosts the annual Newbury Show every September, an agricultural and farming show which attracts over 50,000 visitors and which returned in 2023 after a 3-year hiatus.

== Media ==
Local news and television programmes are provided by BBC South and ITV Meridian from the Hannington TV transmitter.

There are four main local radio stations broadcasting in the Newbury area; BBC Radio Berkshire; a community radio station, Kennet Radio; and two Independent Local Radio stations – Greatest Hits Radio Berkshire &amp; North Hampshire (formerly &#x27;Newbury Sound&#x27;, &#x27;Kick FM&#x27;, &#x27;Kestrel FM&#x27; and &#x27;The Breeze&#x27;) which broadcasts from Newbury, and Heart South (formerly 2-Ten FM) which broadcasts into the area from nearby Reading. The following local newspapers are distributed in Newbury (circulation):
* &quot;Newbury Weekly News&quot; &quot;(Part of Newbury Weekly News, advertising-funded free paper)&quot; (33,400)
* &quot;Newbury &amp; Thatcham Chronicle&quot; (21,500)
* &quot;Newbury Weekly News&quot; (24,300)

== Places of interest ==

* The Corn Exchange – theatre and cinema.
* Kennet and Avon Canal shop and tearooms.
* West Berkshire Museum.
* Jack of Newbury&#x27;s House.
* St Nicolas&#x27; Church (CofE), completed in 1532. This is a fine example of a parish church built entirely in the Perpendicular style.
* St Joseph&#x27;s Church, Newbury, Roman Catholic church with Italianate architecture.
* St Bartholomew&#x27;s Hospital (almshouses).
* Raymond Almshouses, Newtown Road, built in 1796, founded by Philip Jemmett of Kintbury, and endowed by his daughter Anne and her husband Sir Jonathan Raymond, Alderman of the City of London.
* The Litten Chapel.
* The Falkland Memorial.
* Donnington Castle.
* Nearby places of interest include Bucklebury Farm Park, Combe Gibbet, Highclere Castle, the Sandham Memorial Chapel, The Nature Discovery Centre, the Watermill Theatre and Watership Down.
* New Greenham Arts – an ex-US military building on Greenham Common airbase, now used to house artist studios, and a performing arts centre.
* Disused GAMA cruise missile storage area at Greenham Common.
* Greenham Control Tower cafe and museum.

== Notable people ==

A number of notable people have originated from, worked, lived or died in Newbury:

* Richard Adams (1920–2016), author
* Hannah Aldworth (?–1778), philanthropist
* Roger Attfield (1939–), thoroughbred horse trainer
* Francis Baily (1774–1844), astronomer
* Captain Collet Barker (1784–1831), early Australian explorer
* Michael Bond (1926–2017), creator of Paddington Bear
* Harry Bowl (1914–?), footballer
* Bruno Brookes (1959–), radio and television presenter
* Lord Carey (1935–), former Archbishop of Canterbury
* Lawrence Chaney (1996–), drag performer
* Simon Channing-Williams (1945–2009), film producer
* Keith Chegwin (1957–2017), television presenter
* Harry Cotterell (1841–1925), British trader
* Miles or Myles Coverdale (1488–1569), bishop, co-author of the 1st English Bible
* George Dangerfield (1904–1986), journalist and author
*Mary Farmer (born 1940 Newbury, Berkshire - Died 2021 Boston, Lincolnshire) UK-based designer and weaver of tapestries and rugs
* Sebastian Faulks (1953–), author
* Gerald Finzi (1901–1956), composer and founder of the Newbury String Players
* Jill Fraser (1946–2006), Watermill Theatre owner and director
* William Henry Gore (1857–1942), painter of the Berkshire countryside, born and died in Newbury.
* James Hanson, Lord Hanson (1922–2004), haulier, later venture capitalist
* Alec Hopkins (1986–), actor who played the young Severus Snape in &quot;Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix&quot;
* Sir Michael Hordern (1911–1995), actor
* Luke Humphries (1995–), professional darts player
* John Kendrick (1573–1624), philanthropic patron of the town of Reading
* Edwin Lewis (1881–1959), Methodist theologian
* William Marshal &quot;The Marshal&quot; seen as first Lord Marshal, (1147–1219) medieval knight given up as a hostage at &#x27;Newbury Castle&#x27;
* Henry Martin (?-1866), British murderer
* Jack O&#x27;Newbury (1489–1557), cloth merchant and patron

* John Septimus Roe (1797–1878), the first Surveyor-General of Western Australia
* &quot;Lord&quot; George Sanger (1825–1911), circus owner born in Newbury who gave the Queen Victoria statue to the town in 1902
* Hannah Snell (1723–1792), female soldier
* Edward C. (&#x27;Ted&#x27;) Titchmarsh (1899–1963), leading 20th-century theoretical mathematician
* Theo Walcott (1989–), retired footballer, originally for A.F.C. Newbury. He played for Southampton before his retirement and previously played for Arsenal and Everton
* Sir Frank Williams (1942–2021) – Formula One manager, founded the WilliamsF1 team
* Tim Jeffrey (1996-) – Paralympic shooter for Team GB

Nobles killed at the First Battle of Newbury

* Earl of Carnarvon
* Earl of Sunderland
* Lord Falkland

== See also ==
* Newbury power station

== Citations ==
== General and cited references ==
* 
== External links ==
* Newbury Town Council
* Newbury Twin Town Association
* The History of Newbury District
* Newbury Community Website
* A History of RAF Greenham Common and RAF Welford</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q655874" start="0" end="7" title="Newbury, Berkshire" label="Newbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q18511725" start="13" end="24" title="market town" label="market town"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473780" start="28" end="42" title="West Berkshire" label="West Berkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2987365" start="74" end="86" title="River Kennet" label="River Kennet"/>
<link wikidata="Q34217" start="103" end="109" title="Oxford" label="Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q172157" start="120" end="130" title="Winchester" label="Winchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q200942" start="145" end="152" title="Swindon" label="Swindon"/>
<link wikidata="Q161491" start="165" end="172" title="Reading, Berkshire" label="Reading"/>
<link wikidata="Q17041496" start="191" end="213" title="West Berkshire Council" label="West Berkshire Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q4892257" start="265" end="280" title="Berkshire Downs" label="Berkshire Downs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7057217" start="294" end="312" title="North Wessex Downs" label="North Wessex Downs"/>
<link wikidata="Q174945" start="313" end="347" title="Area of outstanding natural beauty" label="Area of outstanding natural beauty"/>
<link wikidata="Q23204" start="362" end="371" title="Hampshire" label="Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q23220" start="372" end="381" title="Berkshire" label="Berkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q672296" start="426" end="436" title="Donnington, Berkshire" label="Donnington"/>
<link wikidata="Q849861" start="458" end="475" title="Donnington Castle" label="Donnington Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2273355" start="599" end="607" title="Lambourn" label="Lambourn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1162495" start="662" end="674" title="Walbury Hill" label="Walbury Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q12783" start="693" end="709" title="landscape garden" label="landscape garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508450" start="733" end="749" title="Highclere Castle" label="Highclere Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q855577" start="809" end="820" title="M4 corridor" label="M4 corridor"/>
<link wikidata="Q161491" start="923" end="930" title="Reading, Berkshire" label="Reading"/>
<link wikidata="Q783210" start="932" end="941" title="Bracknell" label="Bracknell"/>
<link wikidata="Q238803" start="943" end="953" title="Maidenhead" label="Maidenhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q211907" start="958" end="964" title="Slough" label="Slough"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026304" start="1002" end="1010" title="Thatcham" label="Thatcham"/>
<link wikidata="Q11324938" start="1128" end="1146" title="Newbury Racecourse" label="Newbury Racecourse"/>
<link wikidata="Q122141" start="1201" end="1209" title="Vodafone" label="Vodafone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931458" start="1235" end="1260" title="Micro Focus International" label="Micro Focus International"/>
<link wikidata="Q13033698" start="1294" end="1307" title="market square" label="market square"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="1327" end="1335" title="medieval" label="medieval"/>
<link wikidata="Q977382" start="1336" end="1346" title="Cloth Hall" label="Cloth Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q114768" start="1375" end="1382" title="granary" label="granary"/>
<link wikidata="Q7594969" start="1405" end="1422" title="St Nicolas Church, Newbury" label="St Nicolas Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q570600" start="1458" end="1474" title="listed buildings" label="listed buildings"/>
<link wikidata="Q44155" start="1505" end="1515" title="Mesolithic" label="Mesolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2725983" start="1573" end="1581" title="Greenham" label="Greenham"/>
<link wikidata="Q15059310" start="1705" end="1719" title="Newbury Bypass" label="Newbury Bypass"/>
<link wikidata="Q200485" start="1780" end="1795" title="Norman conquest of England" label="Norman conquest"/>
<link wikidata="Q5195043" start="1805" end="1812" title="borough" label="borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q19867" start="1892" end="1905" title="Domesday Book" label="Domesday Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550557" start="1983" end="1988" title="Manorialism" label="manor"/>
<link wikidata="Q101985" start="2109" end="2114" title="Saxon" label="Saxon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5477473" start="2234" end="2242" title="villein (feudal)" label="villeins"/>
<link wikidata="Q587965" start="2477" end="2491" title="Newbury Castle" label="Newbury Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q129308" start="2570" end="2579" title="John of England" label="King John"/>
<link wikidata="Q160311" start="2584" end="2593" title="Henry III of England" label="Henry III"/>
<link wikidata="Q17553311" start="2680" end="2694" title="Newbury Bridge" label="Newbury Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7034" start="2738" end="2750" title="14th Century" label="14th Century"/>
<link wikidata="Q5236" start="2766" end="2775" title="Edward II" label="Edward II"/>
<link wikidata="Q6114414" start="3200" end="3215" title="Jack of Newbury" label="Jack of Newbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="3280" end="3287" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q7368" start="3466" end="3471" title="sheep" label="sheep"/>
<link wikidata="Q912595" start="3565" end="3576" title="Elizabethan" label="Elizabethan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530410" start="3584" end="3598" title="Thomas Deloney" label="Thomas Deloney"/>
<link wikidata="Q80330" start="3647" end="3664" title="English Civil War" label="English Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2058454" start="3670" end="3693" title="First Battle of Newbury" label="First Battle of Newbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q7971416" start="3698" end="3709" title="Wash Common" label="Wash Common"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031282" start="3728" end="3752" title="Second Battle of Newbury" label="Second Battle of Newbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q2198537" start="3757" end="3762" title="Speen, Berkshire" label="Speen"/>
<link wikidata="Q849861" start="3784" end="3801" title="Donnington Castle" label="Donnington Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q22889" start="4078" end="4082" title="Bath, Somerset" label="Bath"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="4133" end="4139" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q7575739" start="4310" end="4322" title="Speenhamland, Berkshire" label="Speenhamland"/>
<link wikidata="Q479027" start="4691" end="4710" title="Speenhamland System" label="Speenhamland System"/>
<link wikidata="Q686264" start="4729" end="4740" title="poor relief" label="poor relief"/>
<link wikidata="Q19686" start="4877" end="4889" title="River Thames" label="River Thames"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412795" start="4974" end="4995" title="Kennet and Avon Canal" label="Kennet and Avon Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q22889" start="5041" end="5045" title="Bath, Somerset" label="Bath"/>
<link wikidata="Q23154" start="5103" end="5110" title="Bristol" label="Bristol"/>
<link wikidata="Q843251" start="5185" end="5206" title="Great Western Railway" label="Great Western Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q12284" start="5258" end="5263" title="canal" label="canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q820955" start="5439" end="5462" title="Berks and Hants Railway" label="Berks and Hants Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q6265965" start="5557" end="5577" title="Reading-Taunton line" label="Reading-Taunton line"/>
<link wikidata="Q187916" start="5694" end="5706" title="horse-racing" label="horse-racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1484064" start="5728" end="5734" title="stocks" label="stocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q7278840" start="5874" end="5879" title="Racal" label="Racal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7939294" start="5966" end="5977" title="Vodafone UK" label="Vodafone UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="6199" end="6214" title="Royal Air Force" label="Royal Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="6250" end="6266" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7275353" start="6270" end="6285" title="Greenham Common" label="Greenham Common"/>
<link wikidata="Q11223" start="6343" end="6355" title="US Air Force" label="US Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q170877" start="6356" end="6363" title="bombers" label="bombers"/>
<link wikidata="Q142804" start="6368" end="6375" title="Tanker (aircraft)" label="tankers"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="6443" end="6457" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q12802" start="6550" end="6557" title="nuclear weapon" label="nuclear"/>
<link wikidata="Q181860" start="6564" end="6578" title="cruise missile" label="cruise missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q5604092" start="6679" end="6718" title="Greenham Common Women&amp;#x27;s Peace Camp" label="Greenham Common Women&amp;#x27;s Peace Camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="6740" end="6748" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q15059310" start="6846" end="6860" title="Newbury bypass" label="Newbury bypass"/>
<link wikidata="Q27590" start="6891" end="6900" title="heathland" label="heathland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5187893" start="6937" end="6945" title="Crookham, Berkshire" label="Crookham"/>
<link wikidata="Q126966" start="7049" end="7063" title="Dornier Do 217" label="Dornier Do 217"/>
<link wikidata="Q843251" start="7135" end="7156" title="Great Western Railway" label="Great Western Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115575" start="7857" end="7863" title="civil parish" label="parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q21561328" start="7875" end="7892" title="Unitary authorities of England" label="unitary authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q17041496" start="7925" end="7947" title="West Berkshire Council" label="West Berkshire Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q26505633" start="7982" end="7991" title="Newbury Town Hall" label="Town Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q708492" start="8144" end="8154" title="councillor" label="councillor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195098" start="8176" end="8181" title="ward (politics)" label="wards"/>
<link wikidata="Q112136750" start="8295" end="8330" title="2023 United Kingdom local elections" label="2023 United Kingdom local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q11010" start="8466" end="8482" title="Parliament of the United Kingdom" label="House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053007" start="8503" end="8523" title="Newbury (constituency)" label="Newbury constituency"/>
<link wikidata="Q78851988" start="8535" end="8551" title="2024 United Kingdom general election" label="General Election"/>
<link wikidata="Q75839148" start="8607" end="8617" title="Lee Dillon" label="Lee Dillon"/>
<link wikidata="Q9624" start="8621" end="8637" title="Liberal Democrats (UK)" label="Liberal Democrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q7567115" start="8681" end="8699" title="South East England (European Parliament constituency)" label="South East England"/>
<link wikidata="Q8889" start="8700" end="8719" title="European Parliament" label="European Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q13365595" start="8750" end="8777" title="proportional representation" label="proportional representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4752944" start="8824" end="8839" title="ancient borough" label="ancient borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q2940451" start="9049" end="9066" title="municipal charter" label="municipal charter"/>
<link wikidata="Q518343" start="9176" end="9193" title="municipal borough" label="municipal borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q4256081" start="9212" end="9243" title="Municipal Corporations Act 1835" label="Municipal Corporations Act 1835"/>
<link wikidata="Q1510461" start="9389" end="9414" title="Local Government Act 1972" label="Local Government Act 1972"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473780" start="9444" end="9460" title="Newbury (district)" label="Newbury district"/>
<link wikidata="Q3306606" start="9556" end="9572" title="charter trustees" label="charter trustees"/>
<link wikidata="Q4892255" start="9742" end="9766" title="Berkshire County Council" label="Berkshire County Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q5171021" start="10319" end="10332" title="Corn Exchange, Newbury" label="Corn Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q184711" start="10345" end="10352" title="Sister city" label="twinned"/>
<link wikidata="Q525612" start="10375" end="10384" title="Braunfels" label="Braunfels"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="10388" end="10395" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q274183" start="10405" end="10421" title="Bagnols-sur-Cèze" label="Bagnols-sur-Cèze"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="10425" end="10431" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q12440" start="10442" end="10447" title="Eeklo" label="Eeklo"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="10451" end="10458" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1465" start="10468" end="10474" title="Feltre" label="Feltre"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="10478" end="10483" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771128" start="10493" end="10503" title="Carcaixent" label="Carcaixent"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="10507" end="10512" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115575" start="10543" end="10555" title="civil parishes in England" label="Civil Parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q188509" start="10596" end="10602" title="suburb" label="suburb"/>
<link wikidata="Q7971416" start="10607" end="10618" title="Wash Common" label="Wash Common"/>
<link wikidata="Q7575739" start="10659" end="10671" title="Speenhamland, Berkshire" label="Speenhamland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2198537" start="10834" end="10839" title="Speen, Berkshire" label="Speen"/>
<link wikidata="Q672296" start="10841" end="10851" title="Donnington, Berkshire" label="Donnington"/>
<link wikidata="Q7491132" start="10853" end="10857" title="Shaw, Berkshire" label="Shaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q2725983" start="10862" end="10870" title="Greenham" label="Greenham"/>
<link wikidata="Q23154" start="10952" end="10959" title="Bristol" label="Bristol"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="10964" end="10970" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q4336080" start="11012" end="11032" title="Above Ordnance Datum" label="above mean sea level"/>
<link wikidata="Q7971416" start="11045" end="11056" title="Wash Common" label="Wash Common"/>
<link wikidata="Q2987365" start="11122" end="11134" title="River Kennet" label="River Kennet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412795" start="11143" end="11164" title="Kennet and Avon Canal" label="Kennet and Avon Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q19686" start="11219" end="11225" title="River Thames" label="Thames"/>
<link wikidata="Q161491" start="11229" end="11236" title="Reading, Berkshire" label="Reading"/>
<link wikidata="Q7337559" start="11248" end="11262" title="River Lambourn" label="River Lambourn"/>
<link wikidata="Q4892257" start="11352" end="11366" title="Lambourn Downs" label="Lambourn Downs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339959" start="11463" end="11476" title="River Enborne" label="River Enborne"/>
<link wikidata="Q23204" start="11541" end="11550" title="Hampshire" label="Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7275353" start="11604" end="11619" title="Greenham Common" label="Greenham Common"/>
<link wikidata="Q11324938" start="11635" end="11653" title="Newbury Racecourse" label="Newbury Racecourse"/>
<link wikidata="Q7057217" start="11723" end="11741" title="North Wessex Downs" label="North Wessex Downs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253315" start="11747" end="11755" title="downland" label="downland"/>
<link wikidata="Q478538" start="11841" end="11855" title="Watership Down, Hampshire" label="Watership Down"/>
<link wikidata="Q4875935" start="11901" end="11912" title="Beacon Hill, Burghclere, Hampshire" label="Beacon Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1162495" start="11949" end="11961" title="Walbury Hill" label="Walbury Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q5150761" start="11967" end="11979" title="Combe Gibbet" label="Combe Gibbet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026304" start="12049" end="12057" title="Thatcham" label="Thatcham"/>
<link wikidata="Q2145224" start="12087" end="12106" title="Shaw cum Donnington" label="Shaw cum Donnington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473780" start="12458" end="12472" title="West Berkshire" label="West Berkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q855577" start="12532" end="12543" title="M4 corridor" label="M4 corridor"/>
<link wikidata="Q161491" start="12631" end="12638" title="Reading, Berkshire" label="Reading"/>
<link wikidata="Q211907" start="12643" end="12649" title="Slough" label="Slough"/>
<link wikidata="Q2519746" start="12700" end="12706" title="Theale" label="Theale"/>
<link wikidata="Q783210" start="12708" end="12717" title="Bracknell" label="Bracknell"/>
<link wikidata="Q238803" start="12722" end="12732" title="Maidenhead" label="Maidenhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="12757" end="12771" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1941618" start="12793" end="12816" title="mobile network operator" label="mobile network operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q122141" start="12817" end="12825" title="Vodafone" label="Vodafone"/>
<link wikidata="Q122141" start="13051" end="13059" title="Vodafone" label="Vodafone"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="13089" end="13103" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544413" start="13120" end="13140" title="National Instruments" label="National Instruments"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931458" start="13142" end="13153" title="Micro Focus" label="Micro Focus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2357515" start="13155" end="13174" title="Stryker Corporation" label="Stryker Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q60744818" start="13185" end="13191" title="EValue" label="EValue"/>
<link wikidata="Q7017222" start="13196" end="13220" title="Newbury Building Society" label="Newbury Building Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q507443" start="13226" end="13248" title="pharmaceutical company" label="pharmaceutical company"/>
<link wikidata="Q152051" start="13249" end="13257" title="Bayer" label="Bayer AG"/>
<link wikidata="Q5602951" start="13372" end="13396" title="Green Park Business Park" label="Green Park Business Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q161491" start="13402" end="13409" title="Reading, Berkshire" label="Reading"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210426" start="13568" end="13607" title="Didcot, Newbury and Southampton Railway" label="Didcot, Newbury and Southampton Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1966303" start="13695" end="13702" title="A4 road (Great Britain)" label="A4 road"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638174" start="13835" end="13846" title="M4 motorway" label="M4 motorway"/>
<link wikidata="Q4027640" start="13914" end="13923" title="Chieveley" label="Chieveley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1302778" start="14000" end="14016" title="dual-carriageway" label="dual-carriageway"/>
<link wikidata="Q79848" start="14076" end="14087" title="Southampton" label="Southampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q850235" start="14121" end="14129" title="English Midlands" label="Midlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q4649158" start="14246" end="14254" title="A34 road (England)" label="A34 road"/>
<link wikidata="Q4649139" start="14913" end="14917" title="A339 road" label="A339"/>
<link wikidata="Q810196" start="15019" end="15030" title="Basingstoke" label="Basingstoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785279" start="15039" end="15050" title="M3 motorway (Great Britain)" label="M3 motorway"/>
<link wikidata="Q492805" start="15064" end="15071" title="Andover, Hampshire" label="Andover"/>
<link wikidata="Q953957" start="15109" end="15116" title="Wantage" label="Wantage"/>
<link wikidata="Q2051589" start="15134" end="15143" title="Streatley, Berkshire" label="Streatley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7300581" start="15238" end="15251" title="Reading Buses" label="Reading Buses"/>
<link wikidata="Q7596863" start="15377" end="15393" title="Stagecoach South" label="Stagecoach South"/>
<link wikidata="Q7709919" start="15512" end="15525" title="Thames Travel" label="Thames Travel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5677831" start="15612" end="15626" title="Harwell Science and Innovation Campus" label="Harwell Campus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7709958" start="15718" end="15744" title="Swindon&amp;#x27;s Bus Company" label="Swindon&amp;#x27;s Bus Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q13479582" start="15827" end="15843" title="National Express Coaches" label="National Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q738031" start="15926" end="15941" title="Park &amp;amp; Ride" label="Park &amp;amp; Ride"/>
<link wikidata="Q5694328" start="15943" end="15959" title="Heathrow Central bus station" label="Heathrow Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q2256" start="16144" end="16154" title="Birmingham" label="Birmingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q4027640" start="16400" end="16409" title="Chieveley" label="Chieveley"/>
<link wikidata="Q15059310" start="16483" end="16497" title="Newbury bypass" label="Newbury bypass"/>
<link wikidata="Q159334" start="16901" end="16918" title="secondary schools" label="secondary schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q7587237" start="16923" end="16952" title="St. Bartholomew&amp;#x27;s School" label="St. Bartholomew&amp;#x27;s School"/>
<link wikidata="Q23220" start="16984" end="16993" title="Berkshire" label="Berkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7137798" start="17014" end="17031" title="Park House School" label="Park House School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7842962" start="17034" end="17048" title="Trinity School (Newbury)" label="Trinity School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7491169" start="17078" end="17088" title="Shaw House, Berkshire" label="Shaw House"/>
<link wikidata="Q406633" start="17100" end="17108" title="Turnpike trust" label="Turnpike"/>
<link wikidata="Q7017225" start="17132" end="17147" title="Newbury College (England)" label="Newbury College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7246203" start="17201" end="17227" title="private finance initiative" label="private finance initiative"/>
<link wikidata="Q6779718" start="17233" end="17249" title="Mary Hare School" label="Mary Hare School"/>
<link wikidata="Q541394" start="17265" end="17279" title="Mixed-sex education" label="co-educational"/>
<link wikidata="Q212105" start="17290" end="17310" title="special needs school" label="special needs school"/>
<link wikidata="Q423208" start="17329" end="17348" title="Independent schools" label="Independent schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q5905097" start="17368" end="17379" title="Horris Hill School" label="Horris Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q269770" start="17401" end="17416" title="boarding school" label="boarding school"/>
<link wikidata="Q5303087" start="17462" end="17480" title="Downe House School" label="Downe House School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5088830" start="17483" end="17495" title="Cheam School" label="Cheam School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7593106" start="17498" end="17522" title="St Gabriel&amp;#x27;s School" label="St Gabriel&amp;#x27;s School"/>
<link wikidata="Q541394" start="17590" end="17604" title="Mixed-sex education" label="co-educational"/>
<link wikidata="Q5757909" start="17622" end="17631" title="Highclere" label="Highclere"/>
<link wikidata="Q45581" start="17711" end="17721" title="St Michael" label="St Michael"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="17739" end="17753" title="Roman Catholic" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2561398" start="17764" end="17774" title="Burghclere" label="Burghclere"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="17827" end="17834" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q11324938" start="17861" end="17879" title="Newbury Racecourse" label="Newbury Racecourse"/>
<link wikidata="Q11336443" start="17973" end="17990" title="Hennessy Gold Cup" label="Hennessy Gold Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q552770" start="18154" end="18163" title="Olly Murs" label="Olly Murs"/>
<link wikidata="Q154222" start="18165" end="18176" title="Craig David" label="Craig David"/>
<link wikidata="Q180850" start="18178" end="18187" title="Tom Jones (singer)" label="Tom Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q219237" start="18189" end="18200" title="Rick Astley" label="Rick Astley"/>
<link wikidata="Q745741" start="18205" end="18212" title="Madness (band)" label="Madness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757063" start="18310" end="18315" title="Lido (swimming pool)" label="lidos"/>
<link wikidata="Q17041496" start="18543" end="18565" title="West Berkshire Council" label="West Berkshire Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q4647149" start="18647" end="18661" title="A.F.C. Newbury" label="A.F.C. Newbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q7017230" start="18937" end="18949" title="Newbury F.C." label="Newbury F.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q5849" start="19379" end="19390" title="rugby union" label="rugby union"/>
<link wikidata="Q7017241" start="19396" end="19410" title="Newbury R.F.C." label="Newbury R.F.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q106610578" start="19799" end="19820" title="Charlotte Edwards Cup" label="Charlotte Edwards Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q5296710" start="20041" end="20057" title="Donnington Grove" label="Donnington Grove"/>
<link wikidata="Q7926922" start="20125" end="20138" title="Victoria Park, Newbury" label="Victoria Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q207238" start="20604" end="20613" title="raft race" label="raft race"/>
<link wikidata="Q12284" start="20624" end="20629" title="canal" label="canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5171021" start="20689" end="20702" title="Corn Exchange, Newbury" label="Corn Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q93346" start="20890" end="20897" title="the Who" label="the Who"/>
<link wikidata="Q7974372" start="20942" end="20959" title="Watermill Theatre" label="Watermill Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7275353" start="21039" end="21054" title="RAF Greenham Common" label="Greenham Common"/>
<link wikidata="Q7017238" start="21365" end="21388" title="Newbury Comedy Festival" label="Newbury Comedy Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q32795" start="21459" end="21468" title="Alan Carr" label="Alan Carr"/>
<link wikidata="Q3395525" start="21473" end="21481" title="Jo Brand" label="Jo Brand"/>
<link wikidata="Q4834969" start="21862" end="21871" title="BBC South" label="BBC South"/>
<link wikidata="Q5975073" start="21876" end="21888" title="ITV Meridian" label="ITV Meridian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5649200" start="21898" end="21908" title="Hannington transmitting station" label="Hannington"/>
<link wikidata="Q273623" start="21952" end="21965" title="radio station" label="radio station"/>
<link wikidata="Q4834910" start="22001" end="22020" title="BBC Radio Berkshire" label="BBC Radio Berkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5155046" start="22024" end="22047" title="Community radio in the United Kingdom" label="community radio station"/>
<link wikidata="Q6016767" start="22071" end="22094" title="Independent Local Radio" label="Independent Local Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q16953940" start="22106" end="22157" title="The Breeze (Newbury)" label="Greatest Hits Radio Berkshire &amp;amp; North Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q65066884" start="22302" end="22313" title="Heart South" label="Heart South"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002697" start="22445" end="22456" title="periodical" label="circulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026304" start="22597" end="22605" title="Thatcham" label="Thatcham"/>
<link wikidata="Q7017256" start="22639" end="22658" title="Newbury Weekly News" label="Newbury Weekly News"/>
<link wikidata="Q5171021" start="22707" end="22720" title="Corn Exchange, Newbury" label="Corn Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412795" start="22745" end="22766" title="Kennet and Avon Canal" label="Kennet and Avon Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7984470" start="22788" end="22809" title="West Berkshire Museum" label="West Berkshire Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q6114414" start="22813" end="22828" title="Jack of Newbury" label="Jack of Newbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q7594969" start="22845" end="22868" title="St Nicolas Church, Newbury" label="St Nicolas&amp;#x27; Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q82708" start="22870" end="22874" title="Church of England" label="CofE"/>
<link wikidata="Q15609295" start="22960" end="22973" title="Perpendicular Period" label="Perpendicular"/>
<link wikidata="Q105692682" start="22983" end="23015" title="St Joseph&amp;#x27;s Church, Newbury" label="St Joseph&amp;#x27;s Church, Newbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q43982" start="23071" end="23085" title="St Bartholomew" label="St Bartholomew"/>
<link wikidata="Q15548045" start="23103" end="23113" title="almshouses" label="almshouses"/>
<link wikidata="Q2749964" start="23196" end="23204" title="Kintbury" label="Kintbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q3364526" start="23277" end="23285" title="Alderman" label="Alderman"/>
<link wikidata="Q23311" start="23293" end="23307" title="City of London" label="City of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q17552960" start="23311" end="23328" title="Litten Chapel, Newbury" label="The Litten Chapel"/>
<link wikidata="Q849861" start="23357" end="23374" title="Donnington Castle" label="Donnington Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4983312" start="23412" end="23432" title="Bucklebury Farm Park" label="Bucklebury Farm Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5150761" start="23434" end="23446" title="Combe Gibbet" label="Combe Gibbet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508450" start="23448" end="23464" title="Highclere Castle" label="Highclere Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416244" start="23470" end="23493" title="Sandham Memorial Chapel" label="Sandham Memorial Chapel"/>
<link wikidata="Q85788025" start="23495" end="23522" title="The Nature Discovery Centre" label="The Nature Discovery Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7974372" start="23528" end="23545" title="Watermill Theatre" label="Watermill Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q478538" start="23550" end="23564" title="Watership Down (place)" label="Watership Down"/>
<link wikidata="Q7275353" start="23618" end="23633" title="Greenham Common" label="Greenham Common"/>
<link wikidata="Q181860" start="23722" end="23736" title="cruise missile" label="cruise missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q313289" start="23921" end="23934" title="Richard Adams" label="Richard Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q58824322" start="23957" end="23972" title="Hannah Aldworth" label="Hannah Aldworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7357815" start="24000" end="24014" title="Roger Attfield" label="Roger Attfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q466640" start="24037" end="24050" title="horse trainer" label="horse trainer"/>
<link wikidata="Q358244" start="24053" end="24066" title="Francis Baily" label="Francis Baily"/>
<link wikidata="Q5147053" start="24093" end="24114" title="Captain Collet Barker" label="Captain Collet Barker"/>
<link wikidata="Q122127" start="24156" end="24168" title="Michael Bond" label="Michael Bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q632908" start="24193" end="24208" title="Paddington Bear" label="Paddington Bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q5667450" start="24211" end="24221" title="Harry Bowl" label="Harry Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q4979153" start="24245" end="24258" title="Bruno Brookes" label="Bruno Brookes"/>
<link wikidata="Q335458" start="24301" end="24311" title="Lord Carey" label="Lord Carey"/>
<link wikidata="Q29282" start="24328" end="24352" title="Archbishop of Canterbury" label="Archbishop of Canterbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q105003185" start="24355" end="24370" title="Lawrence Chaney" label="Lawrence Chaney"/>
<link wikidata="Q2606507" start="24397" end="24420" title="Simon Channing-Williams" label="Simon Channing-Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q3194729" start="24450" end="24463" title="Keith Chegwin" label="Keith Chegwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q30070963" start="24500" end="24515" title="Harry Cotterell" label="Harry Cotterell"/>
<link wikidata="Q778508" start="24546" end="24570" title="Miles Coverdale" label="Miles or Myles Coverdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q5326690" start="24609" end="24626" title="Early Modern English Bible translations" label="1st English Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507199" start="24629" end="24647" title="George Dangerfield" label="George Dangerfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q125952103" start="24684" end="24695" title="Mary Farmer" label="Mary Farmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q443055" start="24814" end="24830" title="Sebastian Faulks" label="Sebastian Faulks"/>
<link wikidata="Q713025" start="24849" end="24861" title="Gerald Finzi" label="Gerald Finzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q64006291" start="24903" end="24925" title="Newbury String Players" label="Newbury String Players"/>
<link wikidata="Q6192832" start="24928" end="24939" title="Jill Fraser" label="Jill Fraser"/>
<link wikidata="Q7974372" start="24953" end="24970" title="Watermill Theatre" label="Watermill Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q16683343" start="24992" end="25010" title="William Henry Gore" label="William Henry Gore"/>
<link wikidata="Q23220" start="25039" end="25048" title="Berkshire" label="Berkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q426423" start="25090" end="25115" title="James Hanson, Baron Hanson" label="James Hanson, Lord Hanson"/>
<link wikidata="Q176772" start="25214" end="25227" title="Severus Snape" label="Severus Snape"/>
<link wikidata="Q102235" start="25237" end="25278" title="Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix (film)" label="Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix"/>
<link wikidata="Q956867" start="25291" end="25306" title="Michael Hordern" label="Michael Hordern"/>
<link wikidata="Q40667057" start="25328" end="25342" title="Luke Humphries" label="Luke Humphries"/>
<link wikidata="Q16240189" start="25380" end="25393" title="John Kendrick (cloth merchant)" label="John Kendrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q161491" start="25443" end="25450" title="Reading, Berkshire" label="Reading"/>
<link wikidata="Q5346613" start="25453" end="25464" title="Edwin Lewis" label="Edwin Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q33203" start="25478" end="25487" title="Methodist" label="Methodist"/>
<link wikidata="Q34178" start="25488" end="25498" title="theologian" label="theologian"/>
<link wikidata="Q348911" start="25501" end="25516" title="William Marshal, 1st Earl of Pembroke" label="William Marshal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265164" start="25555" end="25567" title="Lord Marshal of England" label="Lord Marshal"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="25581" end="25589" title="medieval" label="medieval"/>
<link wikidata="Q102083" start="25590" end="25596" title="knight" label="knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q587965" start="25628" end="25642" title="Newbury Castle" label="Newbury Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q16065838" start="25651" end="25663" title="Henry Martin (murderer)" label="Henry Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6114414" start="25693" end="25712" title="Jack O&amp;#x27;Newbury" label="Jack O&amp;#x27;Newbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q1701718" start="25755" end="25772" title="John Septimus Roe" label="John Septimus Roe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7647130" start="25796" end="25833" title="Surveyor-General of Western Australia" label="Surveyor-General of Western Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16043794" start="25836" end="25866" title="Lord George Sanger" label="&amp;quot;Lord&amp;quot; George Sanger"/>
<link wikidata="Q9439" start="25922" end="25936" title="Queen Victoria" label="Queen Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027280" start="25966" end="25978" title="Hannah Snell" label="Hannah Snell"/>
<link wikidata="Q526013" start="26009" end="26047" title="Edward Charles Titchmarsh" label="Edward C. (&amp;#x27;Ted&amp;#x27;) Titchmarsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q29516" start="26110" end="26122" title="Theo Walcott" label="Theo Walcott"/>
<link wikidata="Q4647149" start="26167" end="26181" title="A.F.C. Newbury" label="A.F.C. Newbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q18732" start="26197" end="26208" title="Southampton Football Club" label="Southampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q9617" start="26257" end="26264" title="Arsenal F.C." label="Arsenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5794" start="26269" end="26276" title="Everton F.C." label="Everton"/>
<link wikidata="Q173214" start="26283" end="26297" title="Frank Williams (Formula One)" label="Frank Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="26312" end="26323" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q171337" start="26345" end="26355" title="WilliamsF1" label="WilliamsF1"/>
<link wikidata="Q130236341" start="26363" end="26374" title="Tim Jeffery" label="Tim Jeffrey"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26385" end="26403" title="Paralympic shooter" label="Paralympic shooter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7691492" start="26408" end="26415" title="Team GB" label="Team GB"/>
<link wikidata="Q2058454" start="26438" end="26461" title="First Battle of Newbury" label="First Battle of Newbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q3938254" start="26465" end="26482" title="Robert Dormer, 1st Earl of Carnarvon" label="Earl of Carnarvon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1622077" start="26485" end="26503" title="Henry Spencer, 1st Earl of Sunderland" label="Earl of Sunderland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1964668" start="26506" end="26519" title="Lucius Cary, 2nd Viscount Falkland" label="Lord Falkland"/>
<link wikidata="Q104879245" start="26538" end="26559" title="Newbury power station" label="Newbury power station"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="125331" wikidata="Q5165665" url="?curid=125331" title="Contract bridge diagram">
<text>Diagrams are used to illustrate a deal of 52 cards in four hands in the game of contract bridge. Each hand is designated by a point on the compass and so North–South are partners against East–West.

Suit features include:
* Each line represents a suit, indicated by its symbol – for spades, for hearts, for diamonds, and for clubs
* Each card in a suit is indicated by its abbreviation: &#x27;A&#x27;, &#x27;K&#x27;, &#x27;Q&#x27;, &#x27;J&#x27;, &#x27;10&#x27;, &#x27;9&#x27;, &#x27;8&#x27;, &#x27;7&#x27;, &#x27;6&#x27;, &#x27;5&#x27;, &#x27;4&#x27;, &#x27;3&#x27;, &#x27;2&#x27;
* Cards of higher rank are to the left of those of lower rank
* Smaller cards whose exact value is unimportant may be represented by an &quot;x&quot;
* Thin spacing or hair spacing between cards is optional but generally improves readability
* When one hand is &quot;void&quot; (i.e. has no cards) in a suit, it is usually denoted by a long dash (an emdash)

The full deal diagram is usually drawn with North at the top, with the other hands following their normal compass orientation. For convenience and consistency, South is usually declarer, so that the reader can see the hand as if playing it; exceptions to this rule can occur when reporting deals from actual matches, but even then the players&#x27; seats are often rotated to follow this convention.

The diagram may include additional information such as deal or board number, scoring method (Matchpoints, IMPs, etc.), the final contract, vulnerability and the opening lead.

Diagram variants may leave out one or more hands if irrelevant to the presentation. Partially played hands may be displayed to illustrate end-position play.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q188966" start="80" end="95" title="contract bridge" label="contract bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q27905" start="247" end="251" title="suit (cards)" label="suit"/>
<link wikidata="Q4931276" start="1405" end="1410" title="board (bridge)" label="board"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="125332" wikidata="Q1928621" url="?curid=125332" title="NuBus">
<text>NuBus () is a 32-bit parallel computer bus, originally developed at MIT and standardized in 1987 as a part of the NuMachine workstation project. The first complete implementation of the NuBus was done by Western Digital for their NuMachine, and for the Lisp Machines Inc. LMI Lambda. The NuBus was later incorporated in Lisp products by Texas Instruments (Explorer), and used as the main expansion bus by Apple Computer and a variant called NeXTBus was developed by NeXT. It is no longer widely used outside the embedded market.

==Architecture==
Early microcomputer buses like S-100 were often just connections to the pins of the microprocessor and to the power rails. This meant that a change in the computer&#x27;s architecture generally led to a new bus as well. Looking to avoid such problems in the future, NuBus was designed to be independent of the processor, its general architecture and any details of its I/O handling.

Among its many advanced features for the era, NuBus used a 32-bit backplane when 8- or 16-bit busses were common. This was seen as making the bus &quot;future-proof&quot;, as it was generally believed that 32-bit systems would arrive in the near future while 64-bit buses and beyond would remain impractical and excessive.

In addition, NuBus was agnostic about the processor itself. Most buses up to this point conformed to the signalling and data standards of the machine they were plugged into (being big or little endian for instance). NuBus made no such assumptions, which meant that any NuBus card could be plugged into any NuBus machine, as long as there was an appropriate device driver.

In order to select the proper device driver, NuBus included an ID scheme that allowed the cards to identify themselves to the host computer during startup. This meant that the user didn&#x27;t have to configure the system, the bane of bus systems up to that point. For instance, with ISA the driver had to be configured not only for the card, but for any memory it required, the interrupts it used, and so on. NuBus required no such configuration, making it one of the first examples of &quot;plug-and-play&quot; architecture.

On the downside, while this flexibility made NuBus much simpler for the user and device driver authors, it made things more difficult for the designers of the cards themselves. Whereas most &quot;simple&quot; bus systems were easily supported with a handful of input/output chips designed to be used with that CPU in mind, with NuBus every card and computer had to convert everything to a platform-agnostic &quot;NuBus world&quot;. Typically this meant adding a NuBus controller chip between the bus and any I/O chips on the card, increasing costs. While this is a trivial exercise today, one that all newer buses require, in the 1980s NuBus was considered needlessly complex and expensive.

==Implementations==

The NuBus became an IEEE standard in 1987 as IEEE 1196. This version used a standard DIN 41612 96-pin three-row connector, running the system on a 10 MHz clock for a maximum burst throughput of 40 MB/s and average speeds of 10 to 20 MB/s. A later addition, NuBus 90, increased the clock rate to 20 MHz for better throughput, burst increasing to about 70 MB/s, and average to about 30 MB/s.

The NuBus was first developed commercially in the Western Digital NuMachine, and first used in a production product by their licensee, Lisp Machines, Inc., in the LMI-Lambda, a Lisp Machine. The project and the development group was sold by Western Digital to Texas Instruments in 1984. The technology was incorporated into their TI Explorer, also a Lisp Machine. In 1986, Texas Instruments used the NuBus in the S1500 multiprocessor UNIX system. Later, both Texas Instruments and Symbolics developed Lisp Machine NuBus boards (the TI MicroExplorer and the Symbolics MacIvory) based on their Lisp supporting microprocessors. These NuBus boards were co-processor Lisp Machines for the Apple Macintosh line (the Mac II and Mac Quadras).

NuBus was also selected by Apple Computer for use in their Macintosh II project, where its plug-n-play nature fit well with the Mac philosophy of ease-of-use. It was used in most of the Macintosh II series that made up the professional-level Mac lineup from the late 1980s. It was upgraded to NuBus 90 starting with the Macintosh Quadras and used into the mid-1990s. Early Quadras only supported the 20 MHz rate when two cards were talking to each other, since the motherboard controller was not upgraded. This was later addressed in the NuBus implementation on the 660AV and 840AV models. This improved NuBus controller was used in the first generation Power Macintosh 6100, 7100 and 8100 models. Later Power Mac models adopted Intel&#x27;s PCI bus. Apple&#x27;s NuBus implementation used pin and socket connectors on the back of the card rather than edge connectors with Phillips screws inside the case that most cards use, making it much easier to install cards. Apple&#x27;s computers also supplied an always-on +5 V &quot;trickle&quot; power supply for tasks such as watching the phone line while the computer was turned off. This was apparently part of an unapproved NuBus standard.

NuBus was also selected by NeXT Computer for their line of machines, but used a different physical PCB layout. NuBus appears to have seen little use outside these roles, and when Apple switched to PCI in the mid-1990s, NuBus quickly disappeared.

== See also ==
* List of device bandwidths

==References==

* NuBus specs

== External links ==
* Developing for the Macintosh NuBus
* Pictures of several NuBus cards at applefritter</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1928621" start="0" end="5" title="NuBus" label="NuBus"/>
<link wikidata="Q225147" start="14" end="20" title="32-bit" label="32-bit"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21" end="29" title="series and parallel circuits#Parallel circuits" label="parallel"/>
<link wikidata="Q178048" start="30" end="42" title="computer bus" label="computer bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q49108" start="68" end="71" title="Massachusetts Institute of Technology" label="MIT"/>
<link wikidata="Q17086697" start="114" end="123" title="NuMachine" label="NuMachine"/>
<link wikidata="Q192525" start="124" end="135" title="workstation" label="workstation"/>
<link wikidata="Q738770" start="204" end="219" title="Western Digital" label="Western Digital"/>
<link wikidata="Q262903" start="253" end="271" title="Lisp Machines Inc." label="Lisp Machines Inc."/>
<link wikidata="None" start="272" end="282" title="LMI Lambda" label="LMI Lambda"/>
<link wikidata="Q193412" start="337" end="354" title="Texas Instruments" label="Texas Instruments"/>
<link wikidata="Q3512207" start="356" end="364" title="TI Explorer" label="Explorer"/>
<link wikidata="Q216158" start="388" end="401" title="expansion bus" label="expansion bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q312" start="405" end="419" title="Apple Computer" label="Apple Computer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="441" end="448" title="NeXTBus" label="NeXTBus"/>
<link wikidata="Q308993" start="466" end="470" title="NeXT" label="NeXT"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546156" start="578" end="583" title="S-100 bus" label="S-100"/>
<link wikidata="Q225147" start="990" end="996" title="32-bit" label="32-bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q339338" start="1442" end="1455" title="little endian" label="little endian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033951" start="1612" end="1625" title="device driver" label="device driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q273326" start="1912" end="1915" title="Industry Standard Architecture" label="ISA"/>
<link wikidata="Q220764" start="2007" end="2016" title="interrupt" label="interrupt"/>
<link wikidata="Q857815" start="2121" end="2134" title="plug-and-play" label="plug-and-play"/>
<link wikidata="Q219320" start="2417" end="2429" title="input/output" label="input/output"/>
<link wikidata="Q131566" start="2889" end="2893" title="IEEE" label="IEEE"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153776" start="2954" end="2963" title="DIN 41612" label="DIN 41612"/>
<link wikidata="Q17086697" start="3310" end="3335" title="NuMachine" label="Western Digital NuMachine"/>
<link wikidata="Q262903" start="3395" end="3414" title="Lisp Machines, Inc." label="Lisp Machines, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q1653376" start="3437" end="3449" title="Lisp Machine" label="Lisp Machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3512207" start="3590" end="3601" title="TI Explorer" label="TI Explorer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653376" start="3610" end="3622" title="Lisp Machine" label="Lisp Machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2034213" start="3741" end="3750" title="Symbolics" label="Symbolics"/>
<link wikidata="Q75687" start="3950" end="3959" title="Mac (computer)" label="Macintosh"/>
<link wikidata="Q312" start="4023" end="4037" title="Apple Computer" label="Apple Computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753588" start="4055" end="4067" title="Macintosh II" label="Macintosh II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052592" start="4182" end="4201" title="Macintosh II series" label="Macintosh II series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1882844" start="4316" end="4332" title="Macintosh Quadra" label="Macintosh Quadra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3274617" start="4562" end="4567" title="Macintosh Quadra 660AV" label="660AV"/>
<link wikidata="Q3274652" start="4572" end="4577" title="Macintosh Quadra 840AV" label="840AV"/>
<link wikidata="Q3400920" start="4650" end="4670" title="Power Macintosh 6100" label="Power Macintosh 6100"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052837" start="4672" end="4676" title="Power Macintosh 7100" label="7100"/>
<link wikidata="Q753536" start="4681" end="4685" title="Power Macintosh 8100" label="8100"/>
<link wikidata="Q248" start="4725" end="4730" title="Intel" label="Intel"/>
<link wikidata="Q191012" start="4738" end="4741" title="Peripheral Component Interconnect" label="PCI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972118" start="4848" end="4862" title="edge connector" label="edge connector"/>
<link wikidata="Q4045099" start="5213" end="5226" title="NeXT Computer" label="NeXT Computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q173350" start="5285" end="5288" title="Printed circuit board" label="PCB"/>
<link wikidata="Q191012" start="5383" end="5386" title="Peripheral Component Interconnect" label="PCI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149752" start="5450" end="5475" title="List of device bandwidths" label="List of device bandwidths"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="125337" wikidata="Q1226237" url="?curid=125337" title="George Cavendish (writer)">
<text>George Cavendish (1497 – ) was an English writer, best known as the biographer of Cardinal Thomas Wolsey. His &quot;Thomas Wolsey, Late Cardinall, his Lyffe and Deathe&quot; is described by the &quot;Oxford Dictionary of National Biography&quot; as the &quot;most important single contemporary source for Wolsey&#x27;s life&quot; which also offers a &quot;detailed picture of early sixteenth-century court life and of political events in the 1520s, particularly the divorce proceedings against Catherine of Aragon.

==Family==
Cavendish was born in 1497, the elder son of Thomas Cavendish (d. 1524), who was a senior financial official, the &quot;clerk of the pipe&quot;, in the Court of Exchequer, and his wife, Alice Smith of Padbrook Hall, Suffolk. He was the great-grandson of Sir John Cavendish from whom the Dukes of Devonshire and the Dukes of Newcastle inherited the family name of Cavendish. George was an English courtier and author and the brother of William Cavendish, the second husband of Bess of Hardwick. He was probably born at his father&#x27;s manor of Cavendish, in Suffolk. Later the family resided in London, in the parish of St Alban, Wood Street, where Thomas Cavendish died in 1524. Around this time Cavendish married Margery Kemp, of Spains Hall, an heiress, and the niece of Sir Thomas More.

==Career==
Probably aided by his father&#x27;s position at the exchequer, in about 1522 Cavendish entered the service of Cardinal Wolsey as gentleman-usher, and stayed in his service until Wolsey&#x27;s death in 1530. His position required him personally to attend the Cardinal at all times, as well as responsibilities for the lavish entertainments that Wolsey enjoyed. During this time Cavendish was often separated from his wife, children and estates. Cavendish also knew Anne Boleyn when she was first a &#x27;debutante&#x27; at Henry VIII&#x27;s court in 1522. He was adamant that she remained a virgin until her marriage, despite Catholic rumours to the contrary. However, although he attested to her sexual morals, he never forgave her for her hatred of Cardinal Wolsey or her animosity towards the Pope.

Cavendish was wholly devoted to Wolsey&#x27;s interests, and also he saw in this appointment an opportunity to gratify his master-passion, a craving &quot;to see and be acquainted with strangers, in especial with men in honour and authority.&quot; He was faithful to his master in disgrace, and showed the courage of the &quot;loyal servitor.&quot; It is plain that he enjoyed Wolsey&#x27;s closest confidence to the end, for after the cardinal&#x27;s death Cavendish was called before the privy council and closely examined as to Wolsey&#x27;s latest acts and words. He gave his evidence so clearly and with so much natural dignity, that he won the applause of the hostile council, and the praise of being &quot;a just and diligent servant.&quot; He was not allowed to suffer in pocket by his fidelity to his master, but retired, as it would seem, a wealthy man to his estate of Glemsford, in West Suffolk, in 1530, having refused the offer of a position as gentleman usher from Henry VIII. He was only thirty years of age, but his appetite for being acquainted with strange acts and persons was apparently sated, for we do not hear of his engaging in any more adventures.

==Writings and influence==
It is likely that Cavendish had taken down notes of Wolsey&#x27;s conversation and movements, for many years passed before his biography was composed. Between 1554 and 1558, he wrote it out in its final form. It was not, however, possible to publish it in the author&#x27;s lifetime, but it was widely circulated in manuscript. Evidently one of these manuscripts fell into the hands of William Shakespeare, for that poet made use of it in his &quot;Henry VIII&quot;, and Samuel Weller Singer even said that Shakespeare &quot;merely put Cavendish&#x27;s language into verse.&quot;

&quot;Thomas Wolsey, Late Cardinall, his Lyffe and Deathe&quot; was first printed in 1641, in a garbled text, and under the title of &quot;The Negotiations of Thomas Wolsey&quot;. The genuine text, from contemporary manuscripts, was published in 1810. Singer published the first complete edition in 1825: &quot;The Life of Cardinal Wolsey, and Metrical Visions; from the original autograph manuscript&quot;. The &quot;metrical visions&quot; were his tragic poems: laments in the voice of ill-fated contemporary figures like Lady Jane Grey. Until the 19th century it was believed that the book was the composition of George Cavendish&#x27;s younger brother William, the owner of Chatsworth House, who also was attached to Wolsey. Joseph Hunter proved this to be impossible, and definitely asserted the claim of George. The latter is believed to have died at Glemsford before July 1562.

The intrinsic value of Cavendish&#x27;s &quot;Life of Cardinal Wolsey&quot; has long been perceived, for it is the sole authentic record of a multitude of events highly important in a particularly interesting section of the history of England. Its importance as a product of biographical literature was first emphasised by Mandell Creighton, who insisted on the claim of Cavendish to be recognised as the earliest of the great English biographers, and an individual writer of charm and originality. He writes with simplicity and vividness, rarely yielding to the rhetoric which governed the ordinary prose of his age.

==Fictional portrayals==
George Cavendish appears as a minor character in Dame Hilary Mantel&#x27;s novel &quot;Wolf Hall&quot;, a fictional biography of Thomas Cromwell. Cavendish is portrayed (by Robert Wilfort in the TV adaptation) as a devoted servant who genuinely admires Wolsey; in the novel, Cromwell describes him as &quot;a sensitive sort of man&quot;.

Actor David Oakes portrays Cavendish in David Starkey&#x27;s 2009 documentary series &quot;Henry VIII: The Mind of a Tyrant&quot;.

Cavendish appears as a quiet and loyal servant in &quot;Frailty of Human Affairs&quot; by Caroline Angus. He is similarly portrayed in Cora Harrison&#x27;s mystery novel, &quot;The Cardinal&#x27;s Court&quot; (History Press, 2017)

==Notes==

==Further reading==
*Cavendish, George. &quot;The Life and Death of Cardinal Wolsey&quot;.
==External links== 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1226237" start="0" end="16" title="George Cavendish (writer)" label="George Cavendish"/>
<link wikidata="Q45722" start="82" end="90" title="Cardinal (Catholicism)" label="Cardinal"/>
<link wikidata="Q206512" start="91" end="104" title="Thomas Wolsey" label="Thomas Wolsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210343" start="200" end="239" title="Oxford Dictionary of National Biography" label="Oxford Dictionary of National Biography"/>
<link wikidata="Q162819" start="494" end="513" title="Catherine of Aragon" label="Catherine of Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137765" start="679" end="697" title="Exchequer of Pleas" label="Court of Exchequer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3809147" start="781" end="799" title="John Cavendish" label="Sir John Cavendish"/>
<link wikidata="Q541098" start="814" end="833" title="Dukes of Devonshire" label="Dukes of Devonshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2411815" start="842" end="860" title="Dukes of Newcastle" label="Dukes of Newcastle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960463" start="890" end="899" title="House of Cavendish" label="Cavendish"/>
<link wikidata="Q762439" start="962" end="979" title="William Cavendish (courtier)" label="William Cavendish"/>
<link wikidata="Q508447" start="1003" end="1019" title="Bess of Hardwick" label="Bess of Hardwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1821172" start="1072" end="1081" title="Cavendish, Suffolk, England" label="Cavendish"/>
<link wikidata="Q23111" start="1086" end="1093" title="Suffolk" label="Suffolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q7592245" start="1148" end="1169" title="St Alban, Wood Street" label="St Alban, Wood Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q42544" start="1306" end="1317" title="Thomas More" label="Thomas More"/>
<link wikidata="Q80823" start="1795" end="1806" title="Anne Boleyn" label="Anne Boleyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q38370" start="1853" end="1863" title="Henry VIII" label="Henry VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q170538" start="1921" end="1927" title="virgin" label="virgin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2524180" start="3013" end="3022" title="Glemsford" label="Glemsford"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="3721" end="3740" title="William Shakespeare" label="William Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q672059" start="3784" end="3794" title="Henry VIII (play)" label="Henry VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q7412903" start="3806" end="3826" title="Samuel Weller Singer" label="Samuel Weller Singer"/>
<link wikidata="Q162356" start="4440" end="4454" title="Lady Jane Grey" label="Lady Jane Grey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068289" start="4594" end="4610" title="Chatsworth House" label="Chatsworth House"/>
<link wikidata="Q6284135" start="4645" end="4658" title="Joseph Hunter (antiquarian)" label="Joseph Hunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2362238" start="5125" end="5142" title="Mandell Creighton" label="Mandell Creighton"/>
<link wikidata="Q465700" start="5500" end="5513" title="Hilary Mantel" label="Hilary Mantel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2657795" start="5533" end="5542" title="Wolf Hall" label="Wolf Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q294435" start="5575" end="5590" title="Thomas Cromwell" label="Thomas Cromwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3436554" start="5619" end="5633" title="Robert Wilfort" label="Robert Wilfort"/>
<link wikidata="Q768479" start="5791" end="5802" title="David Oakes" label="David Oakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1176720" start="5825" end="5838" title="David Starkey" label="David Starkey"/>
<link wikidata="" start="5876" end="5908" title="Henry VIII: The Mind of a Tyrant" label="Henry VIII: The Mind of a Tyrant"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="125341" wikidata="Q1010673" url="?curid=125341" title="Flemington, New Jersey">
<text>Flemington is a borough in and the county seat of Hunterdon County, in the U.S. state of New Jersey. Most of the borough is located in the Amwell Valley, a low-lying area of the Newark Basin, and the Raritan Valley, the South Branch of the Raritan River, which flows through the center of Flemington. Northwestern portions of the borough sit on the Hunterdon Plateau. As of the 2020 United States census, the borough&#x27;s population was 4,876, its highest decennial count ever and an increase of 295 (+6.4%) from the 2010 census count of 4,581, which in turn reflected an increase of 381 (+9.1%) from the 4,200 counted in the 2000 census.

Flemington is an independent municipality completely surrounded by Raritan Township and is located near the geographic center of the township. Flemington was incorporated as an independent borough by an act of the New Jersey Legislature on April 7, 1910, based on the results of a referendum held on April 26, 1910, and was formally separated from Raritan Township.

==History==
===18th century===
Before European settlement, the land that comprises Flemington, as was all of Hunterdon County, was the territory of the Lenni Lenape Native Americans. In 1712, as part of a land parcel of , the Flemington area was acquired by William Penn and Daniel Coxe.

The surrounding fertile farmland dictated that the beginnings of Flemington were agricultural. Early German and English settlers engaged in industries dependent on farm products. As time passed poultry and dairy farms superseded crops in agricultural importance. An example of early settlement families was Johann David and Anna Maria Ephland, who emigrated in 1709 from Germany through London to New York and settled on his farm in 1717. They raised their seven children, and two from his previous marriage, on the farm that now makes up the core of Flemington.

On December 14, 1776, during the American Revolutionary War, a party of British dragoons led by Cornet Francis Geary raided a store owned by Thomas Lowrey near the Presbyterian Church in Flemington to seize a supply of guns. On their return to Pennington, local militia led by Captain John Schenck ambushed them and killed their commander. This skirmish is now known as the Ambush of Geary.

In 1785, Flemington was chosen as the County Seat of Hunterdon. Fire destroyed the old courthouse in 1826 and the City of Lambertville made an ultimately unsuccessful attempt to have the seat relocated there. Flemington remained the County Seat and the Courthouse which stands today on Main Street was built.

===19th century===
Present-day Flemington was originally formed as a town by an act of the New Jersey Legislature on March 14, 1870, within portions of Raritan Township. It became a village as of June 11, 1894, still within Raritan Township. Flemington was finally incorporated as an independent borough by an act of the New Jersey Legislature on April 7, 1910, based on the results of a referendum held on April 26, 1910, and was formally separated from Raritan Township. The borough&#x27;s incorporation was confirmed on April 27, 1931. the borough was named for Samuel Fleming.

In 1856, the Hunterdon County Agricultural society purchased of land that would accommodate the people, exhibits and livestock for the County (Flemington) Fair. The purpose of this Fair was to promote competition between farmers, stock raisers and machinery manufacturers. The fair was held every year at the Flemington Fairgrounds which also was the site of Flemington Fair Speedway, later Flemington Raceway.

===20th century===
On February 13, 1935, a jury in Flemington found Bruno Richard Hauptmann guilty of the kidnapping and murder of Charles Lindbergh&#x27;s baby boy. The Union Hotel, opposite the courthouse in which this trial took place, housed several journalists reporting on the event.

In the 1980s, Flemington became home to Liberty Village, the first outlet mall in the United States; by 2023, Liberty Village set empty, awaiting demolition and redevelopment.

From 1992 through 1995, the speedway hosted the Race of Champions, a race for modified racers. The speedway hosted a NASCAR Craftsman Truck Series race from 1995 to 1998. In 2003, the County Fair adopted a new name, the Hunterdon County 4-H and Agricultural Fair, and moved to the South County Park in East Amwell Township.

===21st century===
In the 2010s, local controversy erupted over proposed re-development of the shuttered Union Hotel. By 2021, a settlement was reach to allow a hotel with 100 rooms and nearly 200 apartments and retail space at the site.

===Historic landmarks===
By 1980, 65% of Flemington borough had been included on the New Jersey Register of Historic Places and is now on the National Register of Historic Places as the Flemington Historic District.

* Union Hotel – Early 19th century hotel in downtown Flemington that served as a restaurant until its 2008 closure. The current structure dates to 1877, built on the site of what had been a stagecoach stop that dates to 1814.
* Hunterdon County Courthouse – Historic court house where the Lindbergh Trial took place. Now used for County offices.
* Fleming Castle / Samuel Fleming House – First house in Flemington, 5 Bonnell Street. Purchased by the Borough of Flemington in 2005 and operated as a historical museum by the Friends of Fleming Castle.

==Geography==
According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the borough had a total area of 1.08 square miles (2.79 km2), all of which was land. Flemington is completely surrounded by Raritan Township, making it part one of 21 pairs of &quot;doughnut towns&quot; in the state, where one municipality entirely surrounds another.

===Climate===
==Demographics==
===2010 census===
The 2010 United States census counted 4,581 people, 1,815 households, and 996 families in the borough. The population density was 4,252.2 per square mile (1,641.8/km2). There were 1,926 housing units at an average density of 1,787.8 per square mile (690.3/km2). The racial makeup was 78.48% (3,595) White, 3.93% (180) Black or African American, 0.31% (14) Native American, 5.81% (266) Asian, 0.02% (1) Pacific Islander, 8.71% (399) from other races, and 2.75% (126) from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 26.15% (1,198) of the population.

Of the 1,815 households, 28.5% had children under the age of 18; 37.6% were married couples living together; 11.5% had a female householder with no husband present and 45.1% were non-families. Of all households, 37.1% were made up of individuals and 12.5% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.44 and the average family size was 3.20.

22.3% of the population were under the age of 18, 9.1% from 18 to 24, 33.9% from 25 to 44, 24.3% from 45 to 64, and 10.3% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 35.3 years. For every 100 females, the population had 105.5 males. For every 100 females ages 18 and older there were 106.9 males.

The Census Bureau&#x27;s 2006–2010 American Community Survey showed that (in 2010 inflation-adjusted dollars) median household income was $54,261 (with a margin of error of +/− $15,065) and the median family income was $66,042 (+/− $12,761). Males had a median income of $45,934 (+/− $5,574) versus $47,917 (+/− $11,616) for females. The per capita income for the borough was $31,407 (+/− $3,648). About 14.0% of families and 16.1% of the population were below the poverty line, including 30.0% of those under age 18 and 8.9% of those age 65 or over.

===2000 census===
As of the 2000 United States census there were 4,202 people, 1,804 households, and 997 families residing in the borough. The population density was . There were 1,876 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the borough was 89.71% White, 1.19% African American, 0.31% Native American, 3.12% Asian, 0.17% Pacific Islander, 3.14% from other races, and 2.36% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 10.98% of the population.

There were 1,804 households, out of which 26.8% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 38.7% were married couples living together, 11.7% had a female householder with no husband present, and 44.7% were non-families. 37.7% of all households were made up of individuals, and 12.1% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.26 and the average family size was 3.00.

In the borough, the population was spread out, with 22.2% under the age of 18, 8.6% from 18 to 24, 36.9% from 25 to 44, 20.2% from 45 to 64, and 12.1% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 35 years. For every 100 females, there were 94.3 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 92.7 males.

The median income for a household in the borough was $39,886, and the median income for a family was $51,582. Males had a median income of $38,594 versus $31,250 for females. The per capita income for the borough was $23,769. About 5.0% of families and 6.9% of the population were below the poverty line, including 7.5% of those under age 18 and 3.0% of those age 65 or over.

==Government==
===Local government===
Flemington is governed under the borough form of New Jersey municipal government, which is used in 218 municipalities (of the 564) statewide, making it the most common form of government in New Jersey. The governing body is comprised of the mayor and the borough council, with all positions elected at-large on a partisan basis as part of the November general election. A mayor is elected directly by the voters to a four-year term of office. The borough council includes six members elected to serve three-year terms on a staggered basis, with two seats coming up for election each year in a three-year cycle. The borough form of government used by Flemington, the most common system used in the state, is a &quot;weak mayor / strong council&quot; government in which council members act as the legislative body with the mayor presiding at meetings and voting only in the event of a tie. The mayor can veto ordinances subject to an override by a two-thirds majority vote of the council. The mayor makes committee and liaison assignments for council members, and most appointments are made by the mayor with the advice and consent of the council.

, the mayor of Flemington Borough is Republican Marcia A. Karrow, whose term of office ends December 31, 2026. Members of the Flemington Borough Council are Council President Jeremy Long (D, 2025), Council Vice President Kimberly A. Tilly (R, 2023), Susan D.M. Engelhardt (D, 2025), Malik Johnston (D, 2023), Anthony &quot;Tony&quot; Parker (D, 2024; elected to serve an unexpired term) and Elizabeth Rosetti (D, 2024).

In January 2019, the borough council selected Jeffrey Doshna from a list of three candidates selected by the Democratic municipal committee to fill the seat expiring in December 2020 that was vacated by Betsy Driver when she took office earlier that month as mayor. Doshna served on an interim basis until the November 2019 general election, when Republican Kimberly A. Tilly was elected to serve the balance of the term of office.

In March 2022, Democrat Caitlin Giles-McCormick, who had started her new term of office on January 1 of that year, resigned from office.

====Police====
The borough&#x27;s police department operates under Chief of police Jerry Rotella, with two lieutenants, three sergeants, one corporal, one detective, 8 patrolmen, and one Class III special police officer. The department offers a Police Explorer program.

===Federal, state and county representation===
Flemington is located in the 7th Congressional District and is part of New Jersey&#x27;s 16th state legislative district.



===Politics===
As of September 2023, there were a total of 2,466 registered voters in Flemington, of which 912 (36.9%) were registered as Democrats, 756 (30.6%) were registered as Republicans and 764 (30.9%) were registered as Unaffiliated. There were 13 voters registered as Libertarians or Greens and 21 registered to other parties.

In the 2024 presidential election, Democrat Kamala Harris received 55.3% of the vote (961 votes), ahead of Republican Donald Trump with 41.8% (727 votes), and other candidates with 3.3% (58 votes), among the 1,763 ballots cast by the borough&#x27;s 2,491 registered voters, for a turnout of 70.8%. In the 2020 presidential election, Democrat Joe Biden received 56.3% (1,043 votes), ahead of Republican Donald Trump with 41.1% (762 votes), and other candidates with 2.3% (44 votes), among the 1,876 ballots cast by the borough&#x27;s 2,264 registered voters, for a turnout of 82.9%. In the 2016 presidential election, Democrat Hillary Clinton received 49.2% of the vote (795 votes), ahead of Republican Donald Trump with 41.5% (670 votes), and other candidates with 8.1% (131 votes), among the 1,614 ballots cast by the borough&#x27;s 2,265 registered voters, for a turnout of 71.26%. In the 2012 presidential election, Democrat Barack Obama received 50.4% of the vote (732 cast), ahead of Republican Mitt Romney with 47.5% (689 votes), and other candidates with 2.1% (31 votes), among the 1,467 ballots cast by the borough&#x27;s 2,157 registered voters (15 ballots were spoiled), for a turnout of 68.0%. In the 2008 presidential election, Democrat Barack Obama received 49.9% of the vote (794 cast), ahead of Republican John McCain with 47.1% (750 votes) and other candidates with 2.1% (34 votes), among the 1,591 ballots cast by the borough&#x27;s 2,118 registered voters, for a turnout of 75.1%. In the 2004 presidential election, Democrat John Kerry received 50.0% of the vote (761 ballots cast), outpolling Republican George W. Bush with 49.9% (760 votes) and other candidates with 1.3% (25 votes), among the 1,523 ballots cast by the borough&#x27;s 1,966 registered voters, for a turnout percentage of 77.5.




In the 2013 gubernatorial election, Republican Chris Christie received 68.1% of the vote (656 cast), ahead of Democrat Barbara Buono with 29.3% (282 votes), and other candidates with 2.6% (25 votes), among the 994 ballots cast by the borough&#x27;s 2,117 registered voters (31 ballots were spoiled), for a turnout of 47.0%. In the 2009 gubernatorial election, Republican Chris Christie received 54.6% of the vote (601 ballots cast), ahead of Democrat Jon Corzine with 32.2% (354 votes), Independent Chris Daggett with 10.2% (112 votes) and other candidates with 1.8% (20 votes), among the 1,101 ballots cast by the borough&#x27;s 2,032 registered voters, yielding a 54.2% turnout.

==Education==
Students in public school for pre-kindergarten through eighth grade attend the Flemington-Raritan Regional School District, which also serves children from the neighboring community of Raritan Township. As of the 2023–24 school year, the district, comprised of six schools, had an enrollment of 3,174 students and 335.3 classroom teachers (on an FTE basis), for a student–teacher ratio of 9.5:1. The district is comprised of four PreK/K to 4 elementary schools, one intermediate school for grades 5 and 6 and a middle school for grades 7 and 8. Schools in the district (with 2023–24 enrollment data from the National Center for Education Statistics) are 
Barley Sheaf School with 363 students in grades K–4 (located in Flemington), 
Copper Hill School with 602 students in grades PreK–4 (Ringoes), 
Francis A. Desmares School with 420 students in grades K–4 (Flemington), 
Robert Hunter School with 394 students in grades K–4 (Flemington), 
Reading-Fleming Intermediate School with 702 students in grades 5–6 (Flemington) and 
J. P. Case Middle School with 675 students in grades 7–8 (Flemington). Flemington is allocated two of the nine seats on the regional district&#x27;s board of education.

Public school students in ninth through twelfth grades attend Hunterdon Central Regional High School, part of the Hunterdon Central Regional High School District, which serves students in central Hunterdon County from Flemington and from Delaware Township, East Amwell Township, Raritan Township and Readington Township. As of the 2023–24 school year, the high school had an enrollment of 2,408 students and 226.7 classroom teachers (on an FTE basis), for a student–teacher ratio of 10.6:1. Seats on the high school district&#x27;s nine-member board of education are allocated based on the population of the five constituent municipalities who participate in the school district, with one seat allocated to Flemington.

Eighth grade students from all of Hunterdon County are eligible to apply to attend the high school programs offered by the Hunterdon County Vocational School District, a county-wide vocational school district that offers career and technical education at its campuses in Raritan Township and at programs sited at local high schools, with no tuition charged to students for attendance.

==Transportation==

===Roads and highways===
, the borough had a total of of roadways, of which were maintained by the municipality, by Hunterdon County and by the New Jersey Department of Transportation.

Several major roads that pass through the borough. These include U.S. Route 202, Route 31 and Route 12.

Flemington Circle is the largest of three traffic circles in the Flemington area and sits just to the southeast of Flemington&#x27;s historic downtown. U.S. Route 202 and Route 31 approach the circle separately from the north and continue south concurrently, and the circle is the eastern terminus of Route 12. It is one of only a rapidly diminishing number of New Jersey&#x27;s once-widespread traffic circles still extant according to its original design. The circle sees significant congestion on weekends because of the new developments and big-box retailers. The circle also sees a higher rate of traffic accidents and violations than any other region of Flemington and Raritan Township. Unlike most circles, traffic on US 202 does not yield on entry; US 202, being a main four-lane divided highway, gets the right of way.

One other traffic circle exists on Route 12 at Mine Street west of the Flemington Circle, where Route 12 traffic has the right of way. The intersection of Route 12 and Main Street west of the Flemington Circle was converted to a roundabout in 2009.

===Public transportation===
Trans-Bridge Lines provides frequent daily bus service, west to Doylestown / Bethlehem, Pennsylvania, and east to Newark Liberty International Airport, the Port Authority Bus Terminal in Midtown Manhattan and John F. Kennedy International Airport. Round-trip tickets to the PABT cost $15.

The Hunterdon County LINK provide local bus service on Routes 16 / 19 / 21 which operate to / from Raritan Township, Route 23 to / from Bridgewater Commons Mall and Somerville; Route 15 to Hampton; Route 14 to / from Lambertville; and Route 17 / 18 between Milford and Clinton.

==Notable people==

People who were born in, residents of, or otherwise closely associated with Flemington include:
* Aruna (born 1975), electronic music vocalist
* Brad Benson (born 1955), offensive lineman who played for the New York Giants
* John T. Bird (1829–1911), represented New Jersey&#x27;s 3rd congressional district from 1869 to 1873
* Samuel L. Bodine (1900–1958), President of the New Jersey Senate and chairman of the New Jersey Republican State Committee who served as mayor of Flemington from 1928 to 1936
* Jen Bryant (born 1960), poet, novelist and children&#x27;s author
* Jason Cabinda (born 1996), linebacker for the Detroit Lions
* Marjorie Hulsizer Copher (1892–1935), dietitian who served in World War I
* Jack Cust (born 1979), professional baseball designated hitter and outfielder
* Arthur Fauset (1899–1983), civil rights activist, folklorist, and educator
* Isaac G. Farlee (1787–1855), member of the United States House of Representatives from New Jersey&#x27;s 3rd Congressional District from 1843 to 1845
* Danny Federici (1950–2008), organ and keyboard player for the E Street Band
* Arthur F. Foran (1882–1961), President of the New Jersey Senate
* Dick Foran (1910–1979), a B-movie actor who appeared in several films, most notably with the comedy team of Abbott and Costello
* Walter E. Foran (1919–1986), politician who served in the New Jersey General Assembly and New Jersey Senate
* Kimi Goetz (born 1994), speed skater who represented the United States at the 2022 Winter Olympics
* John A. Hanna (1762–1805), U.S. representative from Pennsylvania
* Rachna Korhonen, diplomat who has served as the United States ambassador to Mali
* Emily Mason (born 2002), professional soccer player who plays as a defender for Seattle Reign FC of the National Women&#x27;s Soccer League
* John Patterson Bryan Maxwell (1804–1845), U.S. representative from New Jersey (1837–1839, 1841–1843)
* Barbara McClintock (born 1955), children&#x27;s book author and illustrator
* Kathryn Minner (1892–1969), character actress best known as the Little Old Lady from Pasadena in a series of television commercials for Dodge which aired in Southern California from 1964 to 1969
* Charlie Morton (born 1983), Major League Baseball pitcher who has played for the Atlanta Braves, Pittsburgh Pirates and Tampa Bay Rays 
* William E. Purcell (1856–1928), United States senator from North Dakota
* Chris Reynolds (born 1998), professional football quarterback for the Calgary Stampeders of the Canadian Football League
* Tucker Richardson, basketball player for Brussels Basketball of the BNXT League
* Richard Rubin (born 1983), television personality who appeared on the first season of &quot;Beauty and the Geek&quot;
* Brian Snyder (born 1958), former MLB pitcher who played for the Seattle Mariners and Oakland Athletics
* Samuel Lewis Southard (1787–1842), U.S. Senator, Secretary of the Navy, and the 10th Governor of New Jersey
* Alex Westlund (born 1975), retired professional ice hockey goaltender who has since been a coach
* Luke Stevenson (born 2004), college baseball catcher for the North Carolina Tar Heels
* Brian White (born 1996), footballer who plays as a forward for the New York Red Bulls in Major League Soccer
==References==
==External links==
* Flemington Borough website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1010673" start="0" end="10" title="Flemington, New Jersey" label="Flemington"/>
<link wikidata="Q2911266" start="16" end="23" title="Borough (New Jersey)" label="borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q62049" start="35" end="46" title="county seat" label="county seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q502451" start="50" end="66" title="Hunterdon County, New Jersey" label="Hunterdon County"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="75" end="85" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="89" end="99" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q4749038" start="139" end="152" title="Amwell Valley" label="Amwell Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7016614" start="178" end="190" title="Newark Basin" label="Newark Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q749287" start="200" end="214" title="Raritan River" label="Raritan Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7566388" start="220" end="232" title="South Branch Raritan River" label="South Branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5944705" start="349" end="366" title="Hunterdon Plateau" label="Hunterdon Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="378" end="403" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345528" start="458" end="473" title="United States census" label="decennial count"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="519" end="530" title="2010 United States census" label="2010 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q166998" start="628" end="639" title="2000 United States census" label="2000 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q3017068" start="709" end="725" title="Raritan Township, New Jersey" label="Raritan Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q2867079" start="856" end="878" title="New Jersey Legislature" label="New Jersey Legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q43109" start="923" end="933" title="referendum" label="referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q82048" start="1161" end="1173" title="Lenape" label="Lenni Lenape"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="1174" end="1190" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="Native Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q209152" start="1267" end="1279" title="William Penn" label="William Penn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1916966" start="1284" end="1295" title="Daniel Coxe" label="Daniel Coxe"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="1895" end="1921" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4742016" start="1965" end="1978" title="Francis Geary (British Army officer)" label="Francis Geary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083335" start="2106" end="2116" title="Pennington, New Jersey" label="Pennington"/>
<link wikidata="Q6256871" start="2147" end="2159" title="John Schenck" label="John Schenck"/>
<link wikidata="Q4742016" start="2236" end="2251" title="Ambush of Geary" label="Ambush of Geary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086436" start="2376" end="2388" title="Lambertville, New Jersey" label="Lambertville"/>
<link wikidata="Q7829892" start="2633" end="2637" title="town (New Jersey)" label="town"/>
<link wikidata="Q2867079" start="2655" end="2677" title="New Jersey Legislature" label="New Jersey Legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q3017068" start="2716" end="2732" title="Raritan Township, New Jersey" label="Raritan Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q7930612" start="2746" end="2753" title="village (New Jersey)" label="village"/>
<link wikidata="Q43109" start="2952" end="2962" title="referendum" label="referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q8563732" start="3537" end="3555" title="Flemington Speedway" label="Flemington Raceway"/>
<link wikidata="Q63731" start="3626" end="3649" title="Richard Hauptmann" label="Bruno Richard Hauptmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q844495" start="3664" end="3685" title="Lindbergh kidnapping" label="kidnapping and murder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1618" start="3689" end="3706" title="Charles Lindbergh" label="Charles Lindbergh"/>
<link wikidata="Q7885770" start="3728" end="3739" title="Union Hotel (Flemington, New Jersey)" label="Union Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7278962" start="4074" end="4091" title="Race of Champions (modified racing)" label="Race of Champions"/>
<link wikidata="Q233929" start="4143" end="4149" title="NASCAR" label="NASCAR"/>
<link wikidata="Q255911" start="4150" end="4172" title="NASCAR Gander RV &amp;amp; Outdoors Truck Series" label="Craftsman Truck Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q3016094" start="4328" end="4348" title="East Amwell Township, New Jersey" label="East Amwell Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q7009307" start="4675" end="4713" title="New Jersey Register of Historic Places" label="New Jersey Register of Historic Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719" start="4732" end="4768" title="National Register of Historic Places" label="National Register of Historic Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q43083009" start="4776" end="4804" title="Flemington Historic District" label="Flemington Historic District"/>
<link wikidata="Q7885770" start="4809" end="4820" title="Union Hotel (Flemington, New Jersey)" label="Union Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5944689" start="5035" end="5062" title="Hunterdon County Courthouse" label="Hunterdon County Courthouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q5458566" start="5155" end="5169" title="Samuel Fleming House" label="Fleming Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="5389" end="5407" title="United States Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q3017068" start="5533" end="5549" title="Raritan Township, New Jersey" label="Raritan Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="5731" end="5756" title="2010 United States census" label="2010 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="5834" end="5852" title="population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="6026" end="6031" title="White (U.S. census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="6045" end="6070" title="Black (U.S. census)" label="Black or African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="6083" end="6098" title="Native American (U.S. census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="6112" end="6117" title="Asian (U.S. census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="6129" end="6145" title="Pacific Islander (U.S. census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6164" end="6175" title="Race and ethnicity in the United States census#Race" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="6217" end="6235" title="Hispanic (U.S. census)" label="Hispanic or Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q463769" start="7021" end="7046" title="American Community Survey" label="American Community Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q311198" start="7068" end="7086" title="Real versus nominal value (economics)" label="inflation-adjusted"/>
<link wikidata="Q1940707" start="7096" end="7119" title="Median income" label="median household income"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="7324" end="7341" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="7451" end="7463" title="Poverty threshold" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q166998" start="7566" end="7591" title="2000 United States census" label="2000 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="7808" end="7813" title="Race and ethnicity in the United States Census" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="7821" end="7837" title="Race and ethnicity in the United States Census" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="7845" end="7860" title="Race and ethnicity in the United States Census" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="7868" end="7873" title="Race and ethnicity in the United States Census" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="7881" end="7897" title="Race and ethnicity in the United States Census" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="7910" end="7921" title="Race and ethnicity in the United States Census" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="7957" end="7965" title="Race and ethnicity in the United States Census" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="7969" end="7975" title="Race and ethnicity in the United States Census" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="8948" end="8965" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="9060" end="9072" title="Poverty threshold" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q2911266" start="9217" end="9224" title="Borough (New Jersey)" label="borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q3682992" start="9483" end="9491" title="at-large" label="at-large"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308596" start="9899" end="9909" title="Mayor–council government" label="weak mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q178074" start="10087" end="10091" title="veto" label="veto"/>
<link wikidata="Q178074" start="10117" end="10125" title="Veto" label="override"/>
<link wikidata="Q30185" start="10338" end="10343" title="mayor" label="mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="10369" end="10379" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q6757079" start="10380" end="10396" title="Marcia A. Karrow" label="Marcia A. Karrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q2855502" start="11391" end="11406" title="Chief of police" label="Chief of police"/>
<link wikidata="Q186024" start="11431" end="11441" title="lieutenant" label="lieutenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q157696" start="11450" end="11458" title="sergeant" label="sergeant"/>
<link wikidata="Q17378201" start="11465" end="11473" title="corporal" label="corporal"/>
<link wikidata="Q842782" start="11479" end="11488" title="detective" label="detective"/>
<link wikidata="Q11379765" start="11492" end="11498" title="patrol" label="patrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q8100696" start="11521" end="11535" title="special police" label="special police"/>
<link wikidata="Q6503025" start="11569" end="11584" title="Law Enforcement Exploring" label="Police Explorer"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="11905" end="11914" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="11947" end="11958" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republicans"/>
<link wikidata="Q5354776" start="11994" end="12006" title="Elections in New Jersey" label="Unaffiliated"/>
<link wikidata="Q558334" start="12043" end="12055" title="Libertarian Party (United States)" label="Libertarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q849158" start="12059" end="12065" title="Green Party (United States)" label="Greens"/>
<link wikidata="Q101110072" start="12110" end="12136" title="2024 United States presidential election" label="2024 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q10853588" start="12147" end="12160" title="Kamala Harris" label="Kamala Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="12221" end="12233" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q22923830" start="12408" end="12434" title="2020 United States presidential election" label="2020 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q6279" start="12445" end="12454" title="Joe Biden" label="Joe Biden"/>
<link wikidata="Q699872" start="12692" end="12718" title="2016 United States presidential election" label="2016 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q6294" start="12729" end="12744" title="Hillary Clinton" label="Hillary Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q17100287" start="12994" end="13020" title="2012 United States presidential election in New Jersey" label="2012 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="13031" end="13043" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q4496" start="13103" end="13114" title="Mitt Romney" label="Mitt Romney"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738441" start="13274" end="13281" title="Spoilt vote" label="spoiled"/>
<link wikidata="Q16959334" start="13315" end="13341" title="2008 United States presidential election in New Jersey" label="2008 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q10390" start="13424" end="13435" title="John McCain" label="John McCain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892945" start="13609" end="13635" title="2004 United States presidential election in New Jersey" label="2004 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q22316" start="13646" end="13656" title="John Kerry" label="John Kerry"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="13726" end="13740" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q15134831" start="13928" end="13955" title="2013 New Jersey gubernatorial election" label="2013 gubernatorial election"/>
<link wikidata="Q63879" start="13968" end="13982" title="Chris Christie" label="Chris Christie"/>
<link wikidata="Q4858790" start="14040" end="14053" title="Barbara Buono" label="Barbara Buono"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586264" start="14252" end="14279" title="2009 New Jersey gubernatorial election" label="2009 gubernatorial election"/>
<link wikidata="Q380570" start="14372" end="14383" title="Jon Corzine" label="Jon Corzine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5106343" start="14420" end="14433" title="Chris Daggett" label="Chris Daggett"/>
<link wikidata="Q7239239" start="14647" end="14663" title="pre-kindergarten" label="pre-kindergarten"/>
<link wikidata="Q5349142" start="14672" end="14684" title="eighth grade" label="eighth grade"/>
<link wikidata="Q5458616" start="14696" end="14739" title="Flemington-Raritan Regional School District" label="Flemington-Raritan Regional School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q3017068" start="14802" end="14818" title="Raritan Township, New Jersey" label="Raritan Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543700" start="14963" end="14966" title="full-time equivalent" label="FTE"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595370" start="14981" end="15002" title="student–teacher ratio" label="student–teacher ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1966994" start="15225" end="15265" title="National Center for Education Statistics" label="National Center for Education Statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q11183236" start="15405" end="15412" title="Ringoes, New Jersey" label="Ringoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7039258" start="15840" end="15845" title="ninth grade" label="ninth"/>
<link wikidata="Q986388" start="15854" end="15867" title="twelfth grade" label="twelfth grade"/>
<link wikidata="Q5944683" start="15876" end="15914" title="Hunterdon Central Regional High School" label="Hunterdon Central Regional High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q614185" start="16052" end="16069" title="Delaware Township, Hunterdon County, New Jersey" label="Delaware Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q3016094" start="16071" end="16091" title="East Amwell Township, New Jersey" label="East Amwell Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q3017068" start="16093" end="16109" title="Raritan Township, New Jersey" label="Raritan Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q3017759" start="16114" end="16133" title="Readington Township, New Jersey" label="Readington Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543700" start="16254" end="16257" title="full-time equivalent" label="FTE"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595370" start="16272" end="16293" title="student–teacher ratio" label="student–teacher ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q399541" start="16358" end="16376" title="board of education" label="board of education"/>
<link wikidata="Q5944694" start="16657" end="16700" title="Hunterdon County Vocational School District" label="Hunterdon County Vocational School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q3017068" start="16805" end="16821" title="Raritan Township, New Jersey" label="Raritan Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q867675" start="17084" end="17123" title="New Jersey Department of Transportation" label="New Jersey Department of Transportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2436504" start="17191" end="17205" title="U.S. Route 202" label="U.S. Route 202"/>
<link wikidata="Q822339" start="17207" end="17215" title="New Jersey Route 31" label="Route 31"/>
<link wikidata="Q821607" start="17220" end="17228" title="New Jersey Route 12" label="Route 12"/>
<link wikidata="Q1525" start="17273" end="17288" title="Roundabout" label="traffic circles"/>
<link wikidata="Q5159092" start="17476" end="17488" title="concurrency (road)" label="concurrently"/>
<link wikidata="Q867298" start="17592" end="17641" title="List of traffic circles in New Jersey" label="New Jersey&amp;#x27;s once-widespread traffic circles"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18045" end="18057" title="Traffic#Passage Priority (right of way)" label="right of way"/>
<link wikidata="Q7833500" start="18338" end="18356" title="Trans-Bridge Lines" label="Trans-Bridge Lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010232" start="18402" end="18412" title="Doylestown, Pennsylvania" label="Doylestown"/>
<link wikidata="Q164380" start="18415" end="18438" title="Bethlehem, Pennsylvania" label="Bethlehem, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q466786" start="18452" end="18488" title="Newark Liberty International Airport" label="Newark Liberty International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190614" start="18494" end="18521" title="Port Authority Bus Terminal" label="Port Authority Bus Terminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q11249" start="18525" end="18542" title="Midtown Manhattan" label="Midtown Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q8685" start="18547" end="18584" title="John F. Kennedy International Airport" label="John F. Kennedy International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q3017068" start="18727" end="18743" title="Raritan Township, New Jersey" label="Raritan Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q4966837" start="18764" end="18788" title="Bridgewater Commons" label="Bridgewater Commons Mall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088776" start="18793" end="18803" title="Somerville, New Jersey" label="Somerville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086532" start="18817" end="18824" title="Hampton, New Jersey" label="Hampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086436" start="18845" end="18857" title="Lambertville, New Jersey" label="Lambertville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083131" start="18885" end="18892" title="Milford, New Jersey" label="Milford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087573" start="18897" end="18904" title="Clinton, New Jersey" label="Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q716526" start="19025" end="19030" title="Aruna (singer)" label="Aruna"/>
<link wikidata="Q9663263" start="19072" end="19083" title="Brad Benson" label="Brad Benson"/>
<link wikidata="Q190618" start="19134" end="19149" title="New York Giants" label="New York Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q1441556" start="19152" end="19164" title="John T. Bird" label="John T. Bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q14705794" start="19190" end="19234" title="New Jersey&amp;#x27;s 3rd congressional district" label="New Jersey&amp;#x27;s 3rd congressional district"/>
<link wikidata="Q7411940" start="19255" end="19271" title="Samuel L. Bodine" label="Samuel L. Bodine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1480298" start="19302" end="19319" title="New Jersey Senate" label="New Jersey Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q15980751" start="19340" end="19377" title="New Jersey Republican State Committee" label="New Jersey Republican State Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q58325123" start="19432" end="19442" title="Jen Bryant" label="Jen Bryant"/>
<link wikidata="Q22060851" start="19500" end="19513" title="Jason Cabinda" label="Jason Cabinda"/>
<link wikidata="Q528145" start="19527" end="19537" title="linebacker" label="linebacker"/>
<link wikidata="Q271880" start="19546" end="19559" title="Detroit Lions" label="Detroit Lions"/>
<link wikidata="Q60594199" start="19562" end="19586" title="Marjorie Hulsizer Copher" label="Marjorie Hulsizer Copher"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="19624" end="19635" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q961553" start="19638" end="19647" title="Jack Cust" label="Jack Cust"/>
<link wikidata="Q4798675" start="19718" end="19731" title="Arthur Fauset" label="Arthur Fauset"/>
<link wikidata="Q1673388" start="19795" end="19810" title="Isaac G. Farlee" label="Isaac G. Farlee"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="19838" end="19876" title="United States House of Representatives" label="United States House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q14705794" start="19882" end="19926" title="New Jersey&amp;#x27;s 3rd Congressional District" label="New Jersey&amp;#x27;s 3rd Congressional District"/>
<link wikidata="Q561921" start="19947" end="19961" title="Danny Federici" label="Danny Federici"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276681" start="20009" end="20022" title="E Street Band" label="E Street Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q4798637" start="20025" end="20040" title="Arthur F. Foran" label="Arthur F. Foran"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209649" start="20091" end="20101" title="Dick Foran" label="Dick Foran"/>
<link wikidata="Q223770" start="20117" end="20124" title="B movie" label="B-movie"/>
<link wikidata="Q23679" start="20199" end="20218" title="Abbott and Costello" label="Abbott and Costello"/>
<link wikidata="Q7964714" start="20221" end="20236" title="Walter E. Foran" label="Walter E. Foran"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455914" start="20279" end="20306" title="New Jersey General Assembly" label="New Jersey General Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1480298" start="20311" end="20328" title="New Jersey Senate" label="New Jersey Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q80760501" start="20331" end="20341" title="Kimi Goetz" label="Kimi Goetz"/>
<link wikidata="Q192431" start="20355" end="20367" title="Speed skating" label="speed skater"/>
<link wikidata="Q193074" start="20409" end="20429" title="2022 Winter Olympics" label="2022 Winter Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q6217717" start="20432" end="20445" title="John A. Hanna" label="John A. Hanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q111610354" start="20499" end="20514" title="Rachna Korhonen" label="Rachna Korhonen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889334" start="20547" end="20579" title="List of ambassadors of the United States to Mali" label="United States ambassador to Mali"/>
<link wikidata="Q5372284" start="20582" end="20593" title="Emily Mason" label="Emily Mason"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="20620" end="20626" title="association football" label="soccer"/>
<link wikidata="Q336286" start="20649" end="20657" title="defender (association football)" label="defender"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357111" start="20662" end="20678" title="Seattle Reign FC" label="Seattle Reign FC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1101443" start="20686" end="20721" title="National Women&amp;#x27;s Soccer League" label="National Women&amp;#x27;s Soccer League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1701352" start="20724" end="20752" title="John Patterson Bryan Maxwell" label="John Patterson Bryan Maxwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q4859141" start="20827" end="20845" title="Barbara McClintock (illustrator)" label="Barbara McClintock"/>
<link wikidata="Q6377093" start="20905" end="20919" title="Kathryn Minner" label="Kathryn Minner"/>
<link wikidata="Q948329" start="20933" end="20950" title="character actor" label="character actress"/>
<link wikidata="Q7747677" start="20965" end="20998" title="The Little Old Lady (from Pasadena)" label="the Little Old Lady from Pasadena"/>
<link wikidata="Q854995" start="21014" end="21036" title="Television advertisement" label="television commercials"/>
<link wikidata="Q27564" start="21041" end="21046" title="Dodge" label="Dodge"/>
<link wikidata="Q844837" start="21062" end="21081" title="Southern California" label="Southern California"/>
<link wikidata="Q2960875" start="21102" end="21116" title="Charlie Morton (pitcher)" label="Charlie Morton"/>
<link wikidata="Q461595" start="21183" end="21197" title="Atlanta Braves" label="Atlanta Braves"/>
<link wikidata="Q653772" start="21199" end="21217" title="Pittsburgh Pirates" label="Pittsburgh Pirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q650865" start="21222" end="21236" title="Tampa Bay Rays" label="Tampa Bay Rays"/>
<link wikidata="Q1465434" start="21240" end="21258" title="William E. Purcell" label="William E. Purcell"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="21272" end="21293" title="United States Senate" label="United States senator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207" start="21299" end="21311" title="North Dakota" label="North Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q124854086" start="21314" end="21328" title="Chris Reynolds (gridiron football)" label="Chris Reynolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546270" start="21355" end="21363" title="gridiron football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q622747" start="21364" end="21375" title="quarterback" label="quarterback"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026679" start="21384" end="21402" title="Calgary Stampeders" label="Calgary Stampeders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032175" start="21410" end="21434" title="Canadian Football League" label="Canadian Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q100913715" start="21437" end="21454" title="Tucker Richardson" label="Tucker Richardson"/>
<link wikidata="Q13601976" start="21478" end="21497" title="Brussels Basketball" label="Brussels Basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q104880240" start="21505" end="21516" title="BNXT League" label="BNXT League"/>
<link wikidata="Q4025922" start="21519" end="21532" title="Richard Rubin (TV personality)" label="Richard Rubin"/>
<link wikidata="Q117210076" start="21611" end="21630" title="Beauty and the Geek" label="Beauty and the Geek"/>
<link wikidata="Q4965340" start="21639" end="21651" title="Brian Snyder" label="Brian Snyder"/>
<link wikidata="Q466586" start="21703" end="21719" title="Seattle Mariners" label="Seattle Mariners"/>
<link wikidata="Q131926583" start="21724" end="21741" title="Oakland Athletics" label="Oakland Athletics"/>
<link wikidata="Q880272" start="21744" end="21765" title="Samuel Lewis Southard" label="Samuel Lewis Southard"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="21779" end="21791" title="U.S. Senator" label="U.S. Senator"/>
<link wikidata="Q940135" start="21793" end="21814" title="Secretary of the Navy" label="Secretary of the Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q886931" start="21824" end="21828" title="List of Governors of New Jersey" label="10th"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112728" start="21829" end="21851" title="Governor of New Jersey" label="Governor of New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q877210" start="21854" end="21867" title="Alex Westlund" label="Alex Westlund"/>
<link wikidata="Q41466" start="21902" end="21912" title="ice hockey" label="ice hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317534" start="21913" end="21923" title="goaltender" label="goaltender"/>
<link wikidata="Q132736404" start="21953" end="21967" title="Luke Stevenson" label="Luke Stevenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146585" start="21981" end="21997" title="college baseball" label="college baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050571" start="21998" end="22005" title="catcher" label="catcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q7054627" start="22014" end="22038" title="North Carolina Tar Heels baseball" label="North Carolina Tar Heels"/>
<link wikidata="Q3644521" start="22041" end="22052" title="Brian White (soccer)" label="Brian White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="22066" end="22076" title="association football" label="footballer"/>
<link wikidata="Q280658" start="22092" end="22099" title="Forward (association football)" label="forward"/>
<link wikidata="Q204220" start="22108" end="22126" title="New York Red Bulls" label="New York Red Bulls"/>
<link wikidata="Q18543" start="22130" end="22149" title="Major League Soccer" label="Major League Soccer"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="125342" wikidata="Q5491960" url="?curid=125342" title="Franklin Township, Hunterdon County, New Jersey">
<text>Franklin Township is a township in central Hunterdon County, in the U.S. state of New Jersey. As of the 2020 United States census, the township&#x27;s population was 3,267, an increase of 72 (+2.3%) from the 2010 census count of 3,195, which in turn reflected an increase of 205 (+6.9%) from the 2,990 counted in the 2000 census. Most of the township lies on the Hunterdon Plateau with only the eastern section along the South Branch Raritan River being on the lower part of the Newark Basin.

==History==
Long populated by the Lenape (Delaware) Native Americans, the first European settlement of present-day Franklin was around 1700, when it became a Quaker community of settlers who came from Burlington County. The most reliable records that are available about the early days of the Township are found in the minutes of the Friends&#x27; Meeting in Quakertown.

Franklin Township was established by an act of the New Jersey Legislature on April 7, 1845, when it was created from portions of Kingwood Township, based on the results of a referendum held that day. Portions of the township were taken to form Clinton town on April 5, 1865. The township was named for Benjamin Franklin.

The rich soil made the township a center of agriculture for hundreds of years. While Franklin Township had long hosted a major dairy farming industry, in modern times, the primary crops have been corn, hay and soybeans.

==Geography==
According to the United States Census Bureau, the township had a total area of 23.18 square miles (60.02 km2), including 23.04 square miles (59.66 km2) of land and 0.14 square miles (0.36 km2) of water (0.60%).

Unincorporated communities, localities and place names located partially or completely within the township include Allens Corner, Alvater Corner, Cherryville (previously known as Dogtown), Grandin, Kingtown, Lansdowne, Littletown, Oak Grove, Pittstown, Quakertown (previously known as Fairview), Sidney and Sunnyside. Pittstown, previously known as Hoffs, is also spread across Alexandria Township and Union Township.

The Capoolong Creek, which runs through Pittstown, was an attraction to early settlers and they soon established three of the oldest churches in present-day Hunterdon: Thomas Episcopal, established in 1723, Bethlehem Presbyterian, organized in 1730 and the Quaker Church in 1733.

The township borders the Hunterdon County municipalities of Alexandria Township, Clinton, Clinton Township, Delaware Township, Kingwood Township, Raritan Township and Union Township.

==Demographics==
===2010 census===
The 2010 United States census counted 3,195 people, 1,137 households, and 908 families in the township. The population density was 140.1 per square mile (54.1/km2). There were 1,204 housing units at an average density of 52.8 per square mile (20.4/km2). The racial makeup was 96.84% (3,094) White, 0.69% (22) Black or African American, 0.16% (5) Native American, 1.25% (40) Asian, 0.09% (3) Pacific Islander, 0.44% (14) from other races, and 0.53% (17) from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 3.44% (110) of the population.

Of the 1,137 households, 34.6% had children under the age of 18; 71.0% were married couples living together; 5.3% had a female householder with no husband present and 20.1% were non-families. Of all households, 15.1% were made up of individuals and 6.9% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.80 and the average family size was 3.13.

24.7% of the population were under the age of 18, 5.9% from 18 to 24, 19.4% from 25 to 44, 34.6% from 45 to 64, and 15.3% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 45.0 years. For every 100 females, the population had 98.1 males. For every 100 females ages 18 and older there were 98.9 males.

The Census Bureau&#x27;s 2006–2010 American Community Survey showed that (in 2010 inflation-adjusted dollars) median household income was $104,500 (with a margin of error of +/− $19,534) and the median family income was $118,182 (+/− $16,643). Males had a median income of $72,303 (+/− $13,313) versus $52,202 (+/− $5,525) for females. The per capita income for the borough was $46,892 (+/− $5,196). About 1.7% of families and 1.1% of the population were below the poverty line, including 1.0% of those under age 18 and none of those age 65 or over.

===2000 census===
As of the 2000 United States census there were 2,990 people, 1,091 households, and 890 families residing in the township. The population density was . There were 1,125 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the township was 97.53% White, 0.40% African American, 0.23% Native American, 0.77% Asian, 0.33% from other races, and 0.74% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 2.24% of the population.

There were 1,091 households, out of which 34.6% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 73.8% were married couples living together, 5.7% had a female householder with no husband present, and 18.4% were non-families. 14.2% of all households were made up of individuals, and 6.0% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.74 and the average family size was 3.04.

In the township the population was spread out, with 24.9% under the age of 18, 4.4% from 18 to 24, 28.0% from 25 to 44, 30.6% from 45 to 64, and 12.1% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 42 years. For every 100 females, there were 98.3 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 99.1 males.

The median income for a household in the township was $91,364, and the median income for a family was $96,320. Males had a median income of $66,667 versus $44,779 for females. The per capita income for the township was $39,668. About 1.5% of families and 1.6% of the population were below the poverty line, including 1.5% of those under age 18 and 4.9% of those age 65 or over.

== Government ==
===Local government===
Franklin Township is governed under the Township form of government, which is used by 141 of the state&#x27;s 564 municipalities. The Township Committee is comprised of five members, who are elected directly by the voters at-large in partisan elections to serve three-year terms of office on a staggered basis, with either one or two seats coming up for election each year as part of the November general election in a three-year cycle. At an annual reorganization meeting, the Township Committee selects one of its members to serve as Mayor and another as Deputy Mayor.

, members of the Franklin Township Committee are Mayor Philip J. Koury (R, term on committee and as mayor ends December 31, 2023), Deputy Mayor Michael Homulak (R, term on committee ends 2024; term as deputy mayor ends 2023), Sebastian Donaruma (R, 2025), Craig A. Repmann (R, 2024) and Deanna Seiple (R, 2025).

In January 2019, the Township Committee selected Sebastian Donaruma from a list of three candidates nominated by the Republic municipal committee to fill the seat expiring in December 2019 that was vacated in December 2018 by Susan Soloway before she was sworn into the Hunterdon County Board of Chosen Freeholders.

=== Federal, state and county representation ===
Franklin Township is located in the 7th Congressional District and is part of New Jersey&#x27;s 23rd state legislative district. Prior to the 2010 Census, Franklin Township had been part of the , a change made by the New Jersey Redistricting Commission that took effect in January 2013, based on the results of the November 2012 general elections.



===Politics===
As of March 2011, there were a total of 2,253 registered voters in Franklin Township, of which 382 (17.0%) were registered as Democrats, 1,021 (45.3%) were registered as Republicans and 850 (37.7%) were registered as Unaffiliated. There were no voters registered to other parties.

In the 2012 presidential election, Republican Mitt Romney received 65.8% of the vote (1,166 cast), ahead of Democrat Barack Obama with 33.2% (588 votes), and other candidates with 1.0% (18 votes), among the 1,781 ballots cast by the township&#x27;s 2,362 registered voters (9 ballots were spoiled), for a turnout of 75.4%. In the 2008 presidential election, Republican John McCain received 61.0% of the vote (1,118 cast), ahead of Democrat Barack Obama with 36.6% (670 votes) and other candidates with 1.7% (31 votes), among the 1,833 ballots cast by the township&#x27;s 2,228 registered voters, for a turnout of 82.3%. In the 2004 presidential election, Republican George W. Bush received 63.3% of the vote (1,130 ballots cast), outpolling Democrat John Kerry with 35.3% (630 votes) and other candidates with 1.1% (24 votes), among the 1,784 ballots cast by the township&#x27;s 2,133 registered voters, for a turnout percentage of 83.6.




In the 2013 gubernatorial election, Republican Chris Christie received 77.8% of the vote (861 cast), ahead of Democrat Barbara Buono with 20.3% (225 votes), and other candidates with 1.9% (21 votes), among the 1,132 ballots cast by the township&#x27;s 2,279 registered voters (25 ballots were spoiled), for a turnout of 49.7%. In the 2009 gubernatorial election, Republican Chris Christie received 69.5% of the vote (977 ballots cast), ahead of Democrat Jon Corzine with 21.6% (303 votes), Independent Chris Daggett with 8.0% (112 votes) and other candidates with 0.3% (4 votes), among the 1,406 ballots cast by the township&#x27;s 2,215 registered voters, yielding a 63.5% turnout.

== Education ==
The Franklin Township School District serves public school students in pre-kindergarten through eighth grade at Franklin Township School. As of the 2018–19 school year, the district, comprised of one school, had an enrollment of 283 students and 29.0 classroom teachers (on an FTE basis), for a student–teacher ratio of 9.8:1.

Public school students in ninth through twelfth grades attend North Hunterdon High School in Annandale together with students from Bethlehem Township, Clinton Town, Clinton Township, Lebanon Borough and Union Township. As of the 2018–19 school year, the high school had an enrollment of 1,584 students and 123.2 classroom teachers (on an FTE basis), for a student–teacher ratio of 12.9:1. The school is part of the North Hunterdon-Voorhees Regional High School District, which also includes students from Califon, Glen Gardner, Hampton, High Bridge, Lebanon Township and Tewksbury Township, who attend Voorhees High School in Lebanon Township.

==Transportation==

, the township had a total of of roadways, of which were maintained by the municipality, by Hunterdon County and by the New Jersey Department of Transportation.

There are several major roads in Franklin Township. The most significant is Interstate 78/U.S. Route 22, which traverses through for a fifth of a mile with an interchange (Exit 15) at the northern tip of the township (which is the eastern overlapping end of Route 173). Route 12 also passes through for just less than .

County roads that pass through include CR 513 and CR 579.

The Norfolk Southern Railway&#x27;s Lehigh Line (formerly the mainline of the Lehigh Valley Railroad), runs through the northern part of Franklin Township.

==Points of interest==

* Lansdown, a historic house in Lansdowne, was owned by Commissary-General Charles Stewart during the American Revolution. It was listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1979.
* Quaker Meeting House, a Quaker meeting house in Quakertown, was listed on the NRHP in 1990

==Notable people==

People who were born in, residents of, or otherwise closely associated with Franklin Township include:

* Christian Bauman (born 1970), novelist, essayist, and lyricist
* Hiram Deats (1810–1887), businessman, agricultural manufacturing
* Chris Kappler (born 1967), Olympic gold and silver medalist in equestrian events
* John J. Myers (born 1941), prelate of the Catholic Church and former Archbishop emeritus of Newark, New Jersey
* Erik Peterson (born 1966), politician who serves in the New Jersey General Assembly representing the 23rd Legislative District
* Toshiko Takaezu (1922–2011), ceramic artist and painter

==References==
==External links==

*Official Franklin Township, Hunterdon County Site
*Hunterdon County webpage for Franklin Township
*Franklin Township School
*School Data for the Franklin Township School, National Center for Education Statistics
*North Hunterdon-Voorhees Regional High School District
*Hunterdon Land Trust Alliance
*Rural Awareness, Inc. – Preserving Franklin Township&#x27;s Rich History and Rural Character</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5491960" start="0" end="17" title="Franklin Township, Hunterdon County, New Jersey" label="Franklin Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q7830213" start="23" end="31" title="Township (New Jersey)" label="township"/>
<link wikidata="Q502451" start="43" end="59" title="Hunterdon County, New Jersey" label="Hunterdon County"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="68" end="78" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="82" end="92" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="104" end="129" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="208" end="219" title="2010 United States census" label="2010 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q166998" start="317" end="328" title="2000 United States census" label="2000 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q5944705" start="363" end="380" title="Hunterdon Plateau" label="Hunterdon Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q7566388" start="421" end="447" title="South Branch Raritan River" label="South Branch Raritan River"/>
<link wikidata="Q7016614" start="479" end="491" title="Newark Basin" label="Newark Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q82048" start="528" end="534" title="Lenape" label="Lenape"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="546" end="562" title="Native American in the United States" label="Native Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q170208" start="652" end="658" title="Quakers" label="Quaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q138141" start="695" end="712" title="Burlington County, New Jersey" label="Burlington County"/>
<link wikidata="Q2867079" start="917" end="939" title="New Jersey Legislature" label="New Jersey Legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q3015394" start="995" end="1012" title="Kingwood Township, New Jersey" label="Kingwood Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087573" start="1110" end="1122" title="Clinton, New Jersey" label="Clinton town"/>
<link wikidata="Q34969" start="1168" end="1185" title="Benjamin Franklin" label="Benjamin Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="1440" end="1467" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1635" end="1661" title="Local government in New Jersey#Unincorporated communities" label="Unincorporated communities"/>
<link wikidata="Q5491960" start="1750" end="1763" title="Allens Corner, New Jersey" label="Allens Corner"/>
<link wikidata="Q18149227" start="1781" end="1792" title="Cherryville, New Jersey" label="Cherryville"/>
<link wikidata="Q19462050" start="1824" end="1831" title="Grandin, New Jersey" label="Grandin"/>
<link wikidata="Q20657153" start="1843" end="1852" title="Lansdowne, New Jersey" label="Lansdowne"/>
<link wikidata="Q7199513" start="1877" end="1886" title="Pittstown, New Jersey" label="Pittstown"/>
<link wikidata="Q3017769" start="2013" end="2032" title="Alexandria Township, New Jersey" label="Alexandria Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q7886242" start="2037" end="2051" title="Union Township, Hunterdon County, New Jersey" label="Union Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q3017769" start="2395" end="2414" title="Alexandria Township, New Jersey" label="Alexandria Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087573" start="2416" end="2423" title="Clinton, New Jersey" label="Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3016644" start="2425" end="2441" title="Clinton Township, New Jersey" label="Clinton Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q614185" start="2443" end="2460" title="Delaware Township, New Jersey" label="Delaware Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q3015394" start="2462" end="2479" title="Kingwood Township, New Jersey" label="Kingwood Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q3017068" start="2481" end="2497" title="Raritan Township, New Jersey" label="Raritan Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q7886242" start="2502" end="2516" title="Union Township, Hunterdon County, New Jersey" label="Union Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="2558" end="2583" title="2010 United States census" label="2010 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="2662" end="2680" title="population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2845" end="2850" title="White (U.S. census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2863" end="2888" title="Black (U.S. census)" label="Black or African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2900" end="2915" title="Native American (U.S. census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2928" end="2933" title="Asian (U.S. census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2945" end="2961" title="Pacific Islander (U.S. census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2979" end="2990" title="Race and ethnicity in the United States census#Race" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3031" end="3049" title="Hispanic (U.S. census)" label="Hispanic or Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q463769" start="3828" end="3853" title="American Community Survey" label="American Community Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q311198" start="3875" end="3893" title="inflation adjustment" label="inflation-adjusted"/>
<link wikidata="Q1940707" start="3903" end="3926" title="median household income" label="median household income"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="4133" end="4150" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="4258" end="4270" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q166998" start="4372" end="4397" title="2000 United States census" label="2000 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4616" end="4621" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4629" end="4645" title="African American (U.S. Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4653" end="4668" title="Native American (U.S. Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4676" end="4681" title="Asian (U.S. Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4694" end="4705" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4741" end="4749" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4753" end="4759" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="4913" end="4928" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="5730" end="5747" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="5843" end="5855" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q7830213" start="6009" end="6017" title="Township (New Jersey)" label="Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q3682992" start="6191" end="6199" title="at-large" label="at-large"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="6613" end="6614" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="R"/>
<link wikidata="Q17091563" start="7437" end="7472" title="New Jersey Redistricting Commission" label="New Jersey Redistricting Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="7712" end="7721" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="7756" end="7767" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republicans"/>
<link wikidata="Q5354776" start="7803" end="7815" title="Unaffiliated (New Jersey)" label="Unaffiliated"/>
<link wikidata="Q17100287" start="7875" end="7901" title="United States presidential election in New Jersey, 2012" label="2012 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q4496" start="7914" end="7925" title="Mitt Romney" label="Mitt Romney"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="7985" end="7997" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738441" start="8157" end="8164" title="Spoilt vote" label="spoiled"/>
<link wikidata="Q16959334" start="8198" end="8224" title="United States presidential election in New Jersey, 2008" label="2008 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q10390" start="8237" end="8248" title="John McCain" label="John McCain"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="8308" end="8320" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892945" start="8495" end="8521" title="United States presidential election in New Jersey, 2004" label="2004 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="8534" end="8548" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q22316" start="8618" end="8628" title="John Kerry" label="John Kerry"/>
<link wikidata="Q15134831" start="8817" end="8844" title="New Jersey gubernatorial election, 2013" label="2013 gubernatorial election"/>
<link wikidata="Q63879" start="8857" end="8871" title="Chris Christie" label="Chris Christie"/>
<link wikidata="Q4858790" start="8929" end="8942" title="Barbara Buono" label="Barbara Buono"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586264" start="9144" end="9171" title="New Jersey gubernatorial election, 2009" label="2009 gubernatorial election"/>
<link wikidata="Q380570" start="9264" end="9275" title="Jon Corzine" label="Jon Corzine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5106343" start="9312" end="9325" title="Chris Daggett" label="Chris Daggett"/>
<link wikidata="Q5492068" start="9514" end="9547" title="Franklin Township School District (Hunterdon County, New Jersey)" label="Franklin Township School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q7239239" start="9581" end="9597" title="pre-kindergarten" label="pre-kindergarten"/>
<link wikidata="Q5349142" start="9606" end="9618" title="eighth grade" label="eighth grade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543700" start="9787" end="9790" title="full-time equivalent" label="FTE"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595370" start="9805" end="9826" title="student–teacher ratio" label="student–teacher ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7039258" start="9864" end="9869" title="ninth grade" label="ninth"/>
<link wikidata="Q986388" start="9878" end="9891" title="twelfth grade" label="twelfth grade"/>
<link wikidata="Q7055674" start="9900" end="9927" title="North Hunterdon High School" label="North Hunterdon High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084050" start="9931" end="9940" title="Annandale, New Jersey" label="Annandale"/>
<link wikidata="Q542454" start="9969" end="9987" title="Bethlehem Township, New Jersey" label="Bethlehem Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087573" start="9989" end="10001" title="Clinton, New Jersey" label="Clinton Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q3016644" start="10003" end="10019" title="Clinton Township, New Jersey" label="Clinton Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083772" start="10021" end="10036" title="Lebanon, New Jersey" label="Lebanon Borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q7886242" start="10041" end="10055" title="Union Township, Hunterdon County, New Jersey" label="Union Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543700" start="10176" end="10179" title="full-time equivalent" label="FTE"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595370" start="10194" end="10215" title="student–teacher ratio" label="student–teacher ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q14705816" start="10253" end="10307" title="North Hunterdon-Voorhees Regional High School District" label="North Hunterdon-Voorhees Regional High School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q515694" start="10343" end="10350" title="Califon, New Jersey" label="Califon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087569" start="10352" end="10364" title="Glen Gardner, New Jersey" label="Glen Gardner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086532" start="10366" end="10373" title="Hampton, New Jersey" label="Hampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086813" start="10375" end="10386" title="High Bridge, New Jersey" label="High Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3015934" start="10388" end="10404" title="Lebanon Township, New Jersey" label="Lebanon Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q3016994" start="10409" end="10427" title="Tewksbury Township, New Jersey" label="Tewksbury Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q14705907" start="10440" end="10460" title="Voorhees High School" label="Voorhees High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q867675" start="10623" end="10662" title="New Jersey Department of Transportation" label="New Jersey Department of Transportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q811194" start="10741" end="10754" title="Interstate 78 in New Jersey" label="Interstate 78"/>
<link wikidata="Q811410" start="10755" end="10768" title="U.S. Route 22 in New Jersey" label="U.S. Route 22"/>
<link wikidata="Q827316" start="10923" end="10932" title="New Jersey Route 173" label="Route 173"/>
<link wikidata="Q821607" start="10935" end="10943" title="New Jersey Route 12" label="Route 12"/>
<link wikidata="Q858781" start="11025" end="11031" title="County Route 513 (New Jersey)" label="CR 513"/>
<link wikidata="Q859457" start="11036" end="11042" title="County Route 579 (New Jersey)" label="CR 579"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321054" start="11049" end="11073" title="Norfolk Southern Railway" label="Norfolk Southern Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q16981160" start="11081" end="11092" title="Lehigh Line (Norfolk Southern)" label="Lehigh Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q490228" start="11123" end="11145" title="Lehigh Valley Railroad" label="Lehigh Valley Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q54967015" start="11228" end="11236" title="Lansdown (Pittstown, New Jersey)" label="Lansdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q20657153" start="11258" end="11267" title="Lansdowne, New Jersey" label="Lansdowne"/>
<link wikidata="Q5082675" start="11301" end="11316" title="Charles Stewart (New Jersey politician)" label="Charles Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719" start="11370" end="11406" title="National Register of Historic Places" label="National Register of Historic Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q104189059" start="11418" end="11438" title="Quaker Meeting House (Quakertown, New Jersey)" label="Quaker Meeting House"/>
<link wikidata="Q5504247" start="11442" end="11462" title="Quaker meeting house" label="Quaker meeting house"/>
<link wikidata="Q20657638" start="11466" end="11476" title="Quakertown, New Jersey" label="Quakertown"/>
<link wikidata="Q5109318" start="11636" end="11652" title="Christian Bauman" label="Christian Bauman"/>
<link wikidata="Q104381734" start="11701" end="11712" title="Hiram Deats" label="Hiram Deats"/>
<link wikidata="Q2964761" start="11768" end="11781" title="Chris Kappler" label="Chris Kappler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638264" start="11851" end="11864" title="John J. Myers" label="John J. Myers"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="11893" end="11908" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365140" start="11943" end="11961" title="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Newark" label="Newark, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5388774" start="11964" end="11977" title="Erik Peterson (politician)" label="Erik Peterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455914" start="12020" end="12047" title="New Jersey General Assembly" label="New Jersey General Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q4631654" start="12065" end="12090" title="New Jersey&amp;#x27;s 23rd legislative district" label="23rd Legislative District"/>
<link wikidata="Q7827716" start="12093" end="12108" title="Toshiko Takaezu" label="Toshiko Takaezu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1966994" start="12357" end="12397" title="National Center for Education Statistics" label="National Center for Education Statistics"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="125344" wikidata="Q1089312" url="?curid=125344" title="Frenchtown, New Jersey">
<text>Frenchtown is a borough in Hunterdon County, in the U.S. state of New Jersey. Frenchtown is located along the banks of the Delaware River on the Hunterdon Plateau, northwest of the state capital of Trenton. As of the 2020 United States census, the borough&#x27;s population was 1,370, a decrease of three people (−0.2%) from the 2010 census count of 1,373, which in turn reflected a decline of 115 (−7.7%) from the 1,488 counted in the 2000 census.

==History==

===Naming Frenchtown===
Various names have been applied to this settlement after the many ferry operators residing on both sides of the river. The community had variously been known as Alexandriaville, Sunbeam and Frenchtown over the years. The borough was formed by an Incorporation act of the New Jersey Legislature on April 4, 1867, from portions of Alexandria Township. Additional territory was acquired from Kingwood Township in 1876.

===Bridges===
The first bridge across the Delaware at Frenchtown was a six-span covered wooden bridge built in 1841 on the five piers that still stand today, and the community became a gateway to Pennsylvania. The present day steel truss Uhlerstown-Frenchtown Bridge is a free Delaware River Joint Toll Bridge Commission bridge over the Delaware River connecting Frenchtown to Uhlerstown, Bucks County, Pennsylvania.

===Lenape and early European settlers===
The Lenape Native Americans had populated the area until they were fully supplanted by European settlement around 1750. About 1725, a group of French Huguenot refugees settled in Hunterdon County. Originally from the Picardy region of France, they had fled after the revocation of the Edict of Nantes in 1685 when the King began persecution of non Catholics in France. One notable settler was Luther Calvin, a landowner and ferry operator who also bought a Hotel on Everittstown Road. Calvin also served as a 1st Lieutenant of the Associated Companies in 1756 during the French and Indian War. In 1757, three joint owners of a tract purchased from the West Jersey Land Society began laying out streets and building lots at what was then known as Calvin&#x27;s Ferry. The developing town was to be called &quot;Alexandria&quot; in honor of William Alexander, Lord Stirling, one of the three owners. In 1776, the three sold the settlement to Thomas Lowrey, a Flemington speculator. In 1794, Lowrey sold the tract to Paul Henri Mallet-Prevost, a Swiss fugitive from the French Revolution. He and other early settlers were French speaking, leading some to begin calling the settlement &quot;Frenchtown.&quot;

===The canal, railroad, and industry===
Lambertville grew substantially in the next four decades. A trade in grain and other farm products brought into town developed. Boatmen and river men helped fuel Frenchtown&#x27;s growth through their buying of cargo and food, and hiring of pilots. In the years after Henri Mallet-Prevost&#x27;s death, his sons sold off portions of their property and no longer was the town privately owned.

The arrival of the Belvidere Delaware Railroad in 1853 sparked continued growth in Frenchtown. Steam-powered industry became widely developed, and by the 1860s, water powered mills were being converted into larger factories. Around the same time, the town had three major hotels: The Lower Hotel (Present day Frenchtown Inn), The Middle Hotel (no longer existing), and the Upper Hotel (The National Hotel). In 1889, Britton Brothers Big Brick Store, which sold a variety of goods, opened on Bridge Street. The railroad eventually became a branch of the Pennsylvania Railroad. It no longer operates but its tracks are still evident. The Delaware and Raritan Canal had been constructed adjacent to the Delaware River in the 1800s. It was quickly abandoned upon the arrival of the paralleling railroad. Its extant towpaths are now a popular biking and hiking trail from Trenton through Lambertville to Frenchtown and beyond. It is maintained by the State of New Jersey as the Delaware and Raritan State Park Trail.

In the early 20th century, growth was spurred by the arrival of Frenchtown Porcelain Works, the establishment of the Milford plant of the Warren Paper Company, and the rise of the poultry industry.

===Floods===
Hurricane Diane in 1955 raised the level of the Delaware River dramatically and flooded the streets of Frenchtown as well as other riverbank towns and caused serious damage to buildings and residences. Frenchtown streets have flooded on occasion due to other hurricanes since 1955.

==Geography==
According to the United States Census Bureau, the borough had a total area of 1.23 square miles (3.18 km2), including 1.13 square miles (2.92 km2) of land and 0.10 square miles (0.26 km2) of water (8.05%).

Frenchtown borders the municipalities of Alexandria Township and Kingwood Township in Hunterdon County; and Tinicum Township in Bucks County, across the Delaware River in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.

Frenchtown Solar is a group of three photovoltaic arrays forming one of the largest solar farms in the state covering with 68,500 solar panels and 20.1 megawatt capacity.

==Demographics==
===2010 census===
The 2010 United States census counted 1,373 people, 596 households, and 366 families in the borough. The population density was . There were 656 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup was 96.65% (1,327) White, 0.80% (11) Black or African American, 0.36% (5) Native American, 0.95% (13) Asian, 0.00% (0) Pacific Islander, 0.07% (1) from other races, and 1.17% (16) from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 5.10% (70) of the population.

Of the 596 households, 26.7% had children under the age of 18; 46.0% were married couples living together; 11.1% had a female householder with no husband present and 38.6% were non-families. Of all households, 31.4% were made up of individuals and 8.7% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.27 and the average family size was 2.88.

20.9% of the population were under the age of 18, 6.2% from 18 to 24, 27.3% from 25 to 44, 34.3% from 45 to 64, and 11.3% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 42.6 years. For every 100 females, the population had 95.6 males. For every 100 females ages 18 and older there were 95.3 males.

The Census Bureau&#x27;s 2006–2010 American Community Survey showed that (in 2010 inflation-adjusted dollars) median household income was $62,574 (with a margin of error of +/− $9,339) and the median family income was $76,250 (+/− $12,807). Males had a median income of $62,500 (+/− $7,602) versus $34,886 (+/− $5,656) for females. The per capita income for the borough was $33,966 (+/− $5,364). About 4.9% of families and 8.0% of the population were below the poverty line, including 11.1% of those under age 18 and 4.3% of those age 65 or over.

===2000 census===
As of the 2000 United States census there were 1,488 people, 613 households, and 375 families residing in the borough. The population density was . There were 630 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the borough was 95.97% White, 0.40% African American, 0.20% Native American, 1.21% Asian, 1.34% from other races, and 0.87% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 2.62% of the population.

There were 613 households, out of which 30.7% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 49.9% were married couples living together, 8.5% had a female householder with no husband present, and 38.7% were non-families. 28.9% of all households were made up of individuals, and 7.8% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.38 and the average family size was 2.99.

In the borough the population was spread out, with 22.5% under the age of 18, 6.5% from 18 to 24, 35.2% from 25 to 44, 25.9% from 45 to 64, and 9.8% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 38 years. For every 100 females, there were 94.0 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 95.4 males.

The median income for a household in the borough was $52,109, and the median income for a family was $62,132. Males had a median income of $42,321 versus $30,952 for females. The per capita income for the borough was $27,765. About 2.4% of families and 3.3% of the population were below the poverty line, including 4.0% of those under age 18 and 1.4% of those age 65 or over.

==Government==

===Local government===
Frenchtown is governed under the borough form of New Jersey municipal government, the state&#x27;s most common form, which is used by 218 of the state&#x27;s 564 municipalities. The governing body is comprised of a mayor and a borough council, with all positions elected at-large on a partisan basis as part of the November general election. A mayor is elected directly by the voters to a four-year term of office. The borough council includes six members elected to serve three-year terms on a staggered basis, with two seats coming up for election each year in a three-year cycle. The borough form of government used by Frenchtown is a &quot;weak mayor / strong council&quot; government in which council members act as the legislative body with the mayor presiding at meetings and voting only in the event of a tie. The mayor can veto ordinances subject to an override by a two-thirds majority vote of the council. The mayor makes committee and liaison assignments for council members, and most appointments are made by the mayor with the advice and consent of the council.

, the mayor of Frenchtown is Republican Brad Myhre, whose term of office ends on December 31, 2023. Members of the Borough Council are Council President Michele Liebtag (D, 2023), Stacy Becker (D, 2023), Kandy Ferree (D, 2025), Hannah Opdyke (I, 2025), William O&#x27;Brien (D, 2024) and Elaine Warner (D, 2024).

Liz Johnson had resigned from her seat expiring in December 202. In January 2022, the borough council appointed Caroline Scutt to fill the vacant council seat.

In the November 2015 general election, Republican Brad Myhre ran a successful write-in campaign, defeating incumbent Democrat Warren Cooper by 236–185 to win the seat.

Jack Opdyke was appointed in August 2013 to replace Councilman Robb Arent following his resignation

===Federal, state and county representation===
Frenchtown is located in the 7th Congressional District and is part of New Jersey&#x27;s 15th state legislative district.



===Politics===
As of March 2011, there were a total of 931 registered voters in Frenchtown, of which 289 (31.0%) were registered as Democrats, 270 (29.0%) were registered as Republicans and 370 (39.7%) were registered as Unaffiliated. There were 2 voters registered as either Libertarians or Greens.

In the 2012 presidential election, Democrat Barack Obama received 61.6% of the vote (431 cast), ahead of Republican Mitt Romney with 35.7% (250 votes), and other candidates with 2.7% (19 votes), among the 705 ballots cast by the borough&#x27;s 982 registered voters (5 ballots were spoiled), for a turnout of 71.8%. In the 2008 presidential election, Democrat Barack Obama received 59.6% of the vote (439 cast), ahead of Republican John McCain with 38.3% (282 votes) and other candidates with 1.2% (9 votes), among the 737 ballots cast by the borough&#x27;s 953 registered voters, for a turnout of 77.3%. In the 2004 presidential election, Democrat John Kerry received 57.1% of the vote (392 ballots cast), outpolling Republican George W. Bush with 42.4% (291 votes) and other candidates with 1.4% (13 votes), among the 686 ballots cast by the borough&#x27;s 914 registered voters, for a turnout percentage of 75.1.




In the 2013 gubernatorial election, Republican Chris Christie received 54.9% of the vote (284 cast), ahead of Democrat Barbara Buono with 42.7% (221 votes), and other candidates with 2.3% (12 votes), among the 533 ballots cast by the borough&#x27;s 976 registered voters (16 ballots were spoiled), for a turnout of 54.6%. In the 2009 gubernatorial election, Republican Chris Christie received 48.3% of the vote (247 ballots cast), ahead of Democrat Jon Corzine with 40.9% (209 votes), Independent Chris Daggett with 8.2% (42 votes) and other candidates with 1.4% (7 votes), among the 511 ballots cast by the borough&#x27;s 943 registered voters, yielding a 54.2% turnout.

==Historic district==
The Frenchtown Historic District is a historic district encompassing the community. It was added to the National Register of Historic Places on May 19, 1994, for its significance in architecture, commerce, community planning and development, and transportation from 1795 to 1931. The district includes 401 contributing buildings, one contributing structure, and one contributing site. It includes the Uhlerstown–Frenchtown Bridge, which crosses the Delaware River.

The Frenchtown Inn was built in 1832 and features Greek Revival architecture. The Frenchtown Station for the Belvidere Delaware Railroad was built and is now the Bridge Cafe. The Nathaniel Shurtz house was built with Italianate style. The Oddfellows Building was built in 1879 with Romanesque Revival architecture.

==Education==
The Frenchtown School District serves public school students in pre-kindergarten through eighth grade at Edith Ort Thomas Elementary School. As of the 2022–23 school year, the district, comprised of one school, had an enrollment of 105 students and 14.6 classroom teachers (on an FTE basis), for a student–teacher ratio of 7.2:1. In the 2016–2017 school year, Frenchtown was tied for the 18th-smallest enrollment of any school district in the state, with 129 students.

Public school students in ninth through twelfth grades attend the Delaware Valley Regional High School in Frenchtown, which serves students in western Hunterdon County from Alexandria, Holland and Kingwood townships along with the boroughs of Frenchtown and Milford. As of the 2022–23 school year, the high school had an enrollment of 722 students and 59.9 classroom teachers (on an FTE basis), for a student–teacher ratio of 12.1:1. The nine seats on the high school district&#x27;s nine-member board of education are allocated based on population, with one seat allocated to Frenchtown.

Eighth grade students from all of Hunterdon County are eligible to apply to attend the high school programs offered by the Hunterdon County Vocational School District, a county-wide vocational school district that offers career and technical education at its campuses in Raritan Township and at programs sited at local high schools, with no tuition charged to students for attendance.

==Transportation==

, the borough had a total of of roadways, of which were maintained by the municipality, by Hunterdon County and by the New Jersey Department of Transportation and by the Delaware River Joint Toll Bridge Commission.

The borough is traversed by several roadways. Frenchtown is the northern terminus of Route 29, the western terminus of Route 12 and the southern terminus of Route 513.

The Uhlerstown–Frenchtown Bridge is a toll-free bridge over the Delaware River, owned and operated by the Delaware River Joint Toll Bridge Commission, connecting New Jersey Route 12 in Frenchtown with Pennsylvania Route 32 in Uhlerstown, located in Tinicum Township, Bucks County, Pennsylvania. Reconstructed in 1931, the bridge is a six-span Warren truss that extends .

==Civic events==
Frenchtown holds La Fete Nationale on Bastille Day in July with a different theme each year related to borough&#x27;s &quot;French heritage and flavor&quot;.

==Notable people==

People who were born in, residents of, or otherwise closely associated with Frenchtown include:

* James Agee (1909–1955), author, editor and poet who lived in Frenchtown (on Second Street in what is now the police station) with second wife Alma from 1938 to 1939 and wrote &quot;Let Us Now Praise Famous Men&quot; during that time
* Elizabeth Gilbert (born 1969), author of &quot;Eat, Pray, Love&quot;
* Shea Hembrey (born 1974), conceptual artist
* Lois Hunt (1925–2009), soprano opera singer who toured for decades with baritone Earl Wrightson
* Anne Kursinski (born 1959), top show jumping competitor
* Harvey Spencer Lewis (1883–1939), Rosicrucian author, occultist and mystic
* J. Linus McAtee (1897–1963), thoroughbred horse racing jockey
* Barb Morrison (born 1967), songwriter and record producer
* Billy Pauch (born 1957), race car driver
* Anna Pump (1934–2015), chef, cookbook author, baker, and innkeeper famous for her bakery in The Hamptons, Loaves &amp; Fishes
* Nathanael West (1903–1940), novelist, screenwriter and satirist, author of &quot;Miss Lonelyhearts&quot; and &quot;The Day of the Locust&quot;, boarded at the Frenchtown Inn during the 1930s

==See also==
*Hunterdon Plateau
* National Register of Historic Places listings in Hunterdon County, New Jersey

==References==
==External links==
* Municipal website
* Hunterdon County web page for Frenchtown Borough
* Frenchtown Elementary School
* School Data for the Frenchtown School District, National Center for Education Statistics
* Delaware Valley Regional High School District
* Frenchtown NJ
* Hunterdon Land Trust Alliance
* Frenchtown Business &amp; Professional Association</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1089312" start="0" end="10" title="Frenchtown, New Jersey" label="Frenchtown"/>
<link wikidata="Q2911266" start="16" end="23" title="Borough (New Jersey)" label="borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q502451" start="27" end="43" title="Hunterdon County, New Jersey" label="Hunterdon County"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="52" end="62" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="66" end="76" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q143762" start="123" end="137" title="Delaware River" label="Delaware River"/>
<link wikidata="Q5944705" start="145" end="162" title="Hunterdon Plateau" label="Hunterdon Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q25330" start="198" end="205" title="Trenton, New Jersey" label="Trenton"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="217" end="242" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="329" end="340" title="2010 United States census" label="2010 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q166998" start="436" end="447" title="2000 United States census" label="2000 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2867079" start="758" end="780" title="New Jersey Legislature" label="New Jersey Legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q3017769" start="816" end="835" title="Alexandria Township, New Jersey" label="Alexandria Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q3015394" start="876" end="893" title="Kingwood Township, New Jersey" label="Kingwood Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400" start="1100" end="1112" title="Pennsylvania" label="Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q7877995" start="1142" end="1170" title="Uhlerstown-Frenchtown Bridge" label="Uhlerstown-Frenchtown Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5253341" start="1181" end="1224" title="Delaware River Joint Toll Bridge Commission" label="Delaware River Joint Toll Bridge Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q143762" start="1241" end="1255" title="Delaware River" label="Delaware River"/>
<link wikidata="Q7877994" start="1281" end="1291" title="Uhlerstown, Pennsylvania" label="Uhlerstown"/>
<link wikidata="Q494192" start="1293" end="1305" title="Bucks County, Pennsylvania" label="Bucks County"/>
<link wikidata="Q82048" start="1367" end="1373" title="Lenape" label="Lenape"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="1374" end="1390" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="Native Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q101935" start="1513" end="1521" title="Huguenot" label="Huguenot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249603" start="1580" end="1587" title="Picardy" label="Picardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="1598" end="1604" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q179788" start="1648" end="1663" title="Edict of Nantes" label="Edict of Nantes"/>
<link wikidata="Q154697" start="1934" end="1955" title="French and Indian War" label="French and Indian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4019918" start="2202" end="2234" title="William Alexander, Lord Stirling" label="William Alexander, Lord Stirling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010673" start="2320" end="2330" title="Flemington, New Jersey" label="Flemington"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="2430" end="2447" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q4884896" start="3021" end="3048" title="Belvidere Delaware Railroad" label="Belvidere Delaware Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q3301991" start="4227" end="4242" title="Hurricane Diane" label="Hurricane Diane"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="4541" end="4568" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q3017769" start="4772" end="4791" title="Alexandria Township, New Jersey" label="Alexandria Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q3015394" start="4796" end="4813" title="Kingwood Township, New Jersey" label="Kingwood Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q56691" start="4839" end="4855" title="Tinicum Township, Bucks County, Pennsylvania" label="Tinicum Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q494192" start="4859" end="4871" title="Bucks County, Pennsylvania" label="Bucks County"/>
<link wikidata="Q143762" start="4884" end="4898" title="Delaware River" label="Delaware River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400" start="4906" end="4934" title="Pennsylvania" label="Commonwealth of Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q18787650" start="4937" end="4953" title="Frenchtown Solar" label="Frenchtown Solar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1897785" start="4974" end="4993" title="Photovoltaic system" label="photovoltaic arrays"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003207" start="5021" end="5031" title="solar farm" label="solar farm"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="5148" end="5173" title="2010 United States census" label="2010 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="5367" end="5372" title="White (U.S. census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="5385" end="5410" title="Black (U.S. census)" label="Black or African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="5422" end="5437" title="Native American (U.S. census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="5450" end="5455" title="Asian (U.S. census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="5467" end="5483" title="Pacific Islander (U.S. census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5500" end="5511" title="Race and ethnicity in the United States census#Race" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="5552" end="5570" title="Hispanic (U.S. census)" label="Hispanic or Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q463769" start="6347" end="6372" title="American Community Survey" label="American Community Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q311198" start="6394" end="6412" title="inflation adjustment" label="inflation-adjusted"/>
<link wikidata="Q1940707" start="6422" end="6445" title="median household income" label="median household income"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="6648" end="6665" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="6773" end="6785" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q166998" start="6888" end="6913" title="2000 United States census" label="2000 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="7126" end="7131" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="7139" end="7155" title="African American (U.S. Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="7163" end="7178" title="Native American (U.S. Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="7186" end="7191" title="Asian (U.S. Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="7204" end="7215" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="7251" end="7259" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="7263" end="7269" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="7421" end="7436" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="8235" end="8252" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="8347" end="8359" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q2911266" start="8505" end="8512" title="Borough (New Jersey)" label="borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q3682992" start="8743" end="8751" title="at-large" label="at-large"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308596" start="9116" end="9126" title="weak mayor" label="weak mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q178074" start="9304" end="9308" title="veto" label="veto"/>
<link wikidata="Q178074" start="9334" end="9342" title="veto override" label="override"/>
<link wikidata="Q30185" start="9555" end="9560" title="mayor" label="mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="9578" end="9588" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="9719" end="9720" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="D"/>
<link wikidata="Q327591" start="9792" end="9793" title="Independent politician" label="I"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="10598" end="10607" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="10640" end="10651" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republicans"/>
<link wikidata="Q5354776" start="10687" end="10699" title="Unaffiliated (New Jersey)" label="Unaffiliated"/>
<link wikidata="Q558334" start="10742" end="10754" title="Libertarian Party (United States)" label="Libertarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q849158" start="10758" end="10764" title="Green Party (United States)" label="Greens"/>
<link wikidata="Q17100287" start="10774" end="10800" title="United States presidential election in New Jersey, 2012" label="2012 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="10811" end="10823" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q4496" start="10883" end="10894" title="Mitt Romney" label="Mitt Romney"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738441" start="11049" end="11056" title="Spoilt vote" label="spoiled"/>
<link wikidata="Q16959334" start="11090" end="11116" title="United States presidential election in New Jersey, 2008" label="2008 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q10390" start="11199" end="11210" title="John McCain" label="John McCain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892945" start="11379" end="11405" title="United States presidential election in New Jersey, 2004" label="2004 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q22316" start="11416" end="11426" title="John Kerry" label="John Kerry"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="11496" end="11510" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q15134831" start="11694" end="11721" title="New Jersey gubernatorial election, 2013" label="2013 gubernatorial election"/>
<link wikidata="Q63879" start="11734" end="11748" title="Chris Christie" label="Chris Christie"/>
<link wikidata="Q4858790" start="11806" end="11819" title="Barbara Buono" label="Barbara Buono"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586264" start="12016" end="12043" title="New Jersey gubernatorial election, 2009" label="2009 gubernatorial election"/>
<link wikidata="Q380570" start="12136" end="12147" title="Jon Corzine" label="Jon Corzine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5106343" start="12184" end="12197" title="Chris Daggett" label="Chris Daggett"/>
<link wikidata="Q1620797" start="12420" end="12437" title="historic district (United States)" label="historic district"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719" start="12486" end="12522" title="National Register of Historic Places" label="National Register of Historic Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q76321820" start="12688" end="12710" title="contributing buildings" label="contributing buildings"/>
<link wikidata="Q76321820" start="12716" end="12738" title="contributing structure" label="contributing structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q76321820" start="12748" end="12765" title="contributing site" label="contributing site"/>
<link wikidata="Q7877995" start="12783" end="12811" title="Uhlerstown–Frenchtown Bridge" label="Uhlerstown–Frenchtown Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q143762" start="12831" end="12845" title="Delaware River" label="Delaware River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1513688" start="12898" end="12924" title="Greek Revival architecture" label="Greek Revival architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q4884896" start="12957" end="12984" title="Belvidere Delaware Railroad" label="Belvidere Delaware Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q615196" start="13065" end="13081" title="Italianate architecture" label="Italianate style"/>
<link wikidata="Q744373" start="13130" end="13161" title="Romanesque Revival architecture" label="Romanesque Revival architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q14705503" start="13182" end="13208" title="Frenchtown School District" label="Frenchtown School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q7239239" start="13242" end="13258" title="pre-kindergarten" label="pre-kindergarten"/>
<link wikidata="Q5349142" start="13267" end="13279" title="eighth grade" label="eighth grade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543700" start="13458" end="13461" title="full-time equivalent" label="FTE"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595370" start="13476" end="13497" title="student–teacher ratio" label="student–teacher ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7039258" start="13674" end="13679" title="ninth grade" label="ninth"/>
<link wikidata="Q986388" start="13688" end="13701" title="twelfth grade" label="twelfth grade"/>
<link wikidata="Q5253414" start="13714" end="13750" title="Delaware Valley Regional High School" label="Delaware Valley Regional High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q3017769" start="13821" end="13831" title="Alexandria Township, New Jersey" label="Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q3017015" start="13833" end="13840" title="Holland Township, New Jersey" label="Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3015394" start="13845" end="13853" title="Kingwood Township, New Jersey" label="Kingwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083131" start="13906" end="13913" title="Milford, New Jersey" label="Milford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543700" start="14031" end="14034" title="full-time equivalent" label="FTE"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595370" start="14049" end="14070" title="student–teacher ratio" label="student–teacher ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q5944694" start="14361" end="14404" title="Hunterdon County Vocational School District" label="Hunterdon County Vocational School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q3017068" start="14509" end="14525" title="Raritan Township, New Jersey" label="Raritan Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q867675" start="14763" end="14802" title="New Jersey Department of Transportation" label="New Jersey Department of Transportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5253341" start="14814" end="14857" title="Delaware River Joint Toll Bridge Commission" label="Delaware River Joint Toll Bridge Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q822300" start="14945" end="14953" title="New Jersey Route 29" label="Route 29"/>
<link wikidata="Q821607" start="14979" end="14987" title="New Jersey Route 12" label="Route 12"/>
<link wikidata="Q858781" start="15017" end="15026" title="County Route 513 (New Jersey)" label="Route 513"/>
<link wikidata="Q7877995" start="15033" end="15061" title="Uhlerstown–Frenchtown Bridge" label="Uhlerstown–Frenchtown Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5253341" start="15135" end="15178" title="Delaware River Joint Toll Bridge Commission" label="Delaware River Joint Toll Bridge Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052600" start="15230" end="15251" title="Pennsylvania Route 32" label="Pennsylvania Route 32"/>
<link wikidata="Q7877994" start="15255" end="15265" title="Uhlerstown, Pennsylvania" label="Uhlerstown"/>
<link wikidata="Q56691" start="15278" end="15322" title="Tinicum Township, Bucks County, Pennsylvania" label="Tinicum Township, Bucks County, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q30587800" start="15372" end="15384" title="Warren truss" label="Warren truss"/>
<link wikidata="Q352963" start="15696" end="15706" title="James Agee" label="James Agee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2108471" start="15877" end="15905" title="Let Us Now Praise Famous Men" label="Let Us Now Praise Famous Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q231424" start="15931" end="15948" title="Elizabeth Gilbert" label="Elizabeth Gilbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q2661615" start="15978" end="15993" title="Eat, Pray, Love" label="Eat, Pray, Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q7492127" start="16002" end="16014" title="Shea Hembrey" label="Shea Hembrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3187146" start="16048" end="16057" title="Lois Hunt" label="Lois Hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5326178" start="16129" end="16143" title="Earl Wrightson" label="Earl Wrightson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4768520" start="16146" end="16160" title="Anne Kursinski" label="Anne Kursinski"/>
<link wikidata="Q211773" start="16178" end="16190" title="show jumping" label="show jumping"/>
<link wikidata="Q930320" start="16204" end="16224" title="Harvey Spencer Lewis" label="Harvey Spencer Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q194267" start="16238" end="16249" title="Rosicrucian" label="Rosicrucian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6106361" start="16281" end="16296" title="J. Linus McAtee" label="J. Linus McAtee"/>
<link wikidata="Q4858544" start="16345" end="16358" title="Barb Morrison" label="Barb Morrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q4913148" start="16405" end="16416" title="Billy Pauch" label="Billy Pauch"/>
<link wikidata="Q4767420" start="16448" end="16457" title="Anna Pump" label="Anna Pump"/>
<link wikidata="Q3499072" start="16471" end="16475" title="chef" label="chef"/>
<link wikidata="Q605076" start="16477" end="16485" title="cookbook" label="cookbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q160131" start="16494" end="16499" title="baker" label="baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1574020" start="16540" end="16552" title="The Hamptons" label="The Hamptons"/>
<link wikidata="Q370521" start="16576" end="16590" title="Nathanael West" label="Nathanael West"/>
<link wikidata="Q6876987" start="16657" end="16674" title="Miss Lonelyhearts" label="Miss Lonelyhearts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150908" start="16691" end="16712" title="The Day of the Locust" label="The Day of the Locust"/>
<link wikidata="Q5944705" start="16782" end="16799" title="Hunterdon Plateau" label="Hunterdon Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q6976354" start="16802" end="16879" title="National Register of Historic Places listings in Hunterdon County, New Jersey" label="National Register of Historic Places listings in Hunterdon County, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1966994" start="17067" end="17107" title="National Center for Education Statistics" label="National Center for Education Statistics"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="125346" wikidata="Q1087569" url="?curid=125346" title="Glen Gardner, New Jersey">
<text>Glen Gardner is a borough in Hunterdon County, in the U.S. state of New Jersey. As of the 2020 United States census, the borough&#x27;s population was 1,682, a decrease of 22 (−1.3%) from the 2010 census count of 1,704, which in turn reflected a decline of 198 (−10.4%) from the 1,902 counted in the 2000 census.

Glen Gardner is located at the extreme western border of Lebanon Township and was incorporated as a borough by an act of the New Jersey Legislature on March 26, 1919, from portions of both Lebanon Township and Bethlehem Township based on the results of a referendum held that same day. Portions of the borough were ceded to Hampton borough in 1931.

==History==
Originally settled by the Lenape Native Americans, European settlement began around the time of the American Revolutionary War.

The area that is now Glen Gardner had been known as Eveland&#x27;s Tavern for tavernkeeper John Eveland. Later, the area was variously called Spruce Run Mills and Sodom. The name of both the community and post office were officially changed to Glen Gardner in 1871 to mark the glen of the Spruce Run and in honor of the Gardner brothers who owned a chair and frame factory in the area.

As part of the 1931 settlement reached between the two municipalities to resolve a border dispute dating back to the borough of Glen Gardner&#x27;s formation in 1919, Hampton paid Glen Gardner $4,000 (equivalent to $ in ) for of land that officially became part of the borough of Hampton.

==Geography==
According to the United States Census Bureau, the borough had a total area of 1.55 square miles (4.01 km2), all of which was land.

Bells Crossing and Clarksville are unincorporated communities located within Glen Gardner.

The borough borders the Hunterdon County municipalities of Bethlehem Township, Hampton Borough and Lebanon Township.

==Demographics==
===2010 census===
The 2010 United States census counted 1,704 people, 768 households, and 434 families in the borough. The population density was 1,117.8 per square mile (431.6/km2). There were 825 housing units at an average density of 541.2 per square mile (209.0/km2). The racial makeup was 94.54% (1,611) White, 1.76% (30) Black or African American, 0.06% (1) Native American, 1.82% (31) Asian, 0.00% (0) Pacific Islander, 0.35% (6) from other races, and 1.47% (25) from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 5.28% (90) of the population.

Of the 768 households, 28.4% had children under the age of 18; 45.1% were married couples living together; 8.5% had a female householder with no husband present and 43.5% were non-families. Of all households, 35.3% were made up of individuals and 7.6% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.22 and the average family size was 2.97.

21.3% of the population were under the age of 18, 6.6% from 18 to 24, 28.5% from 25 to 44, 34.8% from 45 to 64, and 8.8% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 41.6 years. For every 100 females, the population had 97.7 males. For every 100 females ages 18 and older there were 91.6 males.

The Census Bureau&#x27;s 2006–2010 American Community Survey showed that (in 2010 inflation-adjusted dollars) median household income was $73,750 (with a margin of error of +/− $15,026) and the median family income was $98,693 (+/− $9,105). Males had a median income of $62,434 (+/− $12,072) versus $49,417 (+/− $13,970) for females. The per capita income for the borough was $37,184 (+/− $4,006). About 1.2% of families and 2.3% of the population were below the poverty line, including 1.4% of those under age 18 and 7.6% of those age 65 or over.

===2000 census===
At the 2000 United States census, there were 1,902 people, 805 households and 474 families residing in the borough. The population density was . There were 829 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the borough was 95.69% White, 0.89% African American, 0.11% Native American, 1.47% Asian, 0.11% Pacific Islander, 0.58% from other races, and 1.16% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 3.42% of the population.

There were 805 households, of which 32.9% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 46.6% were married couples living together, 9.7% had a female householder with no husband present, and 41.1% were non-families. 34.2% of all households were made up of individuals, and 8.6% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.33 and the average family size was 3.07.

Age distribution was 25.3% under the age of 18, 6.0% from 18 to 24, 41.2% from 25 to 44, 19.8% from 45 to 64, and 7.6% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 35 years. For every 100 females, there were 95.5 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 89.7 males.

The median household income was $59,917, and the median family income was $75,369. Males had a median income of $50,776 versus $40,179 for females. The per capita income for the borough was $28,647. About 4.2% of families and 4.5% of the population were below the poverty line, including 4.8% of those under age 18 and 1.4% of those age 65 or over.

==Government==

===Local government===

Glen Gardner is governed under the borough form of New Jersey municipal government, one of 218 municipalities (of the 564) statewide that use this form, which is the state&#x27;s most common form of government. The governing body is comprised of the mayor and the borough council, with all positions elected at-large on a partisan basis as part of the November general election. The mayor is elected directly by the voters to a four-year term of office. The borough council has six members elected to serve three-year terms on a staggered basis, with two seats coming up for election each year in a three-year cycle. The borough form of government used by Glen Gardner is a &quot;weak mayor / strong council&quot; government in which council members act as the legislative body with the mayor presiding at meetings and voting only in the event of a tie. The mayor can veto ordinances subject to an override by a two-thirds majority vote of the council. The mayor makes committee and liaison assignments for council members, and most appointments are made by the mayor with the advice and consent of the council. This seven-member governing body enacts local ordinances, levies municipal taxes and conducts the affairs of the borough. The mayor and borough council conducts all of its business during monthly meetings open to the public.

, the mayor of Glen Gardner is Republican Mattias E. Schroeter, whose term of office ends December 31, 2023. Members of the Borough Council are Council President Michael Gronau (R, 2023), James Ayotte (R, 2025), Jason Hollenstein (R, 2025), Richard J. Mitterando (R, 2024), Don Robertella (R, 2023) and Sue Welch (R, 2024).

In April 2021, the borough council appointed Jason Hollenstein to fill the council seat expiring in December 2022 that had been held by Lisa Fielding until she resigned from office the previous month. Hollenstein served on an interim basis until the November 2021 general election, when he was elected to serve the balance of the term of office.

James Ayotte was selected in May 2020 from a list of three names submitted by the Republican municipal committee to fill the seat expiring in December 2022 that had been held by Sandra Sutton-Lavis until she resigned from her seat in April. After serving on an interim basis, Ayotte was elected to serve the remainder of the term at the November 2020 general election.

In 2018, the borough had an average property tax bill of $5,894, the lowest in the county, compared to an average bill of $9,738 in Hunterdon County and $8,767 statewide.

===Federal, state and county representation===
Glen Gardner is located in the 7th Congressional District and is part of New Jersey&#x27;s 23rd state legislative district.



===Politics===
As of March 2011, there were a total of 1,097 registered voters in Glen Gardner, of which 249 (22.7%) were registered as Democrats, 347 (31.6%) were registered as Republicans and 500 (45.6%) were registered as Unaffiliated. There was 1 voter registered to other parties.

In the 2012 presidential election, Republican Mitt Romney received 54.7% of the vote (438 cast), ahead of Democrat Barack Obama with 43.3% (347 votes), and other candidates with 2.0% (16 votes), among the 810 ballots cast by the borough&#x27;s 1,144 registered voters (9 ballots were spoiled), for a turnout of 70.8%. In the 2008 presidential election, Republican John McCain received 54.0% of the vote (445 cast), ahead of Democrat Barack Obama with 44.1% (363 votes) and other candidates with 1.5% (12 votes), among the 824 ballots cast by the borough&#x27;s 1,102 registered voters, for a turnout of 74.8%. In the 2004 presidential election, Republican George W. Bush received 57.9% of the vote (453 ballots cast), outpolling Democrat John Kerry with 41.0% (321 votes) and other candidates with 0.8% (8 votes), among the 783 ballots cast by the borough&#x27;s 1,027 registered voters, for a turnout percentage of 76.2.




In the 2013 gubernatorial election, Republican Chris Christie received 74.7% of the vote (386 cast), ahead of Democrat Barbara Buono with 23.4% (121 votes), and other candidates with 1.9% (10 votes), among the 525 ballots cast by the borough&#x27;s 1,118 registered voters (8 ballots were spoiled), for a turnout of 47.0%. In the 2009 gubernatorial election, Republican Chris Christie received 69.6% of the vote (410 ballots cast), ahead of Democrat Jon Corzine with 19.4% (114 votes), Independent Chris Daggett with 8.8% (52 votes) and other candidates with 1.0% (6 votes), among the 589 ballots cast by the borough&#x27;s 1,088 registered voters, yielding a 54.1% turnout.

==Education==
Clinton-Glen Gardner School District is school district based in the Town of Clinton, that serves students from Clinton Town and Glen Gardner Borough in pre-kindergarten through eighth grade at Clinton Public School. Before Glen Gardner, a non-operating district, was consolidated into the district, students from the borough had attended the district&#x27;s school as part of a sending/receiving relationship. Other students attend the school on a tuition basis. Formerly known as the Town of Clinton School District, the district&#x27;s board of education voted in November 2009 to revise the name to Clinton-Glen Gardner School District to reflect the merger. As of the 2021–22 school year, the district, comprised of one school, had an enrollment of 427 students and 38.3 classroom teachers (on an FTE basis), for a student–teacher ratio of 11.1:1.

Public school students in ninth through twelfth grades have two choices: North Hunterdon High School or Voorhees High School, both of the North Hunterdon-Voorhees Regional High School District. Glen Gardner residents began to select which high school they wished to attend in 2014. Pre-2014, Glen Gardner students were zoned to Voorhees High.

Eighth grade students from all of Hunterdon County are eligible to apply to attend the high school programs offered by the Hunterdon County Vocational School District, a county-wide vocational school district that offers career and technical education at its campuses in Raritan Township and at programs sited at local high schools, with no tuition charged to students for attendance.

==Transportation==

, the borough had a total of of roadways, of which were maintained by the municipality, by Hunterdon County and by the New Jersey Department of Transportation.

New Jersey Route 31 is the main highway through Glen Gardner.

==Notable people==

People who were born in, residents of, or otherwise closely associated with Glen Gardner include:

* Whittaker Chambers (1901–1961), writer and editor who testified against Alger Hiss about their work for Soviet intelligence
* Wyllis Cooper (1899–1955), radio writer
* David Dellinger (1915–2004), pacifist, author, and one of the Chicago Seven
* Lee Getz (born 1964), former American football guard who played for the Kansas City Chiefs in the National Football League
* Wesley Lance (1908–2007), member of both the New Jersey General Assembly and the New Jersey Senate
* Anne Marie Letko (born 1969), long-distance runner who competed in the Summer Olympics in 1996 and 2000

==References==
==External links==

* Glen Gardner borough website
* Hunterdon County webpage for Glen Gardner Borough
* Clinton Public School
* School Data for the Clinton Public School, National Center for Education Statistics
* North Hunterdon-Voorhees Regional High School District
* Hunterdon Land Trust Alliance</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1087569" start="0" end="12" title="Glen Gardner, New Jersey" label="Glen Gardner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2911266" start="18" end="25" title="Borough (New Jersey)" label="borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q502451" start="29" end="45" title="Hunterdon County, New Jersey" label="Hunterdon County"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="54" end="64" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="68" end="78" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="90" end="115" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="192" end="203" title="2010 United States census" label="2010 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q166998" start="300" end="311" title="2000 United States census" label="2000 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2867079" start="439" end="461" title="New Jersey Legislature" label="New Jersey Legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q3015934" start="503" end="519" title="Lebanon Township, New Jersey" label="Lebanon Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q542454" start="524" end="542" title="Bethlehem Township, New Jersey" label="Bethlehem Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086532" start="638" end="653" title="Hampton, New Jersey" label="Hampton borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q82048" start="702" end="708" title="Lenape" label="Lenape"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="709" end="725" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="Native Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="776" end="802" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1976531" start="1082" end="1086" title="glen" label="glen"/>
<link wikidata="Q35354388" start="1094" end="1104" title="Spruce Run (Raritan River tributary)" label="Spruce Run"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086532" start="1359" end="1366" title="Hampton, New Jersey" label="Hampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="1513" end="1540" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087569" start="1647" end="1658" title="Clarksville, Hunterdon County, New Jersey" label="Clarksville"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1663" end="1689" title="Local government in New Jersey#Unincorporated communities" label="unincorporated communities"/>
<link wikidata="Q542454" start="1779" end="1797" title="Bethlehem Township, New Jersey" label="Bethlehem Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086532" start="1799" end="1814" title="Hampton, New Jersey" label="Hampton Borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q3015934" start="1819" end="1835" title="Lebanon Township, New Jersey" label="Lebanon Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="1877" end="1902" title="2010 United States census" label="2010 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="1978" end="1996" title="population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2164" end="2169" title="White (U.S. census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2182" end="2207" title="Black (U.S. census)" label="Black or African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2219" end="2234" title="Native American (U.S. census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2247" end="2252" title="Asian (U.S. census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2264" end="2280" title="Pacific Islander (U.S. census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2297" end="2308" title="Race and ethnicity in the United States census#Race" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2349" end="2367" title="Hispanic (U.S. census)" label="Hispanic or Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q463769" start="3142" end="3167" title="American Community Survey" label="American Community Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q311198" start="3189" end="3207" title="inflation adjustment" label="inflation-adjusted"/>
<link wikidata="Q1940707" start="3217" end="3240" title="median household income" label="median household income"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="3445" end="3462" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="3570" end="3582" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q166998" start="3681" end="3706" title="2000 United States census" label="2000 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3919" end="3924" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3932" end="3948" title="African American (U.S. Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3956" end="3971" title="Native American (U.S. Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3979" end="3984" title="Asian (U.S. Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3992" end="4008" title="Pacific Islander (U.S. Census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4021" end="4032" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4068" end="4076" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4080" end="4086" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="4234" end="4249" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q1940707" start="4843" end="4866" title="median household income" label="median household income"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="4991" end="5008" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="5103" end="5115" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q2911266" start="5264" end="5271" title="Borough (New Jersey)" label="borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q3682992" start="5537" end="5545" title="at-large" label="at-large"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308596" start="5909" end="5919" title="weak mayor" label="weak mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q178074" start="6097" end="6101" title="veto" label="veto"/>
<link wikidata="Q178074" start="6127" end="6135" title="veto override" label="override"/>
<link wikidata="Q30185" start="6573" end="6578" title="mayor" label="mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="6598" end="6608" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="8091" end="8100" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="8133" end="8144" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republicans"/>
<link wikidata="Q5354776" start="8180" end="8192" title="Unaffiliated (New Jersey)" label="Unaffiliated"/>
<link wikidata="Q17100287" start="8249" end="8275" title="United States presidential election in New Jersey, 2012" label="2012 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q4496" start="8288" end="8299" title="Mitt Romney" label="Mitt Romney"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="8357" end="8369" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738441" start="8526" end="8533" title="Spoilt vote" label="spoiled"/>
<link wikidata="Q16959334" start="8567" end="8593" title="United States presidential election in New Jersey, 2008" label="2008 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q10390" start="8606" end="8617" title="John McCain" label="John McCain"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="8675" end="8687" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892945" start="8859" end="8885" title="United States presidential election in New Jersey, 2004" label="2004 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="8898" end="8912" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q22316" start="8980" end="8990" title="John Kerry" label="John Kerry"/>
<link wikidata="Q15134831" start="9175" end="9202" title="New Jersey gubernatorial election, 2013" label="2013 gubernatorial election"/>
<link wikidata="Q63879" start="9215" end="9229" title="Chris Christie" label="Chris Christie"/>
<link wikidata="Q4858790" start="9287" end="9300" title="Barbara Buono" label="Barbara Buono"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586264" start="9498" end="9525" title="New Jersey gubernatorial election, 2009" label="2009 gubernatorial election"/>
<link wikidata="Q380570" start="9618" end="9629" title="Jon Corzine" label="Jon Corzine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5106343" start="9666" end="9679" title="Chris Daggett" label="Chris Daggett"/>
<link wikidata="Q5134206" start="9858" end="9894" title="Clinton-Glen Gardner School District" label="Clinton-Glen Gardner School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087573" start="9970" end="9982" title="Clinton, New Jersey" label="Clinton Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q7239239" start="10011" end="10027" title="pre-kindergarten" label="pre-kindergarten"/>
<link wikidata="Q5349142" start="10036" end="10048" title="eighth grade" label="eighth grade"/>
<link wikidata="Q7450229" start="10237" end="10267" title="sending/receiving relationship" label="sending/receiving relationship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543700" start="10660" end="10663" title="full-time equivalent" label="FTE"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595370" start="10678" end="10699" title="student–teacher ratio" label="student–teacher ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7039258" start="10738" end="10743" title="ninth grade" label="ninth"/>
<link wikidata="Q986388" start="10752" end="10765" title="twelfth grade" label="twelfth grade"/>
<link wikidata="Q7055674" start="10785" end="10812" title="North Hunterdon High School" label="North Hunterdon High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q14705907" start="10816" end="10836" title="Voorhees High School" label="Voorhees High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q14705816" start="10850" end="10904" title="North Hunterdon-Voorhees Regional High School District" label="North Hunterdon-Voorhees Regional High School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q5944694" start="11179" end="11222" title="Hunterdon County Vocational School District" label="Hunterdon County Vocational School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q3017068" start="11327" end="11343" title="Raritan Township, New Jersey" label="Raritan Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q867675" start="11581" end="11620" title="New Jersey Department of Transportation" label="New Jersey Department of Transportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q822339" start="11623" end="11642" title="New Jersey Route 31" label="New Jersey Route 31"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204764" start="11807" end="11825" title="Whittaker Chambers" label="Whittaker Chambers"/>
<link wikidata="Q549966" start="11879" end="11889" title="Alger Hiss" label="Alger Hiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q8039957" start="11933" end="11946" title="Wyllis Cooper" label="Wyllis Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q3017756" start="11975" end="11990" title="David Dellinger" label="David Dellinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071992" start="12037" end="12050" title="Chicago Seven" label="Chicago Seven"/>
<link wikidata="Q108052761" start="12053" end="12061" title="Lee Getz" label="Lee Getz"/>
<link wikidata="Q41323" start="12082" end="12099" title="American football" label="American football"/>
<link wikidata="Q25113" start="12100" end="12105" title="Guard (gridiron football)" label="guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q223522" start="12125" end="12143" title="Kansas City Chiefs" label="Kansas City Chiefs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="12151" end="12175" title="National Football League" label="National Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q7983953" start="12178" end="12190" title="Wesley Lance" label="Wesley Lance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455914" start="12223" end="12250" title="New Jersey General Assembly" label="New Jersey General Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1480298" start="12259" end="12276" title="New Jersey Senate" label="New Jersey Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q4768604" start="12279" end="12295" title="Anne Marie Letko" label="Anne Marie Letko"/>
<link wikidata="Q1966994" start="12571" end="12611" title="National Center for Education Statistics" label="National Center for Education Statistics"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="125349" wikidata="Q1086532" url="?curid=125349" title="Hampton, New Jersey">
<text>Hampton is a borough in Hunterdon County, in the U.S. state of New Jersey. As of the 2020 United States census, the borough&#x27;s population was 1,438, an increase of 37 (+2.6%) from the 2010 census count of 1,401, which in turn reflected a decline of 145 (−9.4%) from the 1,546 counted in the 2000 census.

==History==
What is now Hampton was originally incorporated by an act of the New Jersey Legislature as Junction Borough on February 20, 1895, from portions of both Lebanon Township and Bethlehem Township, based on the results of a referendum held on the previous day. By a resolution of the borough council, the name was changed to Hampton as of February 11, 1909. In 1931, additional territory was annexed from both Glen Gardner and Bethlehem Township. As part of the 1931 settlement reached between the two municipalities to resolve a border dispute dating back to the borough of Glen Gardner&#x27;s formation in 1919, Hampton paid Glen Gardner $4,000 (equivalent to $ in ) for of land that became part of the borough.

Located on the banks of the Musconetcong River, Hampton was first settled in 1800. In 1880, the town consisted of a store, hotel, cabinet manufacturer, blacksmith, wheelwright shop, grist mill, school house and about 25 dwellings. Hampton was once known as &quot;Junction&quot; because the Central Railroad of New Jersey and the Delaware, Lackawanna and Western Railroad crossed through here.

The cremated remains of occultist Aleister Crowley were buried under a tree by O.T.O. successor Karl Germer at his home in Hampton.

==Geography==
According to the United States Census Bureau, the borough had a total area of 1.52 square miles (3.93 km2), including 1.51 square miles (3.90 km2) of land and 0.01 square miles (0.03 km2) of water (0.79%).

Hampton Junction is an unincorporated community within Hampton.

The borough borders the municipalities of Bethlehem Township, Glen Gardner Borough and Lebanon Township in Hunterdon County; and Washington Township in Warren County.

==Demographics==
===2010 census===
The 2010 United States census counted 1,401 people, 570 households, and 368 families in the borough. The population density was 915.1 per square mile (353.3/km2). There were 612 housing units at an average density of 399.7 per square mile (154.3/km2). The racial makeup was 92.29% (1,293) White, 2.50% (35) Black or African American, 0.71% (10) Native American, 1.86% (26) Asian, 0.07% (1) Pacific Islander, 1.00% (14) from other races, and 1.57% (22) from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 5.35% (75) of the population.

Of the 570 households, 29.3% had children under the age of 18; 50.4% were married couples living together; 9.5% had a female householder with no husband present and 35.4% were non-families. Of all households, 30.2% were made up of individuals and 14.4% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.46 and the average family size was 3.11.

21.6% of the population were under the age of 18, 8.1% from 18 to 24, 25.8% from 25 to 44, 31.1% from 45 to 64, and 13.4% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 41.6 years. For every 100 females, the population had 101.0 males. For every 100 females ages 18 and older there were 97.0 males.

The Census Bureau&#x27;s 2006–2010 American Community Survey showed that (in 2010 inflation-adjusted dollars) median household income was $63,681 (with a margin of error of +/− $9,751) and the median family income was $82,396 (+/− $19,162). Males had a median income of $54,500 (+/− $9,914) versus $33,594 (+/− $8,886) for females. The per capita income for the borough was $30,468 (+/− $3,353). About 10.2% of families and 10.0% of the population were below the poverty line, including 17.3% of those under age 18 and 10.1% of those age 65 or over.

===2000 census===
As of the 2000 United States census there were 1,546 people, 559 households, and 377 families residing in the borough. The population density was . There were 574 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the borough was 91.01% White, 4.98% African American, 0.39% Native American, 0.97% Asian, 0.78% from other races, and 1.88% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 2.85% of the population.

There were 559 households, out of which 36.5% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 53.3% were married couples living together, 10.7% had a female householder with no husband present, and 32.4% were non-families. 27.7% of all households were made up of individuals, and 13.1% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.58 and the average family size was 3.20.

In the borough the population was spread out, with 25.7% under the age of 18, 10.9% from 18 to 24, 30.3% from 25 to 44, 22.1% from 45 to 64, and 11.0% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 35 years. For every 100 females there were 106.7 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 108.0 males.

The median income for a household in the borough was $51,111, and the median income for a family was $64,583. Males had a median income of $45,096 versus $32,000 for females. The per capita income for the borough was $22,440. About 7.1% of families and 8.3% of the population were below the poverty line, including 11.1% of those under age 18 and 3.5% of those age 65 or over.

==Government==

===Local government===
Hampton is governed under the borough form of New Jersey municipal government, which is used in 218 municipalities (of the 564) statewide, making it the most common form of government in New Jersey. The governing body is comprised of the mayor and the borough council, with all positions elected at-large on a partisan basis as part of the November general election. A mayor is elected directly by the voters to a four-year term of office. The borough council includes six members elected to serve three-year terms on a staggered basis, with two seats coming up for election each year in a three-year cycle. The borough form of government used by Hampton is a &quot;weak mayor / strong council&quot; government in which council members act as the legislative body with the mayor presiding at meetings and voting only in the event of a tie. The mayor can veto ordinances subject to an override by a two-thirds majority vote of the council. The mayor makes committee and liaison assignments for council members, and most appointments are made by the mayor with the advice and consent of the council.

, the mayor of Hampton Borough is Republican Todd Shaner, whose term of office ends December 31, 2023. Members of the Hampton Borough Council are Council President Robert T. Wotanowski (R, 2023), Robert M. Celentano (R, 2023), John R. Drummond (R, 2025), Douglas E. Rega (R, 2024), Carroll L. Swenson (R, 2025) and Jeffrey A. Tampier (R, 2024).

In May 2013, the borough council selected James Cregar from a list of three candidates recommended by the Republican municipal committee to fill the vacant seat of Mayor Peter Winter following his resignation in May, at which time Cregar had become acting mayor.

===Federal, state and county representation===
Hampton is located in the 7th Congressional District and is part of New Jersey&#x27;s 23rd state legislative district.



===Politics===
As of March 2011, there were a total of 884 registered voters in Hampton, of which 182 (20.6%) were registered as Democrats, 270 (30.5%) were registered as Republicans and 432 (48.9%) were registered as Unaffiliated. There were no voters registered to other parties.

In the 2012 presidential election, Republican Mitt Romney received 54.1% of the vote (326 cast), ahead of Democrat Barack Obama with 43.4% (262 votes), and other candidates with 2.5% (15 votes), among the 612 ballots cast by the borough&#x27;s 915 registered voters (9 ballots were spoiled), for a turnout of 66.9%. In the 2008 presidential election, Republican John McCain received 53.4% of the vote (355 cast), ahead of Democrat Barack Obama with 43.9% (292 votes) and other candidates with 2.1% (14 votes), among the 665 ballots cast by the borough&#x27;s 894 registered voters, for a turnout of 74.4%. In the 2004 presidential election, Republican George W. Bush received 58.6% of the vote (379 ballots cast), outpolling Democrat John Kerry with 39.6% (256 votes) and other candidates with 0.8% (7 votes), among the 647 ballots cast by the borough&#x27;s 861 registered voters, for a turnout percentage of 75.1.




In the 2013 gubernatorial election, Republican Chris Christie received 72.0% of the vote (272 cast), ahead of Democrat Barbara Buono with 25.1% (95 votes), and other candidates with 2.9% (11 votes), among the 388 ballots cast by the borough&#x27;s 918 registered voters (10 ballots were spoiled), for a turnout of 42.3%. In the 2009 gubernatorial election, Republican Chris Christie received 66.8% of the vote (310 ballots cast), ahead of Democrat Jon Corzine with 23.9% (111 votes), Independent Chris Daggett with 8.4% (39 votes) and other candidates with 0.4% (2 votes), among the 464 ballots cast by the borough&#x27;s 879 registered voters, yielding a 52.8% turnout.

==Public services==

===Emergency services===
;Fire Department

The Hampton Fire Company is an all-volunteer fire department that was originally established in 1899 as the Junction Fire Company after the borough completed a water system with fire hydrants. In 1909, the name changed to the Musconetcong Fire Company and then later to the Hampton Fire Company. The fire company built the current Borough Hall/Fire House for the borough in 1951. The borough occupied the east side of the building and the fire company used the west side. In 1981, the fire company expanded the building by adding a second floor for borough use and the Fire Company took over the entire lower floor.

The fire company currently has as active apparatuses a 1959 International Harvester fire engine, a 2000 Pierce Fire Engine, 2009 Pierce Fire Engine, Engine 13-1 is a 2000 Pierce Dash pumper with an eight-man cab, pump and a tank, a 2013 Ford Expedition Command Vehicle, and a 1978 GMC Rescue Truck. There are more than 40 active members on the rolls which includes an active Junior Firefighter program for young people age 14 and over.

;Emergency squad

In 1955, the Hampton Fire Company selected one of its members, Gilbert Riddle, to organize an emergency squad. With the backing of the Fire Company, the present squad became operational in 1956. The Fire Company purchased the first ambulance, which was housed in the firehouse until the squad&#x27;s permanent facilities were completed. On August 6, 1966 the dedication of the permanent home of the Emergency Squad took place. The Hampton Emergency Squad incorporated itself in 1976, becoming independent of the Fire Company, however its name did not change. In January 1978, the squad established an auxiliary membership. A new GMC rescue truck was purchased in 1978, equipped with four-wheel drive and quartz spotlights for better lighting during accidents and fires. The rescue truck is still in service with the fire company today. The old 1968 Cadillac ambulance was replaced in 1982 by a Braun ambulance, and was later used as a service vehicle. A Ford Horton ambulance was purchased in 1987, and in 1992 another Ford Horton ambulance was added. An additional bay was added to the building in 1979 to provide storage of emergency vehicles and equipment. The Hampton Emergency Squad dedicated their building to the memory of Charles Tampier and William Deemer in 1982. Construction of the second story addition began in September 1985. And then January 1, 2022 the Hampton Emergency Squad merged with South Branch Emergency Services.

==Education==
The Hampton School District serves students in pre-kindergarten through fifth grade at Hampton Public School. As of the 2022–23 school year, the district, comprised of one school, had an enrollment of 112 students and 14.8 classroom teachers (on an FTE basis), for a student–teacher ratio of 7.6:1. In the 2016–17 school year, Hampton was the 15th-smallest enrollment of any school district in the state, with 128 students.

Starting in the 2018–19 school year, middle school students in grades 6 through 8 are sent to the Lebanon Township Schools on a tuition basis as part of a sending/receiving relationship. As of the 2022–23 school year, Woodglen School had an enrollment of 292 students and 32.4 classroom teachers (on an FTE basis), for a student–teacher ratio of 9.0:1.

Students in public school for ninth through twelfth grades attend Voorhees High School, which also serves the communities of Califon, Glen Gardner (the home of the school), High Bridge, Lebanon Township and Tewksbury Township. As of the 2022–23 school year, the high school had an enrollment of 672 students and 72.3 classroom teachers (on an FTE basis), for a student–teacher ratio of 9.3:1. The school is part of the North Hunterdon-Voorhees Regional High School District, which also serves students from Bethlehem Township, Clinton Town, Clinton Township, Franklin Township, Lebanon Borough and Union Township at North Hunterdon High School in Clinton Township.

Eighth grade students from all of Hunterdon County are eligible to apply to attend the high school programs offered by the Hunterdon County Vocational School District, a county-wide vocational school district that offers career and technical education at its campuses in Raritan Township and at programs sited at local high schools, with no tuition charged to students for attendance.

==Transportation==

, the borough had a total of of roadways, of which were maintained by the municipality, by Hunterdon County and by the New Jersey Department of Transportation.

New Jersey Route 31 is the main highway through Hampton.

==Notable people==

People who were born in, residents of, or otherwise closely associated with Hampton include:

* Daryl Cobb (born 1961), children&#x27;s book author
* Stephen Dilts, former commissioner of the New Jersey Department of Transportation who served as mayor of Hampton
* Frank L. Howley (1903–1993), United States Army Brigadier General
* Stephen Kovacs (1972–2022), saber fencer and fencing coach, charged with sexual assault, died in prison
* Sidney Rivera (born 1993), professional soccer player
* Matt Walton (born 1973), stage, screen and television actor who appeared on &quot;Onion SportsDome&quot;
* Glenway Wescott (1901–1987), novelist
* Bernie Worrell (1944–2016), keyboardist for Parliament-Funkadelic

==References==
==External links==

* Hampton Borough website
* Hunterdon County webpage for Hampton Borough
* Hampton Public School
* School Data for the Hampton Public School, National Center for Education Statistics</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1086532" start="0" end="7" title="Hampton, New Jersey" label="Hampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2911266" start="13" end="20" title="Borough (New Jersey)" label="borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q502451" start="24" end="40" title="Hunterdon County, New Jersey" label="Hunterdon County"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="49" end="59" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="63" end="73" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="85" end="110" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="188" end="199" title="2010 United States census" label="2010 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q166998" start="295" end="306" title="2000 United States census" label="2000 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2867079" start="386" end="408" title="New Jersey Legislature" label="New Jersey Legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q3015934" start="473" end="489" title="Lebanon Township, New Jersey" label="Lebanon Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q542454" start="494" end="512" title="Bethlehem Township, New Jersey" label="Bethlehem Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087569" start="726" end="738" title="Glen Gardner, New Jersey" label="Glen Gardner"/>
<link wikidata="Q6940356" start="1059" end="1077" title="Musconetcong River" label="Musconetcong River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053974" start="1321" end="1351" title="Central Railroad of New Jersey" label="Central Railroad of New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183933" start="1360" end="1401" title="Delaware, Lackawanna and Western Railroad" label="Delaware, Lackawanna and Western Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1449" end="1458" title="Occult#Occultism" label="occultist"/>
<link wikidata="Q172684" start="1459" end="1475" title="Aleister Crowley" label="Aleister Crowley"/>
<link wikidata="Q33237" start="1504" end="1510" title="Ordo Templi Orientis" label="O.T.O."/>
<link wikidata="Q78405" start="1521" end="1532" title="Karl Germer" label="Karl Germer"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="1589" end="1616" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q542454" start="1886" end="1904" title="Bethlehem Township, New Jersey" label="Bethlehem Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087569" start="1906" end="1926" title="Glen Gardner, New Jersey" label="Glen Gardner Borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q3015934" start="1931" end="1947" title="Lebanon Township, New Jersey" label="Lebanon Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q3017778" start="1973" end="1992" title="Washington Township, Warren County, New Jersey" label="Washington Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q502468" start="1996" end="2009" title="Warren County, New Jersey" label="Warren County"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="2051" end="2076" title="2010 United States census" label="2010 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="2152" end="2170" title="population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2336" end="2341" title="White (U.S. census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2354" end="2379" title="Black (U.S. census)" label="Black or African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2392" end="2407" title="Native American (U.S. census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2420" end="2425" title="Asian (U.S. census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2437" end="2453" title="Pacific Islander (U.S. census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2471" end="2482" title="Race and ethnicity in the United States census#Race" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2523" end="2541" title="Hispanic (U.S. census)" label="Hispanic or Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q463769" start="3319" end="3344" title="American Community Survey" label="American Community Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q311198" start="3366" end="3384" title="inflation adjustment" label="inflation-adjusted"/>
<link wikidata="Q1940707" start="3394" end="3417" title="median household income" label="median household income"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="3620" end="3637" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="3747" end="3759" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q166998" start="3863" end="3888" title="2000 United States census" label="2000 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4101" end="4106" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4114" end="4130" title="African American (U.S. Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4138" end="4153" title="Native American (U.S. Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4161" end="4166" title="Asian (U.S. Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4179" end="4190" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4226" end="4234" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4238" end="4244" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="4396" end="4411" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="5215" end="5232" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="5327" end="5339" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q2911266" start="5483" end="5490" title="Borough (New Jersey)" label="borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q3682992" start="5749" end="5757" title="at-large" label="at-large"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308596" start="6119" end="6129" title="weak mayor" label="weak mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q178074" start="6307" end="6311" title="veto" label="veto"/>
<link wikidata="Q178074" start="6337" end="6345" title="veto override" label="override"/>
<link wikidata="Q30185" start="6558" end="6563" title="mayor" label="mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="6586" end="6596" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="7460" end="7469" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="7502" end="7513" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republicans"/>
<link wikidata="Q5354776" start="7549" end="7561" title="Unaffiliated (New Jersey)" label="Unaffiliated"/>
<link wikidata="Q17100287" start="7621" end="7647" title="United States presidential election in New Jersey, 2012" label="2012 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q4496" start="7660" end="7671" title="Mitt Romney" label="Mitt Romney"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="7729" end="7741" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738441" start="7896" end="7903" title="Spoilt vote" label="spoiled"/>
<link wikidata="Q16959334" start="7937" end="7963" title="United States presidential election in New Jersey, 2008" label="2008 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q10390" start="7976" end="7987" title="John McCain" label="John McCain"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="8045" end="8057" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892945" start="8227" end="8253" title="United States presidential election in New Jersey, 2004" label="2004 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="8266" end="8280" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q22316" start="8348" end="8358" title="John Kerry" label="John Kerry"/>
<link wikidata="Q15134831" start="8541" end="8568" title="New Jersey gubernatorial election, 2013" label="2013 gubernatorial election"/>
<link wikidata="Q63879" start="8581" end="8595" title="Chris Christie" label="Chris Christie"/>
<link wikidata="Q4858790" start="8653" end="8666" title="Barbara Buono" label="Barbara Buono"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586264" start="8862" end="8889" title="New Jersey gubernatorial election, 2009" label="2009 gubernatorial election"/>
<link wikidata="Q380570" start="8982" end="8993" title="Jon Corzine" label="Jon Corzine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5106343" start="9030" end="9043" title="Chris Daggett" label="Chris Daggett"/>
<link wikidata="Q285852" start="9305" end="9330" title="volunteer fire department" label="volunteer fire department"/>
<link wikidata="Q5646307" start="11800" end="11823" title="Hampton School District (New Jersey)" label="Hampton School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q7239239" start="11843" end="11859" title="pre-kindergarten" label="pre-kindergarten"/>
<link wikidata="Q5447589" start="11868" end="11879" title="fifth grade" label="fifth grade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543700" start="12045" end="12048" title="full-time equivalent" label="FTE"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595370" start="12063" end="12084" title="student–teacher ratio" label="student–teacher ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q14705702" start="12319" end="12343" title="Lebanon Township Schools" label="Lebanon Township Schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q7450229" start="12376" end="12406" title="sending/receiving relationship" label="sending/receiving relationship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543700" start="12524" end="12527" title="full-time equivalent" label="FTE"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595370" start="12542" end="12563" title="student–teacher ratio" label="student–teacher ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7039258" start="12605" end="12610" title="ninth grade" label="ninth"/>
<link wikidata="Q986388" start="12619" end="12632" title="twelfth grade" label="twelfth grade"/>
<link wikidata="Q14705907" start="12641" end="12661" title="Voorhees High School" label="Voorhees High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q515694" start="12700" end="12707" title="Califon, New Jersey" label="Califon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087569" start="12709" end="12721" title="Glen Gardner, New Jersey" label="Glen Gardner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086813" start="12748" end="12759" title="High Bridge, New Jersey" label="High Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3015934" start="12761" end="12777" title="Lebanon Township, New Jersey" label="Lebanon Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q3016994" start="12782" end="12800" title="Tewksbury Township, New Jersey" label="Tewksbury Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543700" start="12918" end="12921" title="full-time equivalent" label="FTE"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595370" start="12936" end="12957" title="student–teacher ratio" label="student–teacher ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q14705816" start="12994" end="13048" title="North Hunterdon-Voorhees Regional High School District" label="North Hunterdon-Voorhees Regional High School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q542454" start="13082" end="13100" title="Bethlehem Township, New Jersey" label="Bethlehem Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087573" start="13102" end="13114" title="Clinton, New Jersey" label="Clinton Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q3016644" start="13116" end="13132" title="Clinton Township, New Jersey" label="Clinton Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q5491960" start="13134" end="13151" title="Franklin Township, Hunterdon County, New Jersey" label="Franklin Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083772" start="13153" end="13168" title="Lebanon, New Jersey" label="Lebanon Borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q7886242" start="13173" end="13187" title="Union Township, Hunterdon County, New Jersey" label="Union Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q7055674" start="13191" end="13218" title="North Hunterdon High School" label="North Hunterdon High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5944694" start="13364" end="13407" title="Hunterdon County Vocational School District" label="Hunterdon County Vocational School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q3017068" start="13512" end="13528" title="Raritan Township, New Jersey" label="Raritan Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q867675" start="13766" end="13805" title="New Jersey Department of Transportation" label="New Jersey Department of Transportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q822339" start="13808" end="13827" title="New Jersey Route 31" label="New Jersey Route 31"/>
<link wikidata="Q20630847" start="13982" end="13992" title="Daryl Cobb" label="Daryl Cobb"/>
<link wikidata="Q7609066" start="14036" end="14049" title="Stephen Dilts" label="Stephen Dilts"/>
<link wikidata="Q867675" start="14078" end="14117" title="New Jersey Department of Transportation" label="New Jersey Department of Transportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q16013005" start="14151" end="14166" title="Frank L. Howley" label="Frank L. Howley"/>
<link wikidata="Q110654612" start="14219" end="14233" title="Stephen Kovacs" label="Stephen Kovacs"/>
<link wikidata="Q231204" start="14247" end="14252" title="saber" label="saber"/>
<link wikidata="Q12100" start="14253" end="14259" title="fencing" label="fencer"/>
<link wikidata="Q673281" start="14292" end="14306" title="sexual assault" label="sexual assault"/>
<link wikidata="Q20031579" start="14325" end="14338" title="Sidney Rivera" label="Sidney Rivera"/>
<link wikidata="Q6789484" start="14381" end="14392" title="Matt Walton" label="Matt Walton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7093926" start="14463" end="14479" title="Onion SportsDome" label="Onion SportsDome"/>
<link wikidata="Q347890" start="14488" end="14503" title="Glenway Wescott" label="Glenway Wescott"/>
<link wikidata="Q826598" start="14528" end="14542" title="Bernie Worrell" label="Bernie Worrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3353842" start="14572" end="14593" title="Parliament-Funkadelic" label="Parliament-Funkadelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1966994" start="14772" end="14812" title="National Center for Education Statistics" label="National Center for Education Statistics"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="125350" wikidata="Q1086813" url="?curid=125350" title="High Bridge, New Jersey">
<text>High Bridge is a borough in Hunterdon County, in the U.S. state of New Jersey. As of the 2020 United States census, the borough&#x27;s population was 3,546, a decrease of 102 (−2.8%) from the 2010 census count of 3,648, which in turn reflected a decline of 128 (−3.4%) from the 3,776 counted in the 2000 census.

==History==

High Bridge was originally incorporated as a township by an act of the New Jersey Legislature on March 29, 1871, from portions of Clinton Township and Lebanon Township. On February 19, 1898, the borough of High Bridge was incorporated from portions of the township, with the remainder returned to Clinton and Lebanon Townships five days later.

The borough is located on the South Branch of the Raritan River in the north central part of Hunterdon County. Water from the South Branch was a valuable power source for one of the first ironworks in the United States, established in the 1740s by William Allen and Joseph Turner of Philadelphia. Allen was the mayor of Philadelphia, a Chief Justice of Pennsylvania, and a prominent landowner in New Jersey. In 1859, the Central Railroad of New Jersey began a five-year construction project of a , bridge across the river from which structure the locality ultimately took its name.

==Geography==
According to the United States Census Bureau, the borough had a total area of 2.43 square miles (6.30 km2), including 2.39 square miles (6.19 km2) of land and 0.04 square miles (0.10 km2) of water (1.65%). It is drained by the South Branch of the Raritan River.

High Bridge borders the Hunterdon County municipalities of Clinton Township and Lebanon Township.

Unincorporated communities, localities and place names located partially or completely within the township include Jericho Hill, Pierce Heights and Silverthorn.

===Climate===
==Demographics==
===2010 census===
The 2010 United States census counted 3,648 people, 1,418 households, and 1,004 families in the borough. The population density was 1,526.9 per square mile (589.5/km2). There were 1,481 housing units at an average density of 619.9 per square mile (239.3/km2). The racial makeup was 93.17% (3,399) White, 1.32% (48) Black or African American, 0.22% (8) Native American, 3.18% (116) Asian, 0.00% (0) Pacific Islander, 0.74% (27) from other races, and 1.37% (50) from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 6.00% (219) of the population.

Of the 1,418 households, 33.6% had children under the age of 18; 58.3% were married couples living together; 9.0% had a female householder with no husband present and 29.2% were non-families. Of all households, 22.9% were made up of individuals and 5.3% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.57 and the average family size was 3.06.

24.3% of the population were under the age of 18, 6.9% from 18 to 24, 28.0% from 25 to 44, 32.3% from 45 to 64, and 8.6% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 39.9 years. For every 100 females, the population had 101.2 males. For every 100 females ages 18 and older there were 101.4 males.

The Census Bureau&#x27;s 2006–2010 American Community Survey showed that (in 2010 inflation-adjusted dollars) median household income was $90,037 (with a margin of error of +/− $10,054) and the median family income was $108,148 (+/− $6,913). Males had a median income of $77,500 (+/− $10,021) versus $47,936 (+/− $5,291) for females. The per capita income for the borough was $40,866 (+/− $4,587). About none of families and 0.8% of the population were below the poverty line, including none of those under age 18 and none of those age 65 or over.

===2000 census===
As of the 2000 United States census there were 3,776 people, 1,428 households, and 1,051 families residing in the borough. The population density was . There were 1,478 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the borough was 96.24% White, 0.79% African American, 0.34% Native American, 1.43% Asian, 0.03% Pacific Islander, 0.45% from other races, and 0.72% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 2.12% of the population.

There were 1,428 households, out of which 39.9% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 62.3% were married couples living together, 8.5% had a female householder with no husband present, and 26.4% were non-families. 20.9% of all households were made up of individuals, and 4.8% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.64 and the average family size was 3.10.

In the borough the population was spread out, with 27.6% under the age of 18, 5.3% from 18 to 24, 36.4% from 25 to 44, 24.2% from 45 to 64, and 6.5% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 36 years. For every 100 females, there were 94.0 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 92.7 males.

The median income for a household in the borough was $68,719, and the median income for a family was $75,357. Males had a median income of $56,607 versus $35,450 for females. The per capita income for the borough was $29,276. About 1.9% of families and 3.2% of the population were below the poverty line, including 1.9% of those under age 18 and 9.2% of those age 65 or over.

==Economy==
High Bridge has a downtown (Main Street) that is home to eateries, services and professionals. Circa Restaurant, at the center of Main Street, has received acclaim from a variety of sources including a food editor from &quot;The New York Times&quot; who proclaimed, &quot;Circa is the kind of place I wish were in my town.&quot;

The businesses are collectively marketed by the High Bridge Business Association, which assists its member businesses through co-operative advertising, press releases, goodwill and other benefits.

==Parks and recreation==

High Bridge serves as the southern terminus of a rail trail that was created out of the former Central Railroad of New Jersey High Bridge Branch. The trail is maintained by Hunterdon County Parks and Recreation and is called the Columbia Trail. The trail runs northeastward from the center of the borough (at the junction of Main Street and Church Street) towards Califon, through a scenic area outside the borough limits, known as the Ken Lockwood Gorge.

Union Forge Park is High Bridge&#x27;s main public park, located by the South Branch Raritan River and the Taylor Wharton complex. Another park is the Borough Commons, situated at the start of the Columbia Trail. A grant received by the Union Forge Heritage Association in 2008 provided for the creation of the Taylor Steelworkers Historical Greenway, which stretches around the borough, starting at Columbia Trail and connecting the borough&#x27;s parks and other historic sites.

The High Bridge Hills golf course, located near Route 31, provides another means of recreation in the small town.

==Government==

===Local government===
High Bridge is governed under the borough form of New Jersey municipal government, which is used in 218 municipalities (of the 564) statewide, making it the most common form of government in New Jersey. The governing body is comprised of the mayor and the six-member borough council. The mayor is elected directly by the voters to a four-year term of office. The borough council includes six members elected to serve three-year terms on a staggered basis, with two seats coming up for election each year in a three-year cycle. The borough form of government used by High Bridge is a &quot;weak mayor / strong council&quot; government in which council members act as the legislative body with the mayor presiding at meetings and voting only in the event of a tie. The mayor can veto ordinances subject to an override by a two-thirds majority vote of the council. The borough council decides committee and liaison assignments for council members. Appointments are made by the mayor with the advice and consent of the council.

, the mayor of High Bridge Borough is Democrat Michele Lee, whose term of office ends December 31, 2026. Members of the Borough Council are Kenneth Doyle (D, 2025), Natalie Ferry (D, 2023), Christopher Graham (D, 2024; elected to serve an unexpired term), Curtis Nowell (D, 2025), Alan Schwartz (R, 2023) and Steven Silvestri (R, 2024).

High Bridge Borough Council meeting agendas and minutes are available on the borough website.

In February 2022 the borough council selected Christopher Graham from a list of three candidates nominated by the Republican municipal committee to fill the seat expiring in December 2024 that had been held by Leigh Ann Moore until she stepped down from office. Graham won election outright in November 2022 and will now serve the balance of the term of office to December 2024.

In April 2016, the borough council selected Keir LoIacono from a list of three candidates nominated by the Republican municipal committee to fill the seat of Mike Stemple, who had resigned from office the previous month.

In November 2014, the borough council selected Stephen Strange to fill the vacant seat expiring in 2016 of Victoria Miller, who had resigned from office in the previous month. In the November 2015 general election, Strange was elected to serve the balance of the term.

===Federal, state and county representation===
High Bridge is located in the 7th Congressional District and is part of New Jersey&#x27;s 16th state legislative district.



===Politics===
As of November 7, 2017, there were a total of 2,587 registered voters in High Bridge.

In the 2012 presidential election, Democrat Barack Obama received 50.4% of the vote (893 cast), ahead of Republican Mitt Romney with 47.8% (846 votes), and other candidates with 1.8% (32 votes), among the 1,788 ballots cast by the borough&#x27;s 2,497 registered voters (17 ballots were spoiled), for a turnout of 71.6%. In the 2008 presidential election, Democrat Barack Obama received 48.6% of the vote (938 cast), ahead of Republican John McCain with 48.4% (936 votes) and other candidates with 2.1% (41 votes), among the 1,932 ballots cast by the borough&#x27;s 2,487 registered voters, for a turnout of 77.7%. In the 2004 presidential election, Republican George W. Bush received 55.9% of the vote (1,012 ballots cast), outpolling Democrat John Kerry with 43.0% (778 votes) and other candidates with 1.1% (25 votes), among the 1,811 ballots cast by the borough&#x27;s 2,315 registered voters, for a turnout percentage of 78.2.




In the 2013 gubernatorial election, Republican Chris Christie received 69.3% of the vote (778 cast), ahead of Democrat Barbara Buono with 28.5% (320 votes), and other candidates with 2.1% (24 votes), among the 1,136 ballots cast by the borough&#x27;s 2,469 registered voters (14 ballots were spoiled), for a turnout of 46.0%. In the 2009 gubernatorial election, Republican Chris Christie received 60.6% of the vote (819 ballots cast), ahead of Democrat Jon Corzine with 27.1% (367 votes), Independent Chris Daggett with 10.3% (139 votes) and other candidates with 1.1% (15 votes), among the 1,352 ballots cast by the borough&#x27;s 2,433 registered voters, yielding a 55.6% turnout.

==Education==
The High Bridge School District serves students in pre-kindergarten through eighth grade. As of the 2018–19 school year, the district, comprised of two schools, had an enrollment of 370 students and 38.2 classroom teachers (on an FTE basis), for a student–teacher ratio of 9.7:1. Schools in the districts (with 2018–19 enrollment data from the National Center for Education Statistics) are 
High Bridge Elementary School with 194 students in grades Pre-K–4 and 
High Bridge Middle School with 178 students in grades 5–8.

Public school students in ninth through twelfth grades attend Voorhees High School, which also serves students from Califon, Glen Gardner, Hampton, Lebanon Township and Tewksbury Township. As of the 2018–19 school year, the high school had an enrollment of 982 students and 83.1 classroom teachers (on an FTE basis), for a student–teacher ratio of 11.8:1. The school is part of the North Hunterdon-Voorhees Regional High School District, which also includes students from Bethlehem Township, Clinton Town, Clinton Township, Franklin Township, Lebanon Borough and Union Township who attend North Hunterdon High School in Annandale.

The High Bridge district previously operated High Bridge High School. In October 1972, voters agreed to place the high schoolers at North Hunterdon Regional High School. High Bridge High closed in 1973. In 1975, high school students in High Bridge, except 12th grade students (seniors) already at North Hunterdon, were moved to Voorhees High.

Eighth grade students from all of Hunterdon County are eligible to apply to attend the high school programs offered by the Hunterdon County Vocational School District, a county-wide vocational school district that offers career and technical education at its campuses in Raritan Township and at programs sited at local high schools, with no tuition charged to students for attendance.

==Transportation==
===Roads and highways===
, the borough had a total of of roadways, of which were maintained by the municipality and by Hunterdon County.

County Route 513 is the main road that passes through and connects to Route 31 to the west. Interstate 78 is accessible via Routes 513 and 31 in neighboring Clinton Township.

===Public transportation===
Originally a vital junction for the Central Railroad of New Jersey in hauling iron ore from northern New Jersey via its High Bridge Branch which headed north toward Wharton and High Bridge station now serves as the westernmost station on NJ Transit&#x27;s Raritan Valley Line. It is located at the southern end of the station. The parking lot for the station is located one block to the west. The station only uses the southern track for inbound and outbound trains. There is a station building that is no longer used and there are two small shelters. This station has limited weekday service and no weekend service. The station has been the western terminus of the line since 1983, the year NJ Transit commenced operations. Between 1983 and 1989, NJ Transit reached Phillipsburg, New Jersey on the former Central Railroad of New Jersey mainline. Since that time, the route between High Bridge and Phillipsburg has been inactive. NJ Transit considers making plans for bringing service back to Phillipsburg again in the future.

There is also service available between Flemington and Hampton on the Hunterdon LINK Route 15.

==Points of interest==
Solitude House, built –1725, became the centerpiece of the iron plantation that became Union Forge Ironworks. Later called Taylor Iron and Steel Company, it eventually became known as Taylor-Wharton. John Penn, the last royal governor of Pennsylvania, and Benjamin Chew, the last chief justice of the Supreme Court of Pennsylvania, were political prisoners at Solitude House during the American Revolutionary War. Five generations of the Taylor family managed the business and continued to live in the house, until 1938. Acquired by the Borough in 2001, and previously operated as a museum. The Union Forge Heritage Association operated Solitude House Museum from 2002 to 2012. The museum is now at the Turner–Chew–Carhart Farm in nearby Union Township.

The Taylor Steel Workers Historical Greenway, created by the Union Forge Heritage Association, connects to the Columbia Trail.

The TISCO Headquarters, constructed in 1742 for the Union Iron Works, is the oldest office building in New Jersey.

Lake Solitude Dam, replacing the crib dam of 1858, replaced in 1909, is the last remaining example of a buttress dam in New Jersey, built by master engineer Frank S. Tainter.

Springside Farm was established by Archibald S. Taylor, as the agricultural farm of the Taylor Iron and Steel Company. Covering , the site includes buildings dating back to 1803, some of which have deteriorated over the years.

The Paul Robinson Observatory is an astronomical observatory owned and operated by New Jersey Astronomical Association in nearby Voorhees State Park.

==Notable people==

People who were born in, residents of, or otherwise closely associated with High Bridge include:

* Frank Baldwin (1928–2004), Major League Baseball catcher who played for the Cincinnati Reds
* Florence Howe Hall (1845–1922), writer, critic, and lecturer about Women&#x27;s suffrage in the United States
* Naomi Jakobsson (born 1941 as Naomi Dick), represents the 103rd District in the Illinois House of Representatives
* Howard Menger (1922–2009), UFO contactee whose writings on the subject include &quot;The High Bridge Incident&quot;, about his initial contact with aliens, when he was ten years old
* Dan Smith (born 1975), former MLB pitcher who played for the Montreal Expos and Boston Red Sox
* George W. Taylor (1808–1862), Union Army brigadier general during the American Civil War

==References==
==External links==

* Borough of High Bridge, New Jersey
* High Bridge Public Library
* Web page for High Bridge Borough, Hunterdon County, New Jersey
* High Bridge School District
* School Data for the High Bridge School District, National Center for Education Statistics
* North Hunterdon-Voorhees Regional High School District
* High Bridge Emergency Squad
* Hunterdon Land Trust Alliance
* Photo Essay of High Bridge from 1991
* High Bridge Business Association</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1086813" start="0" end="11" title="High Bridge, New Jersey" label="High Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2911266" start="17" end="24" title="Borough (New Jersey)" label="borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q502451" start="28" end="44" title="Hunterdon County, New Jersey" label="Hunterdon County"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="53" end="63" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="67" end="77" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="89" end="114" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="192" end="203" title="2010 United States census" label="2010 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q166998" start="299" end="310" title="2000 United States census" label="2000 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q7830213" start="371" end="379" title="township (New Jersey)" label="township"/>
<link wikidata="Q2867079" start="397" end="419" title="New Jersey Legislature" label="New Jersey Legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q3016644" start="456" end="472" title="Clinton Township, New Jersey" label="Clinton Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q3015934" start="477" end="493" title="Lebanon Township, New Jersey" label="Lebanon Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q7566388" start="701" end="734" title="South Branch Raritan River" label="South Branch of the Raritan River"/>
<link wikidata="Q10832530" start="859" end="868" title="ironworks" label="ironworks"/>
<link wikidata="Q8004347" start="919" end="932" title="William Allen (loyalist)" label="William Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6287514" start="937" end="950" title="Joseph Turner (loyalist)" label="Joseph Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="954" end="966" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q21855009" start="982" end="1003" title="mayor of Philadelphia" label="mayor of Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053974" start="1092" end="1122" title="Central Railroad of New Jersey" label="Central Railroad of New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="1285" end="1312" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q7566388" start="1495" end="1528" title="South Branch Raritan River" label="South Branch of the Raritan River"/>
<link wikidata="Q3016644" start="1590" end="1606" title="Clinton Township, New Jersey" label="Clinton Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q3015934" start="1611" end="1627" title="Lebanon Township, New Jersey" label="Lebanon Township"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1630" end="1656" title="Local government in New Jersey#Unincorporated communities" label="Unincorporated communities"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086813" start="1759" end="1773" title="Pierce Heights, New Jersey" label="Pierce Heights"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="1845" end="1870" title="2010 United States census" label="2010 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="1950" end="1968" title="population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2138" end="2143" title="White (U.S. census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2156" end="2181" title="Black (U.S. census)" label="Black or African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2193" end="2208" title="Native American (U.S. census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2222" end="2227" title="Asian (U.S. census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2239" end="2255" title="Pacific Islander (U.S. census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2273" end="2284" title="Race and ethnicity in the United States census#Race" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2325" end="2343" title="Hispanic (U.S. census)" label="Hispanic or Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q463769" start="3123" end="3148" title="American Community Survey" label="American Community Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q311198" start="3170" end="3188" title="inflation adjustment" label="inflation-adjusted"/>
<link wikidata="Q1940707" start="3198" end="3221" title="median household income" label="median household income"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="3426" end="3443" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="3551" end="3563" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q166998" start="3665" end="3690" title="2000 United States census" label="2000 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3909" end="3914" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3922" end="3938" title="African American (U.S. Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3946" end="3961" title="Native American (U.S. Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3969" end="3974" title="Asian (U.S. Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3982" end="3998" title="Pacific Islander (U.S. Census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4011" end="4022" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4058" end="4066" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4070" end="4076" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="4230" end="4245" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="5044" end="5061" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="5156" end="5168" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="5479" end="5497" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053974" start="5903" end="5933" title="Central Railroad of New Jersey" label="Central Railroad of New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5754964" start="5934" end="5952" title="High Bridge Branch" label="High Bridge Branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5149878" start="6037" end="6051" title="Columbia Trail" label="Columbia Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q515694" start="6172" end="6179" title="Califon, New Jersey" label="Califon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6388034" start="6244" end="6262" title="Ken Lockwood Gorge" label="Ken Lockwood Gorge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7566388" start="6337" end="6363" title="South Branch Raritan River" label="South Branch Raritan River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2911266" start="6935" end="6942" title="Borough (New Jersey)" label="borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308596" start="7490" end="7500" title="weak mayor" label="weak mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q178074" start="7678" end="7682" title="veto" label="veto"/>
<link wikidata="Q178074" start="7708" end="7716" title="veto override" label="override"/>
<link wikidata="Q30185" start="7932" end="7937" title="mayor" label="mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="7964" end="7972" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q17100287" start="9513" end="9539" title="United States presidential election in New Jersey, 2012" label="2012 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="9550" end="9562" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q4496" start="9622" end="9633" title="Mitt Romney" label="Mitt Romney"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738441" start="9793" end="9800" title="Spoilt vote" label="spoiled"/>
<link wikidata="Q16959334" start="9834" end="9860" title="United States presidential election in New Jersey, 2008" label="2008 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q10390" start="9943" end="9954" title="John McCain" label="John McCain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892945" start="10128" end="10154" title="United States presidential election in New Jersey, 2004" label="2004 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="10167" end="10181" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q22316" start="10251" end="10261" title="John Kerry" label="John Kerry"/>
<link wikidata="Q15134831" start="10449" end="10476" title="New Jersey gubernatorial election, 2013" label="2013 gubernatorial election"/>
<link wikidata="Q63879" start="10489" end="10503" title="Chris Christie" label="Chris Christie"/>
<link wikidata="Q4858790" start="10561" end="10574" title="Barbara Buono" label="Barbara Buono"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586264" start="10775" end="10802" title="New Jersey gubernatorial election, 2009" label="2009 gubernatorial election"/>
<link wikidata="Q380570" start="10895" end="10906" title="Jon Corzine" label="Jon Corzine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5106343" start="10943" end="10956" title="Chris Daggett" label="Chris Daggett"/>
<link wikidata="Q5754974" start="11144" end="11171" title="High Bridge School District" label="High Bridge School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q7239239" start="11191" end="11207" title="pre-kindergarten" label="pre-kindergarten"/>
<link wikidata="Q5349142" start="11216" end="11228" title="eighth grade" label="eighth grade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543700" start="11370" end="11373" title="full-time equivalent" label="FTE"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595370" start="11388" end="11409" title="student–teacher ratio" label="student–teacher ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1966994" start="11484" end="11524" title="National Center for Education Statistics" label="National Center for Education Statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7039258" start="11688" end="11693" title="ninth grade" label="ninth"/>
<link wikidata="Q986388" start="11702" end="11715" title="twelfth grade" label="twelfth grade"/>
<link wikidata="Q14705907" start="11724" end="11744" title="Voorhees High School" label="Voorhees High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q515694" start="11778" end="11785" title="Califon, New Jersey" label="Califon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087569" start="11787" end="11799" title="Glen Gardner, New Jersey" label="Glen Gardner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086532" start="11801" end="11808" title="Hampton, New Jersey" label="Hampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3015934" start="11810" end="11826" title="Lebanon Township, New Jersey" label="Lebanon Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q3016994" start="11831" end="11849" title="Tewksbury Township, New Jersey" label="Tewksbury Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543700" start="11967" end="11970" title="full-time equivalent" label="FTE"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595370" start="11985" end="12006" title="student–teacher ratio" label="student–teacher ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q14705816" start="12044" end="12098" title="North Hunterdon-Voorhees Regional High School District" label="North Hunterdon-Voorhees Regional High School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q542454" start="12134" end="12152" title="Bethlehem Township, New Jersey" label="Bethlehem Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087573" start="12154" end="12166" title="Clinton, New Jersey" label="Clinton Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q3016644" start="12168" end="12184" title="Clinton Township, New Jersey" label="Clinton Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q5491960" start="12186" end="12203" title="Franklin Township, Hunterdon County, New Jersey" label="Franklin Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083772" start="12205" end="12220" title="Lebanon, New Jersey" label="Lebanon Borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q7886242" start="12225" end="12239" title="Union Township, Hunterdon County, New Jersey" label="Union Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q7055674" start="12251" end="12278" title="North Hunterdon High School" label="North Hunterdon High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084050" start="12282" end="12291" title="Annandale, New Jersey" label="Annandale"/>
<link wikidata="Q123524180" start="12339" end="12362" title="High Bridge High School" label="High Bridge High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7055674" start="12426" end="12462" title="North Hunterdon Regional High School" label="North Hunterdon Regional High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5944694" start="12761" end="12804" title="Hunterdon County Vocational School District" label="Hunterdon County Vocational School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q3017068" start="12909" end="12925" title="Raritan Township, New Jersey" label="Raritan Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q858781" start="13181" end="13197" title="County Route 513 (New Jersey)" label="County Route 513"/>
<link wikidata="Q822339" start="13251" end="13259" title="New Jersey Route 31" label="Route 31"/>
<link wikidata="Q811194" start="13273" end="13286" title="Interstate 78 in New Jersey" label="Interstate 78"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088847" start="13550" end="13557" title="Wharton, New Jersey" label="Wharton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5754947" start="13562" end="13581" title="High Bridge station" label="High Bridge station"/>
<link wikidata="Q498553" start="13623" end="13633" title="NJ Transit" label="NJ Transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7294577" start="13641" end="13660" title="Raritan Valley Line" label="Raritan Valley Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q6252491" start="14732" end="14741" title="John Penn (governor)" label="John Penn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2896028" start="14788" end="14801" title="Benjamin Chew" label="Benjamin Chew"/>
<link wikidata="Q107530865" start="15235" end="15259" title="Turner–Chew–Carhart Farm" label="Turner–Chew–Carhart Farm"/>
<link wikidata="Q7886242" start="15270" end="15284" title="Union Township, Hunterdon County, New Jersey" label="Union Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q5149878" start="15398" end="15412" title="Columbia Trail" label="Columbia Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355334" start="15635" end="15647" title="buttress dam" label="buttress dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7153287" start="15939" end="15964" title="Paul Robinson Observatory" label="Paul Robinson Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7941714" start="16064" end="16083" title="Voorhees State Park" label="Voorhees State Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5485171" start="16206" end="16219" title="Frank Baldwin (baseball)" label="Frank Baldwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q826751" start="16282" end="16297" title="Cincinnati Reds" label="Cincinnati Reds"/>
<link wikidata="Q37044123" start="16300" end="16318" title="Florence Howe Hall" label="Florence Howe Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246745" start="16367" end="16409" title="Women&amp;#x27;s suffrage in the United States" label="Women&amp;#x27;s suffrage in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q6964650" start="16412" end="16427" title="Naomi Jakobsson" label="Naomi Jakobsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q908954" start="16492" end="16525" title="Illinois House of Representatives" label="Illinois House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q2375657" start="16528" end="16541" title="Howard Menger" label="Howard Menger"/>
<link wikidata="Q2527177" start="16559" end="16568" title="contactee" label="contactee"/>
<link wikidata="Q5214405" start="16712" end="16721" title="Dan Smith (right-handed pitcher)" label="Dan Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148233" start="16773" end="16787" title="Montreal Expos" label="Montreal Expos"/>
<link wikidata="Q213959" start="16792" end="16806" title="Boston Red Sox" label="Boston Red Sox"/>
<link wikidata="Q5545756" start="16809" end="16825" title="George W. Taylor (general)" label="George W. Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752901" start="16839" end="16849" title="Union Army" label="Union Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="16879" end="16897" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q502451" start="17036" end="17064" title="Hunterdon County, New Jersey" label="Hunterdon County, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1966994" start="17146" end="17186" title="National Center for Education Statistics" label="National Center for Education Statistics"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="125352" wikidata="Q3017015" url="?curid=125352" title="Holland Township, New Jersey">
<text>Holland Township is a township in Hunterdon County, in the U.S. state of New Jersey. As of the 2020 United States census, the township&#x27;s population was 5,177, a decrease of 114 (−2.2%) from the 2010 census count of 5,291, which in turn reflected an increase of 167 (+3.3%) from the 5,124 counted in the 2000 census.

Holland Township is located in the northwestern part of Hunterdon County. The Delaware River forms its boundary with Pennsylvania and the Musconetcong River its boundary with Warren County. It was created from Alexandria Township on April 13, 1874, before being dissolved and reabsorbed into Alexandria Township on March 4, 1878. The township was reformed and separated as a municipality of its own again on March 11, 1879. Milford was created on April 15, 1911, from portions of Holland Township, based on the results of a referendum held on May 8, 1911. The township was named by Dutch settlers for Holland.

==Geography==
According to the United States Census Bureau, the township had a total area of 23.97 square miles (62.08 km2), including 23.47 square miles (60.78 km2) of land and 0.50 square miles (1.30 km2) of water (2.09%).

The township borders the municipalities of Alexandria Township, Bethlehem Township and Milford in Hunterdon County; Pohatcong Township in Warren County; and Bridgeton Township, Durham Township, Nockamixon Township and Riegelsville in Bucks County across the Delaware River in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.

Unincorporated communities, localities and place names located partially or completely within the township include Amsterdam, Finesville, Hughesville, Little York, Mount Joy, Riegel Ridge, Spring Mills and Warren Paper Mills.

==Demographics==
===2010 census===
The 2010 United States census counted 5,291 people, 1,972 households, and 1,544 families in the township. The population density was . There were 2,066 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup was 97.62% (5,165) White, 0.72% (38) Black or African American, 0.06% (3) Native American, 0.77% (41) Asian, 0.04% (2) Pacific Islander, 0.28% (15) from other races, and 0.51% (27) from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 2.68% (142) of the population.

Of the 1,972 households, 34.0% had children under the age of 18; 68.8% were married couples living together; 6.9% had a female householder with no husband present and 21.7% were non-families. Of all households, 18.1% were made up of individuals and 9.0% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.68 and the average family size was 3.06.

24.1% of the population were under the age of 18, 6.1% from 18 to 24, 20.5% from 25 to 44, 33.3% from 45 to 64, and 16.0% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 44.5 years. For every 100 females, the population had 96.7 males. For every 100 females ages 18 and older there were 92.8 males.

The Census Bureau&#x27;s 2006–2010 American Community Survey showed that (in 2010 inflation-adjusted dollars) median household income was $85,190 (with a margin of error of +/− $11,358) and the median family income was $99,535 (+/− $16,553). Males had a median income of $77,951 (+/− $14,766) versus $56,719 (+/− $14,287) for females. The per capita income for the borough was $43,162 (+/− $5,210). About 1.9% of families and 3.2% of the population were below the poverty line, including 3.6% of those under age 18 and none of those age 65 or over.

===2000 census===
As of the 2000 United States census there were 5,124 people, 1,881 households, and 1,523 families residing in the township. The population density was . There were 1,942 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the township was 98.09% White, 0.43% African American, 0.04% Native American, 0.43% Asian, 0.39% from other races, and 0.62% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 1.70% of the population.

There were 1,881 households, out of which 33.3% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 73.2% were married couples living together, 5.2% had a female householder with no husband present, and 19.0% were non-families. 15.5% of all households were made up of individuals, and 7.7% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.72 and the average family size was 3.06.

In the township the population was spread out, with 24.7% under the age of 18, 5.6% from 18 to 24, 26.8% from 25 to 44, 28.4% from 45 to 64, and 14.5% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 41 years. For every 100 females, there were 97.7 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 95.1 males.

The median income for a household in the township was $68,083, and the median income for a family was $71,925. Males had a median income of $50,737 versus $35,615 for females. The per capita income for the township was $28,581. About 1.6% of families and 2.2% of the population were below the poverty line, including 2.9% of those under age 18 and 3.3% of those age 65 or over.

==Parks and recreation==
The Musconetcong Gorge Nature Preserve is an undeveloped park managed by the Hunterdon County Parks and Recreational System, with steeply wooded terrain overlooking the Musconetcong River. The gorge includes many spring-fed streams, a variety of plant species and wildlife. While much of the area offers challenging hikes, a variety of trails are being developed to offer access to less-seasoned hikers.

==Government==

===Local government===
Holland Township is governed under the Township form of government, one of 141 municipalities (of the 564) statewide that use this form. The Township Committee is comprised of five members, who are elected directly by the voters at-large in partisan elections to serve three-year terms of office on a staggered basis, with either one or two seats coming up for election each year as part of the November general election in a three-year cycle. At an annual reorganization meeting, the Township Committee selects one of its members to serve as Mayor.

, members of the Holland Township Committee are Mayor Daniel T. Bush (R, term on committee ends December 31, 2024; term as mayor ends 2023), Deputy Mayor Scott M. Wilhelm (R, term on committee ends 2025; term as deputy mayor ends 2023), Lisa Pezzano Mickey (R, 2023), Robert H. Thurgarland (R, 2025) and Duane C. Young (R, 2023; elected to serve an unexpired term).

In January 2022, the Township Council appointed Duane Young to fill the seat that expires in December 2022 that had been held by Ray Krov until his resignation that became effective earlier that month. Young served on an interim basis until the November 2022 general election, when he was chosen to serve the balance of the term of office.

In April 2019, the Township Committee selected Lisa Mickey from a list of three candidates nominated by the Republican municipal committee to the fill the seat expiring in December 2020 that had been held by Thomas Scheibener until he resigned from office earlier that month.

In March 2016, the Township Committee selected Robert Thurgarland from three candidates nominated by the Republican municipal committee to fill the term expiring December 2016 of Tony Roselle, who had resigned from office the previous month.

===Federal, state and county representation===
Holland Township is located in the 7th Congressional District and is part of New Jersey&#x27;s 23rd state legislative district.



===Politics===
As of March 2011, there were a total of 3,699 registered voters in Holland Township, of which 669 (18.1%) were registered as Democrats, 1,537 (41.6%) were registered as Republicans and 1,490 (40.3%) were registered as Unaffiliated. There were 3 voters registered as Libertarians or Greens.

In the 2012 presidential election, Republican Mitt Romney received 60.8% of the vote (1,680 cast), ahead of Democrat Barack Obama with 37.7% (1,041 votes), and other candidates with 1.6% (43 votes), among the 2,785 ballots cast by the township&#x27;s 3,867 registered voters (21 ballots were spoiled), for a turnout of 72.0%. In the 2008 presidential election, Republican John McCain received 57.5% of the vote (1,698 cast), ahead of Democrat Barack Obama with 39.9% (1,180 votes) and other candidates with 1.6% (48 votes), among the 2,955 ballots cast by the township&#x27;s 3,723 registered voters, for a turnout of 79.4%. In the 2004 presidential election, Republican George W. Bush received 62.9% of the vote (1,805 ballots cast), outpolling Democrat John Kerry with 36.1% (1,036 votes) and other candidates with 1.1% (38 votes), among the 2,871 ballots cast by the township&#x27;s 3,612 registered voters, for a turnout percentage of 79.5.




In the 2013 gubernatorial election, Republican Chris Christie received 74.4% of the vote (1,353 cast), ahead of Democrat Barbara Buono with 23.9% (435 votes), and other candidates with 1.7% (30 votes), among the 1,849 ballots cast by the township&#x27;s 3,836 registered voters (31 ballots were spoiled), for a turnout of 48.2%. In the 2009 gubernatorial election, Republican Chris Christie received 65.0% of the vote (1,478 ballots cast), ahead of Democrat Jon Corzine with 24.2% (551 votes), Independent Chris Daggett with 8.4% (192 votes) and other candidates with 1.0% (22 votes), among the 2,274 ballots cast by the township&#x27;s 3,693 registered voters, yielding a 61.6% turnout.

==Education==
The Holland Township School District serves public school students in pre-kindergarten through eighth grade at Holland Township Elementary School. As of the 2023–24 school year, the district, comprised of one school, had an enrollment of 510 students and 62.5 classroom teachers (on an FTE basis), for a student–teacher ratio of 8.2:1.

Students in public school for ninth through twelfth grades attend Delaware Valley Regional High School, together with students from Alexandria Township, Frenchtown, Kingwood Township and Milford. As of the 2023–24 school year, the high school had an enrollment of 692 students and 61.5 classroom teachers (on an FTE basis), for a student–teacher ratio of 11.3:1. Seats on the high school district&#x27;s nine-member board of education are allocated based on the population of the constituent municipalities, with three seats assigned to Holland Township.

Eighth grade students from all of Hunterdon County are eligible to apply to attend the high school programs offered by the Hunterdon County Vocational School District, a county-wide vocational school district that offers career and technical education at its campuses in Raritan Township and at programs sited at local high schools, with no tuition charged to students for attendance.

==Transportation==

, the township had a total of of roadways, of which were maintained by the municipality and by Hunterdon County.

The only major road that passes through the township is County Route 519.

The closest limited access road is Interstate 78/U.S. Route 22 (&quot;Phillipsburg-Newark Expressway&quot;) in neighboring Pohatcong Township in Warren County.

==References in fiction==
In the 1984 film &quot;The Adventures of Buckaroo Banzai Across the 8th Dimension&quot;, Holland Township is the location of the Banzai Institute for Biomedical Research and Strategic Information.

==Notable people==

People who were born in, residents of, or otherwise closely associated with Holland Township include:

* Connie Myers (born 1944), politicians who served in the New Jersey General Assembly from 1996 to 2006, where she represented the 23rd Legislative District

==Landmarks==

The Volendam Windmill Museum is a working mill driven by wind, used for grinding raw grain into flour. The structure is seven stories high with sail arms from tip to tip, having been designed and constructed in 1965 by Paul and May Jorgenson, using windmills they had seen in Denmark and the Netherlands as models. The windmill is located on the Charlie Brown Christmas Tree Farm, a property that has been preserved, though the windmill itself is not part of the preservation agreement.

==References==
==External links==

*Holland Township website
*[May 4, 2023 Hunterdon County web page for Holland Township]
*Holland Township School District
*School Data for the Holland Township School District, National Center for Education Statistics
*Delaware Valley Regional High School District
*Hunterdon Land Trust Alliance</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3017015" start="0" end="16" title="Holland Township, New Jersey" label="Holland Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q7830213" start="22" end="30" title="Township (New Jersey)" label="township"/>
<link wikidata="Q502451" start="34" end="50" title="Hunterdon County, New Jersey" label="Hunterdon County"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="59" end="69" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="73" end="83" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="95" end="120" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="199" end="210" title="2010 United States census" label="2010 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q166998" start="308" end="319" title="2000 United States census" label="2000 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q143762" start="400" end="414" title="Delaware River" label="Delaware River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400" start="439" end="451" title="Pennsylvania" label="Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q6940356" start="460" end="478" title="Musconetcong River" label="Musconetcong River"/>
<link wikidata="Q502468" start="497" end="510" title="Warren County, New Jersey" label="Warren County"/>
<link wikidata="Q3017769" start="532" end="551" title="Alexandria Township, New Jersey" label="Alexandria Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083131" start="746" end="753" title="Milford, New Jersey" label="Milford"/>
<link wikidata="Q200569" start="904" end="909" title="Dutch people" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q102911" start="923" end="930" title="Holland" label="Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="964" end="991" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q3017769" start="1202" end="1221" title="Alexandria Township, New Jersey" label="Alexandria Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q542454" start="1223" end="1241" title="Bethlehem Township, New Jersey" label="Bethlehem Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083131" start="1246" end="1253" title="Milford, New Jersey" label="Milford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088408" start="1275" end="1293" title="Pohatcong Township, New Jersey" label="Pohatcong Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q502468" start="1297" end="1310" title="Warren County, New Jersey" label="Warren County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1894068" start="1316" end="1334" title="Bridgeton Township, Pennsylvania" label="Bridgeton Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q56695" start="1336" end="1351" title="Durham Township, Bucks County, Pennsylvania" label="Durham Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q1894747" start="1353" end="1372" title="Nockamixon Township, Bucks County, Pennsylvania" label="Nockamixon Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q590595" start="1377" end="1389" title="Riegelsville, Pennsylvania" label="Riegelsville"/>
<link wikidata="Q494192" start="1393" end="1405" title="Bucks County, Pennsylvania" label="Bucks County"/>
<link wikidata="Q143762" start="1417" end="1431" title="Delaware River" label="Delaware River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400" start="1439" end="1467" title="Pennsylvania" label="Commonwealth of Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1470" end="1496" title="Local government in New Jersey#Unincorporated communities" label="Unincorporated communities"/>
<link wikidata="Q19059403" start="1585" end="1594" title="Amsterdam, New Jersey" label="Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q5450171" start="1596" end="1606" title="Finesville, New Jersey" label="Finesville"/>
<link wikidata="Q19462438" start="1608" end="1619" title="Hughesville, New Jersey" label="Hughesville"/>
<link wikidata="Q14705711" start="1621" end="1632" title="Little York, Hunterdon County, New Jersey" label="Little York"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="1736" end="1761" title="2010 United States census" label="2010 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1962" end="1967" title="White (U.S. census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1980" end="2005" title="Black (U.S. census)" label="Black or African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2017" end="2032" title="Native American (U.S. census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2045" end="2050" title="Asian (U.S. census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2062" end="2078" title="Pacific Islander (U.S. census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2096" end="2107" title="Race and ethnicity in the United States census#Race" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2148" end="2166" title="Hispanic (U.S. census)" label="Hispanic or Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q463769" start="2945" end="2970" title="American Community Survey" label="American Community Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q311198" start="2992" end="3010" title="inflation adjustment" label="inflation-adjusted"/>
<link wikidata="Q1940707" start="3020" end="3043" title="median household income" label="median household income"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="3249" end="3266" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="3374" end="3386" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q166998" start="3488" end="3513" title="2000 United States census" label="2000 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3734" end="3739" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3747" end="3763" title="African American (U.S. Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3771" end="3786" title="Native American (U.S. Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3794" end="3799" title="Asian (U.S. Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3812" end="3823" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3859" end="3867" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3871" end="3877" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="4031" end="4046" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="4848" end="4865" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="4961" end="4973" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q6940356" start="5241" end="5259" title="Musconetcong River" label="Musconetcong River"/>
<link wikidata="Q7830213" start="5555" end="5563" title="Township (New Jersey)" label="Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q3682992" start="5745" end="5753" title="at-large" label="at-large"/>
<link wikidata="Q30185" start="6115" end="6120" title="Mayor" label="Mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="6137" end="6138" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="R"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="7613" end="7622" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="7657" end="7668" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republicans"/>
<link wikidata="Q5354776" start="7706" end="7718" title="Unaffiliated (New Jersey)" label="Unaffiliated"/>
<link wikidata="Q558334" start="7754" end="7766" title="Libertarian Party (United States)" label="Libertarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q849158" start="7770" end="7776" title="Green Party (United States)" label="Greens"/>
<link wikidata="Q17100287" start="7786" end="7812" title="United States presidential election in New Jersey, 2012" label="2012 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q4496" start="7825" end="7836" title="Mitt Romney" label="Mitt Romney"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="7896" end="7908" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738441" start="8071" end="8078" title="Spoilt vote" label="spoiled"/>
<link wikidata="Q16959334" start="8112" end="8138" title="United States presidential election in New Jersey, 2008" label="2008 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q10390" start="8151" end="8162" title="John McCain" label="John McCain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892945" start="8411" end="8437" title="United States presidential election in New Jersey, 2004" label="2004 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="8450" end="8464" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q22316" start="8534" end="8544" title="John Kerry" label="John Kerry"/>
<link wikidata="Q15134831" start="8735" end="8762" title="New Jersey gubernatorial election, 2013" label="2013 gubernatorial election"/>
<link wikidata="Q63879" start="8775" end="8789" title="Chris Christie" label="Chris Christie"/>
<link wikidata="Q4858790" start="8849" end="8862" title="Barbara Buono" label="Barbara Buono"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586264" start="9064" end="9091" title="New Jersey gubernatorial election, 2009" label="2009 gubernatorial election"/>
<link wikidata="Q380570" start="9186" end="9197" title="Jon Corzine" label="Jon Corzine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5106343" start="9234" end="9247" title="Chris Daggett" label="Chris Daggett"/>
<link wikidata="Q14705594" start="9435" end="9467" title="Holland Township School District" label="Holland Township School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q7239239" start="9501" end="9517" title="pre-kindergarten" label="pre-kindergarten"/>
<link wikidata="Q5349142" start="9526" end="9538" title="eighth grade" label="eighth grade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543700" start="9717" end="9720" title="full-time equivalent" label="FTE"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595370" start="9735" end="9756" title="student–teacher ratio" label="student–teacher ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7039258" start="9798" end="9803" title="ninth grade" label="ninth"/>
<link wikidata="Q986388" start="9812" end="9825" title="twelfth grade" label="twelfth grade"/>
<link wikidata="Q5253414" start="9834" end="9870" title="Delaware Valley Regional High School" label="Delaware Valley Regional High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q3017769" start="9900" end="9919" title="Alexandria Township, New Jersey" label="Alexandria Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089312" start="9921" end="9931" title="Frenchtown, New Jersey" label="Frenchtown"/>
<link wikidata="Q3015394" start="9933" end="9950" title="Kingwood Township, New Jersey" label="Kingwood Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083131" start="9955" end="9962" title="Milford, New Jersey" label="Milford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543700" start="10080" end="10083" title="full-time equivalent" label="FTE"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595370" start="10098" end="10119" title="student–teacher ratio" label="student–teacher ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q5944694" start="10447" end="10490" title="Hunterdon County Vocational School District" label="Hunterdon County Vocational School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q3017068" start="10595" end="10611" title="Raritan Township, New Jersey" label="Raritan Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q858866" start="10900" end="10916" title="County Route 519 (New Jersey)" label="County Route 519"/>
<link wikidata="Q811194" start="10954" end="10967" title="Interstate 78 in New Jersey" label="Interstate 78"/>
<link wikidata="Q811410" start="10968" end="10981" title="U.S. Route 22 in New Jersey" label="U.S. Route 22"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088408" start="11042" end="11060" title="Pohatcong Township, New Jersey" label="Pohatcong Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q502468" start="11064" end="11077" title="Warren County, New Jersey" label="Warren County"/>
<link wikidata="Q963081" start="11129" end="11187" title="The Adventures of Buckaroo Banzai Across the 8th Dimension" label="The Adventures of Buckaroo Banzai Across the 8th Dimension"/>
<link wikidata="Q5161911" start="11429" end="11441" title="Connie Myers" label="Connie Myers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455914" start="11485" end="11512" title="New Jersey General Assembly" label="New Jersey General Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q4631654" start="11558" end="11583" title="New Jersey&amp;#x27;s 23rd legislative district" label="23rd Legislative District"/>
<link wikidata="Q7940140" start="11604" end="11628" title="Volendam Windmill" label="Volendam Windmill Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="11876" end="11883" title="Denmark" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="11892" end="11903" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1966994" start="12300" end="12340" title="National Center for Education Statistics" label="National Center for Education Statistics"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="125354" wikidata="Q3015394" url="?curid=125354" title="Kingwood Township, New Jersey">
<text>Kingwood Township is a township in Hunterdon County, in the U.S. state of New Jersey, located on the Hunterdon Plateau. As of the 2020 United States census, the township&#x27;s population was 3,802, a decrease of 43 (−1.1%) from the 2010 census count of 3,845, which in turn reflected an increase of 63 (+1.7%) from the 3,782 counted in the 2000 census.

==History==

Kingwood Township is one of the westernmost townships of Hunterdon County. Kingwood was originally established around 1746 when it was created from Bethlehem Township, though the exact details are uncertain. Kingwood was incorporated by Act of the New Jersey Legislature on February 21, 1798, as one of New Jersey&#x27;s initial group of 104 townships. Portions of the township were taken to form Franklin Township on April 7, 1845. Frenchtown borough acquired portions of the township in 1876.

Kingwood Township was the home of Daniel Bray, the local captain who rounded up the boats for George Washington&#x27;s crossing of the Delaware River during the Revolutionary War. The portion of Route 29 that runs through the township along its western edge is named for him.

In late 1981, Dick Siano became the first Libertarian Party candidate to win a partisan election outside of Alaska by winning a committee seat in the township. In the November election, he and the Democratic tied in the general election placing the incumbent Republican mayor in third place. Siano won the runoff election held on December 22.

==Geography==
According to the United States Census Bureau, the township had a total area of 35.62 square miles (92.24 km2), including 35.01 square miles (90.66 km2) of land and 0.61 square miles (1.58 km2) of water (1.71%).

The township borders the municipalities of Alexandria Township, Delaware Township, Franklin Township and Frenchtown in Hunterdon County; and the communities of Plumstead Township and Tinicum Township in Bucks County, across the Delaware River in Pennsylvania. Most of the township lies on the Hunterdon Plateau, a geologic plateau averaging in elevation though approaching the Delaware River, the elevation drops sharply to about at the banks of the river. Exposed rock can be seen on portions of Route 29 in the township between the River and the plateau.

Unincorporated communities, localities and place names located partially or completely within the township include Baptistown, Barbertown, Byram, Idell, Milltown, Point Breeze, Treasure Island, Tumble and Tumble Falls.

Frenchtown Solar is a group of three photovoltaic arrays owned by Consolidated Edison that forms one of the largest solar farms in the state, covering with a total of 68,500 solar panels and a 20.1 megawatt generating capacity. Two arrays are located just outside Baptistown on Route 12. The third and largest is to the south off County Route 519.

==Demographics==
===2010 census===
The 2010 United States census counted 3,845 people, 1,446 households, and 1,103 families in the township. The population density was . There were 1,569 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup was 96.51% (3,711) White, 0.65% (25) Black or African American, 0.03% (1) Native American, 1.09% (42) Asian, 0.00% (0) Pacific Islander, 0.52% (20) from other races, and 1.20% (46) from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 2.39% (92) of the population.

Of the 1,446 households, 32.2% had children under the age of 18; 64.2% were married couples living together; 8.0% had a female householder with no husband present and 23.7% were non-families. Of all households, 18.1% were made up of individuals and 6.5% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.66 and the average family size was 3.04.

23.1% of the population were under the age of 18, 6.0% from 18 to 24, 20.8% from 25 to 44, 37.3% from 45 to 64, and 12.9% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 45.1 years. For every 100 females, the population had 103.0 males. For every 100 females ages 18 and older there were 99.1 males.

The Census Bureau&#x27;s 2006–2010 American Community Survey showed that (in 2010 inflation-adjusted dollars) median household income was $94,951 (with a margin of error of +/− $8,656) and the median family income was $101,722 (+/− $3,508). Males had a median income of $62,636 (+/− $11,644) versus $39,704 (+/− $5,890) for females. The per capita income for the borough was $38,977 (+/− $4,174). About 2.7% of families and 3.2% of the population were below the poverty line, including 6.1% of those under age 18 and none of those age 65 or over.

===2000 census===
As of the 2000 United States census there were 3,782 people, 1,340 households, and 1,042 families residing in the township. The population density was . There were 1,422 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the township was 97.62% White, 0.61% African American, 0.08% Native American, 0.77% Asian, 0.19% from other races, and 0.74% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 1.85% of the population.

There were 1,340 households, out of which 38.9% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 68.9% were married couples living together, 6.0% had a female householder with no husband present, and 22.2% were non-families. 17.6% of all households were made up of individuals, and 6.9% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.82 and the average family size was 3.21.

In the township the population was spread out, with 27.3% under the age of 18, 4.8% from 18 to 24, 31.6% from 25 to 44, 25.7% from 45 to 64, and 10.5% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 39 years. For every 100 females, there were 102.0 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 99.3 males.

The median income for a household in the township was $71,551, and the median income for a family was $81,642. Males had a median income of $54,107 versus $31,326 for females. The per capita income for the township was $30,219. About 2.3% of families and 2.9% of the population were below the poverty line, including 4.1% of those under age 18 and none of those age 65 or over.

== Government ==

===Local government===

Kingwood Township operates under the Township form of New Jersey municipal government, one of 141 municipalities (of the 564) statewide that use this form. The Township Committee is comprised of three members, who are elected directly by the voters at-large in partisan elections to serve three-year terms of office on a staggered basis, with one seat coming up for election each year as part of the November general election in a three-year cycle. The Mayor is elected by the Committee from among its members and serves a one-year term, as does the Deputy Mayor. The Mayor serves as the Chairperson of the Committee and votes as an equal member, but has no other special powers.

, members of the Kingwood Township Committee are Mayor Andrew Russano Jr. (R, term on committee ends December 31, 2024; term as mayor ends 2023), Deputy Mayor Maureen Syrnick (R, term on committee and as deputy mayor ends 2023) and Lance Riggio (R, 2025).

=== Federal, state and county representation ===
Kingwood Township is located in the 7th Congressional District and is part of New Jersey&#x27;s 15th state legislative district.



===Politics===
In the 2012 presidential election, Republican Mitt Romney received 62.5% of the vote (1,282 cast), ahead of Democrat Barack Obama with 36.1% (741 votes), and other candidates with 1.3% (27 votes), among the 2,066 ballots cast by the township&#x27;s 2,797 registered voters (16 ballots were spoiled), for a turnout of 73.9%.




In the 2013 gubernatorial election, Republican Chris Christie received 77.9% of the vote (1,006 cast), ahead of Democrat Barbara Buono with 19.3% (250 votes), and other candidates with 2.8% (36 votes), among the 1,313 ballots cast by the township&#x27;s 2,751 registered voters (21 ballots were spoiled), for a turnout of 47.7%.

== Education ==
The Kingwood Township School District serves public school students ranging from pre-kindergarten through eighth grade at Kingwood Township School. As of the 2022–23 school year, the district, comprised of one school, had an enrollment of 324 students and 36.2 classroom teachers (on an FTE basis), for a student–teacher ratio of 9.0:1.

Students in public school for ninth through twelfth grades attend Delaware Valley Regional High School, together with students from Alexandria Township, Frenchtown, Holland Township and Milford borough. As of the 2022–23 school year, the high school had an enrollment of 722 students and 59.9 classroom teachers (on an FTE basis), for a student–teacher ratio of 12.1:1. Seats on the high school district&#x27;s nine-member board of education are allocated based on the population of the constituent municipalities, with two seats assigned to Kingwood Township.

Eighth grade students from all of Hunterdon County are eligible to apply to attend the high school programs offered by the Hunterdon County Vocational School District, a county-wide vocational school district that offers career and technical education at its campuses in Raritan Township and at programs sited at local high schools, with no tuition charged to students for attendance.

==Transportation==

, the township had a total of of roadways, of which were maintained by the municipality, by Hunterdon County and by the New Jersey Department of Transportation.

The two state routes that pass through are Route 12 and Route 29. The only major county road that goes through is County Route 519.

No limited access roads traverse Kingwood; the closest one is Interstate 78 in neighboring Franklin Township.

==Points of interest==

The Old Stone Church was built in 1837 and is now owned by the First Unitarian Universalist Fellowship of Hunterdon County. It was added to the National Register of Historic Places in 2018.

The Oak Summit Cemetery, across Oak Summit Road from the Old Stone Church, was established in 1754 and is now owned by the Prospect Hill Cemetery Association.

The Oak Summit School, a one-room schoolhouse, was established in 1849 and used until 1953. It is located next to the Old Stone Church.

The Thatcher House, built in 1765, featuring patterned brickwork, was added to the NRHP in 2020.

The Devil&#x27;s Tea Table, is a prominent landmark near Warsaw Road on Route 29. It is the focal point of a series of bluffs that contain several geological features of interest, such as the type localities for van Houghton cycles, as well as the type sections for units of the Locatong and Passaic Formations of the Triassic. These bluffs are a regional scenic attraction and are admired by many tourists who float by on the adjacent Delaware River.

==Notable people==

People who were born in, residents of, or otherwise closely associated with Kingwood Township include:
* George Opdyke (1805–1880), Mayor of New York City
* Billy Pauch Jr. (born 1987), professional stock car racing driver
* John Runk (1791–1872), represented in the United States House of Representatives from 1845–1847
* Kurt Wiese (1887–1974), author and children&#x27;s book illustrator, including &quot;The Five Chinese Brothers&quot; and the English translation of &quot;Bambi, A Life in the Woods&quot;, the novel upon which the film &quot;Bambi&quot; was based

==References==
==External links==

*Kingwood Township website
*Hunterdon County web page for Kingwood Township</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3015394" start="0" end="17" title="Kingwood Township, New Jersey" label="Kingwood Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q7830213" start="23" end="31" title="Township (New Jersey)" label="township"/>
<link wikidata="Q502451" start="35" end="51" title="Hunterdon County, New Jersey" label="Hunterdon County"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="60" end="70" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="74" end="84" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5944705" start="101" end="118" title="Hunterdon Plateau" label="Hunterdon Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="130" end="155" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="233" end="244" title="2010 United States census" label="2010 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q166998" start="341" end="352" title="2000 United States census" label="2000 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q542454" start="516" end="534" title="Bethlehem Township, New Jersey" label="Bethlehem Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q2867079" start="616" end="638" title="New Jersey Legislature" label="New Jersey Legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q5491960" start="765" end="782" title="Franklin Township, Hunterdon County, New Jersey" label="Franklin Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089312" start="801" end="819" title="Frenchtown, New Jersey" label="Frenchtown borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q5216649" start="898" end="909" title="Daniel Bray" label="Daniel Bray"/>
<link wikidata="Q23" start="958" end="975" title="George Washington" label="George Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q143762" start="999" end="1013" title="Delaware River" label="Delaware River"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="1025" end="1042" title="American Revolutionary War" label="Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q822300" start="1059" end="1067" title="New Jersey Route 29" label="Route 29"/>
<link wikidata="Q558334" start="1183" end="1200" title="Libertarian Party (United States)" label="Libertarian Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="1249" end="1255" title="Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076105" start="1361" end="1377" title="general election" label="general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="1516" end="1543" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q3017769" start="1754" end="1773" title="Alexandria Township, New Jersey" label="Alexandria Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q614185" start="1775" end="1792" title="Delaware Township, Hunterdon County, New Jersey" label="Delaware Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q5491960" start="1794" end="1811" title="Franklin Township, Hunterdon County, New Jersey" label="Franklin Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089312" start="1816" end="1826" title="Frenchtown, New Jersey" label="Frenchtown"/>
<link wikidata="Q75047" start="1871" end="1889" title="Plumstead Township, Pennsylvania" label="Plumstead Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q56691" start="1894" end="1910" title="Tinicum Township, Bucks County, Pennsylvania" label="Tinicum Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q494192" start="1914" end="1926" title="Bucks County, Pennsylvania" label="Bucks County"/>
<link wikidata="Q143762" start="1939" end="1953" title="Delaware River" label="Delaware River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400" start="1957" end="1969" title="Pennsylvania" label="Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q75520" start="2034" end="2041" title="plateau" label="plateau"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2269" end="2295" title="Local government in New Jersey#Unincorporated communities" label="Unincorporated communities"/>
<link wikidata="Q14705435" start="2384" end="2394" title="Baptistown, New Jersey" label="Baptistown"/>
<link wikidata="Q19059395" start="2396" end="2406" title="Barbertown, New Jersey" label="Barbertown"/>
<link wikidata="Q12888289" start="2408" end="2413" title="Byram, New Jersey" label="Byram"/>
<link wikidata="Q3015394" start="2415" end="2420" title="Idell, New Jersey" label="Idell"/>
<link wikidata="Q22083198" start="2474" end="2486" title="Tumble Falls, New Jersey" label="Tumble Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q18787650" start="2489" end="2505" title="Frenchtown Solar" label="Frenchtown Solar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1897785" start="2526" end="2545" title="Photovoltaic system" label="photovoltaic arrays"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127536" start="2555" end="2574" title="Consolidated Edison" label="Consolidated Edison"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003207" start="2605" end="2615" title="solar farm" label="solar farm"/>
<link wikidata="Q821607" start="2767" end="2775" title="New Jersey Route 12" label="Route 12"/>
<link wikidata="Q858866" start="2819" end="2835" title="County Route 519 (New Jersey)" label="County Route 519"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="2877" end="2902" title="2010 United States census" label="2010 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3103" end="3108" title="White (U.S. census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3121" end="3146" title="Black (U.S. census)" label="Black or African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3158" end="3173" title="Native American (U.S. census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3186" end="3191" title="Asian (U.S. census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3203" end="3219" title="Pacific Islander (U.S. census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3237" end="3248" title="Race and ethnicity in the United States census#Race" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3289" end="3307" title="Hispanic (U.S. census)" label="Hispanic or Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q463769" start="4086" end="4111" title="American Community Survey" label="American Community Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q311198" start="4133" end="4151" title="inflation adjustment" label="inflation-adjusted"/>
<link wikidata="Q1940707" start="4161" end="4184" title="median household income" label="median household income"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="4388" end="4405" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="4513" end="4525" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q166998" start="4627" end="4652" title="2000 United States census" label="2000 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4873" end="4878" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4886" end="4902" title="African American (U.S. Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4910" end="4925" title="Native American (U.S. Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4933" end="4938" title="Asian (U.S. Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4951" end="4962" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4998" end="5006" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="5010" end="5016" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="5170" end="5185" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="5988" end="6005" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="6101" end="6113" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q7830213" start="6266" end="6274" title="Township (New Jersey)" label="Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q3682992" start="6478" end="6486" title="at-large" label="at-large"/>
<link wikidata="Q30185" start="6959" end="6964" title="Mayor" label="Mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="6985" end="6986" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="R"/>
<link wikidata="Q17100287" start="7370" end="7396" title="United States presidential election in New Jersey, 2012" label="2012 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q4496" start="7409" end="7420" title="Mitt Romney" label="Mitt Romney"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="7480" end="7492" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738441" start="7653" end="7660" title="Spoilt vote" label="spoiled"/>
<link wikidata="Q15134831" start="7698" end="7725" title="New Jersey gubernatorial election, 2013" label="2013 gubernatorial election"/>
<link wikidata="Q63879" start="7738" end="7752" title="Chris Christie" label="Chris Christie"/>
<link wikidata="Q4858790" start="7812" end="7825" title="Barbara Buono" label="Barbara Buono"/>
<link wikidata="Q6413818" start="8041" end="8074" title="Kingwood Township School District" label="Kingwood Township School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q7239239" start="8118" end="8134" title="pre-kindergarten" label="pre-kindergarten"/>
<link wikidata="Q5349142" start="8143" end="8155" title="eighth grade" label="eighth grade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543700" start="8324" end="8327" title="full-time equivalent" label="FTE"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595370" start="8342" end="8363" title="student–teacher ratio" label="student–teacher ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7039258" start="8405" end="8410" title="ninth grade" label="ninth"/>
<link wikidata="Q986388" start="8419" end="8432" title="twelfth grade" label="twelfth grade"/>
<link wikidata="Q5253414" start="8441" end="8477" title="Delaware Valley Regional High School" label="Delaware Valley Regional High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q3017769" start="8507" end="8526" title="Alexandria Township, New Jersey" label="Alexandria Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089312" start="8528" end="8538" title="Frenchtown, New Jersey" label="Frenchtown"/>
<link wikidata="Q3017015" start="8540" end="8556" title="Holland Township, New Jersey" label="Holland Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083131" start="8561" end="8576" title="Milford, New Jersey" label="Milford borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543700" start="8694" end="8697" title="full-time equivalent" label="FTE"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595370" start="8712" end="8733" title="student–teacher ratio" label="student–teacher ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q5944694" start="9060" end="9103" title="Hunterdon County Vocational School District" label="Hunterdon County Vocational School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q3017068" start="9208" end="9224" title="Raritan Township, New Jersey" label="Raritan Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q867675" start="9463" end="9502" title="New Jersey Department of Transportation" label="New Jersey Department of Transportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q821607" start="9548" end="9556" title="New Jersey Route 12" label="Route 12"/>
<link wikidata="Q822300" start="9561" end="9569" title="New Jersey Route 29" label="Route 29"/>
<link wikidata="Q858866" start="9619" end="9635" title="County Route 519 (New Jersey)" label="County Route 519"/>
<link wikidata="Q811194" start="9700" end="9713" title="Interstate 78 in New Jersey" label="Interstate 78"/>
<link wikidata="Q50604985" start="9777" end="9793" title="Old Stone Church (Kingwood Township, New Jersey)" label="Old Stone Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1622507" start="9842" end="9864" title="Unitarian Universalist" label="Unitarian Universalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719" start="9917" end="9953" title="National Register of Historic Places" label="National Register of Historic Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q104164396" start="10265" end="10279" title="Thatcher House (Kingwood Township, New Jersey)" label="Thatcher House"/>
<link wikidata="Q3101809" start="10937" end="10950" title="George Opdyke" label="George Opdyke"/>
<link wikidata="Q130233342" start="10989" end="11004" title="Billy Pauch Jr." label="Billy Pauch Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q1758324" start="11031" end="11047" title="stock car racing" label="stock car racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1683345" start="11057" end="11066" title="John Runk" label="John Runk"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="11099" end="11137" title="United States House of Representatives" label="United States House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q144520" start="11155" end="11165" title="Kurt Wiese" label="Kurt Wiese"/>
<link wikidata="Q7734267" start="11240" end="11265" title="The Five Chinese Brothers" label="The Five Chinese Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q742753" start="11309" end="11335" title="Bambi, A Life in the Woods" label="Bambi, A Life in the Woods"/>
<link wikidata="Q43051" start="11379" end="11384" title="Bambi" label="Bambi"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="125356" wikidata="Q1086436" url="?curid=125356" title="Lambertville, New Jersey">
<text>Lambertville is a city within Hunterdon County in the U.S. state of New Jersey. As of the 2020 United States census, the city&#x27;s population was 4,139, an increase of 233 (+6.0%) from the 3,906 recorded at the 2010 census, which in turn reflected an increase of 38 (1.0%) from the 3,868 counted in the 2000 census.

Lambertville is situated on the banks of the Delaware River in southwestern Hunterdon County, directly across the river from New Hope, Pennsylvania. In the 18th century, the area was named after various operators of ferries across the river to Pennsylvania, ultimately becoming known as Coryell&#x27;s Ferry, after its owner, Emanuel Coryell. Coryell&#x27;s Ferry was the western terminus of the New Jersey portion of York Road, which became U.S. Route 202, connecting New York City and Philadelphia. The community was named Lambertville in 1810, when the post office was established, in honor of John Lambert, a resident who had served as United States senator and acting governor of New Jersey, and who was responsible for the opening of the post office. In June 2022, &quot;The New York Times&quot; described Lambertville as a gay-friendly travel destination with a quieter vibe than New York&#x27;s Fire Island. 

==History==
Originally settled by the Lenape (Delaware) Native Americans, a area around Lambertville was acquired for 700 Pounds by the Council of West Jersey and divided into smaller plots. The earliest European settler in present-day Lambertville was John Holcombe, who purchased a lot and built a stone home in 1744.

Emanuel Coryell bought a property in the area in 1732, which was used for commercial purposes. He received a charter to operate a ferry connecting what is now Lambertville and New Hope, and opened a tavern and inn to host travelers stopping halfway along the route between New York City and Philadelphia. The settlements on either side of the Delaware River were each called Coryell&#x27;s Ferry. During the American Revolutionary War, George Washington and his colonial forces twice camped at the home John Holcombe built in 1744.

The Delaware River and the Delaware and Raritan Canal were instrumental in the early prosperity of Lambertville. In June 1834, the opening of the canal was celebrated with a barge ride from Trenton to Lambertville. The canal&#x27;s completion was not without hardship. 4,000 Irish immigrants were hired to dig the canal with pick and shovel. During the construction, an epidemic of cholera broke out in 1832 and dozens of men were buried along the banks of the canal and the Delaware.

Lambertville was originally incorporated as a town by an act of the New Jersey Legislature on March 1, 1849, from portions of West Amwell Township. It was reincorporated as a city on March 26, 1872.

In the 19th century, due to its proximity to the canal and the Belvidere Delaware Railroad, Lambertville became a factory town. The range of products extended from underwear to rubber bands. After the introduction of motorized vehicles made the canal obsolete, the factories began shutting down. Some lasted into the 1970s. The railroad continued to serve as a vital freight carrier until the mid-1970s. Later, the Black River and Western Railroad acquired the line into town and operated short-distance local freight trains and scenic tourist passenger excursion trains into the late 1990s.

Starting in the early 1980s, with pioneers including the Jonsdottir art gallery, Hamilton Grill and the Lambertville Station eatery (a hotel soon followed), the city began to attract artists and other creative types. These days, much of the town&#x27;s 18th- and 19th-century flavor remains, including many restored houses. The town has become a tourist destination, with many shops, galleries, restaurants, and B&amp;Bs. The canal path offers cyclists, joggers and walkers a level place to exercise and enjoy views of the canal and Delaware River in all seasons. Lambertville is also largely noted for its socially progressive culture, similar to the neighboring city of New Hope, Pennsylvania.

==Geography==

According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the city had an area of 1.23 square miles (3.17 km2), including 1.08 square miles (2.81 km2) of land and 0.14 square miles (0.36 km2) of water (11.46%). The city borders Delaware Township and West Amwell Township in Hunterdon County and New Hope and Solebury Township across the Delaware River in Bucks County, Pennsylvania.

The Delaware and Raritan Canal flows through the western half of Lambertville, parallel to the Delaware River. Sections of the Delaware and Raritan Canal State Park are in the city, including trails and bridges.

===Climate===
Lambertville&#x27;s climate is characterized by hot, humid summers and generally cold winters. According to the Köppen Climate Classification system, Lambertville has a humid continental climate, abbreviated &quot;Dfa&quot; on climate maps.

==Demographics==
===2010 census===
The 2010 United States census counted 3,906 people, 1,958 households, and 897 families in the city. The population density was . There were 2,075 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup was 91.30% (3,566) White, 1.95% (76) Black or African American, 0.20% (8) Native American, 1.31% (51) Asian, 0.00% (0) Pacific Islander, 4.12% (161) from other races, and 1.13% (44) from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 9.75% (381) of the population.

Of the 1,958 households, 15.3% had children under the age of 18; 36.0% were married couples living together; 6.8% had a female householder with no husband present and 54.2% were non-families. Of all households, 41.4% were made up of individuals and 14.5% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 1.98 and the average family size was 2.72.

13.7% of the population were under the age of 18, 5.9% from 18 to 24, 26.9% from 25 to 44, 36.1% from 45 to 64, and 17.4% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 47.3 years. For every 100 females, the population had 95.8 males. For every 100 females ages 18 and older there were 93.6 males.

The Census Bureau&#x27;s 2006–2010 American Community Survey showed that (in 2010 inflation-adjusted dollars) median household income was $71,532 (with a margin of error of +/− $7,040) and the median family income was $100,952 (+/− $14,554). Males had a median income of $57,596 (+/− $17,671) versus $53,869 (+/− $30,408) for females. The per capita income for the borough was $47,684 (+/− $6,399). About 2.3% of families and 6.4% of the population were below the poverty line, including 7.8% of those under age 18 and 5.1% of those age 65 or over.

===2000 census===
As of the 2000 United States census there were 3,868 people, 1,860 households, and 939 families residing in the city. The population density was . There were 1,961 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 94.65% White, 1.94% African American, 0.34% Native American, 1.06% Asian, 0.05% Pacific Islander, 0.90% from other races, and 1.06% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 3.10% of the population.

There were 1,860 households, out of which 18.3% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 40.3% were married couples living together, 7.8% had a female householder with no husband present, and 49.5% were non-families. 38.8% of all households were made up of individuals, and 10.8% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. 3.7% have unmarried partners. The average household size was 2.06 and the average family size was 2.82.

In the city the population was spread out, with 15.4% under the age of 18, 6.1% from 18 to 24, 32.4% from 25 to 44, 30.9% from 45 to 64, and 15.2% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 43 years. For every 100 females, there were 94.8 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 93.2 males.

The median income for a household in the city was $52,647, and the median income for a family was $80,669. Males had a median income of $47,313 versus $40,369 for females. The per capita income for the city was $36,267. About 4.5% of families and 5.9% of the population were below the poverty line, including 2.5% of those under age 18 and 12.3% of those age 65 or over.

==Government==
===Local government===
Lambertville is the only city in Hunterdon County, and describes itself as one of the smallest cities in the United States. It is governed within the Faulkner Act (formally known as the Optional Municipal charter Law) under the Small Municipality form of government (Plan C), which is available only for municipalities with a population of under 12,000, and was implemented in Lambertville by direct petition as of January 1, 1983. This form of government is used by 18 municipalities (of the 564) statewide and is available to municipalities with fewer than 12,000 residents at the time of adoption. The government comprises the mayor and the four-member city council, with all positions elected at-large on a partisan basis in the November general elections. The mayor is elected directly by the voters to a three-year term of office. Council members serve a term of three years, which are staggered so that two seats come up for election in two years in a three-year cycle, with the mayoral election in the third year.

The mayor exercises executive power; presides over the council with voice and vote, but has no veto power; appoints council committees; appoints the municipal clerk, attorney, tax assessor, tax collector and treasurer, all with council confirmation. The council exercises legislative power and approves the mayor&#x27;s appointees.

, Lambertville&#x27;s mayor is Democrat Andrew J. Nowick, whose term of office ends December 31, 2024. Members of the city council are Bendetta Lambert (D, 2023), Karen Kominsky (D, 2025), Evan Lide (D, 2025) and Steven Stegman (D, 2023).

In December 2019, the council selected Madeline Urbish to fill the seat expiring in December 2020 that Elaine Warner had held until she resigned earlier that month.

In November 2018, the city council appointed Julia Taylor to fill the seat expiring in December 2019 that became vacant following the resignation the previous month of Steven M. Stegman, who left office to focus on family issues.

In the 2020 City Council primary elections, incumbents Asaro and Urbish lost to Democratic challengers Stegman and Benedetta Lambert, who went on to win in the general election on November 3.

On January 19, 2021, the Borough of Flemington canceled the service agreement to share Business Administrators with Lambertville.

===Federal, state and county representation===
Lambertville is in the 7th Congressional District and the 15th state legislative district.



===Politics===
As of March 2011, there were 3,053 registered voters in Lambertville, of whom 1,395 (45.7%) were registered Democrats, 569 (18.6%) were registered Republicans and 1,087 (35.6%) were unaffiliated. Two voters were registered as either Libertarians or Greens.

In the 2012 presidential election, Democrat Barack Obama received 71.8% of the vote (1,684), ahead of Republican Mitt Romney&#x27;s 26.7% (627), and other candidates&#x27; 1.5% (35), among the 2,361 ballots cast by the city&#x27;s 3,296 registered voters (15 ballots were spoiled), for a turnout of 71.6%. In the 2008 presidential election, Obama received 71.1% of the vote (1,744), ahead of Republican John McCain&#x27;s 26.8% (658) and other candidates&#x27; 1.4% (35), among the 2,453 ballots cast by the city&#x27;s 3,099 registered voters, for a turnout of 79.2%. In the 2004 presidential election, Democrat John Kerry received 68.1% of the vote (1,495), outpolling Republican George W. Bush&#x27;s 30.8% (677) and other candidates&#x27; 0.5% (15), among the 2,195 ballots cast by the city&#x27;s 2,738 registered voters, for a turnout of 80.2%.




In the 2013 gubernatorial election, Democrat Barbara Buono received 54.7% of the vote (798), ahead of Republican Chris Christie&#x27;s 43.4% (633), and other candidates&#x27; 2.0% (29), among the 1,501 ballots cast by the city&#x27;s 3,231 registered voters (41 ballots were spoiled), for a turnout of 46.5%. In the 2009 gubernatorial election, Democrat Jon Corzine received 59.5% of the vote (1,068), ahead of Christie&#x27;s 31.2% (560), Independent Chris Daggett&#x27;s 6.6% (118) and other candidates&#x27; 0.7% (12), among the 1,795 ballots cast by the city&#x27;s 3,036 registered voters, yielding a 59.1% turnout.

==Transportation==
 
, Lambertville had of roadways, of which were maintained by the municipality, by Hunterdon County, by the New Jersey Department of Transportation and by the Delaware River Joint Toll Bridge Commission.

U.S. Route 202 is the most prominent highway to pass through Lambertville. Other major roads that pass through include Route 29, Route 165 and County Route 518.

No interstate highways pass through, but there are several nearby, such as Interstate 78 in Franklin Township and Interstate 295 in Hopewell Township.

The Delaware River Joint Toll Bridge Commission operates the toll-free New Hope-Lambertville Toll Supported Bridge which stretches across the Delaware River, connecting PA 179 in New Hope, Pennsylvania, with NJ 179. Constructed in 1904 as the third bridge on the site, the bridge stretches across the Delaware River. The original bridge, designed by Lewis Wernwag, was constructed in 1814 and destroyed in 1841. A second bridge completed in 1842 was destroyed by flooding in 1903.

==Education==
The South Hunterdon Regional School District serves students in pre-kindergarten through 12th grade from Lambertville, Stockton and West Amwell Township. Each of the three municipalities had its own school through sixth grade until the Stockton school was closed after the 2017–18 school year; public school students in 7th through 12th grades attend a shared high school in Lambertville. As of the 2022–23 school year, the district, comprised of three schools, had an enrollment of 827 students and 108.1 classroom teachers (on an FTE basis), for a student–teacher ratio of 7.7:1. Schools in the district (with 2022–23 enrollment data from the National Center for Education Statistics) are
South Hunterdon Regional Elementary School for grades PreK–4 (was Lambertville Public School, which had 221 students in grades PreK–6),
South Hunterdon Regional Middle School for grades 5–8 (was West Amwell School, with 170 students in grades K–6) and 
South Hunterdon Regional High School for grades 9–12 (which had 417 students in grades 7–12). Lambertville is assigned five of the nine seats on the regional district&#x27;s board of education.

In a September 2013 special election, voters from Lambertville, Stockton and West Amwell Township passed referendums to dissolve the South Hunterdon Regional High School District and combine the three existing school districts from each municipality (Lambertville City School District, Stockton Borough School District and West Amwell Township School District), with majorities in each community passing both ballot items. A single combined regional Pre-K–12 district was created, with property taxes levied under a formula in which 57% is based on property values and 43% on the number of students. The executive county superintendent appointed an interim board of education for the new regional district, which was responsible for implementing the merger.

Before the creation of the South Hunterdon district, students had attended Lambertville High School, which was constructed in 1854 and closed in September 1960, and has since been the subject of various legends described in &quot;Weird NJ&quot;.

Eighth-grade students from Hunterdon County are eligible to apply to attend the high school programs offered by the Hunterdon County Vocational School District, a county-wide vocational school district that offers career and technical education at its campuses in Raritan Township and at programs sited at local high schools, with no tuition charged.

==Community==
Annually, in April, the City of Lambertville celebrates the return of the shad, a fish that supplied the Lewis Island Fishery in Lambertville as of 1888. The festival launched in 1981 and is organized by the Greater Lambertville Chamber of Commerce. Featuring vendors&#x27; booths focusing on the area arts community, the ShadFest supports local nonprofits that support Lambertville-area residents and businesses. Lambertville is well-known as having a gay friendly vibe, along with its neighboring community of New Hope, Pennsylvania, situated across the Delaware River.

==Dining==
Lambertville is known for an array of dining opportunities, ranging from casual family-owned to eclectic and upscale options.

==Historic sites==
Lambertville has several properties listed on the National Register of Historic Places. The James W. Marshall House was added in 1970. The Delaware and Raritan Canal, which flows through the city, was added as a historic district in 1973. The Lambertville House was added in 1978. Nearly the entire city was listed as the Lambertville Historic District in 1983. The Kalmia Club was added in 2012. The Lambertville City Hall, originally known as the A. H. Holcombe House, is part of the historic district.

==Notable people==

People who were born in, residents of, or otherwise closely associated with Lambertville include:
* Bradley M. Campbell (born 1961), former head of the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
* Lucilla Green Cheney (1853–1878), physician and medical missionary
* James Gould Cozzens (1903–1978), novelist and Pulitzer Prize winner
* Elsie Driggs (1898–1992), painter mostly known for her contributions to the Precisionist movement of the 1920s
* Anne Elstner (1899–1981), actress who played the title role in the radio soap opera &quot;Stella Dallas&quot; from 1937–1955 and operated the River&#x27;s Edge restaurant in Lambertville until 1973
* Jamie Fox (1954-2017), political strategist
* Anne Garefino (born 1959), co-producer of Comedy Central&#x27;s &quot;South Park&quot; and the Broadway musical &quot;The Book of Mormon&quot;
* William Crane Gray (1835–1919), elected in 1892 as the first Bishop of the Episcopal Missionary Jurisdiction of Southern Florida
* Harry Haenigsen (1900–1990), cartoonist best known for his comic strip &quot;Penny&quot;
* George Holcombe (1786–1828), member of the United States House of Representatives from New Jersey&#x27;s at-large congressional district
* William Holcombe (1804–1870), first Lieutenant Governor of Minnesota
* John E. Hunt (1908–1989), represented New Jersey&#x27;s 1st congressional district in the United States House of Representatives from 1967 to 1975
* John Lambert (1746–1823), U.S. Senator and namesake of Lambertville
* Samuel Lilly (1816–1880), represented New Jersey&#x27;s 3rd congressional district from 1853 to 1855. Lilly served as the first mayor of Lambertville, serving in office from 1849–1852
* Anne Marie Macari (born 1955), poet
* James W. Marshall (1810–1885), discoverer of gold at Sutter&#x27;s Mill in California in 1848
* James McBride (born 1957), author and musician
* Scott Metzger (born 1977), guitarist who has performed with Joe Russo&#x27;s Almost Dead and Phil and Friends
* Bror Julius Olsson Nordfeldt (1878–1955), Swedish-born, American artist best known for his seascapes and depictions of New Mexico&#x27;s indigenous culture
* Erik Peterson (born 1966), member of the New Jersey General Assembly
* Horace Griggs Prall (1881–1951), attorney and politician who served in both houses of the New Jersey Legislature
* John Runk (1791–1872), represented in the United States House of Representatives from 1845–1847
* Charles Bradford Smith (1916–2004), United States Army Brigadier general who received the Silver Star medal for his service in South Korea
* Gerald Stern (1925-2022), poet who was Poet Laureate of New Jersey from 2000 to 2002
* Kyle Tress (born 1981), Olympic athlete in the sport of skeleton
* Gene Ween (born 1970), founding member of the band Ween
* Gary Woodward, author and retired professor who was an early contributor to the field of political communication
==References==
==External links==

* Official Lambertville website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1086436" start="0" end="12" title="Lambertville, New Jersey" label="Lambertville"/>
<link wikidata="Q2974552" start="18" end="22" title="city (New Jersey)" label="city"/>
<link wikidata="Q502451" start="30" end="46" title="Hunterdon County, New Jersey" label="Hunterdon County"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="54" end="64" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="68" end="78" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="90" end="115" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="213" end="224" title="2010 United States census" label="2010 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q166998" start="305" end="316" title="2000 United States census" label="2000 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q143762" start="364" end="378" title="Delaware River" label="Delaware River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1182069" start="444" end="452" title="New Hope, Pennsylvania" label="New Hope"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400" start="454" end="466" title="Pennsylvania" label="Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q867736" start="737" end="746" title="Old York Road" label="York Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q2436504" start="761" end="775" title="U.S. Route 202" label="U.S. Route 202"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="788" end="801" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="806" end="818" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q377562" start="916" end="928" title="John Lambert (politician)" label="John Lambert"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="959" end="980" title="United States Senator" label="United States senator"/>
<link wikidata="Q886931" start="985" end="1014" title="List of Governors of New Jersey" label="acting governor of New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="1096" end="1114" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q2264991" start="1149" end="1161" title="gay tourism" label="gay-friendly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418789" start="1222" end="1233" title="Fire Island" label="Fire Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q82048" start="1275" end="1281" title="Lenape" label="Lenape"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="1293" end="1309" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="Native Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q6273074" start="1384" end="1395" title="West Jersey" label="West Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="1831" end="1844" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="1849" end="1861" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="1966" end="1992" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q23" start="1994" end="2011" title="George Washington" label="George Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q143762" start="2095" end="2109" title="Delaware River" label="Delaware River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2131731" start="2118" end="2144" title="Delaware and Raritan Canal" label="Delaware and Raritan Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q25330" start="2281" end="2288" title="Trenton, New Jersey" label="Trenton"/>
<link wikidata="Q12090" start="2473" end="2480" title="cholera" label="cholera"/>
<link wikidata="Q7829892" start="2623" end="2627" title="town (New Jersey)" label="town"/>
<link wikidata="Q2867079" start="2645" end="2667" title="New Jersey Legislature" label="New Jersey Legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q3016070" start="2703" end="2723" title="West Amwell Township, New Jersey" label="West Amwell Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q4884896" start="2840" end="2867" title="Belvidere Delaware Railroad" label="Belvidere Delaware Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q4921676" start="3192" end="3224" title="Black River and Western Railroad" label="Black River and Western Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q367914" start="3782" end="3790" title="Bed and breakfast" label="B&amp;amp;Bs"/>
<link wikidata="Q821102" start="3977" end="3997" title="Progressivism" label="socially progressive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1182069" start="4042" end="4064" title="New Hope, Pennsylvania" label="New Hope, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="4099" end="4117" title="United States Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q614185" start="4289" end="4306" title="Delaware Township, Hunterdon County, New Jersey" label="Delaware Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q3016070" start="4311" end="4331" title="West Amwell Township, New Jersey" label="West Amwell Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q1182069" start="4356" end="4364" title="New Hope, Pennsylvania" label="New Hope"/>
<link wikidata="Q46211" start="4369" end="4386" title="Solebury Township, Pennsylvania" label="Solebury Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q143762" start="4398" end="4412" title="Delaware River" label="Delaware River"/>
<link wikidata="Q494192" start="4416" end="4428" title="Bucks County, Pennsylvania" label="Bucks County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400" start="4430" end="4442" title="Pennsylvania" label="Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q5253440" start="4572" end="4609" title="Delaware and Raritan Canal State Park" label="Delaware and Raritan Canal State Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="4784" end="4813" title="Köppen Climate Classification" label="Köppen Climate Classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q10856115" start="4841" end="4866" title="humid continental climate" label="humid continental climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="4953" end="4978" title="2010 United States census" label="2010 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="5053" end="5071" title="population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="5173" end="5178" title="White (U.S. census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="5191" end="5216" title="Black (U.S. census)" label="Black or African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="5228" end="5243" title="Native American (U.S. census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="5256" end="5261" title="Asian (U.S. census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="5273" end="5289" title="Pacific Islander (U.S. census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5308" end="5319" title="Race and ethnicity in the United States census#Race" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="5360" end="5378" title="Hispanic (U.S. census)" label="Hispanic or Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q463769" start="6158" end="6183" title="American Community Survey" label="American Community Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q311198" start="6205" end="6223" title="inflation adjustment" label="inflation-adjusted"/>
<link wikidata="Q1940707" start="6233" end="6256" title="median household income" label="median household income"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="6462" end="6479" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="6587" end="6599" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q166998" start="6701" end="6726" title="2000 United States census" label="2000 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="6937" end="6942" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="6950" end="6966" title="African American (U.S. Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="6974" end="6989" title="Native American (U.S. Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="6997" end="7002" title="Asian (U.S. Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="7010" end="7026" title="Pacific Islander (U.S. Census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="7039" end="7050" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="7086" end="7094" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="7098" end="7104" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="7258" end="7273" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="8098" end="8115" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="8207" end="8219" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q5438118" start="8482" end="8494" title="Faulkner Act" label="Faulkner Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q5438118" start="8560" end="8578" title="Faulkner Act (small municipality)" label="Small Municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q3682992" start="9029" end="9037" title="at-large" label="at-large"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="9719" end="9727" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="10913" end="10922" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="10952" end="10963" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republicans"/>
<link wikidata="Q5354776" start="10987" end="10999" title="Unaffiliated (New Jersey)" label="unaffiliated"/>
<link wikidata="Q558334" start="11038" end="11050" title="Libertarian Party (United States)" label="Libertarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q849158" start="11054" end="11060" title="Green Party (United States)" label="Greens"/>
<link wikidata="Q17100287" start="11070" end="11096" title="United States presidential election in New Jersey, 2012" label="2012 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="11107" end="11119" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q4496" start="11176" end="11187" title="Mitt Romney" label="Mitt Romney"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738441" start="11335" end="11342" title="Spoilt vote" label="spoiled"/>
<link wikidata="Q16959334" start="11376" end="11402" title="United States presidential election in New Jersey, 2008" label="2008 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q10390" start="11466" end="11477" title="John McCain" label="John McCain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892945" start="11639" end="11665" title="United States presidential election in New Jersey, 2004" label="2004 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q22316" start="11676" end="11686" title="John Kerry" label="John Kerry"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="11745" end="11759" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q15134831" start="11925" end="11952" title="New Jersey gubernatorial election, 2013" label="2013 gubernatorial election"/>
<link wikidata="Q4858790" start="11963" end="11976" title="Barbara Buono" label="Barbara Buono"/>
<link wikidata="Q63879" start="12031" end="12045" title="Chris Christie" label="Chris Christie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586264" start="12234" end="12261" title="New Jersey gubernatorial election, 2009" label="2009 gubernatorial election"/>
<link wikidata="Q380570" start="12272" end="12283" title="Jon Corzine" label="Jon Corzine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5106343" start="12370" end="12383" title="Chris Daggett" label="Chris Daggett"/>
<link wikidata="Q867675" start="12667" end="12706" title="New Jersey Department of Transportation" label="New Jersey Department of Transportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5253341" start="12718" end="12761" title="Delaware River Joint Toll Bridge Commission" label="Delaware River Joint Toll Bridge Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q811458" start="12764" end="12778" title="U.S. Route 202 in New Jersey" label="U.S. Route 202"/>
<link wikidata="Q822300" start="12883" end="12891" title="New Jersey Route 29" label="Route 29"/>
<link wikidata="Q822300" start="12893" end="12902" title="New Jersey Route 165" label="Route 165"/>
<link wikidata="Q858853" start="12907" end="12923" title="County Route 518 (New Jersey)" label="County Route 518"/>
<link wikidata="Q94247" start="12929" end="12948" title="Interstate highway system" label="interstate highways"/>
<link wikidata="Q811194" start="13001" end="13014" title="Interstate 78 in New Jersey" label="Interstate 78"/>
<link wikidata="Q5491960" start="13018" end="13035" title="Franklin Township, Hunterdon County, New Jersey" label="Franklin Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q798013" start="13040" end="13054" title="Interstate 295 (Delaware–Pennsylvania)" label="Interstate 295"/>
<link wikidata="Q5900433" start="13058" end="13075" title="Hopewell Township, Mercer County, New Jersey" label="Hopewell Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q5253341" start="13082" end="13125" title="Delaware River Joint Toll Bridge Commission" label="Delaware River Joint Toll Bridge Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q12063838" start="13149" end="13192" title="New Hope-Lambertville Toll Supported Bridge" label="New Hope-Lambertville Toll Supported Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q143762" start="13220" end="13234" title="Delaware River" label="Delaware River"/>
<link wikidata="Q827445" start="13247" end="13253" title="Pennsylvania State Route 179" label="PA 179"/>
<link wikidata="Q1182069" start="13257" end="13279" title="New Hope, Pennsylvania" label="New Hope, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q827445" start="13286" end="13292" title="New Jersey Route 179" label="NJ 179"/>
<link wikidata="Q143762" start="13379" end="13393" title="Delaware River" label="Delaware River"/>
<link wikidata="Q6688369" start="13428" end="13441" title="Lewis Wernwag" label="Lewis Wernwag"/>
<link wikidata="Q18648781" start="13578" end="13618" title="South Hunterdon Regional School District" label="South Hunterdon Regional School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q7239239" start="13638" end="13654" title="pre-kindergarten" label="pre-kindergarten"/>
<link wikidata="Q986388" start="13663" end="13673" title="twelfth grade" label="12th grade"/>
<link wikidata="Q46216" start="13693" end="13701" title="Stockton, New Jersey" label="Stockton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3016070" start="13706" end="13726" title="West Amwell Township, New Jersey" label="West Amwell Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q43791171" start="13894" end="13897" title="seventh grade" label="7th"/>
<link wikidata="Q986388" start="13906" end="13916" title="twelfth grade" label="12th grade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543700" start="14106" end="14109" title="full-time equivalent" label="FTE"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595370" start="14124" end="14145" title="student–teacher ratio" label="student–teacher ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1966994" start="14219" end="14259" title="National Center for Education Statistics" label="National Center for Education Statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7567513" start="14518" end="14554" title="South Hunterdon Regional High School" label="South Hunterdon Regional High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q399541" start="14692" end="14710" title="board of education" label="board of education"/>
<link wikidata="Q6481393" start="14964" end="14997" title="Lambertville City School District" label="Lambertville City School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q7618221" start="14999" end="15031" title="Stockton Borough School District" label="Stockton Borough School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q7984307" start="15036" end="15072" title="West Amwell Township School District" label="West Amwell Township School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q14705695" start="15547" end="15571" title="Lambertville High School" label="Lambertville High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q3567106" start="15702" end="15710" title="Weird NJ" label="Weird NJ"/>
<link wikidata="Q5944694" start="15835" end="15878" title="Hunterdon County Vocational School District" label="Hunterdon County Vocational School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q3017068" start="15983" end="15999" title="Raritan Township, New Jersey" label="Raritan Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q2650600" start="16159" end="16163" title="shad" label="shad"/>
<link wikidata="Q661717" start="16538" end="16550" title="gay friendly" label="gay friendly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1182069" start="16597" end="16605" title="New Hope, Pennsylvania" label="New Hope"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400" start="16607" end="16619" title="Pennsylvania" label="Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q143762" start="16641" end="16655" title="Delaware River" label="Delaware River"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719" start="16865" end="16901" title="National Register of Historic Places" label="National Register of Historic Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q6144844" start="16907" end="16930" title="James W. Marshall House" label="James W. Marshall House"/>
<link wikidata="Q2131731" start="16954" end="16980" title="Delaware and Raritan Canal" label="Delaware and Raritan Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6481396" start="17058" end="17076" title="Lambertville House" label="Lambertville House"/>
<link wikidata="Q15241421" start="17137" end="17167" title="Lambertville Historic District" label="Lambertville Historic District"/>
<link wikidata="Q124101039" start="17181" end="17192" title="Kalmia Club" label="Kalmia Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q15241421" start="17216" end="17238" title="Lambertville City Hall" label="Lambertville City Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q4954976" start="17441" end="17460" title="Bradley M. Campbell" label="Bradley M. Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q17091547" start="17493" end="17542" title="New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection" label="New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection"/>
<link wikidata="Q106383186" start="17545" end="17565" title="Lucilla Green Cheney" label="Lucilla Green Cheney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1238811" start="17614" end="17633" title="James Gould Cozzens" label="James Gould Cozzens"/>
<link wikidata="Q46525" start="17660" end="17674" title="Pulitzer Prize" label="Pulitzer Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q3051756" start="17684" end="17696" title="Elsie Driggs" label="Elsie Driggs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1578378" start="17760" end="17772" title="Precisionist" label="Precisionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q21608049" start="17797" end="17809" title="Anne Elstner" label="Anne Elstner"/>
<link wikidata="Q23739" start="17870" end="17880" title="soap opera" label="soap opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q7607056" start="17887" end="17900" title="Stella Dallas (radio)" label="Stella Dallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6146902" start="17997" end="18006" title="Jamie Fox" label="Jamie Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q4768366" start="18043" end="18056" title="Anne Garefino" label="Anne Garefino"/>
<link wikidata="Q16538" start="18113" end="18123" title="South Park" label="South Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064850" start="18161" end="18179" title="The Book of Mormon (musical)" label="The Book of Mormon"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007245" start="18188" end="18206" title="William Crane Gray" label="William Crane Gray"/>
<link wikidata="Q5669382" start="18319" end="18334" title="Harry Haenigsen" label="Harry Haenigsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164331" start="18396" end="18401" title="Penny (comic strip)" label="Penny"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507586" start="18410" end="18425" title="George Holcombe" label="George Holcombe"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="18453" end="18491" title="United States House of Representatives" label="United States House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q17017690" start="18497" end="18546" title="New Jersey&amp;#x27;s at-large congressional district" label="New Jersey&amp;#x27;s at-large congressional district"/>
<link wikidata="Q442187" start="18549" end="18565" title="William Holcombe" label="William Holcombe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1725504" start="18585" end="18617" title="List of Lieutenant Governors of Minnesota" label="Lieutenant Governor of Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1699887" start="18620" end="18632" title="John E. Hunt" label="John E. Hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7009098" start="18658" end="18702" title="New Jersey&amp;#x27;s 1st congressional district" label="New Jersey&amp;#x27;s 1st congressional district"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="18710" end="18748" title="United States House of Representatives" label="United States House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q377562" start="18769" end="18781" title="John Lambert (politician)" label="John Lambert"/>
<link wikidata="Q2218571" start="18839" end="18851" title="Samuel Lilly" label="Samuel Lilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q14705794" start="18877" end="18921" title="New Jersey&amp;#x27;s 3rd congressional district" label="New Jersey&amp;#x27;s 3rd congressional district"/>
<link wikidata="Q4768606" start="19025" end="19042" title="Anne Marie Macari" label="Anne Marie Macari"/>
<link wikidata="Q253373" start="19063" end="19080" title="James W. Marshall" label="James W. Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q897" start="19108" end="19112" title="gold" label="gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973789" start="19116" end="19134" title="Sutter&amp;#x27;s Mill" label="Sutter&amp;#x27;s Mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="19138" end="19148" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q2892695" start="19159" end="19172" title="James McBride (writer)" label="James McBride"/>
<link wikidata="Q24053679" start="19208" end="19221" title="Scott Metzger" label="Scott Metzger"/>
<link wikidata="Q18712367" start="19268" end="19296" title="Joe Russo&amp;#x27;s Almost Dead" label="Joe Russo&amp;#x27;s Almost Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q2085676" start="19301" end="19317" title="Phil and Friends" label="Phil and Friends"/>
<link wikidata="Q4975372" start="19320" end="19348" title="Bror Julius Olsson Nordfeldt" label="Bror Julius Olsson Nordfeldt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5388774" start="19478" end="19491" title="Erik Peterson (politician)" label="Erik Peterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6055578" start="19549" end="19568" title="Horace Griggs Prall" label="Horace Griggs Prall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2867079" start="19639" end="19661" title="New Jersey Legislature" label="New Jersey Legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1683345" start="19664" end="19673" title="John Runk" label="John Runk"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="19706" end="19744" title="United States House of Representatives" label="United States House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q60694321" start="19762" end="19784" title="Charles Bradford Smith" label="Charles Bradford Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="19798" end="19816" title="United States Army" label="United States Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q4967196" start="19817" end="19834" title="Brigadier general (United States)" label="Brigadier general"/>
<link wikidata="Q852071" start="19852" end="19863" title="Silver Star" label="Silver Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q884" start="19889" end="19900" title="South Korea" label="South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q5549604" start="19903" end="19915" title="Gerald Stern" label="Gerald Stern"/>
<link wikidata="Q49757" start="19929" end="19933" title="poet" label="poet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7207426" start="19942" end="19969" title="Poet Laureate of New Jersey" label="Poet Laureate of New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1795064" start="19990" end="20000" title="Kyle Tress" label="Kyle Tress"/>
<link wikidata="Q186190" start="20046" end="20054" title="skeleton (sport)" label="skeleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3373497" start="20057" end="20066" title="Gene Ween" label="Gene Ween"/>
<link wikidata="Q2117518" start="20108" end="20112" title="Ween" label="Ween"/>
<link wikidata="Q124883613" start="20115" end="20128" title="Gary Woodward" label="Gary Woodward"/>
<link wikidata="Q1660049" start="20204" end="20227" title="political communication" label="political communication"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="125358" wikidata="Q1083772" url="?curid=125358" title="Lebanon, New Jersey">
<text>Lebanon (pronounced &quot;LEB-uh-nin&quot;) is a borough in Hunterdon County, in the U.S. state of New Jersey. As of the 2020 United States census, the borough&#x27;s population was 1,665, the highest ever in any decennial census and an increase of 307 (+22.6%) from the 2010 census count of 1,358, which in turn reflected an increase of 293 (+27.5%) from the 1,065 counted in the 2000 census.

Lebanon was incorporated as a borough by an act of the New Jersey Legislature on March 26, 1926, from portions of Clinton Township, based on the results of a referendum held on April 20, 1926. Additional portions of Clinton Township were annexed in 1962.

The borough is located north of the Round Valley Reservoir. In the early part of the 19th century, before the separation of Clinton Township from Lebanon Township on April 12, 1841, the community was known as Jacksonville and later as Lebanonville, Lebanonville Depot and finally Lebanon, a station on the Central Railroad of New Jersey.

The center of Lebanon has changed little in the past century. The Dutch Reformed Church is one of the oldest congregations in the County. Records of the church begin in 1769, however, the church is cited as early as 1747. The Lebanon Historic District was listed on the state and national registers of historic places in 2009.

On April 5, 2024, Lebanon, Oldwick, and Tewksbury Township became epicenters of the 2024 New Jersey earthquake, a 4.8 magnitude earthquake that shook much of the Northeast United States, rare in that area.

==Geography==
According to the United States Census Bureau, the borough had a total area of 0.90 square miles (2.34 km2), almost all of which was land.

The borough is an independent municipality surrounded by Clinton Township, making it part of one of 21 pairs of &quot;doughnut towns&quot; in the state, where one municipality entirely surrounds another.

==Demographics==
===2010 census===
The 2010 United States census counted 1,358 people, 602 households, and 366 families in the borough. The population density was 1,532.0 per square mile (591.5/km2). There were 664 housing units at an average density of 749.1 per square mile (289.2/km2). The racial makeup was 90.13% (1,224) White, 1.77% (24) Black or African American, 0.15% (2) Native American, 5.23% (71) Asian, 0.00% (0) Pacific Islander, 0.88% (12) from other races, and 1.84% (25) from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 5.01% (68) of the population.

Of the 602 households, 28.6% had children under the age of 18; 46.5% were married couples living together; 10.5% had a female householder with no husband present and 39.2% were non-families. Of all households, 34.2% were made up of individuals and 13.1% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.26 and the average family size was 2.93.

21.1% of the population were under the age of 18, 6.4% from 18 to 24, 30.5% from 25 to 44, 28.9% from 45 to 64, and 13.2% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 40.2 years. For every 100 females, the population had 84.8 males. For every 100 females ages 18 and older there were 82.6 males. The Census Bureau&#x27;s 2006–2010 American Community Survey showed that (in 2010 inflation-adjusted dollars) median household income was $71,629 (with a margin of error of +/− $5,410) and the median family income was $96,500 (+/− $10,275). Males had a median income of $70,977 (+/− $9,418) versus $53,750 (+/− $18,758) for females. The per capita income for the borough was $37,035 (+/− $2,975). About 1.5% of families and 2.8% of the population were below the poverty line, including 1.3% of those under age 18 and 1.8% of those age 65 or over.

===2000 census===
As of the 2000 United States census there were 1,065 people, 458 households, and 287 families residing in the borough. The population density was . There were 477 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the borough was 95.40% White, 0.66% African American, 0.19% Native American, 3.10% Asian, 0.38% from other races, and 0.28% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 2.07% of the population.

There were 458 households, out of which 30.8% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 50.4% were married couples living together, 9.6% had a female householder with no husband present, and 37.3% were non-families. 33.0% of all households were made up of individuals, and 10.5% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.33 and the average family size was 2.97.

In the borough the population was spread out, with 24.1% under the age of 18, 3.7% from 18 to 24, 35.1% from 25 to 44, 25.4% from 45 to 64, and 11.6% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 39 years. For every 100 females, there were 92.2 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 82.4 males.

The median income for a household in the borough was $68,542, and the median income for a family was $83,436. Males had a median income of $52,316 versus $37,396 for females. The per capita income for the borough was $34,066. About 0.7% of families and 3.6% of the population were below the poverty line, including 2.0% of those under age 18 and 5.1% of those age 65 or over.

==Government==

===Local government===
Lebanon Borough is governed under the borough form of New Jersey municipal government, one of 218 municipalities (of the 564) statewide that use this form, the most common form of government in New Jersey. The governing body is comprised of the mayor and the borough council, with all positions elected at-large on a partisan basis as part of the November general election. The mayor is elected directly by the voters to a four-year term of office. The borough council includes six members elected to serve three-year terms on a staggered basis, with two seats coming up for election each year in a three-year cycle. The borough form of government used by Lebanon is a &quot;weak mayor / strong council&quot; government in which council members act as the legislative body with the mayor presiding at meetings and voting only in the event of a tie. The mayor can veto ordinances subject to an override by a two-thirds majority vote of the council. The mayor makes committee and liaison assignments for council members, and most appointments are made by the mayor with the advice and consent of the council.

, the mayor of Lebanon Borough is Republican James J. Pittinger, whose term of office ends December 31, 2026. The Lebanon Borough Council is comprised of Council President Richard J. Burton (R, 2024), Samuel Berger (R, 2024), Gregory F. Crawford (R, 2025), Robert J. Kirchofer (R, 2025), James Lance (R, 2023) and Mary Basile Logan (R, 2023).

In August 2019, the borough council selected Melissa Saharic to fill the seat expiring in December 2020 that became vacant following the resignation of Michael Piagentini, who left office the previous month after announcing that he was moving out of the borough. In November 2019, Saharic was elected to serve the balance of the term of office.

After Republican incumbent Barbara &quot;Bonnie&quot; Schmidt and Democratic challenger Marlene Baldinger ended up tied with 431 votes for the second of two council seats in the November 2016 general election, the two faced off in a January runoff, which Baldinger won by a 183-135 margin.

===Federal, state and county representation===
Lebanon Borough is located in the 7th Congressional District and is part of New Jersey&#x27;s 16th state legislative district.



===Politics===
As of March 2011, there were a total of 955 registered voters in Lebanon, of which 190 (19.9%) were registered as Democrats, 374 (39.2%) were registered as Republicans and 388 (40.6%) were registered as Unaffiliated. There were three voters registered as Libertarians or Greens.

In the 2012 presidential election, Republican Mitt Romney received 57.5% of the vote (471 cast), ahead of Democrat Barack Obama with 40.9% (335 votes), and other candidates with 1.6% (13 votes), among the 826 ballots cast by the borough&#x27;s 1,118 registered voters (7 ballots were spoiled), for a turnout of 73.9%. In the 2008 presidential election, Republican John McCain received 56.7% of the vote (403 cast), ahead of Democrat Barack Obama with 41.4% (294 votes) and other candidates with 1.3% (9 votes), among the 711 ballots cast by the borough&#x27;s 861 registered voters, for a turnout of 82.6%. In the 2004 presidential election, Republican George W. Bush received 63.0% of the vote (410 ballots cast), outpolling Democrat John Kerry with 36.1% (235 votes) and other candidates with 0.6% (5 votes), among the 651 ballots cast by the borough&#x27;s 780 registered voters, for a turnout percentage of 83.5.




In the 2013 gubernatorial election, Republican Chris Christie received 77.1% of the vote (373 cast), ahead of Democrat Barbara Buono with 20.5% (99 votes), and other candidates with 2.5% (12 votes), among the 497 ballots cast by the borough&#x27;s 1,107 registered voters (13 ballots were spoiled), for a turnout of 44.9%. In the 2009 gubernatorial election, Republican Chris Christie received 67.1% of the vote (365 ballots cast), ahead of Democrat Jon Corzine with 19.9% (108 votes), Independent Chris Daggett with 10.1% (55 votes) and other candidates with 1.7% (9 votes), among the 544 ballots cast by the borough&#x27;s 880 registered voters, yielding a 61.8% turnout.

==Historic district==

The Lebanon Historic District is a historic district encompassing the village of Lebanon. The district was added to the National Register of Historic Places on August 26, 2009, for its significance in architecture and community development from to . It includes 227 contributing buildings.

==Education==
Students in pre-kindergarten through sixth grade for public school are served by the Lebanon Borough School District at Lebanon Borough School. As of the 2018–19 school year, the district, comprised of one school, had an enrollment of 40 students and 13.8 classroom teachers (on an FTE basis), for a student–teacher ratio of 2.9:1. In the 2016–17 school year, Lebanon had the ninth-smallest enrollment of any school district in the state, with 101 students.

Students in seventh and eighth grades attend Clinton Township Middle School in Clinton Township as part of a sending/receiving relationship with the Clinton Township School District. As of the 2018–19 school year, the middle school had an enrollment of 479 students and 57.0 classroom teachers (on an FTE basis), for a student–teacher ratio of 8.4:1.

Public school students in ninth through twelfth grades attend North Hunterdon High School in Annandale together with students from Bethlehem Township, Clinton Town, Clinton Township, Franklin Township and Union Township. As of the 2018–19 school year, the high school had an enrollment of 1,584 students and 123.2 classroom teachers (on an FTE basis), for a student–teacher ratio of 12.9:1. The school is part of the North Hunterdon-Voorhees Regional High School District, which also includes students from Califon, Glen Gardner, Hampton, High Bridge, Lebanon Township and Tewksbury Township, who attend Voorhees High School in Lebanon Township.

Eighth grade students from all of Hunterdon County are eligible to apply to attend the high school programs offered by the Hunterdon County Vocational School District, a county-wide vocational school district that offers career and technical education at its campuses in Raritan Township and at programs sited at local high schools, with no tuition charged to students for attendance.

==Emergency services==
The Borough of Lebanon is covered by three emergency services providers.

Police and law enforcement is provided by the New Jersey State Police from Troop B, based at the Perryville station.

The Lebanon Volunteer Fire Company provides fire suppression to the borough as per ordinance.

The borough&#x27;s Emergency Medical and Rescue services are provided by the Clinton First Aid &amp; Rescue Squad.

==Transportation==

===Roads and highways===
, the borough had a total of of roadways, of which were maintained by the municipality, by Hunterdon County and by the New Jersey Department of Transportation.

U.S. Route 22 passes through the center of town. Interstate 78 runs through the northern part with Exit 20 within its borders.

===Public transportation===
The Lebanon station offers service on NJ Transit&#x27;s Raritan Valley Line. There is a station building on the south side of the tracks. The northern track is no longer in use and the stop has limited weekday and no weekend service.

==Gallery==
==Notable people==

People who were born in, residents of, or otherwise closely associated with Lebanon include:

* Alvah A. Clark (1840–1912), represented in the United States House of Representatives from 1877 to 1881
* Garrett LeRose (born ), college football coach who is head coach for Washington and Lee Generals football team
* James N. Pidcock (1836–1899), represented in the United States House of Representatives from 1885 to 1889

==Points of interest==
* Hunterdon County Arboretum
* Round Valley Reservoir
* Cushetunk Mountain

==References==
==External links==
* Lebanon Borough website
* Hunterdon County webpage for Lebanon Borough
* Lebanon Borough School District
* School Data for the Lebanon Borough School District, National Center for Education Statistics
* Clinton Township School District
* North Hunterdon-Voorhees Regional High School District
* Hunterdon Land Trust Alliance</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1083772" start="0" end="7" title="Lebanon, New Jersey" label="Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2911266" start="49" end="56" title="Borough (New Jersey)" label="borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q502451" start="60" end="76" title="Hunterdon County, New Jersey" label="Hunterdon County"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="85" end="95" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="99" end="109" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="121" end="146" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345528" start="213" end="229" title="United States census" label="decennial census"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="271" end="282" title="2010 United States census" label="2010 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q166998" start="381" end="392" title="2000 United States census" label="2000 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2867079" start="450" end="472" title="New Jersey Legislature" label="New Jersey Legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q3016644" start="509" end="525" title="Clinton Township, New Jersey" label="Clinton Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q7332454" start="687" end="709" title="Round Valley Reservoir" label="Round Valley Reservoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q3015934" start="797" end="813" title="Lebanon Township, New Jersey" label="Lebanon Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053974" start="957" end="987" title="Central Railroad of New Jersey" label="Central Railroad of New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083772" start="1216" end="1241" title="Lebanon, New Jersey" label="Lebanon Historic District"/>
<link wikidata="Q257270" start="1345" end="1352" title="Oldwick, New Jersey" label="Oldwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q3016994" start="1358" end="1376" title="Tewksbury Township, New Jersey" label="Tewksbury Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q125349769" start="1402" end="1428" title="2024 New Jersey earthquake" label="2024 New Jersey earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q24460" start="1480" end="1503" title="Northeast United States" label="Northeast United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="1556" end="1583" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q3016644" start="1735" end="1751" title="Clinton Township, New Jersey" label="Clinton Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="1922" end="1947" title="2010 United States census" label="2010 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="2023" end="2041" title="population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2209" end="2214" title="White (U.S. census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2227" end="2252" title="Black (U.S. census)" label="Black or African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2264" end="2279" title="Native American (U.S. census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2292" end="2297" title="Asian (U.S. census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2309" end="2325" title="Pacific Islander (U.S. census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2343" end="2354" title="Race and ethnicity in the United States census#Race" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2395" end="2413" title="Hispanic (U.S. census)" label="Hispanic or Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q463769" start="3190" end="3215" title="American Community Survey" label="American Community Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q311198" start="3237" end="3255" title="inflation adjustment" label="inflation-adjusted"/>
<link wikidata="Q1940707" start="3265" end="3288" title="median household income" label="median household income"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="3492" end="3509" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="3617" end="3629" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q166998" start="3731" end="3756" title="2000 United States census" label="2000 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3969" end="3974" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3982" end="3998" title="African American (U.S. Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4006" end="4021" title="Native American (U.S. Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4029" end="4034" title="Asian (U.S. Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4047" end="4058" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4094" end="4102" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4106" end="4112" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="4264" end="4279" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="5080" end="5097" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="5192" end="5204" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q2911266" start="5355" end="5362" title="Borough (New Jersey)" label="borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q3682992" start="5620" end="5628" title="at-large" label="at-large"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308596" start="5992" end="6002" title="weak mayor" label="weak mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q178074" start="6180" end="6184" title="veto" label="veto"/>
<link wikidata="Q178074" start="6210" end="6218" title="veto override" label="override"/>
<link wikidata="Q30185" start="6431" end="6436" title="mayor" label="mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="6459" end="6469" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="7712" end="7721" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="7754" end="7765" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republicans"/>
<link wikidata="Q5354776" start="7801" end="7813" title="Unaffiliated (New Jersey)" label="Unaffiliated"/>
<link wikidata="Q558334" start="7853" end="7865" title="Libertarian Party (United States)" label="Libertarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q849158" start="7869" end="7875" title="Green Party (United States)" label="Greens"/>
<link wikidata="Q17100287" start="7885" end="7911" title="United States presidential election in New Jersey, 2012" label="2012 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q4496" start="7924" end="7935" title="Mitt Romney" label="Mitt Romney"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="7993" end="8005" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738441" start="8162" end="8169" title="Spoilt vote" label="spoiled"/>
<link wikidata="Q16959334" start="8203" end="8229" title="United States presidential election in New Jersey, 2008" label="2008 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q10390" start="8242" end="8253" title="John McCain" label="John McCain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892945" start="8492" end="8518" title="United States presidential election in New Jersey, 2004" label="2004 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="8531" end="8545" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q22316" start="8613" end="8623" title="John Kerry" label="John Kerry"/>
<link wikidata="Q15134831" start="8806" end="8833" title="New Jersey gubernatorial election, 2013" label="2013 gubernatorial election"/>
<link wikidata="Q63879" start="8846" end="8860" title="Chris Christie" label="Chris Christie"/>
<link wikidata="Q4858790" start="8918" end="8931" title="Barbara Buono" label="Barbara Buono"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586264" start="9129" end="9156" title="New Jersey gubernatorial election, 2009" label="2009 gubernatorial election"/>
<link wikidata="Q380570" start="9249" end="9260" title="Jon Corzine" label="Jon Corzine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5106343" start="9297" end="9310" title="Chris Daggett" label="Chris Daggett"/>
<link wikidata="Q1620797" start="9532" end="9549" title="historic district (United States)" label="historic district"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719" start="9617" end="9653" title="National Register of Historic Places" label="National Register of Historic Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q76321820" start="9763" end="9785" title="contributing buildings" label="contributing buildings"/>
<link wikidata="Q7239239" start="9814" end="9830" title="pre-kindergarten" label="pre-kindergarten"/>
<link wikidata="Q7533207" start="9839" end="9850" title="sixth grade" label="sixth grade"/>
<link wikidata="Q6511060" start="9887" end="9918" title="Lebanon Borough School District" label="Lebanon Borough School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543700" start="10084" end="10087" title="full-time equivalent" label="FTE"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595370" start="10102" end="10123" title="student–teacher ratio" label="student–teacher ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q43791171" start="10273" end="10280" title="seventh grade" label="seventh"/>
<link wikidata="Q5349142" start="10285" end="10297" title="eighth grade" label="eighth grade"/>
<link wikidata="Q3016644" start="10340" end="10356" title="Clinton Township, New Jersey" label="Clinton Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q7450229" start="10370" end="10400" title="sending/receiving relationship" label="sending/receiving relationship"/>
<link wikidata="Q5134272" start="10410" end="10442" title="Clinton Township School District" label="Clinton Township School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543700" start="10562" end="10565" title="full-time equivalent" label="FTE"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595370" start="10580" end="10601" title="student–teacher ratio" label="student–teacher ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7039258" start="10639" end="10644" title="ninth grade" label="ninth"/>
<link wikidata="Q986388" start="10653" end="10666" title="twelfth grade" label="twelfth grade"/>
<link wikidata="Q7055674" start="10675" end="10702" title="North Hunterdon High School" label="North Hunterdon High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084050" start="10706" end="10715" title="Annandale, New Jersey" label="Annandale"/>
<link wikidata="Q542454" start="10744" end="10762" title="Bethlehem Township, New Jersey" label="Bethlehem Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087573" start="10764" end="10776" title="Clinton, New Jersey" label="Clinton Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q3016644" start="10778" end="10794" title="Clinton Township, New Jersey" label="Clinton Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q5491960" start="10796" end="10813" title="Franklin Township, Hunterdon County, New Jersey" label="Franklin Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q7886242" start="10818" end="10832" title="Union Township, Hunterdon County, New Jersey" label="Union Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543700" start="10953" end="10956" title="full-time equivalent" label="FTE"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595370" start="10971" end="10992" title="student–teacher ratio" label="student–teacher ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q14705816" start="11030" end="11084" title="North Hunterdon-Voorhees Regional High School District" label="North Hunterdon-Voorhees Regional High School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q515694" start="11120" end="11127" title="Califon, New Jersey" label="Califon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087569" start="11129" end="11141" title="Glen Gardner, New Jersey" label="Glen Gardner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086532" start="11143" end="11150" title="Hampton, New Jersey" label="Hampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086813" start="11152" end="11163" title="High Bridge, New Jersey" label="High Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3015934" start="11165" end="11181" title="Lebanon Township, New Jersey" label="Lebanon Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q3016994" start="11186" end="11204" title="Tewksbury Township, New Jersey" label="Tewksbury Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q14705907" start="11217" end="11237" title="Voorhees High School" label="Voorhees High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5944694" start="11383" end="11426" title="Hunterdon County Vocational School District" label="Hunterdon County Vocational School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q3017068" start="11531" end="11547" title="Raritan Township, New Jersey" label="Raritan Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q15679789" start="11789" end="11812" title="New Jersey State Police" label="New Jersey State Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q285852" start="11873" end="11895" title="Volunteer fire department" label="Volunteer Fire Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q867675" start="12236" end="12275" title="New Jersey Department of Transportation" label="New Jersey Department of Transportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q811410" start="12278" end="12291" title="U.S. Route 22 in New Jersey" label="U.S. Route 22"/>
<link wikidata="Q811194" start="12327" end="12340" title="Interstate 78 in New Jersey" label="Interstate 78"/>
<link wikidata="Q6511055" start="12438" end="12453" title="Lebanon station (NJ Transit)" label="Lebanon station"/>
<link wikidata="Q498553" start="12472" end="12482" title="NJ Transit" label="NJ Transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7294577" start="12490" end="12509" title="Raritan Valley Line" label="Raritan Valley Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q448177" start="12797" end="12811" title="Alvah A. Clark" label="Alvah A. Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="12844" end="12882" title="United States House of Representatives" label="United States House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q132128822" start="12903" end="12917" title="Garrett LeRose" label="Garrett LeRose"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109032" start="12927" end="12943" title="college football" label="college football"/>
<link wikidata="Q19867618" start="12972" end="13008" title="Washington and Lee Generals football" label="Washington and Lee Generals football"/>
<link wikidata="Q1680876" start="13016" end="13032" title="James N. Pidcock" label="James N. Pidcock"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="13065" end="13103" title="United States House of Representatives" label="United States House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q14705638" start="13148" end="13174" title="Hunterdon County Arboretum" label="Hunterdon County Arboretum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7332454" start="13177" end="13199" title="Round Valley Reservoir" label="Round Valley Reservoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q5196172" start="13202" end="13220" title="Cushetunk Mountain" label="Cushetunk Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1966994" start="13418" end="13458" title="National Center for Education Statistics" label="National Center for Education Statistics"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="125360" wikidata="Q3015934" url="?curid=125360" title="Lebanon Township, New Jersey">
<text>Lebanon Township (pronounced &quot;LEB-uh-nin&quot;) is the northernmost township in Hunterdon County, in the U.S. state of New Jersey. As of the 2020 United States census, the township&#x27;s population was 6,195, a decrease of 393 (−6.0%) from the 2010 census count of 6,588, which in turn reflected an increase of 772 (+13.3%) from the 5,816 counted in the 2000 census.

Located within the Raritan Valley region, the township is situated in the northernmost part of Hunterdon County bordering both Morris and Warren counties. When Lebanon Township was created in 1731, its original borders extended from the Musconetcong River to Readington Township.

==History==
Lebanon Township was first mentioned on October 26, 1731, as having been formed partly from the now-defunct Amwell Township, though the exact circumstances of its formation are unknown. Lebanon Township was incorporated as one of New Jersey&#x27;s initial 104 townships by an act of the New Jersey Legislature on February 21, 1798. Portions of the township have been taken to form Tewksbury Township (March 11, 1755), Clinton Township (April 12, 1841), High Bridge borough (February 19, 1898), Junction borough (February 20, 1895, now known as Hampton borough), Califon borough (April 2, 1898) and Glen Gardner borough (March 26, 1919).

Spruce Run Evangelical Lutheran Zion Church, a member of the New Jersey Synod and the Evangelical Lutheran Church in America, was established in 1774 by a group of 13 families. The church&#x27;s current facility was constructed in 1870. The Mt. Bethel Evangelical Lutheran Church and Cemetery, popularly known as the Swack Church, is a historical Lutheran church; the burial ground of which houses plots dating as early as 1801.

In April 2024, a magnitude 4.8 earthquake struck New Jersey, with its epicenter in Lebanon Township.

==Geography==

According to the United States Census Bureau, the township had a total area of 31.68 square miles (82.05 km2), including 31.43 square miles (81.40 km2) of land and 0.25 square miles (0.66 km2) of water (0.80%).

Unincorporated communities, localities and place names located partially or completely within the township include Anthony, Bunnvale, Changewater, Hampton Junction, Hoffmans, Little Brook, Lower Valley, Mount Lebanon, New Hampton, Newport, Penwell, Red Mill, Saint Nicholas Village, Scrappy Corner, Spruce Run, Stone Mill, The Point and Woodglen.

The township borders Bethlehem Township, Califon, Clinton Township, Glen Gardner, Hampton, High Bridge, Tewksbury Township and Union Township in Hunterdon County; Washington Township in Morris County; and Mansfield Township and Washington Township in Warren County.

==Demographics==
===2010 census===
The 2010 United States census counted 6,588 people, 2,296 households, and 1,761 families in the township. The population density was 209.4 per square mile (80.8/km2). There were 2,439 housing units at an average density of 77.5 per square mile (29.9/km2). The racial makeup was 95.01% (6,259) White, 1.68% (111) Black or African American, 0.06% (4) Native American, 1.47% (97) Asian, 0.11% (7) Pacific Islander, 0.59% (39) from other races, and 1.08% (71) from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 3.11% (205) of the population.

Of the 2,296 households, 33.6% had children under the age of 18; 66.7% were married couples living together; 6.6% had a female householder with no husband present and 23.3% were non-families. Of all households, 18.4% were made up of individuals and 7.2% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.71 and the average family size was 3.11.

22.6% of the population were under the age of 18, 6.8% from 18 to 24, 19.8% from 25 to 44, 35.6% from 45 to 64, and 15.2% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 45.4 years. For every 100 females, the population had 99.1 males. For every 100 females ages 18 and older there were 98.0 males.

The Census Bureau&#x27;s 2006–2010 American Community Survey showed that (in 2010 inflation-adjusted dollars) median household income was $96,489 (with a margin of error of +/− $7,123) and the median family income was $110,893 (+/− $29,973). Males had a median income of $78,056 (+/− $22,457) versus $56,346 (+/− $14,410) for females. The per capita income for the borough was $43,424 (+/− $5,347). About 4.4% of families and 5.9% of the population were below the poverty line, including 5.8% of those under age 18 and 1.6% of those age 65 or over.

===2000 census===
As of the 2000 United States census there were 5,816 people, 1,963 households, and 1,556 families residing in the township. The population density was . There were 2,020 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the township was 96.97% White, 0.81% African American, 0.10% Native American, 0.93% Asian, 0.02% Pacific Islander, 0.38% from other races, and 0.79% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 1.72% of the population.

There were 1,963 households, out of which 38.5% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 71.1% were married couples living together, 5.5% had a female householder with no husband present, and 20.7% were non-families. 15.5% of all households were made up of individuals, and 5.5% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.79 and the average family size was 3.15.

In the township the population was spread out, with 25.5% under the age of 18, 5.1% from 18 to 24, 28.9% from 25 to 44, 28.7% from 45 to 64, and 11.7% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 40 years. For every 100 females, there were 97.4 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 96.1 males.

The median income for a household in the township was $77,662, and the median income for a family was $86,145. Males had a median income of $58,306 versus $40,474 for females. The per capita income for the township was $30,793. About 1.0% of families and 2.0% of the population were below the poverty line, including none of those under age 18 and 8.4% of those age 65 or over.

==Arts and culture==
Musical groups from the township include the Sleepy Man Banjo Boys, a bluegrass trio of the Mizzone brothers: Jonny (banjo), Robbie (fiddle) and Tommy (guitar)

==Parks and recreation==
Lebanon Township hosts part of a rail trail that was created out of the former Central Railroad of New Jersey High Bridge Branch. The trail is maintained by Hunterdon County Parks and Recreation and is called the Columbia Trail, which includes a scenic area known as the Ken Lockwood Gorge.

== Government ==

===Local government===
Lebanon Township is governed under the Township form of government, a form used by 141 municipalities (of the 564) statewide. The Township Committee, comprised of five members, is elected directly by the voters at-large in partisan elections to serve three-year terms of office on a staggered basis, with either one or two seats coming up for election each year as part of the November general election in a three-year cycle. At an annual reorganization meeting held during the first week of January, the Township Committee selects one of its members to serve as Mayor and another as Deputy Mayor.

, the Lebanon Township Committee consists of Mayor Beverly Koehler (R, term on committee ends December 31, 2025; term as mayor ends 2023), Deputy Mayor Thomas R. McKee (R, term on committee and as deputy mayor ends 2023), Abe Abuchowski (R, 2023; appointed to serve an unexpired term), Michael Schmidt (R, 2024) and Brian K. Wunder (R, 2025).

In January 2021, the Township Committee appointed Abe Abuchowski to fill the seat expiring in December 2022 that had been held by Brian Wunder who resigned from office the previous month. Abuchowski served on an interim basis until the November 2021 general election, when Guy Wilson was elected to serve the balance of the term of office.

=== Federal, state and county representation ===
Lebanon Township is located in the 7th Congressional District and is part of New Jersey&#x27;s 23rd state legislative district.



===Politics===
As of March 2011, there were a total of 4,366 registered voters in Lebanon Township, of which 723 (16.6%) were registered as Democrats, 1,759 (40.3%) were registered as Republicans and 1,881 (43.1%) were registered as Unaffiliated. There were 3 voters registered as Libertarians or Greens.

In the 2012 presidential election, Republican Mitt Romney received 63.3% of the vote (2,048 cast), ahead of Democrat Barack Obama with 35.3% (1,140 votes), and other candidates with 1.4% (46 votes), among the 3,250 ballots cast by the township&#x27;s 4,543 registered voters (16 ballots were spoiled), for a turnout of 71.5%. In the 2008 presidential election, Republican John McCain received 60.4% of the vote (2,119 cast), ahead of Democrat Barack Obama with 37.2% (1,305 votes) and other candidates with 1.7% (59 votes), among the 3,507 ballots cast by the township&#x27;s 4,450 registered voters, for a turnout of 78.8%. In the 2004 presidential election, Republican George W. Bush received 63.9% of the vote (2,152 ballots cast), outpolling Democrat John Kerry with 34.7% (1,170 votes) and other candidates with 1.2% (49 votes), among the 3,370 ballots cast by the township&#x27;s 4,249 registered voters, for a turnout percentage of 79.3.




In the 2013 gubernatorial election, Republican Chris Christie received 74.6% of the vote (1,547 cast), ahead of Democrat Barbara Buono with 23.0% (477 votes), and other candidates with 2.5% (51 votes), among the 2,118 ballots cast by the township&#x27;s 4,499 registered voters (43 ballots were spoiled), for a turnout of 47.1%. In the 2009 gubernatorial election, Republican Chris Christie received 70.3% of the vote (1,851 ballots cast), ahead of Democrat Jon Corzine with 20.5% (539 votes), Independent Chris Daggett with 7.9% (208 votes) and other candidates with 0.6% (15 votes), among the 2,633 ballots cast by the township&#x27;s 4,396 registered voters, yielding a 59.9% turnout.

== Education ==
The Lebanon Township Schools serves students in pre-kindergarten through eighth grade. As of the 2018–19 school year, the district, comprised of two schools, had an enrollment of 624 students and 64.6 classroom teachers (on an FTE basis), for a student–teacher ratio of 9.7:1. Schools in the district (with 2018–19 enrollment data from the National Center for Education Statistics) are 
Valley View School with 310 students in grades Pre-K–4 and 
Woodglen School with 320 students in grades 5–8. Both schools are located in Lebanon Township, but have a Califon mailing address.

Public school students in ninth through twelfth grades attend Voorhees High School, which also serves students from Califon, Glen Gardner, Hampton, High Bridge and Tewksbury Township. As of the 2018–2019 school year, the high school had an enrollment of 982 students and 83.1 classroom teachers (on an FTE basis), for a student–teacher ratio of 11.8:1. The school is part of the North Hunterdon-Voorhees Regional High School District, which also includes students from Bethlehem Township, Clinton Town, Clinton Township, Franklin Township, Lebanon Borough and Union Township who attend North Hunterdon High School in Annandale.

Eighth grade students from all of Hunterdon County are eligible to apply to attend the high school programs offered by the Hunterdon County Vocational School District, a county-wide vocational school district that offers career and technical education at its campuses in Raritan Township and at programs sited at local high schools, with no tuition charged to students for attendance.

Lebanon Township is also home to the Hunterdon Learning Center, an alternative education school founded by James Butters in 1975.

==Points of interest==

The New Hampton Historic District, including the New Hampton Pony Pratt Truss Bridge, are listed on the National Register of Historic Places. The Lebanon Township Museum, built , is a contributing property of the district. It includes a memorial to General Daniel Morgan, who was born here and served in the American Revolutionary War.

==Transportation==
===Roads and highways===
, the township had a total of of roadways, of which were maintained by the municipality, by Hunterdon County and by the New Jersey Department of Transportation.

Route 31 passes through the township, providing access to Interstate 78.

===Public transportation===
Local bus service was provided by NJ Transit on the 884 route, until it was discontinued in 2010. Train service on the Raritan Valley Line is available at the High Bridge station, located just outside of the township.

The Hunterdon County LINK provides bus service on Route 15, which passes through the western part of the township along Route 31.

==Notable people==

People who were born in, residents of, or otherwise closely associated with Lebanon Township include:
* Adrienne Adams (1906–2002), children&#x27;s book illustrator
* Lonzo Anderson (1905–1993), children&#x27;s author
* Alvah A. Clark (1840–1912), lawyer and politician who represented New Jersey&#x27;s 4th congressional district in the United States House of Representatives from 1877 to 1881
* Julie Culley (born 1981), member of the 2012 US Olympic Team for the women&#x27;s 5000m competition
* Mary Decker (born 1958), former track athlete
* Merv Griffin (1925–2007), television producer owned a farm in Lebanon Township, though it had a Califon mailing address
* Daniel Morgan (1735–1802), pioneer, soldier and politician, who was one of the most respected battlefield tacticians of the American Revolutionary War and served in the United States House of Representatives from 1797 to 1799
* Joe Piscopo (born 1951), comedian, actor, musical entertainer and nationally syndicated radio talk show host best known for his work on &quot;Saturday Night Live&quot;
* Helen Walulik (1929–2012), pitcher and an outfield/infield utility who played for three seasons in the All-American Girls Professional Baseball League
* Bernie Worrell (1944–2016), keyboardist and founding member of Parliament-Funkadelic

==References==
==External links==

*Lebanon Township website
*Hunterdon County page for Lebanon Township
*Lebanon Township Schools
*School Data for the Lebanon Township Schools, National Center for Education Statistics
*North Hunterdon-Voorhees Regional High School District
*Hunterdon Land Trust Alliance
*Hunterdon Learning Center</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3015934" start="0" end="16" title="Lebanon Township, New Jersey" label="Lebanon Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q7830213" start="73" end="81" title="Township (New Jersey)" label="township"/>
<link wikidata="Q502451" start="85" end="101" title="Hunterdon County, New Jersey" label="Hunterdon County"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="110" end="120" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="124" end="134" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="146" end="171" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="250" end="261" title="2010 United States census" label="2010 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q166998" start="360" end="371" title="2000 United States census" label="2000 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q749287" start="393" end="414" title="Raritan River" label="Raritan Valley region"/>
<link wikidata="Q498163" start="501" end="507" title="Morris County, New Jersey" label="Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q502468" start="512" end="518" title="Warren County, New Jersey" label="Warren"/>
<link wikidata="Q6940356" start="611" end="629" title="Musconetcong River" label="Musconetcong River"/>
<link wikidata="Q3017759" start="633" end="652" title="Readington Township, New Jersey" label="Readington Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q4749037" start="775" end="790" title="Amwell Township, New Jersey" label="Amwell Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q2867079" start="954" end="976" title="New Jersey Legislature" label="New Jersey Legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q3016994" start="1048" end="1066" title="Tewksbury Township, New Jersey" label="Tewksbury Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q3016644" start="1085" end="1101" title="Clinton Township, New Jersey" label="Clinton Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086813" start="1120" end="1139" title="High Bridge, New Jersey" label="High Bridge borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086532" start="1211" end="1226" title="Hampton, New Jersey" label="Hampton borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q515694" start="1229" end="1244" title="Califon, New Jersey" label="Califon borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087569" start="1265" end="1285" title="Glen Gardner, New Jersey" label="Glen Gardner borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q85802760" start="1305" end="1348" title="Spruce Run Evangelical Lutheran Zion Church" label="Spruce Run Evangelical Lutheran Zion Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q6569590" start="1366" end="1382" title="New Jersey Synod" label="New Jersey Synod"/>
<link wikidata="Q730726" start="1391" end="1429" title="Evangelical Lutheran Church in America" label="Evangelical Lutheran Church in America"/>
<link wikidata="Q56278929" start="1622" end="1634" title="Swack Church" label="Swack Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="1652" end="1660" title="Lutheran" label="Lutheran"/>
<link wikidata="Q125349769" start="1752" end="1776" title="2024 New Jersey earthquake" label="magnitude 4.8 earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="1869" end="1896" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2064" end="2090" title="Local government in New Jersey#Unincorporated communities" label="Unincorporated communities"/>
<link wikidata="Q19059399" start="2179" end="2186" title="Anthony, New Jersey" label="Anthony"/>
<link wikidata="Q19460738" start="2188" end="2196" title="Bunnvale, New Jersey" label="Bunnvale"/>
<link wikidata="Q19462354" start="2229" end="2237" title="Hoffmans, New Jersey" label="Hoffmans"/>
<link wikidata="Q20657224" start="2253" end="2265" title="Lower Valley, New Jersey" label="Lower Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q19647248" start="2282" end="2293" title="New Hampton, New Jersey" label="New Hampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q20657556" start="2304" end="2311" title="Penwell, New Jersey" label="Penwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3015934" start="2347" end="2361" title="Scrappy Corner, New Jersey" label="Scrappy Corner"/>
<link wikidata="Q542454" start="2433" end="2451" title="Bethlehem Township, New Jersey" label="Bethlehem Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q515694" start="2453" end="2460" title="Califon, New Jersey" label="Califon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3016644" start="2462" end="2478" title="Clinton Township, New Jersey" label="Clinton Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087569" start="2480" end="2492" title="Glen Gardner, New Jersey" label="Glen Gardner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086532" start="2494" end="2501" title="Hampton, New Jersey" label="Hampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086813" start="2503" end="2514" title="High Bridge, New Jersey" label="High Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3016994" start="2516" end="2534" title="Tewksbury Township, New Jersey" label="Tewksbury Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q7886242" start="2539" end="2553" title="Union Township, Hunterdon County, New Jersey" label="Union Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q3015373" start="2575" end="2594" title="Washington Township, Morris County, New Jersey" label="Washington Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q498163" start="2598" end="2611" title="Morris County, New Jersey" label="Morris County"/>
<link wikidata="Q5484355" start="2617" end="2635" title="Mansfield Township, Warren County, New Jersey" label="Mansfield Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q3017778" start="2640" end="2659" title="Washington Township, Warren County, New Jersey" label="Washington Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q502468" start="2663" end="2676" title="Warren County, New Jersey" label="Warren County"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="2718" end="2743" title="2010 United States census" label="2010 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="2824" end="2842" title="population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3007" end="3012" title="White (U.S. census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3026" end="3051" title="Black (U.S. census)" label="Black or African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3063" end="3078" title="Native American (U.S. census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3091" end="3096" title="Asian (U.S. census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3108" end="3124" title="Pacific Islander (U.S. census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3142" end="3153" title="Race and ethnicity in the United States census#Race" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3194" end="3212" title="Hispanic (U.S. census)" label="Hispanic or Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q463769" start="3991" end="4016" title="American Community Survey" label="American Community Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q311198" start="4038" end="4056" title="inflation adjustment" label="inflation-adjusted"/>
<link wikidata="Q1940707" start="4066" end="4089" title="median household income" label="median household income"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="4295" end="4312" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="4420" end="4432" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q166998" start="4534" end="4559" title="2000 United States census" label="2000 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4780" end="4785" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4793" end="4809" title="African American (U.S. Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4817" end="4832" title="Native American (U.S. Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4840" end="4845" title="Asian (U.S. Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4853" end="4869" title="Pacific Islander (U.S. Census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4882" end="4893" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4929" end="4937" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4941" end="4947" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="5101" end="5116" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="5918" end="5935" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="6031" end="6043" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493085" start="6183" end="6204" title="Sleepy Man Banjo Boys" label="Sleepy Man Banjo Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053974" start="6403" end="6433" title="Central Railroad of New Jersey" label="Central Railroad of New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5754964" start="6434" end="6452" title="High Bridge Branch" label="High Bridge Branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5149878" start="6537" end="6551" title="Columbia Trail" label="Columbia Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q6388034" start="6595" end="6613" title="Ken Lockwood Gorge" label="Ken Lockwood Gorge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7830213" start="6696" end="6704" title="Township (New Jersey)" label="Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q3682992" start="6868" end="6876" title="at-large" label="at-large"/>
<link wikidata="Q30185" start="7301" end="7306" title="Mayor" label="Mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="7324" end="7325" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="R"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="8261" end="8270" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="8305" end="8316" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republicans"/>
<link wikidata="Q5354776" start="8354" end="8366" title="Unaffiliated (New Jersey)" label="Unaffiliated"/>
<link wikidata="Q558334" start="8402" end="8414" title="Libertarian Party (United States)" label="Libertarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q849158" start="8418" end="8424" title="Green Party (United States)" label="Greens"/>
<link wikidata="Q17100287" start="8434" end="8460" title="United States presidential election in New Jersey, 2012" label="2012 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q4496" start="8473" end="8484" title="Mitt Romney" label="Mitt Romney"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="8544" end="8556" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738441" start="8719" end="8726" title="Spoilt vote" label="spoiled"/>
<link wikidata="Q16959334" start="8760" end="8786" title="United States presidential election in New Jersey, 2008" label="2008 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q10390" start="8799" end="8810" title="John McCain" label="John McCain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892945" start="9059" end="9085" title="United States presidential election in New Jersey, 2004" label="2004 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="9098" end="9112" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q22316" start="9182" end="9192" title="John Kerry" label="John Kerry"/>
<link wikidata="Q15134831" start="9383" end="9410" title="New Jersey gubernatorial election, 2013" label="2013 gubernatorial election"/>
<link wikidata="Q63879" start="9423" end="9437" title="Chris Christie" label="Chris Christie"/>
<link wikidata="Q4858790" start="9497" end="9510" title="Barbara Buono" label="Barbara Buono"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586264" start="9712" end="9739" title="New Jersey gubernatorial election, 2009" label="2009 gubernatorial election"/>
<link wikidata="Q380570" start="9834" end="9845" title="Jon Corzine" label="Jon Corzine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5106343" start="9882" end="9895" title="Chris Daggett" label="Chris Daggett"/>
<link wikidata="Q14705702" start="10085" end="10109" title="Lebanon Township Schools" label="Lebanon Township Schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q7239239" start="10129" end="10145" title="pre-kindergarten" label="pre-kindergarten"/>
<link wikidata="Q5349142" start="10154" end="10166" title="eighth grade" label="eighth grade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543700" start="10308" end="10311" title="full-time equivalent" label="FTE"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595370" start="10326" end="10347" title="student–teacher ratio" label="student–teacher ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1966994" start="10421" end="10461" title="National Center for Education Statistics" label="National Center for Education Statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q515694" start="10634" end="10641" title="Califon, New Jersey" label="Califon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7039258" start="10686" end="10691" title="ninth grade" label="ninth"/>
<link wikidata="Q986388" start="10700" end="10713" title="twelfth grade" label="twelfth grade"/>
<link wikidata="Q14705907" start="10722" end="10742" title="Voorhees High School" label="Voorhees High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q515694" start="10776" end="10783" title="Califon, New Jersey" label="Califon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087569" start="10785" end="10797" title="Glen Gardner, New Jersey" label="Glen Gardner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086532" start="10799" end="10806" title="Hampton, New Jersey" label="Hampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086813" start="10808" end="10819" title="High Bridge, New Jersey" label="High Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3016994" start="10824" end="10842" title="Tewksbury Township, New Jersey" label="Tewksbury Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543700" start="10962" end="10965" title="full-time equivalent" label="FTE"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595370" start="10980" end="11001" title="student–teacher ratio" label="student–teacher ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q14705816" start="11039" end="11093" title="North Hunterdon-Voorhees Regional High School District" label="North Hunterdon-Voorhees Regional High School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q542454" start="11129" end="11147" title="Bethlehem Township, New Jersey" label="Bethlehem Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087573" start="11149" end="11161" title="Clinton, New Jersey" label="Clinton Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q3016644" start="11163" end="11179" title="Clinton Township, New Jersey" label="Clinton Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q5491960" start="11181" end="11198" title="Franklin Township, Hunterdon County, New Jersey" label="Franklin Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083772" start="11200" end="11215" title="Lebanon, New Jersey" label="Lebanon Borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q7886242" start="11220" end="11234" title="Union Township, Hunterdon County, New Jersey" label="Union Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q7055674" start="11246" end="11273" title="North Hunterdon High School" label="North Hunterdon High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084050" start="11277" end="11286" title="Annandale, New Jersey" label="Annandale"/>
<link wikidata="Q5944694" start="11412" end="11455" title="Hunterdon County Vocational School District" label="Hunterdon County Vocational School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q3017068" start="11560" end="11576" title="Raritan Township, New Jersey" label="Raritan Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q57296994" start="11834" end="11863" title="New Hampton Historic District" label="New Hampton Historic District"/>
<link wikidata="Q55625034" start="11879" end="11914" title="New Hampton Pony Pratt Truss Bridge" label="New Hampton Pony Pratt Truss Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719" start="11934" end="11970" title="National Register of Historic Places" label="National Register of Historic Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q2767" start="12087" end="12100" title="Daniel Morgan" label="Daniel Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="12138" end="12164" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q867675" start="12331" end="12370" title="New Jersey Department of Transportation" label="New Jersey Department of Transportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q822339" start="12373" end="12381" title="New Jersey Route 31" label="Route 31"/>
<link wikidata="Q94822" start="12431" end="12444" title="Interstate 78" label="Interstate 78"/>
<link wikidata="Q498553" start="12509" end="12519" title="NJ Transit" label="NJ Transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7992348" start="12527" end="12530" title="884 (New Jersey bus)" label="884"/>
<link wikidata="Q7294577" start="12594" end="12613" title="Raritan Valley Line" label="Raritan Valley Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q5754947" start="12634" end="12645" title="High Bridge (NJT station)" label="High Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q125577848" start="12698" end="12719" title="Hunterdon County LINK" label="Hunterdon County LINK"/>
<link wikidata="Q822339" start="12814" end="12822" title="New Jersey Route 31" label="Route 31"/>
<link wikidata="Q4685673" start="12949" end="12963" title="Adrienne Adams (illustrator)" label="Adrienne Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q109938491" start="13012" end="13026" title="Lonzo Anderson" label="Lonzo Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q448177" start="13065" end="13079" title="Alvah A. Clark" label="Alvah A. Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q13858956" start="13131" end="13175" title="New Jersey&amp;#x27;s 4th congressional district" label="New Jersey&amp;#x27;s 4th congressional district"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="13183" end="13221" title="United States House of Representatives" label="United States House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q16201008" start="13242" end="13254" title="Julie Culley" label="Julie Culley"/>
<link wikidata="Q238299" start="13344" end="13355" title="Mary Decker" label="Mary Decker"/>
<link wikidata="Q598344" start="13392" end="13404" title="Merv Griffin" label="Merv Griffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2767" start="13514" end="13527" title="Daniel Morgan" label="Daniel Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="13638" end="13664" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="13683" end="13721" title="United States House of Representatives" label="United States House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q2474995" start="13742" end="13753" title="Joe Piscopo" label="Joe Piscopo"/>
<link wikidata="Q13979" start="13884" end="13903" title="Saturday Night Live" label="Saturday Night Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q5703359" start="13912" end="13925" title="Helen Walulik" label="Helen Walulik"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048902" start="13939" end="13946" title="pitcher" label="pitcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q846076" start="13954" end="13962" title="outfield" label="outfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q5476277" start="13963" end="13978" title="utility infielder" label="infield utility"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052634" start="14015" end="14062" title="All-American Girls Professional Baseball League" label="All-American Girls Professional Baseball League"/>
<link wikidata="Q826598" start="14065" end="14079" title="Bernie Worrell" label="Bernie Worrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3353842" start="14128" end="14149" title="Parliament-Funkadelic" label="Parliament-Funkadelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1966994" start="14329" end="14369" title="National Center for Education Statistics" label="National Center for Education Statistics"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="125361" wikidata="Q1083131" url="?curid=125361" title="Milford, New Jersey">
<text>Milford is a borough located in western Hunterdon County, in the U.S. state of New Jersey. As of the 2020 United States census, the borough&#x27;s population was 1,232, a decrease of one person (−0.1%) from the 2010 census count of 1,233, which in turn reflected an increase of 38 (+3.2%) from the 1,195 counted in the 2000 census.

Milford was incorporated as a borough by an act of the New Jersey Legislature on April 15, 1911, from portions of Holland Township, based on the results of a referendum held on May 8, 1911. The borough&#x27;s incorporation was confirmed on March 13, 1925.

The borough is located on the Delaware River in the western portion of Hunterdon County, known as the Hunterdon Plateau. The borough dates to the mid-18th century when a grist mill was established beside a river in what was then Bethlehem Township. After the mill was destroyed by fire in 1769, the settlement became known as Burnt Mills in Alexandria Township. The area was renamed &quot;Lowreytown&quot; after Thomas Lowrey purchased land in the area in 1796. The community became commonly known as &quot;Millford&quot; or &quot;Millsford&quot; by the beginning of the 19th century, but by 1844 the name had lost a letter or two. By 1863 it was consistently spelled as &quot;Milford&quot;. The community was incorporated in 1911 but the official incorporation was not registered until 1925.

==Geography==
According to the United States Census Bureau, the borough had a total area of 1.27 square miles (3.29 km2), including 1.18 square miles (3.06 km2) of land and 0.09 square miles (0.23 km2) of water (6.93%).

Milford borders the municipalities of Alexandria Township and Holland Township in Hunterdon County; and Bridgeton Township in Bucks County, Pennsylvania, across the Delaware River in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.

==Demographics==
===2010 census===
The 2010 United States census counted 1,233 people, 520 households, and 331 families in the borough. The population density was . There were 552 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup was 97.32% (1,200) White, 0.24% (3) Black or African American, 0.16% (2) Native American, 0.97% (12) Asian, 0.08% (1) Pacific Islander, 0.24% (3) from other races, and 0.97% (12) from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 2.19% (27) of the population.

Of the 520 households, 26.7% had children under the age of 18; 51.7% were married couples living together; 7.9% had a female householder with no husband present and 36.3% were non-families. Of all households, 28.8% were made up of individuals and 12.3% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.36 and the average family size was 2.93.

20.6% of the population were under the age of 18, 6.4% from 18 to 24, 24.2% from 25 to 44, 32.8% from 45 to 64, and 16.0% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 44.1 years. For every 100 females, the population had 95.7 males. For every 100 females ages 18 and older there were 97.0 males.

The Census Bureau&#x27;s 2006–2010 American Community Survey showed that (in 2010 inflation-adjusted dollars) median household income was $75,948 (with a margin of error of +/− $6,902) and the median family income was $79,653 (+/− $5,673). Males had a median income of $52,679 (+/− $12,062) versus $42,778 (+/− $8,377) for females. The per capita income for the borough was $32,823 (+/− $2,774). About 0.9% of families and 2.6% of the population were below the poverty line, including none of those under age 18 and 6.6% of those age 65 or over.

===2000 census===
At the 2000 United States census there were 1,195 people, 469 households and 323 families residing in the borough. The population density was . There were 484 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the borough was 97.57% White, 0.17% African American, 0.17% Native American, 0.42% Asian, 0.33% Pacific Islander, 0.08% from other races, and 1.26% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 2.01% of the population.

There were 469 households, of which 33.5% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 59.1% were married couples living together, 5.5% had a female householder with no husband present, and 31.1% were non-families. 27.1% of all households were made up of individuals, and 11.9% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.55 and the average family size was 3.11.

25.4% of the population were under the age of 18, 4.6% from 18 to 24, 33.3% from 25 to 44, 23.1% from 45 to 64, and 13.6% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 39 years. For every 100 females, there were 102.9 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 97.3 males.

The median household income was $54,519 and the median family income was $62,167. Males had a median income of $46,500 and females $31,765. The per capita income was $25,039. About 1.8% of families and 3.7% of the population were below the poverty line, including 3.7% of those under age 18 and 6.4% of those age 65 or over.

==Government==
===Local government===
Milford is governed under the borough form of New Jersey municipal government, one of 218 municipalities (of the 564) statewide that use this form, the most commonly used form of government in the state. The governing body is comprised of the mayor and the borough council, with all positions elected at-large on a partisan basis as part of the November general election. A mayor is elected directly by the voters to a four-year term of office. The borough council includes six members, who are elected to serve three-year terms on a staggered basis, with two seats coming up for election each year in a three-year cycle. The borough form of government used by Milford is a &quot;weak mayor / strong council&quot; government in which council members act as the legislative body with the mayor presiding at meetings and voting only in the event of a tie. The mayor can veto ordinances subject to an override by a two-thirds majority vote of the council. The mayor makes committee and liaison assignments for council members, and most appointments are made by the mayor with the advice and consent of the council.

, the mayor of Milford Borough is Republican Henry Schepens, whose term of office ends December 31, 2023. Members of the Borough Council are Noralie LaFevre (R, 2025), James Gallos (R, 2024; appointed to serve an unexpired term), Ronald R. Rehl (R, 2025), Robert E. White (D, 2023) and Elisa Yager (R, 2024), with one seat vacant.

In February 2023, Russell Heller was shot and killed at a PSE&amp;G facility by a former employee, leaving his seat expiring in December 2023 vacant.

In November 2018, Henry Schepens was elected to serve the balance of the term as mayor expiring in December 2019 that had been held by Ronald R. Rehl.

In January 2016, the Common Council selected Carole Heller to fill the seat expiring in December 2017 that became vacant after Ronald Rehl stepped down to be sworn in as mayor.

===Federal, state and county representation===
Milford is located in the 7th Congressional District and is part of New Jersey&#x27;s 23rd state legislative district.



===Politics===
In March 2011, there were 823 registered voters in Milford Township, of whom 206 (25.0%) were registered as Democrats, 304 (36.9%) as Republicans and 313 (38.0%) as unaffiliated. There were no voters registered to other parties.

In the 2012 presidential election, Republican Mitt Romney received 49.7% of the vote (314 cast), ahead of Democrat Barack Obama with 47.0% (297 votes), and other candidates with 3.3% (21 votes), among the 635 ballots cast by the borough&#x27;s 855 registered voters (3 ballots were spoiled), for a turnout of 74.3%. In the 2008 presidential election, Republican John McCain received 51.4% of the vote (340 cast), ahead of Democrat Barack Obama with 46.4% (307 votes) and other candidates with 2.1% (14 votes), among the 661 ballots cast by the township&#x27;s 840 registered voters, for a turnout of 78.7%. In the 2004 presidential election, Republican George W. Bush received 57.9% of the vote (364 ballots cast), outpolling Democrat John Kerry with 40.7% (256 votes) and other candidates with 1.1% (9 votes), among the 629 ballots cast by the township&#x27;s 787 registered voters, for a turnout percentage of 79.9.




In the 2013 gubernatorial election, Republican Chris Christie received 67.8% of the vote (274 cast), ahead of Democrat Barbara Buono with 29.2% (118 votes), and other candidates with 3.0% (12 votes), among the 407 ballots cast by the borough&#x27;s 851 registered voters (3 ballots were spoiled), for a turnout of 47.8%. In the 2009 gubernatorial election, Republican Chris Christie received 58.4% of the vote (281 ballots cast), ahead of Democrat Jon Corzine with 28.1% (135 votes), Independent Chris Daggett with 10.6% (51 votes) and other candidates with 1.9% (9 votes), among the 481 ballots cast by the township&#x27;s 827 registered voters, yielding a 58.2% turnout.

==Education==
The Milford Borough School District serves public school students in pre-kindergarten through eighth grade at Milford Public School. As of the 2018–19 school year, the district, comprised of one school, had an enrollment of 88 students and 11.4 classroom teachers (on an FTE basis), for a student–teacher ratio of 7.7:1. In the 2016–2017 school year, Milford was the 5th-smallest enrollment of any school district in the state, with 81 students.

Students in public school for ninth through twelfth grades attend Delaware Valley Regional High School, together with students from Alexandria Township, Frenchtown, Holland Township and Kingwood Township. As of the 2018–19 school year, the high school had an enrollment of 721 students and 68.4 classroom teachers (on an FTE basis), for a student–teacher ratio of 10.5:1. The nine seats on the high school district&#x27;s board of education are allocated based on the population of the constituent municipalities, with one seat assigned to Milford.

Eighth grade students from all of Hunterdon County are eligible to apply to attend the high school programs offered by the Hunterdon County Vocational School District, a county-wide vocational school district that offers career and technical education at its campuses in Raritan Township and at programs sited at local high schools, with no tuition charged to students for attendance.

==Transportation==
===Roads and highways===

In May 2010, the borough had of roadways, of which were maintained by the municipality and by Hunterdon County.

County Route 519 (CR 519) is the only major roadway passing through Milford.

The Upper Black Eddy – Milford Bridge, owned and operated by the Delaware River Joint Toll Bridge Commission, carries Bridge Street across the Delaware River, connecting CR 519 in Milford with Pennsylvania Route 32 in Upper Black Eddy, Pennsylvania. The existing bridge was constructed in 1933 on the site of a covered bridge built in 1842 and another partially destroyed in a 1903 flood. The bridge is a Warren truss that extends across the river.

===Public transportation===
The Hunterdon County LINK provide bus service on Routes 17 / 18, which operate between Milford and Clinton.

==Notable people==

People who were born in, residents of, or otherwise closely associated with Milford include:

* Louis Adamic (1899–1951), Slovene-American author and translator
* Carlton Cooley (1898–1981), violist and composer
* Elias Deemer (1838–1918) member of the United States House of Representatives from Pennsylvania from 1901 to 1907
* Richard Egielski (born 1952), illustrator who was awarded the 1987 Caldecott Medal for his work in the book &quot;Hey, Al&quot;, written by Arthur Yorinks
* Wanda Gág (1893–1946), artist and author of children&#x27;s books (&quot;Millions of Cats&quot;)
* Thomas Lowrey (1737–1809), settled in Milford in the 1790s and built the first hotel and grist mill on Bridge Street. He named the town Lowreytown, but it was renamed Millsford following his death in 1809
* George C. Ludlow (1830–1900), 25th Governor of New Jersey
* Abigail Roberts (1791–1841), pioneer in religion and women&#x27;s rights who was one of the first American women to serve as a minister and established the United Church in Milford

==See also==
*Hunterdon Plateau

==References==
==External links==

* Milford Borough website
* Milford on the Delaware website
* Hunterdon County web page for Milford Borough
* Milford Public School
* School Data for the Milford Borough School District, National Center for Education Statistics
* Delaware Valley Regional High School District
* Hunterdon Land Trust Alliance
* Milford Borough Historical Society</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1083131" start="0" end="7" title="Milford, New Jersey" label="Milford"/>
<link wikidata="Q2911266" start="13" end="20" title="Borough (New Jersey)" label="borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q502451" start="40" end="56" title="Hunterdon County, New Jersey" label="Hunterdon County"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="65" end="75" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="79" end="89" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="101" end="126" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="211" end="222" title="2010 United States census" label="2010 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q166998" start="319" end="330" title="2000 United States census" label="2000 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2867079" start="388" end="410" title="New Jersey Legislature" label="New Jersey Legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q3017015" start="447" end="463" title="Holland Township, New Jersey" label="Holland Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q143762" start="620" end="634" title="Delaware River" label="Delaware River"/>
<link wikidata="Q5944705" start="692" end="709" title="Hunterdon Plateau" label="Hunterdon Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q542454" start="819" end="837" title="Bethlehem Township, New Jersey" label="Bethlehem Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q3017769" start="931" end="950" title="Alexandria Township, New Jersey" label="Alexandria Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="1415" end="1442" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q3017769" start="1643" end="1662" title="Alexandria Township, New Jersey" label="Alexandria Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q3017015" start="1667" end="1683" title="Holland Township, New Jersey" label="Holland Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q1894068" start="1709" end="1727" title="Bridgeton Township, Pennsylvania" label="Bridgeton Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q494192" start="1731" end="1757" title="Bucks County, Pennsylvania" label="Bucks County, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q143762" start="1770" end="1784" title="Delaware River" label="Delaware River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400" start="1792" end="1820" title="Pennsylvania" label="Commonwealth of Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="1862" end="1887" title="2010 United States census" label="2010 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2081" end="2086" title="White (U.S. census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2098" end="2123" title="Black (U.S. census)" label="Black or African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2135" end="2150" title="Native American (U.S. census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2163" end="2168" title="Asian (U.S. census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2180" end="2196" title="Pacific Islander (U.S. census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2213" end="2224" title="Race and ethnicity in the United States census#Race" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2265" end="2283" title="Hispanic (U.S. census)" label="Hispanic or Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q463769" start="3060" end="3085" title="American Community Survey" label="American Community Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q311198" start="3107" end="3125" title="inflation adjustment" label="inflation-adjusted"/>
<link wikidata="Q1940707" start="3135" end="3158" title="median household income" label="median household income"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="3361" end="3378" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="3486" end="3498" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q166998" start="3597" end="3622" title="2000 United States census" label="2000 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3834" end="3839" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3847" end="3863" title="African American (U.S. Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3871" end="3886" title="Native American (U.S. Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3894" end="3899" title="Asian (U.S. Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3907" end="3923" title="Pacific Islander (U.S. Census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3936" end="3947" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3983" end="3991" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3995" end="4001" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="4149" end="4164" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q1940707" start="4763" end="4786" title="median household income" label="median household income"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="4903" end="4920" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="4999" end="5011" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q2911266" start="5153" end="5160" title="Borough (New Jersey)" label="borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q3682992" start="5424" end="5432" title="at-large" label="at-large"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308596" start="5803" end="5813" title="weak mayor" label="weak mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q178074" start="5991" end="5995" title="veto" label="veto"/>
<link wikidata="Q178074" start="6021" end="6029" title="veto override" label="override"/>
<link wikidata="Q30185" start="6242" end="6247" title="mayor" label="mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="6270" end="6280" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="6509" end="6510" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="D"/>
<link wikidata="Q930919" start="6626" end="6635" title="PSE&amp;amp;G" label="PSE&amp;amp;G"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="7341" end="7350" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="7367" end="7378" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republicans"/>
<link wikidata="Q5354776" start="7398" end="7410" title="Unaffiliated (New Jersey)" label="unaffiliated"/>
<link wikidata="Q17100287" start="7470" end="7496" title="United States presidential election in New Jersey, 2012" label="2012 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q4496" start="7509" end="7520" title="Mitt Romney" label="Mitt Romney"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="7578" end="7590" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738441" start="7745" end="7752" title="Spoilt vote" label="spoiled"/>
<link wikidata="Q16959334" start="7786" end="7812" title="United States presidential election in New Jersey, 2008" label="2008 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q10390" start="7825" end="7836" title="John McCain" label="John McCain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892945" start="8077" end="8103" title="United States presidential election in New Jersey, 2004" label="2004 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="8116" end="8130" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q22316" start="8198" end="8208" title="John Kerry" label="John Kerry"/>
<link wikidata="Q15134831" start="8392" end="8419" title="New Jersey gubernatorial election, 2013" label="2013 gubernatorial election"/>
<link wikidata="Q63879" start="8432" end="8446" title="Chris Christie" label="Chris Christie"/>
<link wikidata="Q4858790" start="8504" end="8517" title="Barbara Buono" label="Barbara Buono"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586264" start="8713" end="8740" title="New Jersey gubernatorial election, 2009" label="2009 gubernatorial election"/>
<link wikidata="Q380570" start="8833" end="8844" title="Jon Corzine" label="Jon Corzine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5106343" start="8881" end="8894" title="Chris Daggett" label="Chris Daggett"/>
<link wikidata="Q6851712" start="9077" end="9108" title="Milford Borough School District" label="Milford Borough School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q7239239" start="9142" end="9158" title="pre-kindergarten" label="pre-kindergarten"/>
<link wikidata="Q5349142" start="9167" end="9179" title="eighth grade" label="eighth grade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543700" start="9344" end="9347" title="full-time equivalent" label="FTE"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595370" start="9362" end="9383" title="student–teacher ratio" label="student–teacher ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7039258" start="9550" end="9555" title="ninth grade" label="ninth"/>
<link wikidata="Q986388" start="9564" end="9577" title="twelfth grade" label="twelfth grade"/>
<link wikidata="Q5253414" start="9586" end="9622" title="Delaware Valley Regional High School" label="Delaware Valley Regional High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q3017769" start="9652" end="9671" title="Alexandria Township, New Jersey" label="Alexandria Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089312" start="9673" end="9683" title="Frenchtown, New Jersey" label="Frenchtown"/>
<link wikidata="Q3017015" start="9685" end="9701" title="Holland Township, New Jersey" label="Holland Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q3015394" start="9706" end="9723" title="Kingwood Township, New Jersey" label="Kingwood Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543700" start="9841" end="9844" title="full-time equivalent" label="FTE"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595370" start="9859" end="9880" title="student–teacher ratio" label="student–teacher ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q5944694" start="10193" end="10236" title="Hunterdon County Vocational School District" label="Hunterdon County Vocational School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q3017068" start="10341" end="10357" title="Raritan Township, New Jersey" label="Raritan Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q858866" start="10614" end="10630" title="County Route 519 (New Jersey)" label="County Route 519"/>
<link wikidata="Q7898496" start="10696" end="10729" title="Upper Black Eddy – Milford Bridge" label="Upper Black Eddy – Milford Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5253341" start="10757" end="10800" title="Delaware River Joint Toll Bridge Commission" label="Delaware River Joint Toll Bridge Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q143762" start="10835" end="10849" title="Delaware River" label="Delaware River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052600" start="10885" end="10906" title="Pennsylvania Route 32" label="Pennsylvania Route 32"/>
<link wikidata="Q3709507" start="10910" end="10940" title="Upper Black Eddy, Pennsylvania" label="Upper Black Eddy, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q30587800" start="11097" end="11109" title="Warren truss" label="Warren truss"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087573" start="11269" end="11276" title="Clinton, New Jersey" label="Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q713658" start="11395" end="11407" title="Louis Adamic" label="Louis Adamic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5042974" start="11462" end="11476" title="Carlton Cooley" label="Carlton Cooley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5360478" start="11513" end="11525" title="Elias Deemer" label="Elias Deemer"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="11552" end="11590" title="United States House of Representatives" label="United States House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400" start="11596" end="11608" title="Pennsylvania" label="Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325472" start="11629" end="11645" title="Richard Egielski" label="Richard Egielski"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026417" start="11696" end="11711" title="Caldecott Medal" label="Caldecott Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5749130" start="11743" end="11750" title="Hey, Al" label="Hey, Al"/>
<link wikidata="Q712107" start="11769" end="11783" title="Arthur Yorinks" label="Arthur Yorinks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012900" start="11786" end="11795" title="Wanda Gág" label="Wanda Gág"/>
<link wikidata="Q885442" start="12092" end="12108" title="George C. Ludlow" label="George C. Ludlow"/>
<link wikidata="Q5944705" start="12348" end="12365" title="Hunterdon Plateau" label="Hunterdon Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1966994" start="12589" end="12629" title="National Center for Education Statistics" label="National Center for Education Statistics"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="125363" wikidata="Q3017068" url="?curid=125363" title="Raritan Township, New Jersey">
<text>Raritan Township is a township in Hunterdon County, in the U.S. state of New Jersey. As of the 2020 United States census, the township&#x27;s population was 23,447, an increase of 1,262 (+5.7%) from the 2010 census count of 22,185, which in turn reflected an increase of 2,376 (+12.0%) from the 19,809 counted in the 2000 census. The township is located within the heart of the Amwell Valley and Raritan Valley regions, as the South Branch of the Raritan River (along with the Neshanic River) flows through the center of the township. The northwestern portion of the township is located on the Hunterdon Plateau.

Raritan was incorporated as a township by an act of the New Jersey Legislature on April 2, 1838, from portions of the now-defunct Amwell Township. Flemington was formed within the township on March 14, 1870, and became an independent borough on April 7, 1910. Portions of the township were ceded to East Amwell Township in 1854 and 1897.

The township&#x27;s name is derived from the Raritan tribe, a Native American band of Lenape people that inhabited Central New Jersey. The name of the tribe is said to mean &quot;forked river&quot;, &quot;stream overflows&quot; or &quot;point on a tidal river&quot;.

==Geography==
According to the United States Census Bureau, the township had a total area of 37.65 square miles (97.52 km2), including 37.48 square miles (97.08 km2) of land and 0.17 square miles (0.44 km2) of water (0.46%).

Raritan Township completely surrounds Flemington, making it part one of 21 pairs of &quot;doughnut towns&quot; in the state, where one municipality entirely surrounds another. It borders the municipalities of Clinton Township, Delaware Township, East Amwell Township, Franklin Township and Readington Township in Hunterdon County; and Hillsborough Township in Somerset County.

Unincorporated communities, localities and place names located partially or completely within the township include: Cloverhill, Copper Hill, Croton, Flemington Junction, Klinesville, Larisons Corners, Muirhead, Reaville, as well as Bartles Corners, Gary Corner, Mount Carmel, Rockefellows Mills, Thachers Hill and Voorhees Corner.

Raritan Township is located east of Allentown, north of Philadelphia, and southwest of New York City.

==Demographics==

===2010 census===
The 2010 United States census counted 22,185 people, 8,056 households, and 6,058 families in the township. The population density was 591.2 per square mile (228.3/km2). There were 8,288 housing units at an average density of 220.9 per square mile (85.3/km2). The racial makeup was 89.57% (19,870) White, 2.07% (459) Black or African American, 0.10% (23) Native American, 5.95% (1,319) Asian, 0.04% (9) Pacific Islander, 0.83% (185) from other races, and 1.44% (320) from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 5.13% (1,138) of the population.

Of the 8,056 households, 37.6% had children under the age of 18; 64.9% were married couples living together; 7.7% had a female householder with no husband present and 24.8% were non-families. Of all households, 20.7% were made up of individuals and 8.7% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.72 and the average family size was 3.19.

26.2% of the population were under the age of 18, 5.9% from 18 to 24, 22.7% from 25 to 44, 33.2% from 45 to 64, and 12.0% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 42.4 years. For every 100 females, the population had 94.8 males. For every 100 females ages 18 and older there were 89.8 males.

The Census Bureau&#x27;s 2006–2010 American Community Survey showed that (in 2010 inflation-adjusted dollars) median household income was $109,941 (with a margin of error of +/− $7,543) and the median family income was $130,514 (+/− $10,612). Males had a median income of $95,123 (+/− $8,996) versus $62,229 (+/− $3,584) for females. The per capita income for the borough was $48,782 (+/− $2,900). About 2.0% of families and 4.6% of the population were below the poverty line, including 3.6% of those under age 18 and 6.2% of those age 65 or over.

===2000 census===
As of the 2000 United States census there were 19,809 people, 6,939 households, and 5,391 families residing in the township. The population density was . There were 7,094 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the township was 93.22% White, 1.23% African American, 0.09% Native American, 3.50% Asian, 0.01% Pacific Islander, 0.68% from other races, and 1.27% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 2.79% of the population.

There were 6,939 households, out of which 43.0% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 68.2% were married couples living together, 7.0% had a female householder with no husband present, and 22.3% were non-families. 18.2% of all households were made up of individuals, and 5.6% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.81 and the average family size was 3.24.

In the township the population was spread out, with 29.3% under the age of 18, 4.6% from 18 to 24, 32.6% from 25 to 44, 24.7% from 45 to 64, and 8.9% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 37 years. For every 100 females, there were 94.1 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 90.0 males.

The median income for a household in the township was $85,996, and the median income for a family was $96,336. Males had a median income of $69,485 versus $41,911 for females. The per capita income for the township was $38,919. About 1.2% of families and 2.0% of the population were below the poverty line, including 1.6% of those under age 18 and 2.9% of those age 65 or over.

==Government==

===Local government===
Raritan Township is governed under the Township form of government, one of 141 municipalities (of the 564) statewide that use the Township form. The Township Committee is comprised of five members, who are elected directly by the voters at-large in partisan elections to serve three-year terms of office on a staggered basis, with either one or two seats coming up for election each year as part of the November general election in a three-year cycle. At an annual reorganization meeting, the Township Committee selects one of its members to serve as Mayor and another as Deputy Mayor. The mayor presides at Township Committee meetings and votes as a member of the committee, but has no other special powers under the township form of government law. All legislative and executive powers, including the power of appointments, are exercised by the committee as a whole.

, the members of the Raritan Township Committee are Mayor Scott Sipos (R, term on committee and as mayor ends December 31, 2024), Deputy Mayor Bob King (R, term on committee ends 2024; term as deputy mayor ends 2023), Robyn Fatooh (R, 2026), Scott R. MacDade (R, 2025) and Bradford Perry (R, 2026).

In June 2022, Jeff Kuhl resigned from the seat he had held expiring in December 2024 in order to fill a vacant seat on the Hunterdon County Board of County Commissioners. The Township Committee appointed Bob King to fill Kuhl&#x27;s vacant committee seat; King will serve on an interim basis until the November 2022 general election, when voters will choose a candidate to serve the balance of the term of office.

===Federal, state and county representation===
Raritan Township is located in the 7th Congressional District and is part of New Jersey&#x27;s 16th state legislative district. Prior to the 2010 Census, Raritan Township had been part of the , a change made by the New Jersey Redistricting Commission that took effect in January 2013, based on the results of the November 2012 general elections.



===Politics===
As of September 2023, there were a total of 19,626 registered voters in Raritan Township, of which 5,600 (28.5%) were registered as Democrats, 7,113 (36.2%) were registered as Republicans and 6,758 (34.4%) were registered as Unaffiliated. There were 78 voters registered as Libertarians or Greens and 77 registered to other parties.

In the 2012 presidential election, Republican Mitt Romney received 57.8% of the vote (6,798 cast), ahead of Democrat Barack Obama with 41.2% (4,843 votes), and other candidates with 1.0% (118 votes), among the 11,834 ballots cast by the township&#x27;s 16,049 registered voters (75 ballots were spoiled), for a turnout of 73.7%. In the 2008 presidential election, Republican John McCain received 54.7% of the vote (6,705 cast), ahead of Democrat Barack Obama with 43.5% (5,339 votes) and other candidates with 1.0% (121 votes), among the 12,261 ballots cast by the township&#x27;s 15,254 registered voters, for a turnout of 80.4%. In the 2004 presidential election, Republican George W. Bush received 59.7% of the vote (6,727 ballots cast), outpolling Democrat John Kerry with 39.7% (4,470 votes) and other candidates with 0.7% (97 votes), among the 11,265 ballots cast by the township&#x27;s 13,693 registered voters, for a turnout percentage of 82.3.




In the 2013 gubernatorial election, Republican Chris Christie received 74.1% of the vote (5,504 cast), ahead of Democrat Barbara Buono with 24.5% (1,818 votes), and other candidates with 1.5% (109 votes), among the 7,595 ballots cast by the township&#x27;s 16,003 registered voters (164 ballots were spoiled), for a turnout of 47.5%. In the 2009 gubernatorial election, Republican Chris Christie received 64.8% of the vote (5,440 ballots cast), ahead of Democrat Jon Corzine with 25.9% (2,173 votes), Independent Chris Daggett with 7.4% (618 votes) and other candidates with 0.6% (47 votes), among the 8,396 ballots cast by the township&#x27;s 14,991 registered voters, yielding a 56.0% turnout.

==Education==
Students in public schools for pre-kindergarten through eighth grade attend the Flemington-Raritan Regional School District, which also serves children from the neighboring community of Flemington. As of the 2023–24 school year, the district, comprised of six schools, had an enrollment of 3,174 students and 335.3 classroom teachers (on an FTE basis), for a student–teacher ratio of 9.5:1. The district is comprised of four PreK/K to 4 elementary schools, one intermediate school for grades 5 and 6 and a middle school for grades 7 and 8. Schools in the district (with 2023–24 enrollment data from the National Center for Education Statistics) are 
Barley Sheaf School with 363 students in grades K–4 (located in Flemington), 
Copper Hill School with 602 students in grades PreK–4 (Ringoes), 
Francis A. Desmares School with 420 students in grades K–4 (Flemington), 
Robert Hunter School with 394 students in grades K–4 (Flemington), 
Reading-Fleming Intermediate School with 702 students in grades 5–6 (Flemington) and 
J. P. Case Middle School with 675 students in grades 7–8 (Flemington). Raritan Township is allocated seven of the nine seats on the regional district&#x27;s board of education.

Public school students in ninth through twelfth grades attend Hunterdon Central Regional High School, part of the Hunterdon Central Regional High School District, which serves students in central Hunterdon County from Raritan Township and from Delaware Township, East Amwell Township, Flemington and Readington Township. As of the 2023–24 school year, the high school had an enrollment of 2,408 students and 226.7 classroom teachers (on an FTE basis), for a student–teacher ratio of 10.6:1. Seats on the high school district&#x27;s nine-member board of education are allocated based on the population of the five constituent municipalities who participate in the school district, with four seats allocated to Raritan Township, an increase of one seat based on the results of the 2020 Census.

Eighth grade students from all of Hunterdon County are eligible to apply to attend the high school programs offered by the Hunterdon County Vocational School District, a county-wide vocational school district that offers career and technical education at its campuses in Raritan Township and at programs sited at local high schools, with no tuition charged to students for attendance.

==Transportation==

, the township had a total of of roadways, of which were maintained by the municipality, by Hunterdon County and by the New Jersey Department of Transportation.

Several major roads in Raritan Township. These include Route 12, Route 31 and U.S. Route 202 (the latter two run concurrent for about in the southern part of the township).

Major county roads that go through the township include CR 514 (which runs along the southeastern border), CR 523 and CR 579 (which runs along the southwestern border).

The closest Interstate highway is Interstate 78 in neighboring Clinton and Franklin Townships.

===Public transportation===
The Hunterdon County LINK provide local bus service on Route 14 between Lambertville and Flemington; Route 15 between Flemington and Hampton; Routes 16 / 19 / 21 which operate to / from Flemington; Route 17 / 18 between Milford and Clinton; and Route 23 between Flemington and Bridgewater Commons Mall / Somerville.

===Rail service===

The Black River and Western Railroad is a historic short-line railroad that passes through the township. It operates today as a heritage railway.

The Norfolk Southern Railway&#x27;s Lehigh Line (formerly the mainline of the Lehigh Valley Railroad), runs through most of the northeast part of Raritan Township close to its northeast boundary.

==Points of interest==

On December 14, 1776, during the American Revolutionary War, local militia led by Captain John Schenck ambushed a party of British dragoons returning from a raid on Flemington. The British leader, Cornet Francis Geary, was killed during this skirmish, known as the Ambush of Geary, that took place between Copper Hill and Larison&#x27;s Corners. On December 14, 1976, as part of the United States Bicentennial, Raritan Township dedicated a monument to the Amwell Militia at the site along US 202 and Route 31 northbound. A memorial monument to Geary is located nearby along with a historical information plaque describing the Amwell Skirmish.

The John Reading Farmstead, built in 1760 for John Reading, former governor of the Province of New Jersey, is listed on the National Register of Historic Places. It is also a contributing property of the Raritan–Readington South Branch Historic District.

==Notable people==

People who were born in, residents of, or otherwise closely associated with Raritan Township include:
* Marcia A. Karrow (born 1959), member of the New Jersey Senate who served on the Raritan Township Committee, including in 1998 as its mayor
* Orlie Pell (1900–1975), pacifist, philosopher and activist.
* Miles Ross (1827–1903), represented New Jersey&#x27;s 3rd congressional district in the United States House of Representatives from 1875 to 1883
* Alex Shaffer (born 1993), actor who appeared in the 2011 film &quot;Win Win&quot;

==References==
==External links==

*Raritan Township website
*Hunterdon County webpage for Raritan Township
*Flemington-Raritan Regional School District
*School Data for the Flemington-Raritan Regional School District, National Center for Education Statistics
*Hunterdon Central Regional High School District
*School Data for the Hunterdon Central Regional High School, National Center for Education Statistics
*Hunterdon Land Trust Alliance</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3017068" start="0" end="16" title="Raritan Township, New Jersey" label="Raritan Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q7830213" start="22" end="30" title="Township (New Jersey)" label="township"/>
<link wikidata="Q502451" start="34" end="50" title="Hunterdon County, New Jersey" label="Hunterdon County"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="59" end="69" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="73" end="83" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="95" end="120" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="203" end="214" title="2010 United States census" label="2010 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q166998" start="317" end="328" title="2000 United States census" label="2000 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q4749038" start="378" end="391" title="Amwell Valley" label="Amwell Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q749287" start="396" end="410" title="Raritan River" label="Raritan Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7566388" start="427" end="439" title="South Branch Raritan River" label="South Branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q14705786" start="477" end="491" title="Neshanic River" label="Neshanic River"/>
<link wikidata="Q5944705" start="594" end="611" title="Hunterdon Plateau" label="Hunterdon Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q2867079" start="670" end="692" title="New Jersey Legislature" label="New Jersey Legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q4749037" start="744" end="759" title="Amwell Township, New Jersey" label="Amwell Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010673" start="761" end="771" title="Flemington, New Jersey" label="Flemington"/>
<link wikidata="Q3016094" start="913" end="933" title="East Amwell Township, New Jersey" label="East Amwell Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q2749764" start="998" end="1011" title="Raritan tribe" label="Raritan tribe"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="1015" end="1030" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q82048" start="1039" end="1045" title="Lenape" label="Lenape"/>
<link wikidata="Q2945571" start="1068" end="1086" title="Central Jersey" label="Central New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="1252" end="1279" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010673" start="1485" end="1495" title="Flemington, New Jersey" label="Flemington"/>
<link wikidata="Q3016644" start="1656" end="1672" title="Clinton Township, New Jersey" label="Clinton Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q614185" start="1674" end="1691" title="Delaware Township, Hunterdon County, New Jersey" label="Delaware Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q3016094" start="1693" end="1713" title="East Amwell Township, New Jersey" label="East Amwell Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q5491960" start="1715" end="1732" title="Franklin Township, Hunterdon County, New Jersey" label="Franklin Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q3017759" start="1737" end="1756" title="Readington Township, New Jersey" label="Readington Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q367331" start="1782" end="1803" title="Hillsborough Township, Somerset County, New Jersey" label="Hillsborough Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q502414" start="1807" end="1822" title="Somerset County, New Jersey" label="Somerset County"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1825" end="1851" title="Local government in New Jersey#Unincorporated communities" label="Unincorporated communities"/>
<link wikidata="Q19059288" start="1941" end="1951" title="Cloverhill, New Jersey" label="Cloverhill"/>
<link wikidata="Q19059282" start="1953" end="1964" title="Copper Hill, New Jersey" label="Copper Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q614185" start="1966" end="1972" title="Croton, New Jersey" label="Croton"/>
<link wikidata="Q56290791" start="1974" end="1993" title="Flemington Junction, New Jersey" label="Flemington Junction"/>
<link wikidata="Q20657155" start="2008" end="2024" title="Larisons Corners, New Jersey" label="Larisons Corners"/>
<link wikidata="Q20657666" start="2036" end="2044" title="Reaville, New Jersey" label="Reaville"/>
<link wikidata="Q20657710" start="2101" end="2119" title="Rockefellows Mills, New Jersey" label="Rockefellows Mills"/>
<link wikidata="Q3017068" start="2139" end="2154" title="Voorhees Corner, New Jersey" label="Voorhees Corner"/>
<link wikidata="Q142811" start="2193" end="2202" title="Allentown, Pennsylvania" label="Allentown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="2213" end="2225" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="2244" end="2257" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="2300" end="2325" title="2010 United States census" label="2010 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="2407" end="2425" title="population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2593" end="2598" title="White (U.S. census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2612" end="2637" title="Black (U.S. census)" label="Black or African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2650" end="2665" title="Native American (U.S. census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2681" end="2686" title="Asian (U.S. census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2698" end="2714" title="Pacific Islander (U.S. census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2733" end="2744" title="Race and ethnicity in the United States census#Race" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2786" end="2804" title="Hispanic (U.S. census)" label="Hispanic or Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q463769" start="3585" end="3610" title="American Community Survey" label="American Community Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q311198" start="3632" end="3650" title="inflation adjustment" label="inflation-adjusted"/>
<link wikidata="Q1940707" start="3660" end="3683" title="median household income" label="median household income"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="3888" end="3905" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="4013" end="4025" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q166998" start="4127" end="4152" title="2000 United States census" label="2000 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4374" end="4379" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4387" end="4403" title="African American (U.S. Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4411" end="4426" title="Native American (U.S. Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4434" end="4439" title="Asian (U.S. Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4447" end="4463" title="Pacific Islander (U.S. Census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4476" end="4487" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4523" end="4531" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4535" end="4541" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="4695" end="4710" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="5511" end="5528" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="5624" end="5636" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q7830213" start="5788" end="5796" title="Township (New Jersey)" label="Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q3682992" start="5986" end="5994" title="at-large" label="at-large"/>
<link wikidata="Q30185" start="6671" end="6676" title="Mayor" label="Mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="6690" end="6691" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="R"/>
<link wikidata="Q502451" start="7042" end="7058" title="Hunterdon County, New Jersey" label="Hunterdon County"/>
<link wikidata="Q4931391" start="7059" end="7088" title="Board of County Commissioners (New Jersey)" label="Board of County Commissioners"/>
<link wikidata="Q17091563" start="7596" end="7631" title="New Jersey Redistricting Commission" label="New Jersey Redistricting Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="7877" end="7886" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="7921" end="7932" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republicans"/>
<link wikidata="Q5354776" start="7970" end="7982" title="Unaffiliated (New Jersey)" label="Unaffiliated"/>
<link wikidata="Q558334" start="8019" end="8031" title="Libertarian Party (United States)" label="Libertarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q849158" start="8035" end="8041" title="Green Party (United States)" label="Greens"/>
<link wikidata="Q17100287" start="8086" end="8112" title="United States presidential election in New Jersey, 2012" label="2012 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q4496" start="8125" end="8136" title="Mitt Romney" label="Mitt Romney"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="8196" end="8208" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738441" start="8374" end="8381" title="Spoilt vote" label="spoiled"/>
<link wikidata="Q16959334" start="8415" end="8441" title="United States presidential election in New Jersey, 2008" label="2008 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q10390" start="8454" end="8465" title="John McCain" label="John McCain"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="8525" end="8537" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892945" start="8717" end="8743" title="United States presidential election in New Jersey, 2004" label="2004 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="8756" end="8770" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q22316" start="8840" end="8850" title="John Kerry" label="John Kerry"/>
<link wikidata="Q15134831" start="9043" end="9070" title="New Jersey gubernatorial election, 2013" label="2013 gubernatorial election"/>
<link wikidata="Q63879" start="9083" end="9097" title="Chris Christie" label="Chris Christie"/>
<link wikidata="Q4858790" start="9157" end="9170" title="Barbara Buono" label="Barbara Buono"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586264" start="9377" end="9404" title="New Jersey gubernatorial election, 2009" label="2009 gubernatorial election"/>
<link wikidata="Q380570" start="9499" end="9510" title="Jon Corzine" label="Jon Corzine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5106343" start="9549" end="9562" title="Chris Daggett" label="Chris Daggett"/>
<link wikidata="Q7239239" start="9778" end="9794" title="pre-kindergarten" label="pre-kindergarten"/>
<link wikidata="Q5349142" start="9803" end="9815" title="eighth grade" label="eighth grade"/>
<link wikidata="Q5458616" start="9827" end="9870" title="Flemington-Raritan Regional School District" label="Flemington-Raritan Regional School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010673" start="9933" end="9943" title="Flemington, New Jersey" label="Flemington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543700" start="10088" end="10091" title="full-time equivalent" label="FTE"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595370" start="10106" end="10127" title="student–teacher ratio" label="student–teacher ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1966994" start="10350" end="10390" title="National Center for Education Statistics" label="National Center for Education Statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q11183236" start="10530" end="10537" title="Ringoes, New Jersey" label="Ringoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7039258" start="10973" end="10978" title="ninth grade" label="ninth"/>
<link wikidata="Q986388" start="10987" end="11000" title="twelfth grade" label="twelfth grade"/>
<link wikidata="Q5944683" start="11009" end="11047" title="Hunterdon Central Regional High School" label="Hunterdon Central Regional High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q614185" start="11191" end="11208" title="Delaware Township, Hunterdon County, New Jersey" label="Delaware Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q3016094" start="11210" end="11230" title="East Amwell Township, New Jersey" label="East Amwell Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010673" start="11232" end="11242" title="Flemington, New Jersey" label="Flemington"/>
<link wikidata="Q3017759" start="11247" end="11266" title="Readington Township, New Jersey" label="Readington Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543700" start="11387" end="11390" title="full-time equivalent" label="FTE"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595370" start="11405" end="11426" title="student–teacher ratio" label="student–teacher ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q399541" start="11491" end="11509" title="board of education" label="board of education"/>
<link wikidata="Q5944694" start="11863" end="11906" title="Hunterdon County Vocational School District" label="Hunterdon County Vocational School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q867675" start="12266" end="12305" title="New Jersey Department of Transportation" label="New Jersey Department of Transportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q821607" start="12363" end="12371" title="New Jersey Route 12" label="Route 12"/>
<link wikidata="Q822339" start="12373" end="12381" title="New Jersey Route 31" label="Route 31"/>
<link wikidata="Q811458" start="12386" end="12400" title="U.S. Route 202 in New Jersey" label="U.S. Route 202"/>
<link wikidata="Q5159092" start="12421" end="12431" title="concurrency (road)" label="concurrent"/>
<link wikidata="Q858796" start="12538" end="12544" title="County Route 514 (New Jersey)" label="CR 514"/>
<link wikidata="Q858928" start="12589" end="12595" title="County Route 523 (New Jersey)" label="CR 523"/>
<link wikidata="Q859457" start="12600" end="12606" title="County Route 579 (New Jersey)" label="CR 579"/>
<link wikidata="Q94247" start="12664" end="12682" title="Interstate highway" label="Interstate highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q811194" start="12686" end="12699" title="Interstate 78 in New Jersey" label="Interstate 78"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086436" start="12848" end="12860" title="Lambertville, New Jersey" label="Lambertville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010673" start="12865" end="12875" title="Flemington, New Jersey" label="Flemington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086532" start="12909" end="12916" title="Hampton, New Jersey" label="Hampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083131" start="12996" end="13003" title="Milford, New Jersey" label="Milford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087573" start="13008" end="13015" title="Clinton, New Jersey" label="Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4966837" start="13053" end="13077" title="Bridgewater Commons Mall" label="Bridgewater Commons Mall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088776" start="13080" end="13090" title="Somerville, New Jersey" label="Somerville"/>
<link wikidata="Q4921676" start="13117" end="13149" title="Black River and Western Railroad" label="Black River and Western Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q3038271" start="13164" end="13183" title="short-line railroad" label="short-line railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q420962" start="13241" end="13257" title="heritage railway" label="heritage railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321054" start="13264" end="13288" title="Norfolk Southern Railway" label="Norfolk Southern Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q16981160" start="13296" end="13307" title="Lehigh Line (Norfolk Southern)" label="Lehigh Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q490228" start="13338" end="13360" title="Lehigh Valley Railroad" label="Lehigh Valley Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="13514" end="13540" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q6256871" start="13571" end="13583" title="John Schenck" label="John Schenck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010673" start="13646" end="13656" title="Flemington, New Jersey" label="Flemington"/>
<link wikidata="Q4742016" start="13685" end="13698" title="Francis Geary (British Army officer)" label="Francis Geary"/>
<link wikidata="Q4742016" start="13746" end="13761" title="Ambush of Geary" label="Ambush of Geary"/>
<link wikidata="Q19059282" start="13787" end="13798" title="Copper Hill, New Jersey" label="Copper Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q20657155" start="13803" end="13825" title="Larison&amp;#x27;s Corners, New Jersey" label="Larison&amp;#x27;s Corners"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889582" start="13864" end="13890" title="United States Bicentennial" label="United States Bicentennial"/>
<link wikidata="Q106697835" start="14129" end="14151" title="John Reading Farmstead" label="John Reading Farmstead"/>
<link wikidata="Q6254389" start="14171" end="14183" title="John Reading (New Jersey governor)" label="John Reading"/>
<link wikidata="Q2335128" start="14208" end="14230" title="Province of New Jersey" label="Province of New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719" start="14249" end="14285" title="National Register of Historic Places" label="National Register of Historic Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q106686125" start="14329" end="14378" title="Raritan–Readington South Branch Historic District" label="Raritan–Readington South Branch Historic District"/>
<link wikidata="Q6757079" start="14505" end="14521" title="Marcia A. Karrow" label="Marcia A. Karrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1480298" start="14549" end="14566" title="New Jersey Senate" label="New Jersey Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q94628696" start="14646" end="14656" title="Orlie Pell" label="Orlie Pell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934655" start="14708" end="14718" title="Miles Ross" label="Miles Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q14705794" start="14744" end="14788" title="New Jersey&amp;#x27;s 3rd congressional district" label="New Jersey&amp;#x27;s 3rd congressional district"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="14796" end="14834" title="United States House of Representatives" label="United States House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q4717778" start="14855" end="14867" title="Alex Shaffer (actor)" label="Alex Shaffer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2704616" start="14923" end="14930" title="Win Win (film)" label="Win Win"/>
<link wikidata="Q1966994" start="15157" end="15197" title="National Center for Education Statistics" label="National Center for Education Statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1966994" start="15308" end="15348" title="National Center for Education Statistics" label="National Center for Education Statistics"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="125365" wikidata="Q3017759" url="?curid=125365" title="Readington Township, New Jersey">
<text>Readington Township is a township located in the easternmost portion of Hunterdon County, in the U.S. state of New Jersey. As of the 2020 United States census, the township&#x27;s population was 16,128, an increase of two people (+0.0%) from the 2010 census count of 16,126, which in turn reflected an increase of 323 (+2.0%) from the 15,803 counted in the 2000 census.

Created by Royal charter of King George II, &quot;Reading&quot; Township was formed on July 15, 1730, from portions of Amwell Township. It was the first new township created after Hunterdon was established as an independent county. The township was incorporated as Readingtown Township, one of New Jersey&#x27;s initial group of 104 townships, on February 21, 1798. Portions of the township were annexed by Tewksbury Township in 1832 and 1861. The township was named for John Reading, the first native-born governor of the British Province of New Jersey.

Covering more than , it is the largest township in the county, covering almost 11% of the county&#x27;s area. More than of land have been preserved from development. Readington Township is bounded on the north by the Lamington River and Rockaway Creek; to the east by Somerset County, which existed as the boundary between East and West Jersey from 1688 to 1695; to the south, the South Branch of the Raritan River; and to the west by the old West Jersey Society&#x27;s line which crosses the Cushetunk Mountains.

==Geography==

According to the United States Census Bureau, the township had a total area of 47.83 square miles (123.88 km2), including 47.56 square miles (123.17 km2) of land and 0.27 square miles (0.70 km2) of water (0.57%).

Cushetunk Mountain is a ring-shaped mountain located in Clinton Township. The diabase mountain was formed 160 million years ago. The Lenape called the mountain &quot;Cushetunk&quot; meaning &quot;place of hogs&quot;. In the 1960s, the valley was filled with water to create Round Valley Reservoir, at in depth the second-deepest in the state.

Whitehouse Station (2010 Census population of 2,089) is an unincorporated community and census-designated place (CDP) located within Readington Township.

The township borders the municipalities of Clinton Township, Raritan Township and Tewksbury Township in Hunterdon County; and Branchburg and Hillsborough Township in Somerset County.

===Communities===
Unincorporated communities, localities and place names located partially or completely within the township include Backers Island, Higginsville, McCrea Mills, Riverside, Rockfellows Mills, Round Mountain, Stovers Mills and Wood Church, as well as the following:
*Barley Sheaf, a former hamlet within Readington Township, also known as Campbellsville and Farmersville
*Centerville, a hamlet that was located on the halfway point on the Swift Sure Stage route between New York City and Philadelphia
*Cushetunk was a settlement near Cushetunk Mountain and the railroad line
*Darts Mills, a hamlet centered around a former mill complex on the South Branch Raritan River
*Dreahook, a former community near Readington Road and Main Street that was taken from the Dutch word for triangle because of the configuration of the roads at the time
*Holcomb Mills was a community along the South Branch Raritan River
*Mechanicsville, the eastern section of Whitehouse Village on the Jersey Turnpike
*New Bromley, was a small community on the Rockaway Creek that was once home to William Paterson
*Pleasant Run, a small community along Pleasant Run (formerly Campbell&#x27;s Brook)
*Potterstown, a small community at the western edge of the township
*Readington Village, the oldest settled community in the township, along Holland Brook
*Rowland&#x27;s Mills, a deserted community on the South Branch Raritan River
*Stanton, a small community near Round Mountain that has carried the names of Mount Pleasant, Housel&#x27;s Hill, Waggoner&#x27;s Hill and Stanton
*Stilwells, a hamlet located south of Whitehouse Station named after the Stilwell family
*Three Bridges, small community that once had a passenger rail station
*Whitehouse, a community on the old Jersey Turnpike, north of Whitehouse Station
*Whitehouse Station, a community in the western section of Readington near Cushetunk Mountain and the location of the township&#x27;s railroad station

==Demographics==
===2010 census===
The 2010 United States census counted 16,126 people, 5,971 households, and 4,496 families in the township. The population density was 337.8 per square mile (130.4/km2). There were 6,191 housing units at an average density of 129.7 per square mile (50.1/km2). The racial makeup was 93.09% (15,011) White, 1.33% (214) Black or African American, 0.11% (18) Native American, 3.60% (581) Asian, 0.01% (1) Pacific Islander, 0.77% (124) from other races, and 1.10% (177) from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 3.93% (633) of the population.

Of the 5,971 households, 35.1% had children under the age of 18; 66.0% were married couples living together; 6.6% had a female householder with no husband present and 24.7% were non-families. Of all households, 20.7% were made up of individuals and 8.0% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.70 and the average family size was 3.15.

25.1% of the population were under the age of 18, 5.6% from 18 to 24, 20.4% from 25 to 44, 35.3% from 45 to 64, and 13.5% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 44.4 years. For every 100 females, the population had 96.2 males. For every 100 females ages 18 and older there were 94.1 males.

The Census Bureau&#x27;s 2006–2010 American Community Survey showed that (in 2010 inflation-adjusted dollars) median household income was $120,821 (with a margin of error of +/− $9,180) and the median family income was $138,171 (+/− $10,232). Males had a median income of $100,647 (+/− $11,576) versus $61,372 (+/− $6,196) for females. The per capita income for the borough was $55,493 (+/− $4,019). About 1.3% of families and 1.9% of the population were below the poverty line, including 2.7% of those under age 18 and 1.7% of those age 65 or over.

===2000 census===
As of the 2000 United States census there were 15,803 people, 5,676 households, and 4,410 families residing in the township. The population density was . There were 5,794 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the township was 95.14% White, 0.76% African American, 0.06% Native American, 2.56% Asian, 0.53% from other races, and 0.94% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 2.05% of the population.

There were 5,676 households, out of which 37.9% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 69.3% were married couples living together, 6.1% had a female householder with no husband present, and 22.3% were non-families. 18.2% of all households were made up of individuals, and 5.8% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.77 and the average family size was 3.18.

In the township the population was spread out, with 26.5% under the age of 18, 4.9% from 18 to 24, 30.6% from 25 to 44, 28.3% from 45 to 64, and 9.8% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 39 years. For every 100 females, there were 97.0 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 93.7 males.

The median income for a household in the township was $95,356, and the median income for a family was $106,343. Males had a median income of $66,778 versus $48,385 for females. The per capita income for the township was $41,000. About 0.7% of families and 1.6% of the population were below the poverty line, including 1.4% of those under age 18 and 1.8% of those age 65 or over.

==Economy==
Readington Township is home to the personal and commercial lines of insurance of Chubb Corp., and the QuickChek Corporation, which operates over 100 convenience stores throughout New Jersey and New York.

Readington was once also home to the global headquarters of Merck &amp; Co., one of the largest pharmaceutical companies in the country, but the company has since relocated to nearby Kenilworth, New Jersey.

Readington&#x27;s business climate benefits from its proximity to major highways, Princeton, Bridgewater Township and other centers of business in central New Jersey.

==Arts and culture==
Readington is home to several museums and offers many programs for adults and children. The Bouman-Stickney Homestead is located off of Dreahook Road in the hamlet of Stanton. Coldbrook School, the site of living history programs for the township&#x27;s elementary school children, is in the northern section of town, and the Eversole-Hall House is located on Route 523, next to the Municipal building. Taylor&#x27;s Mill, listed on the National Register of Historic Places, was built around 1760 by John Taylor. It is the only remaining pre-revolutionary mill in the township and was used to provide troops with food during the Revolutionary War. The township plans to make Taylor&#x27;s Mill a fourth township museum.

==Government==

===Local government===

Readington Township is governed under the Township form of New Jersey municipal government, one of 141 municipalities (of the 564) statewide that use this form, the second-most commonly used form of government in the state. The Township Committee is comprised of five members, who are elected directly by the voters at-large in partisan elections to serve three-year terms of office on a staggered basis, with either one or two seats coming up for election each year as part of the November general election in a three-year cycle. At an annual reorganization meeting, the Township Committee selects one of its members to serve as Mayor. The Mayor serves as chair of the Township Committee and has the powers vested in the mayor&#x27;s office by general law.

, members of the Readington Township Committee are Mayor Adam Mueller (R, term on committee and as mayor ends December 31, 2024), Deputy Mayor Vincent Panico (R, term on committee ends 2025; term as deputy member ends 2024), John Albanese (R, 2026), Jonathan Heller (R, 2026) and R. Juergen Huelsebusch (R, 2024).

In the 2017 general election, Republicans John Albanese (3887 votes) and Jonathan Heller (3738 votes) prevailed against Democratic challenger Alan Harwick (2027 votes) The all-Republican Committee was unanimous on the leadership roles at the 2018 reorganization meeting, choosing Benjamin Smith as mayor and Betty Ann Fort as deputy mayor.

In December 2014, the Township Council selected M. Elizabeth Duffy from a list of three candidates nominated by the Republican municipal committee to fill the vacant seat of Beatrice Muir, who had resigned the previous month from a term of office ending in December 2015.

===Federal, state and county representation===
Readington Township is located in the 7th Congressional District and is part of New Jersey&#x27;s 16th state legislative district.



===Politics===
As of March 2011, there were a total of 11,223 registered voters in Readington Township, of which 1,745 (15.5%) were registered as Democrats, 5,118 (45.6%) were registered as Republicans and 4,354 (38.8%) were registered as Unaffiliated. There were 6 voters registered as Libertarians or Greens.

In the 2012 presidential election, Republican Mitt Romney received 63.8% of the vote (5,537 cast), ahead of Democrat Barack Obama with 35.0% (3,039 votes), and other candidates with 1.2% (103 votes), among the 8,730 ballots cast by the township&#x27;s 11,700 registered voters (51 ballots were spoiled), for a turnout of 74.6%. In the 2008 presidential election, Republican John McCain received 61.1% of the vote (5,646 cast), ahead of Democrat Barack Obama with 37.0% (3,425 votes) and other candidates with 1.1% (100 votes), among the 9,245 ballots cast by the township&#x27;s 11,302 registered voters, for a turnout of 81.8%. In the 2004 presidential election, Republican George W. Bush received 63.5% of the vote (5,566 ballots cast), outpolling Democrat John Kerry with 35.7% (3,127 votes) and other candidates with 0.9% (91 votes), among the 8,767 ballots cast by the township&#x27;s 10,679 registered voters, for a turnout percentage of 82.1.




In the 2013 gubernatorial election, Republican Chris Christie received 79.1% of the vote (4,524 cast), ahead of Democrat Barbara Buono with 19.5% (1,114 votes), and other candidates with 1.5% (83 votes), among the 5,812 ballots cast by the township&#x27;s 11,669 registered voters (91 ballots were spoiled), for a turnout of 49.8%. In the 2009 gubernatorial election, Republican Chris Christie received 70.4% of the vote (4,771 ballots cast), ahead of Democrat Jon Corzine with 20.6% (1,395 votes), Independent Chris Daggett with 7.3% (495 votes) and other candidates with 0.7% (46 votes), among the 6,777 ballots cast by the township&#x27;s 11,169 registered voters, yielding a 60.7% turnout.

In the 2016 presidential election, Republican Donald Trump received 56.8% of the vote (5,565 cast), ahead of Democrat Hillary Clinton with 36.6% of the vote (3,590 cast), Libertarian Gary Johnson with 2.8% of the vote (278 cast), Green Party Jill Stein with 1% of the vote (100 cast), 27 votes for other candidates and 97 write-in votes for a total of 9,657 votes cast. Turnout was 77.5%, with 9,803 of 12,659 registered voters casting votes that day.

==Education==
The Readington Township Public Schools serve students in pre-kindergarten through eighth grade. As of the 2023–24 school year, the district, comprised of four schools, had an enrollment of 1,404 students and 167.2 classroom teachers (on an FTE basis), for a student–teacher ratio of 8.4:1. Schools in the district (with 2023–24 enrollment data from the National Center for Education Statistics) are 
Three Bridges School with 294 students in grades PreK–3, 
Whitehouse School with 312 students in grades K–3, 
Holland Brook School with 302 students in grades 4–5 and 
Readington Middle School with 486 students in grades 6–8.

Students in public school for ninth through twelfth grades attend the Hunterdon Central Regional High School, part of the Hunterdon Central Regional High School District, which also serves students in central Hunterdon County from Delaware Township, East Amwell Township, Flemington Borough and Raritan Township. As of the 2023–24 school year, the high school had an enrollment of 2,408 students and 226.7 classroom teachers (on an FTE basis), for a student–teacher ratio of 10.6:1. Seats on the high school district&#x27;s nine-member board of education are allocated based on the population of the five constituent municipalities who participate in the school district, with two seats allocated to Readington Township, a decrease of one seat based on the results of the 2020 Census.

Eighth grade students from all of Hunterdon County are eligible to apply to attend the high school programs offered by the Hunterdon County Vocational School District, a county-wide vocational school district that offers career and technical education at its campuses in Raritan Township and at programs sited at local high schools, with no tuition charged to students for attendance.

==Emergency services==
Readington Township is served by a full-time Police Department, two ambulances staffed by the Whitehouse Rescue Squad, and four volunteer Fire Companies.

===EMS and rescue services===
*The Whitehouse First Aid &amp; Rescue Squad Station 22 Rescue was formed in 1950 and provides the lead EMS &amp; Rescue coordination for the Township under the leadership of Chief Jeff Herzog. They are a blended department with career and volunteer members, and a roster of over 50 EMTs. The squad responds to over 2200 calls per year in Readington and Tewksbury Townships. The squad has a rescue services division led by volunteers for rescue operations such as automobile extrication, confined space and water rescue. 22 Rescue is located on Main Street in Whitehouse Station.

===Fire departments===
The following volunteer fire departments serve the Township:
*Whitehouse Fire Company #1 (Station 22 Fire)
*Readington Volunteer Fire Co., established in 1958 (Station 32 Fire)
*Three Bridges Volunteer Fire Co., established in 1927 (Station 33 Fire)
*East Whitehouse Volunteer Fire Co., organized in December 1923, Retired in 2022 (Station 31 Fire)

==Transportation==

===Roads and highways===
, the township had a total of of roadways, of which were maintained by the municipality, by Hunterdon County and by the New Jersey Department of Transportation.

Several roads and highways pass through the township. These include Interstate 78, U.S. Route 202, Route 22 and Route 31.

===Public transportation===

The township is also served by NJ Transit&#x27;s White House station, offering service on the Raritan Valley Line to Newark Penn Station and Hoboken Terminal, with connecting service to Penn Station New York in Midtown Manhattan.

NJ Transit provides local bus service on the 884 route.

The Hunterdon County LINK provide local bus service on Routes 17 / 18 between Milford and Clinton; and Route 23 between Flemington and Bridgewater Commons Mall / Somerville.

===Rail service===
The Norfolk Southern Railway&#x27;s Lehigh Line (formerly the mainline of the Lehigh Valley Railroad), runs through Readington Township.

The Black River and Western Railroad is a freight and heritage railroad that runs from Lambertville via Ringoes and Flemington to Three Bridges (Readington) where it connects to the Norfolk Southern Railway.

==Community==
An annual event known as the New Jersey Lottery Festival of Ballooning celebrated its 39th anniversary in 2022. The event held at Solberg-Hunterdon Airport is the largest summertime hot air balloon festival in North America.

==FBI shootout==
On April 5, 2007, a shootout during the attempt to arrest serial bank robbers near a PNC Bank branch on U.S. Route 22 in Readington resulted in the death of FBI agent Barry Lee Bush. Bush was the first FBI agent to be killed in the line of duty in New Jersey and the second FBI agent to be killed by a fellow agent since the bureau was established in 1908.

==Notable people==

People who were born in, residents of, or otherwise closely associated with Readington Township include:

* Emma Bell (born 1986), actress
* William Cheswick (born ), computer security and networking researcher, co-author of &quot;Firewalls and Internet Security&quot; and started the Internet Mapping Project
* Jack Cust (born 1979), a professional baseball player who played for the Oakland Athletics
* Bergen Davis (1869–1958), physicist
* John De Mott (1790–1870), US Congressman from New York State from 1845 to 1847
* Isaac G. Farlee (1787–1855), member of the United States House of Representatives from New Jersey&#x27;s 3rd Congressional District from 1843 to 1845
* Taissa Farmiga (born 1994), actress
* J. C. Furnas (1906–2001), freelance writer and social historian
* Robert Greifeld (born 1957), CEO NASDAQ OMX Group
* John Knowles Herr (1878–1955), Major General and career American soldier who served for 40 years in the United States Cavalry
* Jonathan Jennings (1784–1834), first Governor of Indiana, serving from 1816 to 1822
* Robyn Kenney (born 1979), field hockey player
* George H. Large (1850–1939), President of the New Jersey Senate who was the last survivor of the first collegiate football game, played in 1869
* Howard Lindsay (1889–1968), theatrical producer, playwright, librettist, director and actor
* Tom Malloy (born 1974), actor and filmmaker
* William Marchant (1923–1995), playwright and screenwriter, best known for writing the play that served as the basis for the 1957 Walter Lang movie, &quot;The Desk Set&quot;
* Ed Martin, politician who served as Chair of the Missouri Republican Party
* Timothy Piazza (1997–2017), Pennsylvania State University student who was killed as a result of hazing taken place at Beta Theta Pi fraternity
* James N. Pidcock (1836–1899), politician who represented New Jersey&#x27;s 4th congressional district in the United States House of Representatives from 1885 to 1889
* Martha M. Place (1849–1899), first woman to die in the electric chair
* Donna Simon (born 1960), politician who has served in the New Jersey General Assembly since 2012, representing the 16th Legislative District
* Dorothy Stickney (1896–1998), Broadway actress
==References==
==External links==

*Readington Township website
*Readington Township Public Schools
*Data for the Readington Township Public Schools, National Center for Education Statistics
*Hunterdon Central Regional High School District
*Data for Hunterdon Central Regional High School, National Center for Education Statistics
*Hunterdon Land Trust Alliance
*Whitehouse Fire Co.
*Whitehouse First Aid &amp; Rescue Squad</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3017759" start="0" end="19" title="Readington Township, New Jersey" label="Readington Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q7830213" start="25" end="33" title="Township (New Jersey)" label="township"/>
<link wikidata="Q502451" start="72" end="88" title="Hunterdon County, New Jersey" label="Hunterdon County"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="97" end="107" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="111" end="121" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="133" end="158" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="246" end="257" title="2010 United States census" label="2010 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q166998" start="357" end="368" title="2000 United States census" label="2000 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422253" start="382" end="395" title="Royal charter" label="Royal charter"/>
<link wikidata="Q131981" start="399" end="413" title="George II of Great Britain" label="King George II"/>
<link wikidata="Q4749037" start="490" end="505" title="Amwell Township, New Jersey" label="Amwell Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q3016994" start="778" end="796" title="Tewksbury Township, New Jersey" label="Tewksbury Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q6254389" start="842" end="854" title="John Reading (New Jersey governor)" label="John Reading"/>
<link wikidata="Q2335128" start="902" end="924" title="Province of New Jersey" label="Province of New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q6481985" start="1144" end="1159" title="Lamington River" label="Lamington River"/>
<link wikidata="Q7354951" start="1164" end="1178" title="Rockaway Creek (New Jersey)" label="Rockaway Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q502414" start="1195" end="1210" title="Somerset County, New Jersey" label="Somerset County"/>
<link wikidata="Q7566388" start="1308" end="1341" title="South Branch Raritan River" label="South Branch of the Raritan River"/>
<link wikidata="Q6273074" start="1370" end="1381" title="West Jersey" label="West Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="1474" end="1501" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q5196172" start="1671" end="1689" title="Cushetunk Mountain" label="Cushetunk Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3016644" start="1727" end="1743" title="Clinton Township, New Jersey" label="Clinton Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q753016" start="1749" end="1756" title="diabase" label="diabase"/>
<link wikidata="Q82048" start="1804" end="1810" title="Lenape" label="Lenape"/>
<link wikidata="Q7332454" start="1945" end="1967" title="Round Valley Reservoir" label="Round Valley Reservoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088302" start="2015" end="2033" title="Whitehouse Station, New Jersey" label="Whitehouse Station"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2074" end="2098" title="Local government in New Jersey#Unincorporated communities" label="unincorporated community"/>
<link wikidata="Q498162" start="2103" end="2126" title="census-designated place" label="census-designated place"/>
<link wikidata="Q3016644" start="2213" end="2229" title="Clinton Township, New Jersey" label="Clinton Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q3017068" start="2231" end="2247" title="Raritan Township, New Jersey" label="Raritan Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q3016994" start="2252" end="2270" title="Tewksbury Township, New Jersey" label="Tewksbury Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q367249" start="2296" end="2306" title="Branchburg Township, New Jersey" label="Branchburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q367331" start="2311" end="2332" title="Hillsborough Township, New Jersey" label="Hillsborough Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q502414" start="2336" end="2351" title="Somerset County, New Jersey" label="Somerset County"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2372" end="2398" title="Local government in New Jersey#Unincorporated communities" label="Unincorporated communities"/>
<link wikidata="Q3017759" start="2517" end="2529" title="McCrea Mills, New Jersey" label="McCrea Mills"/>
<link wikidata="Q3017759" start="2531" end="2540" title="Riverside, Hunterdon County, New Jersey" label="Riverside"/>
<link wikidata="Q4861162" start="2635" end="2647" title="Barley Sheaf, New Jersey" label="Barley Sheaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q19879082" start="2740" end="2751" title="Centerville, Hunterdon County, New Jersey" label="Centerville"/>
<link wikidata="Q124478169" start="2944" end="2955" title="Darts Mills, New Jersey" label="Darts Mills"/>
<link wikidata="Q7566388" start="3011" end="3037" title="South Branch Raritan River" label="South Branch Raritan River"/>
<link wikidata="Q14705484" start="3039" end="3047" title="Dreahook, New Jersey" label="Dreahook"/>
<link wikidata="Q7566388" start="3248" end="3274" title="South Branch Raritan River" label="South Branch Raritan River"/>
<link wikidata="Q6804620" start="3276" end="3290" title="Mechanicsville, Hunterdon County, New Jersey" label="Mechanicsville"/>
<link wikidata="Q811504" start="3341" end="3356" title="Jersey Turnpike" label="Jersey Turnpike"/>
<link wikidata="Q7354951" start="3400" end="3414" title="Rockaway Creek (New Jersey)" label="Rockaway Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q729054" start="3437" end="3453" title="William Paterson (judge)" label="William Paterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7203956" start="3455" end="3467" title="Pleasant Run, New Jersey" label="Pleasant Run"/>
<link wikidata="Q7203958" start="3493" end="3505" title="Pleasant Run (New Jersey)" label="Pleasant Run"/>
<link wikidata="Q7235324" start="3540" end="3551" title="Potterstown, New Jersey" label="Potterstown"/>
<link wikidata="Q7300619" start="3608" end="3626" title="Readington Village, New Jersey" label="Readington Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q5880931" start="3680" end="3693" title="Holland Brook" label="Holland Brook"/>
<link wikidata="Q7372087" start="3695" end="3715" title="Rowland&amp;#x27;s Mills, New Jersey" label="Rowland&amp;#x27;s Mills"/>
<link wikidata="Q7566388" start="3745" end="3771" title="South Branch Raritan River" label="South Branch Raritan River"/>
<link wikidata="Q7600215" start="3773" end="3780" title="Stanton, New Jersey" label="Stanton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088302" start="3957" end="3975" title="Whitehouse Station, New Jersey" label="Whitehouse Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q7797347" start="4009" end="4022" title="Three Bridges, New Jersey" label="Three Bridges"/>
<link wikidata="Q7996090" start="4080" end="4090" title="Whitehouse, New Jersey" label="Whitehouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q811504" start="4115" end="4130" title="Jersey Turnpike" label="Jersey Turnpike"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088302" start="4161" end="4179" title="Whitehouse Station, New Jersey" label="Whitehouse Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="4351" end="4376" title="2010 United States census" label="2010 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="4458" end="4476" title="population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4644" end="4649" title="White (U.S. census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4663" end="4688" title="Black (U.S. census)" label="Black or African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4701" end="4716" title="Native American (U.S. census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4730" end="4735" title="Asian (U.S. census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4747" end="4763" title="Pacific Islander (U.S. census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4782" end="4793" title="Race and ethnicity in the United States census#Race" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4835" end="4853" title="Hispanic (U.S. census)" label="Hispanic or Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q463769" start="5632" end="5657" title="American Community Survey" label="American Community Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q311198" start="5679" end="5697" title="inflation adjustment" label="inflation-adjusted"/>
<link wikidata="Q1940707" start="5707" end="5730" title="median household income" label="median household income"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="5937" end="5954" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="6062" end="6074" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q166998" start="6176" end="6201" title="2000 United States census" label="2000 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="6423" end="6428" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="6436" end="6452" title="African American (U.S. Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="6460" end="6475" title="Native American (U.S. Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="6483" end="6488" title="Asian (U.S. Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="6501" end="6512" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="6548" end="6556" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="6560" end="6566" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="6720" end="6735" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="7537" end="7554" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="7650" end="7662" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089060" start="7829" end="7840" title="Chubb Corp." label="Chubb Corp."/>
<link wikidata="Q7271689" start="7850" end="7859" title="QuickChek" label="QuickChek"/>
<link wikidata="Q247489" start="8013" end="8028" title="Merck &amp;amp; Co." label="Merck &amp;amp; Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q1021540" start="8136" end="8158" title="Kenilworth, New Jersey" label="Kenilworth, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q138518" start="8243" end="8252" title="Princeton, New Jersey" label="Princeton"/>
<link wikidata="Q367285" start="8254" end="8274" title="Bridgewater Township, New Jersey" label="Bridgewater Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q2945571" start="8308" end="8326" title="Central Jersey" label="central New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q105989287" start="8676" end="8695" title="Eversole-Hall House" label="Eversole-Hall House"/>
<link wikidata="Q105810958" start="8753" end="8771" title="Taylor&amp;#x27;s Mill (New Jersey)" label="Taylor&amp;#x27;s Mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719" start="8787" end="8823" title="National Register of Historic Places" label="National Register of Historic Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="8979" end="8996" title="American Revolutionary War" label="Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7830213" start="9153" end="9161" title="Township (New Jersey)" label="Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q3682992" start="9427" end="9435" title="at-large" label="at-large"/>
<link wikidata="Q30185" start="9921" end="9926" title="Mayor" label="Mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="9941" end="9942" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="R"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="10215" end="10226" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republicans"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="10305" end="10315" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="11126" end="11135" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="11170" end="11181" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republicans"/>
<link wikidata="Q5354776" start="11219" end="11231" title="Unaffiliated (New Jersey)" label="Unaffiliated"/>
<link wikidata="Q558334" start="11267" end="11279" title="Libertarian Party (United States)" label="Libertarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q849158" start="11283" end="11289" title="Green Party (United States)" label="Greens"/>
<link wikidata="Q17100287" start="11299" end="11325" title="United States presidential election in New Jersey, 2012" label="2012 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q4496" start="11338" end="11349" title="Mitt Romney" label="Mitt Romney"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="11409" end="11421" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738441" start="11586" end="11593" title="Spoilt vote" label="spoiled"/>
<link wikidata="Q16959334" start="11627" end="11653" title="United States presidential election in New Jersey, 2008" label="2008 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q10390" start="11666" end="11677" title="John McCain" label="John McCain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892945" start="11928" end="11954" title="United States presidential election in New Jersey, 2004" label="2004 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="11967" end="11981" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q22316" start="12051" end="12061" title="John Kerry" label="John Kerry"/>
<link wikidata="Q15134831" start="12253" end="12280" title="New Jersey gubernatorial election, 2013" label="2013 gubernatorial election"/>
<link wikidata="Q63879" start="12293" end="12307" title="Chris Christie" label="Chris Christie"/>
<link wikidata="Q4858790" start="12367" end="12380" title="Barbara Buono" label="Barbara Buono"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586264" start="12585" end="12612" title="New Jersey gubernatorial election, 2009" label="2009 gubernatorial election"/>
<link wikidata="Q63879" start="12625" end="12639" title="Chris Christie" label="Chris Christie"/>
<link wikidata="Q5106343" start="12757" end="12770" title="Chris Daggett" label="Chris Daggett"/>
<link wikidata="Q23018312" start="12948" end="12974" title="United States presidential election in New Jersey, 2016" label="2016 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="12987" end="12999" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q6294" start="13059" end="13074" title="Hillary Clinton" label="Hillary Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q352123" start="13124" end="13136" title="Gary Johnson" label="Gary Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q235321" start="13183" end="13193" title="Jill Stein" label="Jill Stein"/>
<link wikidata="Q7300618" start="13412" end="13446" title="Readington Township Public Schools" label="Readington Township Public Schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q7239239" start="13465" end="13481" title="pre-kindergarten" label="pre-kindergarten"/>
<link wikidata="Q5349142" start="13490" end="13502" title="eighth grade" label="eighth grade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543700" start="13648" end="13651" title="full-time equivalent" label="FTE"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595370" start="13666" end="13687" title="student–teacher ratio" label="student–teacher ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1966994" start="13761" end="13801" title="National Center for Education Statistics" label="National Center for Education Statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7039258" start="14065" end="14070" title="ninth grade" label="ninth"/>
<link wikidata="Q986388" start="14079" end="14092" title="twelfth grade" label="twelfth grade"/>
<link wikidata="Q5944683" start="14105" end="14143" title="Hunterdon Central Regional High School" label="Hunterdon Central Regional High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q614185" start="14266" end="14283" title="Delaware Township, Hunterdon County, New Jersey" label="Delaware Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q3016094" start="14285" end="14305" title="East Amwell Township, New Jersey" label="East Amwell Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010673" start="14307" end="14325" title="Flemington, New Jersey" label="Flemington Borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q3017068" start="14330" end="14346" title="Raritan Township, New Jersey" label="Raritan Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543700" start="14467" end="14470" title="full-time equivalent" label="FTE"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595370" start="14485" end="14506" title="student–teacher ratio" label="student–teacher ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q399541" start="14571" end="14589" title="board of education" label="board of education"/>
<link wikidata="Q5944694" start="14944" end="14987" title="Hunterdon County Vocational School District" label="Hunterdon County Vocational School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q867675" start="16534" end="16573" title="New Jersey Department of Transportation" label="New Jersey Department of Transportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q811194" start="16644" end="16657" title="Interstate 78 in New Jersey" label="Interstate 78"/>
<link wikidata="Q2436504" start="16659" end="16673" title="U.S. Route 202" label="U.S. Route 202"/>
<link wikidata="Q811410" start="16675" end="16683" title="U.S. Route 22 in New Jersey" label="Route 22"/>
<link wikidata="Q822339" start="16688" end="16696" title="New Jersey Route 31" label="Route 31"/>
<link wikidata="Q498553" start="16759" end="16769" title="NJ Transit" label="NJ Transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7994852" start="16777" end="16796" title="White House station" label="White House station"/>
<link wikidata="Q7294577" start="16822" end="16841" title="Raritan Valley Line" label="Raritan Valley Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1745642" start="16845" end="16864" title="Pennsylvania Station (Newark)" label="Newark Penn Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q6128305" start="16869" end="16885" title="Hoboken Terminal" label="Hoboken Terminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q54451" start="16914" end="16935" title="Pennsylvania Station (New York City)" label="Penn Station New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q11249" start="16939" end="16956" title="Midtown Manhattan" label="Midtown Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7992348" start="17004" end="17007" title="884 (New Jersey bus)" label="884"/>
<link wikidata="Q125577848" start="17020" end="17041" title="Hunterdon County LINK" label="Hunterdon County LINK"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083131" start="17094" end="17101" title="Milford, New Jersey" label="Milford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087573" start="17106" end="17113" title="Clinton, New Jersey" label="Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010673" start="17136" end="17146" title="Flemington, New Jersey" label="Flemington"/>
<link wikidata="Q4966837" start="17151" end="17175" title="Bridgewater Commons Mall" label="Bridgewater Commons Mall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088776" start="17178" end="17188" title="Somerville, New Jersey" label="Somerville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321054" start="17214" end="17238" title="Norfolk Southern Railway" label="Norfolk Southern Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q16981160" start="17246" end="17257" title="Lehigh Line (Norfolk Southern)" label="Lehigh Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q490228" start="17288" end="17310" title="Lehigh Valley Railroad" label="Lehigh Valley Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q4921676" start="17352" end="17384" title="Black River and Western Railroad" label="Black River and Western Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q420962" start="17402" end="17419" title="heritage railroad" label="heritage railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q7271690" start="17600" end="17641" title="New Jersey Lottery Festival of Ballooning" label="New Jersey Lottery Festival of Ballooning"/>
<link wikidata="Q7557139" start="17701" end="17726" title="Solberg-Hunterdon Airport" label="Solberg-Hunterdon Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q444456" start="17753" end="17777" title="hot air balloon festival" label="hot air balloon festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q38928" start="17899" end="17907" title="PNC Bank" label="PNC Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q408121" start="17918" end="17931" title="U.S. Route 22" label="U.S. Route 22"/>
<link wikidata="Q8333" start="17971" end="17974" title="Federal Bureau of Investigation" label="FBI"/>
<link wikidata="Q259103" start="18300" end="18309" title="Emma Bell" label="Emma Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q8006762" start="18333" end="18349" title="William Cheswick" label="William Cheswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q5452021" start="18423" end="18454" title="Firewalls and Internet Security" label="Firewalls and Internet Security"/>
<link wikidata="Q17092604" start="18477" end="18501" title="Internet Mapping Project" label="Internet Mapping Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q961553" start="18504" end="18513" title="Jack Cust" label="Jack Cust"/>
<link wikidata="Q131926583" start="18577" end="18594" title="Oakland Athletics" label="Oakland Athletics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1385217" start="18597" end="18609" title="Bergen Davis" label="Bergen Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6228976" start="18635" end="18647" title="John De Mott" label="John De Mott"/>
<link wikidata="Q1673388" start="18716" end="18731" title="Isaac G. Farlee" label="Isaac G. Farlee"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="18759" end="18797" title="United States House of Representatives" label="United States House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q14705794" start="18803" end="18847" title="New Jersey&amp;#x27;s 3rd Congressional District" label="New Jersey&amp;#x27;s 3rd Congressional District"/>
<link wikidata="Q389017" start="18868" end="18882" title="Taissa Farmiga" label="Taissa Farmiga"/>
<link wikidata="Q15489360" start="18906" end="18918" title="J. C. Furnas" label="J. C. Furnas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5770800" start="18972" end="18987" title="Robert Greifeld" label="Robert Greifeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q82059" start="19005" end="19011" title="NASDAQ" label="NASDAQ"/>
<link wikidata="Q6243342" start="19024" end="19041" title="John Knowles Herr" label="John Knowles Herr"/>
<link wikidata="Q1703204" start="19152" end="19169" title="Jonathan Jennings" label="Jonathan Jennings"/>
<link wikidata="Q16147601" start="19189" end="19208" title="Governor of Indiana" label="Governor of Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q7353605" start="19238" end="19250" title="Robyn Kenney" label="Robyn Kenney"/>
<link wikidata="Q5540047" start="19286" end="19301" title="George H. Large" label="George H. Large"/>
<link wikidata="Q1480298" start="19332" end="19349" title="New Jersey Senate" label="New Jersey Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374517" start="19432" end="19446" title="Howard Lindsay" label="Howard Lindsay"/>
<link wikidata="Q7816696" start="19526" end="19536" title="Tom Malloy" label="Tom Malloy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8015110" start="19572" end="19588" title="William Marchant (playwright)" label="William Marchant"/>
<link wikidata="Q214917" start="19602" end="19612" title="playwright" label="playwright"/>
<link wikidata="Q28389" start="19617" end="19629" title="screenwriter" label="screenwriter"/>
<link wikidata="Q269796" start="19701" end="19712" title="Walter Lang" label="Walter Lang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1306336" start="19726" end="19738" title="Desk Set" label="The Desk Set"/>
<link wikidata="Q5335120" start="19747" end="19756" title="Ed Martin (Missouri politician)" label="Ed Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6879610" start="19796" end="19821" title="Missouri Republican Party" label="Missouri Republican Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q29869205" start="19824" end="19838" title="Timothy Piazza" label="Timothy Piazza"/>
<link wikidata="Q739627" start="19852" end="19881" title="Pennsylvania State University" label="Pennsylvania State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q879295" start="19920" end="19926" title="hazing" label="hazing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4897282" start="19942" end="19955" title="Beta Theta Pi" label="Beta Theta Pi"/>
<link wikidata="Q996839" start="19956" end="19966" title="fraternity" label="fraternity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1680876" start="19969" end="19985" title="James N. Pidcock" label="James N. Pidcock"/>
<link wikidata="Q13858956" start="20026" end="20070" title="New Jersey&amp;#x27;s 4th congressional district" label="New Jersey&amp;#x27;s 4th congressional district"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="20078" end="20116" title="United States House of Representatives" label="United States House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q288027" start="20137" end="20152" title="Martha M. Place" label="Martha M. Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q5296463" start="20209" end="20220" title="Donna Simon" label="Donna Simon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455914" start="20267" end="20294" title="New Jersey General Assembly" label="New Jersey General Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q4552184" start="20324" end="20349" title="New Jersey&amp;#x27;s 16th legislative district" label="16th Legislative District"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250344" start="20352" end="20368" title="Dorothy Stickney" label="Dorothy Stickney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1966994" start="20549" end="20589" title="National Center for Education Statistics" label="National Center for Education Statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1966994" start="20689" end="20729" title="National Center for Education Statistics" label="National Center for Education Statistics"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="125366" wikidata="Q46216" url="?curid=125366" title="Stockton, New Jersey">
<text>Stockton is a borough in Hunterdon County, in the U.S. state of New Jersey. The borough sits on the Delaware River at the western end of Amwell Valley. As of the 2020 United States census, the borough&#x27;s population was 495, a decrease of 43 (−8.0%) from the 2010 census count of 538, which in turn reflected a decline of 22 (−3.9%) from the 560 counted in the 2000 census.

Stockton was incorporated as a borough by an act of the New Jersey Legislature on April 14, 1898, from portions of Delaware Township.

==History==
Stockton is located along the Delaware River north of Lambertville. The community was first known as Reading Ferry and later as Howell&#x27;s Ferry. The name was changed to Centre Bridge Station to match the name of the post office and hamlet on the Pennsylvania side of the river. The name became Stockton with the creation of a railroad station and a local post office in 1851. The community was named in honor of U.S. Senator Robert Field Stockton, who was instrumental in the creation of the Delaware and Raritan Canal. Stockton soon began to develop as an industrious town with mills and quarries sprouting in the area. In 1852 the Belvidere Delaware Railroad reached town and accelerated its prosperity. The borough was incorporated in 1898, having been separated from Delaware Township.

===Historic locations and sightseeing===
The Stockton Inn (formerly known as Colligan&#x27;s Stockton Inn) was established in 1710. The inn&#x27;s Dog &amp; Deer Tavern first opened in 1796. The inn was the inspiration for Lorenz Hart for his hit song &quot;There&#x27;s a Small Hotel&quot; sung in the 1936 Broadway musical &quot;On Your Toes&quot;. First built as a private residence it is believed to have been converted to an inn around 1832.

The Delaware River Mill Society was formed to preserve and promote the buildings and site known as Prallsville Mills. John Prall Jr., became the owner of the site in 1794 and with his settlement the area became known as Prallsville.

The Delaware River Mill Society is a private non-profit organization responsible for the restoration, maintenance, and operation of the historic John Prall Jr. House and the Prallsville Mills Complex, which was listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1973. The entire property became part of the D &amp; R Canal State Park in 1973. In 1976 when the State of New Jersey was unable to fund the restoration of its newly acquired Prallsville Mills, local citizens formed the Delaware River Mill Society, to &quot;restore, preserve, operate, maintain and interpret&quot; the historic site.

Prallsville Mills has become a place of cultural and environmental events attracting widespread participation. Visitors can tour 10 historic buildings including an 1877 grist mill, a 1790 linseed oil mill, an 1850 saw mill and a 1900 grain silo. Concerts, art exhibitions, antique shows, holiday parties, school fund-raiser auctions, meetings, as well as private parties, are a source of income for restoration and maintenance of the site. The site currently includes artist Ty Hodanish&#x27;s studio and gallery, known as The Art Colony, which is housed in the Linseed Mill. The Mill is also situated in the center of the Delaware River Scenic Byway.

==Geography==
According to the United States Census Bureau, the borough had a total area of 0.62 square miles (1.61 km2), including 0.55 square miles (1.41 km2) of land and 0.08 square miles (0.19 km2) of water (12.10%).

The borough borders Delaware Township in Hunterdon County and Solebury Township in Bucks County, Pennsylvania.

Prallsville is an unincorporated community located along the border with Delaware Township.

==Demographics==
===2010 census===
The 2010 United States census counted 538 people, 237 households, and 142 families in the borough. The population density was . There were 259 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup was 98.33% (529) White, 0.00% (0) Black or African American, 0.00% (0) Native American, 0.93% (5) Asian, 0.00% (0) Pacific Islander, 0.00% (0) from other races, and 0.74% (4) from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 0.56% (3) of the population.

Of the 237 households, 23.2% had children under the age of 18; 48.5% were married couples living together; 7.2% had a female householder with no husband present and 40.1% were non-families. Of all households, 32.1% were made up of individuals and 11.8% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.27 and the average family size was 2.94.

19.5% of the population were under the age of 18, 5.9% from 18 to 24, 21.4% from 25 to 44, 35.1% from 45 to 64, and 18.0% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 47.7 years. For every 100 females, the population had 94.2 males. For every 100 females ages 18 and older there were 96.8 males.

The Census Bureau&#x27;s 2006–2010 American Community Survey showed that (in 2010 inflation-adjusted dollars) median household income was $58,750 (with a margin of error of +/− $19,736) and the median family income was $72,321 (+/− $19,152). Males had a median income of $61,250 (+/− $24,259) versus $42,273 (+/− $34,015) for females. The per capita income for the borough was $38,153 (+/− $7,749). About none of families and 5.4% of the population were below the poverty line, including none of those under age 18 and 1.8% of those age 65 or over.

===2000 census===
As of the 2000 United States census there were 560 people, 246 households, and 148 families residing in the borough. The population density was . There were 258 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the borough was 98.57% White, 0.89% Asian, and 0.54% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 0.54% of the population.

There were 246 households, out of which 28.5% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 50.4% were married couples living together, 6.5% had a female householder with no husband present, and 39.8% were non-families. 30.5% of all households were made up of individuals, and 11.0% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.28 and the average family size was 2.94.

In the borough the population was spread out, with 21.3% under the age of 18, 4.3% from 18 to 24, 34.5% from 25 to 44, 25.2% from 45 to 64, and 14.8% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 41 years. For every 100 females, there were 87.9 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 85.3 males.

The median income for a household in the borough was $51,406, and the median income for a family was $65,000. Males had a median income of $42,083 versus $36,250 for females. The per capita income for the borough was $25,712. About 1.3% of families and 2.0% of the population were below the poverty line, including 1.7% of those under age 18 and 1.0% of those age 65 or over.

==Government==
===Local government===
Stockton is governed under the borough form of New Jersey municipal government, which is used in 218 municipalities (of the 564) statewide, making it the most common government form in New Jersey. The governing body is comprised of the mayor and the borough council, with all positions elected at-large on a partisan basis as part of the November general election. The mayor is elected directly by the voters to a four-year term of office. The borough council includes six members elected to serve three-year terms on a staggered basis, with two seats coming up for election each year in a three-year cycle. The borough form of government used by Stockton is a &quot;weak mayor / strong council&quot; government in which council members act as the legislative body with the mayor presiding at meetings and voting only in the event of a tie. The mayor can veto ordinances subject to an override by a two-thirds majority vote of the council. The mayor makes committee and liaison assignments for council members, and most appointments are made by the mayor with the advice and consent of the council.

, the mayor of Stockton Borough is Democrat Aaron R. Lipsen, whose term of office ends December 31, 2026. Members of the borough council are Council President Michael L. Mann (D, 2023), William Brown (D, 2024; appointed to unexpired term), Peter Folz (D, 2025), Rebecca Hendricks (D, 2023), Peter M. Hunt (D, 2025), Kenneth Kozuhowski (R, 2024).

In January 2023, the borough council appointed William Brown to fill the seat expiring in December 2024 that became vacant when Aaron Lipsen took office as mayor. Brown will serve on an interim basis until the November 2023 general election, when voters will choose a candidate to serve the remainder of the term of office.

Democrat Neal Esposito died in office on October 23, 2014, and was reelected posthumously for a new three-year term in the November general election. In the same election, Timothy Nemeth was elected as mayor, creating a vacancy in his seat expiring in December 2016. Democrat Adam Juncosa and Republican Anthony A. Grecco were appointed to fill the council vacancies. In the November 2015 general election, both Juncosa and Grecco were elected to serve the balance of the terms of office.

===Federal, state and county representation===
Stockton is located in the 7th Congressional District and is part of New Jersey&#x27;s 15th state legislative district.



===Politics===
As of March 2011, there were a total of 396 registered voters in Stockton, of which 166 (41.9%) were registered as Democrats, 127 (32.1%) were registered as Republicans and 102 (25.8%) were registered as Unaffiliated. There was one voter registered to another party.

In the 2012 presidential election, Democrat Barack Obama received 58.2% of the vote (174 cast), ahead of Republican Mitt Romney with 40.1% (120 votes), and other candidates with 1.7% (5 votes), among the 300 ballots cast by the borough&#x27;s 399 registered voters (1 ballot was spoiled), for a turnout of 75.2%. In the 2008 presidential election, Democrat Barack Obama received 59.3% of the vote (210 cast), ahead of Republican John McCain with 38.1% (135 votes) and other candidates with 1.4% (5 votes), among the 354 ballots cast by the borough&#x27;s 405 registered voters, for a turnout of 87.4%. In the 2004 presidential election, Democrat John Kerry received 57.3% of the vote (200 ballots cast), outpolling Republican George W. Bush with 41.5% (145 votes) and other candidates with 1.0% (4 votes), among the 349 ballots cast by the borough&#x27;s 412 registered voters, for a turnout percentage of 84.7.




In the 2013 gubernatorial election, Republican Chris Christie received 60.1% of the vote (131 cast), ahead of Democrat Barbara Buono with 37.2% (81 votes), and other candidates with 2.8% (6 votes), among the 221 ballots cast by the borough&#x27;s 393 registered voters (3 ballots were spoiled), for a turnout of 56.2%. In the 2009 gubernatorial election, Republican Chris Christie received 45.7% of the vote (122 ballots cast), ahead of Democrat Jon Corzine with 43.4% (116 votes), Independent Chris Daggett with 8.2% (22 votes) and other candidates with 1.9% (5 votes), among the 267 ballots cast by the borough&#x27;s 398 registered voters, yielding a 67.1% turnout.

==Education==

Stockton is part of the South Hunterdon Regional School District, which serves students in pre-kindergarten through twelfth grade from Lambertville, Stockton and West Amwell Township. As of the 2022–23 school year, the district, comprised of three schools, had an enrollment of 827 students and 108.1 classroom teachers (on an FTE basis), for a student–teacher ratio of 7.7:1. Schools in the district (with 2022–23 enrollment data from the National Center for Education Statistics) are
South Hunterdon Regional Elementary School for grades PreK–4 (was Lambertville Public School, which had 221 students in grades PreK–6),
South Hunterdon Regional Middle School for grades 5–8 (was West Amwell School, with 170 students in grades K–6) and 
South Hunterdon Regional High School for grades 9–12 (which had 417 students in grades 7–12). Stockton is assigned one of the nine seats on the regional district&#x27;s board of education.

Historically, Stockton had its own school district, the Stockton Borough School District, serving students in grades K–6. The district&#x27;s sole school building, the District No. 98 Schoolhouse, had been in use since 1872. In a special election held in September 2013, voters from Lambertville, Stockton and West Amwell Township passed referendums to dissolve the South Hunterdon Regional High School District and to combine the three existing school districts from each municipality (Lambertville City School District, Stockton Borough School District and West Amwell Township School District), with majorities in each community passing both ballot items. A single combined regional district was created, serving students in grades Pre-K–12, in which property taxes are levied under a formula in which 57% is based on property values and 43% on the number of students. The executive county superintendent appointed an interim board of education for the new regional district, which was responsible for implementing the merger. The Stockton school was closed after the 2017–2018 school year and the elementary students were sent to Lambertville and West Amwell schools.

Eighth grade students from all of Hunterdon County are eligible to apply to attend the high school programs offered by the Hunterdon County Vocational School District, a county-wide vocational school district that offers career and technical education at its campuses in Raritan Township and at programs sited at local high schools, with no tuition charged to students for attendance.

==Transportation==

, the borough had a total of of roadways, of which were maintained by the municipality, by Hunterdon County and by the New Jersey Department of Transportation.

Route 29 and County Route 523 are the most significant highways passing through Stockton.

The Centre Bridge-Stockton Bridge is a toll-free bridge stretching over the Delaware River that is owned and operated by the Delaware River Joint Toll Bridge Commission, connecting Pennsylvania Route 32 and Pennsylvania Route 263 in Solebury Township, Pennsylvania, to New Jersey Route 29 in Stockton. The original bridge, constructed at the site formerly known as Reading&#x27;s Ferry, was opened to traffic in the spring of 1814. The covered bridge was destroyed in a flood on January 8, 1841, striking the Lambertville Bridge on its way down the Delaware, as part of a flood that severely damaged every bridge between Easton, Pennsylvania, and Trenton.

==Notable people==

People who were born in, residents of, or otherwise closely associated with Stockton include:

* Anne Elstner (1899–1981), actress who played the title role on the radio soap opera &quot;Stella Dallas&quot; during its entire run, from 1937–1955
* Chet Huntley (1911–1974), television newscaster, best known for co-anchoring NBC&#x27;s evening news program, the &quot;Huntley-Brinkley Report&quot;, for 14 years beginning in 1956
* JP Miller (1919–2001), writer of teleplays during the Golden Age of Television
* Lansing Pilch, retired United States Air Force major general
* Carolyn Rovee-Collier (1942–2014), pioneer and expert in cognitive development

==References==
==External links==

* Official website
* Hunterdon County web page for Stockton Borough
* South Hunterdon Regional School District
* School Data for the South Hunterdon Regional School District, National Center for Education Statistics
* Centre Bridge-Stockton article at the Delaware River Joint Toll Bridge Commission website
* Delaware River Mill Society&#x27;s webpage for the Prallsville Mills complex
* Hunterdon Land Trust Alliance</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q46216" start="0" end="8" title="Stockton, New Jersey" label="Stockton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2911266" start="14" end="21" title="Borough (New Jersey)" label="borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q502451" start="25" end="41" title="Hunterdon County, New Jersey" label="Hunterdon County"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="50" end="60" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="64" end="74" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q143762" start="100" end="114" title="Delaware River" label="Delaware River"/>
<link wikidata="Q4749038" start="137" end="150" title="Amwell Valley" label="Amwell Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="162" end="187" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="262" end="273" title="2010 United States census" label="2010 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q166998" start="364" end="375" title="2000 United States census" label="2000 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2867079" start="434" end="456" title="New Jersey Legislature" label="New Jersey Legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q614185" start="493" end="510" title="Delaware Township, Hunterdon County, New Jersey" label="Delaware Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q143762" start="555" end="569" title="Delaware River" label="Delaware River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086436" start="579" end="591" title="Lambertville, New Jersey" label="Lambertville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400" start="775" end="787" title="Pennsylvania" label="Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q878374" start="954" end="975" title="Robert Field Stockton" label="Robert Field Stockton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2131731" start="1021" end="1047" title="Delaware and Raritan Canal" label="Delaware and Raritan Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4884896" start="1162" end="1189" title="Belvidere Delaware Railroad" label="Belvidere Delaware Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q614185" start="1300" end="1317" title="Delaware Township, Hunterdon County, New Jersey" label="Delaware Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q725828" start="1543" end="1554" title="Lorenz Hart" label="Lorenz Hart"/>
<link wikidata="Q7782657" start="1578" end="1604" title="There&amp;#x27;s a Small Hotel" label="There&amp;#x27;s a Small Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q16395228" start="1651" end="1663" title="On Your Toes" label="On Your Toes"/>
<link wikidata="Q20657606" start="1867" end="1884" title="Prallsville Mills" label="Prallsville Mills"/>
<link wikidata="Q20657606" start="1988" end="1999" title="Prallsville, New Jersey" label="Prallsville"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719" start="2227" end="2263" title="National Register of Historic Places" label="National Register of Historic Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q822300" start="3225" end="3252" title="Delaware River Scenic Byway" label="Delaware River Scenic Byway"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="3286" end="3313" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q614185" start="3497" end="3514" title="Delaware Township, Hunterdon County, New Jersey" label="Delaware Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q46211" start="3539" end="3556" title="Solebury Township, Pennsylvania" label="Solebury Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q494192" start="3560" end="3586" title="Bucks County, Pennsylvania" label="Bucks County, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="3721" end="3746" title="2010 United States census" label="2010 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3936" end="3941" title="White (U.S. census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3953" end="3978" title="Black (U.S. census)" label="Black or African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3990" end="4005" title="Native American (U.S. census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4017" end="4022" title="Asian (U.S. census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4034" end="4050" title="Pacific Islander (U.S. census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4067" end="4078" title="Race and ethnicity in the United States census#Race" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4118" end="4136" title="Hispanic (U.S. census)" label="Hispanic or Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q463769" start="4912" end="4937" title="American Community Survey" label="American Community Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q311198" start="4959" end="4977" title="inflation adjustment" label="inflation-adjusted"/>
<link wikidata="Q1940707" start="4987" end="5010" title="median household income" label="median household income"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="5216" end="5233" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="5341" end="5353" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q166998" start="5455" end="5480" title="2000 United States census" label="2000 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="5691" end="5696" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="5704" end="5709" title="Asian (U.S. Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="5745" end="5753" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="5757" end="5763" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="5915" end="5930" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="6731" end="6748" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="6843" end="6855" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q2911266" start="6998" end="7005" title="Borough (New Jersey)" label="borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q3682992" start="7261" end="7269" title="at-large" label="at-large"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308596" start="7634" end="7644" title="weak mayor" label="weak mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q178074" start="7822" end="7826" title="veto" label="veto"/>
<link wikidata="Q178074" start="7852" end="7860" title="veto override" label="override"/>
<link wikidata="Q30185" start="8073" end="8078" title="mayor" label="mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="8102" end="8110" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="8403" end="8404" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="R"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="9529" end="9538" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="9571" end="9582" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republicans"/>
<link wikidata="Q5354776" start="9618" end="9630" title="Unaffiliated (New Jersey)" label="Unaffiliated"/>
<link wikidata="Q17100287" start="9689" end="9715" title="United States presidential election in New Jersey, 2012" label="2012 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="9726" end="9738" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q4496" start="9798" end="9809" title="Mitt Romney" label="Mitt Romney"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738441" start="9961" end="9968" title="Spoilt vote" label="spoiled"/>
<link wikidata="Q16959334" start="10002" end="10028" title="United States presidential election in New Jersey, 2008" label="2008 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q10390" start="10111" end="10122" title="John McCain" label="John McCain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892945" start="10291" end="10317" title="United States presidential election in New Jersey, 2004" label="2004 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q22316" start="10328" end="10338" title="John Kerry" label="John Kerry"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="10408" end="10422" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q15134831" start="10605" end="10632" title="New Jersey gubernatorial election, 2013" label="2013 gubernatorial election"/>
<link wikidata="Q63879" start="10645" end="10659" title="Chris Christie" label="Chris Christie"/>
<link wikidata="Q4858790" start="10717" end="10730" title="Barbara Buono" label="Barbara Buono"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586264" start="10924" end="10951" title="New Jersey gubernatorial election, 2009" label="2009 gubernatorial election"/>
<link wikidata="Q380570" start="11044" end="11055" title="Jon Corzine" label="Jon Corzine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5106343" start="11092" end="11105" title="Chris Daggett" label="Chris Daggett"/>
<link wikidata="Q18648781" start="11307" end="11347" title="South Hunterdon Regional School District" label="South Hunterdon Regional School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q7239239" start="11374" end="11390" title="pre-kindergarten" label="pre-kindergarten"/>
<link wikidata="Q986388" start="11399" end="11412" title="twelfth grade" label="twelfth grade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086436" start="11418" end="11430" title="Lambertville, New Jersey" label="Lambertville"/>
<link wikidata="Q3016070" start="11445" end="11465" title="West Amwell Township, New Jersey" label="West Amwell Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543700" start="11610" end="11613" title="full-time equivalent" label="FTE"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595370" start="11628" end="11649" title="student–teacher ratio" label="student–teacher ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1966994" start="11723" end="11763" title="National Center for Education Statistics" label="National Center for Education Statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7567513" start="12022" end="12058" title="South Hunterdon Regional High School" label="South Hunterdon Regional High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q399541" start="12191" end="12209" title="board of education" label="board of education"/>
<link wikidata="Q7618221" start="12268" end="12300" title="Stockton Borough School District" label="Stockton Borough School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q108570141" start="12380" end="12407" title="District No. 98 Schoolhouse" label="District No. 98 Schoolhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q6481393" start="12699" end="12732" title="Lambertville City School District" label="Lambertville City School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q7618221" start="12734" end="12766" title="Stockton Borough School District" label="Stockton Borough School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q7984307" start="12771" end="12807" title="West Amwell Township School District" label="West Amwell Township School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q5944694" start="13508" end="13551" title="Hunterdon County Vocational School District" label="Hunterdon County Vocational School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q3017068" start="13656" end="13672" title="Raritan Township, New Jersey" label="Raritan Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q867675" start="13910" end="13949" title="New Jersey Department of Transportation" label="New Jersey Department of Transportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q822300" start="13952" end="13960" title="New Jersey Route 29" label="Route 29"/>
<link wikidata="Q858928" start="13965" end="13981" title="County Route 523 (New Jersey)" label="County Route 523"/>
<link wikidata="Q5062235" start="14047" end="14076" title="Centre Bridge-Stockton Bridge" label="Centre Bridge-Stockton Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q143762" start="14119" end="14133" title="Delaware River" label="Delaware River"/>
<link wikidata="Q5253341" start="14168" end="14211" title="Delaware River Joint Toll Bridge Commission" label="Delaware River Joint Toll Bridge Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052600" start="14224" end="14245" title="Pennsylvania Route 32" label="Pennsylvania Route 32"/>
<link wikidata="Q1173333" start="14250" end="14272" title="Pennsylvania Route 263" label="Pennsylvania Route 263"/>
<link wikidata="Q46211" start="14276" end="14293" title="Solebury Township, Pennsylvania" label="Solebury Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400" start="14295" end="14307" title="Pennsylvania" label="Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056542" start="14664" end="14684" title="Easton, Pennsylvania" label="Easton, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q25330" start="14690" end="14697" title="Trenton, New Jersey" label="Trenton"/>
<link wikidata="Q21608049" start="14817" end="14829" title="Anne Elstner" label="Anne Elstner"/>
<link wikidata="Q23739" start="14890" end="14900" title="soap opera" label="soap opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q7607056" start="14907" end="14920" title="Stella Dallas (radio)" label="Stella Dallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q796122" start="14967" end="14979" title="Chet Huntley" label="Chet Huntley"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="15044" end="15047" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q5945613" start="15087" end="15110" title="Huntley-Brinkley Report" label="Huntley-Brinkley Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q6108763" start="15151" end="15160" title="JP Miller" label="JP Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q5579123" start="15205" end="15229" title="Golden Age of Television" label="Golden Age of Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q106521052" start="15232" end="15245" title="Lansing Pilch" label="Lansing Pilch"/>
<link wikidata="Q11223" start="15255" end="15278" title="United States Air Force" label="United States Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q3280545" start="15279" end="15292" title="Major general (United States)" label="major general"/>
<link wikidata="Q5045453" start="15295" end="15316" title="Carolyn Rovee-Collier" label="Carolyn Rovee-Collier"/>
<link wikidata="Q2910672" start="15352" end="15373" title="cognitive development" label="cognitive development"/>
<link wikidata="Q1966994" start="15585" end="15625" title="National Center for Education Statistics" label="National Center for Education Statistics"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="125368" wikidata="Q3016994" url="?curid=125368" title="Tewksbury Township, New Jersey">
<text>Tewksbury Township is a township located in Hunterdon County, in the U.S. state of New Jersey and is located within the New York Metropolitan Area. As of the 2020 United States census, the township&#x27;s population was 5,870, a decrease of 123 (−2.1%) from the 2010 census count of 5,993, which in turn reflected an increase of 452 (+8.2%) from the 5,541 counted in the 2000 census.

The township has been one of the state&#x27;s highest-income communities. Based on data from the 2012–2016 American Community Survey (ACS), NJ.com ranked the township as having the fifth-highest income in the state, with a median household income of $173,473. Based on data from the 2014–2018 ACS, the township residents had a median household income of $162,037, more than double the statewide median of $79,363.

Located within the Raritan Valley region, Tewksbury is situated in northeastern Hunterdon County bordering both Morris and Somerset (along the Lamington River) counties. The township&#x27;s name is thought to be from Tewkesbury, England. Since 2003, the two communities have been twinned.

==History==
The area was originally settled by the Lenape Native Americans. European settlement began in 1708, when George Willocks acquired land from the Lenape in the area, followed by an acquisition by the proprietors of West Jersey of a tract covering .

The township was first mentioned as holding a township meeting on March 11, 1755, as having been formed partly from Lebanon Township, though the exact circumstances of its formation by charter are unknown. Tewksbury was incorporated as one of New Jersey&#x27;s initial 104 townships by an act of the New Jersey Legislature on February 21, 1798. Portions of the township were taken to form Califon borough (April 2, 1898). Portions of the township were acquired from Readington Township in 1832 and 1861, and portions were transferred to Clinton Township in 1871 and 1891.

The earliest European settlers were of English extraction and were followed by a large German contingent who began to settle in the area around 1749 and became the strongest influence around the time Tewksbury became a township. Their community was known as New Germantown, a name that survived until World War I when prejudice against Germans led residents to change the community&#x27;s name to Oldwick. The more than 100 structures and its mixture of Victorian, Federal, New England and Georgian style homes in Oldwick is protected by its listing on the National Register of Historic Places. Established in 1714 and granted a Royal Charter in 1767, Zion Lutheran Church in Oldwick is the oldest German Lutheran parish in New Jersey.

Oldwick is home to Mane Stream, a Professional Association of Therapeutic Horsemanship (PATH) Premier Accredited Center for therapeutic horseback riding.

On April 5, 2024, the township was the epicenter of the 2024 New Jersey earthquake, a magnitude 4.8 earthquake that was felt throughout the Northeastern United States including New York City and Philadelphia.

==Geography==

According to the United States Census Bureau, the township had a total area of , including of land and of water (0.41%).

Tewksbury Township borders Califon, Clinton Township, Lebanon Township and Readington Township in Hunterdon County; Chester Township and Washington Township in Morris County; and Bedminster Township in Somerset County.

Unincorporated communities, localities and place names located partially or completely within the township include Apgar&#x27;s Corner, Bissell, Cokesbury, Fairmount, Farmersville, Fox Hill, Laurel Farms, Lower Fairmount, Mountainville, New Germantown, Oldwick, Pottersville, Sutton and Vernoy.

==Demographics==
===2010 census===
The 2010 United States census counted 5,993 people, 2,189 households, and 1,769 families in the township. The population density was 190.1 per square mile (73.4/km2). There were 2,323 housing units at an average density of 73.7 per square mile (28.5/km2). The racial makeup was 94.16% (5,643) White, 0.83% (50) Black or African American, 0.03% (2) Native American, 2.92% (175) Asian, 0.00% (0) Pacific Islander, 0.82% (49) from other races, and 1.23% (74) from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 3.49% (209) of the population.

Of the 2,189 households, 34.9% had children under the age of 18; 73.0% were married couples living together; 5.5% had a female householder with no husband present and 19.2% were non-families. Of all households, 15.3% were made up of individuals and 6.9% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.74 and the average family size was 3.05.

25.3% of the population were under the age of 18, 4.7% from 18 to 24, 15.2% from 25 to 44, 38.5% from 45 to 64, and 16.3% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 47.3 years. For every 100 females, the population had 97.5 males. For every 100 females ages 18 and older there were 96.7 males.

The Census Bureau&#x27;s 2006–2010 American Community Survey showed that (in 2010 inflation-adjusted dollars) median household income was $160,224 (with a margin of error of +/− $13,609) and the median family income was $189,833 (+/− $21,901). Males had a median income of $128,177 (+/− $22,406) versus $90,833 (+/− $32,868) for females. The per capita income for the borough was $91,644 (+/− $13,544). About 0.9% of families and 1.2% of the population were below the poverty line, including 1.3% of those under age 18 and 1.9% of those age 65 or over.

===2000 census===
As of the 2000 United States census there were 5,541 people, 1,986 households, and 1,662 families residing in the township. The population density was . There were 2,052 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the township was 96.82% White, 0.52% African American, 1.88% Asian, 0.27% from other races, and 0.51% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 1.53% of the population.

There were 1,996 households, out of which 36.6% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 77.2% were married couples living together, 5.1% had a female householder with no husband present, and 16.3% were non-families. 12.5% of all households were made up of individuals, and 4.5% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.79 and the average family size was 3.05.

In the township the population was spread out, with 26.2% under the age of 18, 3.6% from 18 to 24, 25.2% from 25 to 44, 33.7% from 45 to 64, and 11.2% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 43 years. For every 100 females, there were 97.0 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 96.7 males.

The median income for a household in the township was $135,649, and the median income for a family was $150,189. Males had a median income of $100,000 versus $57,500 for females. The per capita income for the township was $65,470. About 1.6% of families and 2.7% of the population were below the poverty line, including 3.9% of those under age 18 and 1.5% of those age 65 or over.

==Parks and recreation==
Tewksbury Township hosts part of a rail trail that was created out of the former Central Railroad of New Jersey High Bridge Branch. The trail is maintained by Hunterdon County Parks and Recreation and is called the Columbia Trail, which includes a scenic area known as the Ken Lockwood Gorge.

==Government==

===Local government===
Tewksbury Township is governed under the Township form of government, one of 141 municipalities (of the 564) statewide governed under this form. The Township Committee is comprised of five members, who are elected directly by the voters at-large in partisan elections to serve three-year terms of office on a staggered basis, with either one or two seats coming up for election each year as part of the November general election in a three-year cycle. At an annual reorganization meeting held in January, the Township Committee selects one of its members to serve as Mayor and another as Deputy Mayor, each serving a one-year term.

, members of the Tewksbury Township Committee are Mayor Jean Frankel (I, term on township committee and as mayor ends December 31, 2023), Deputy Mayor William J. Voyce (R, term on committee ends 2025; term as deputy mayor ends 2023), Dana D. Desiderio (R, 2024), Andrea B. Maranca (R, 2025) and Peter L. Melick (R, 2024).

In 2018, the township had an average property tax bill of $14,367, the highest in the county, compared to an average bill of $8,767 statewide.

===Federal, state and county representation===
Tewksbury Township is located in the 7th Congressional District and is part of New Jersey&#x27;s 23rd state legislative district.



===Politics===
As of March 2011, there were a total of 4,425 registered voters in Tewksbury Township, of which 699 (15.8%) were registered as Democrats, 2,310 (52.2%) were registered as Republicans and 1,412 (31.9%) were registered as Unaffiliated. There were 4 voters registered as Libertarians or Greens.

In the 2020 presidential election, Republican Donald Trump received 52.9% (2,245 votes) of the vote, compared to 45.6% (1,931 votes) for Joe Biden and 1.4% (61 votes) for all other candidates. In the 2016 presidential election, Republican Donald Trump received 57.6% (2,109 votes) of the vote, compared to 38.3% (1,402 votes) for Hillary Rodham Clinton and 4.1% (151 votes) for all other candidates. In the 2012 presidential election, Republican Mitt Romney received 66.6% of the vote (2,291 cast), ahead of Democrat Barack Obama with 32.0% (1,100 votes), and other candidates with 1.5% (51 votes), among the 3,478 ballots cast by the township&#x27;s 4,628 registered voters (36 ballots were spoiled), for a turnout of 75.2%. In the 2008 presidential election, Republican John McCain received 60.7% of the vote (2,280 cast), ahead of Democrat Barack Obama with 37.4% (1,403 votes) and other candidates with 1.0% (39 votes), among the 3,754 ballots cast by the township&#x27;s 4,502 registered voters, for a turnout of 83.4%. In the 2004 presidential election, Republican George W. Bush received 66.7% of the vote (2,321 ballots cast), outpolling Democrat John Kerry with 33.2% (1,156 votes) and other candidates with 0.6% (25 votes), among the 3,480 ballots cast by the township&#x27;s 4,171 registered voters, for a turnout percentage of 83.4.




In the 2013 gubernatorial election, Republican Chris Christie received 77.8% of the vote (1,706 cast), ahead of Democrat Barbara Buono with 20.3% (445 votes), and other candidates with 1.9% (41 votes), among the 2,238 ballots cast by the township&#x27;s 4,551 registered voters (46 ballots were spoiled), for a turnout of 49.2%. In the 2009 gubernatorial election, Republican Chris Christie received 66.7% of the vote (1,982 ballots cast), ahead of Democrat Jon Corzine with 21.5% (638 votes), Independent Chris Daggett with 10.4% (310 votes) and other candidates with 0.2% (5 votes), among the 2,971 ballots cast by the township&#x27;s 4,434 registered voters, yielding a 67.0% turnout.

==Education==
The Tewksbury Township Schools is a public school district, which serves students in pre-kindergarten through eighth grade. As of the 2021–22 school year, the district, comprised of two schools, had an enrollment of 500 students and 55.8 classroom teachers (on an FTE basis), for a student–teacher ratio of 9.0:1. Schools in the district (with 2021–22 enrollment data from the National Center for Education Statistics) are 
Tewksbury Elementary School with 309 students in grades PreK - 4 and 
Old Turnpike School with 186 students in grades 5 - 8. Tewksbury Elementary School was recognized in 2011 as a Blue Ribbon School by the United States Department of Education. Old Turnpike School was one of nine schools in New Jersey honored in 2020 by the National Blue Ribbon Schools Program, which recognizes high student achievement.

The original elementary school, Sawmill, opened in 1951 and was sold in 2003 for $1 million to the Hunterdon County Educational Services Commission.

Public school students in ninth through twelfth grades attend Voorhees High School in Lebanon Township (although the mailing address is Glen Gardner), which also serves students from Califon Borough, Glen Gardner Borough, Hampton Borough, High Bridge Borough and Lebanon Township. As of the 2021–22 school year, the high school had an enrollment of 780 students and 76.4 classroom teachers (on an FTE basis), for a student–teacher ratio of 10.2:1. The school is part of the North Hunterdon-Voorhees Regional High School District, which also includes students from Bethlehem Township, Clinton Town, Clinton Township, Franklin Township, Lebanon Borough and Union Township who attend North Hunterdon High School in Annandale.

Eighth grade students from all of Hunterdon County are eligible to apply to attend the high school programs offered by the Hunterdon County Vocational School District, a county-wide vocational school district that offers career and technical education at its campuses in Raritan Township and at programs sited at local high schools, with no tuition charged to students for attendance.

==Historic district==
The Oldwick Historic District is a national historic district located along County Route 517 (Main Street), Church, King, James, Joliet and William streets in the historic Oldwick neighborhood of Tewksbury Township.

The community has been settled since the 1740s, when Ralph Smith bought land in the northern part of Oldwick. The construction of the Zion Lutheran Church in 1749 (remodeled in 1831) is a fixture of the community, as it utilizes the architectural style of vernacular Gothic/Greek revival. Other notable properties include the Tewksbury Inn (built in 1800 in the Colonial Revival architectural style) and the Oldwick Methodist Church (built in 1865 in the Romanesque architectural style).

The district was added to the National Register of Historic Places on November 14, 1988, for its significance in architecture, commerce, and industry, and has a total of 127 contributing buildings, 12 contributing structures, and one contributing site. Many of the buildings were documented by the Historic American Buildings Survey.

==Transportation==
===Roads and highways===
, the township had a total of of roadways, of which were maintained by the municipality, by Hunterdon County and by the New Jersey Department of Transportation.

There are several roadways that traverse the township. Interstate 78 passes through the township, and is accessible via Oldwick Road (County Route 523) at Exit 24. County Route 517 also passes through the township.

==Notable people==

People who were born in, residents of, or otherwise closely associated with Tewksbury Township include:
* Harriet Adams (1892–1982), novelist and publisher who authored some 200 books including many in the &quot;Nancy Drew&quot; series (under the pseudonym Carolyn Keene) and a few in the &quot;Hardy Boys&quot; series (under the pseudonym Franklin W. Dixon)
* Joseph Alexander Adams (1803–1880), engraver
* John Amos (born 1939), actor
* Dan Cocoziello (born 1985), professional lacrosse player
* Everett Fagan (1918–1983), professional baseball player during the 1940s
* Eileen Ford (1922–2014), co-founder of Ford Modeling Agency, now called Ford Models
* Gerard W. Ford (1924–2008), co-founder of Ford Modeling Agency, now called Ford Models
* James Gandolfini (1961–2013), actor best known for his lead role in the HBO series &quot;The Sopranos&quot;
* Lawrence R. Hafstad (1904–1993), electrical engineer and physicist notable for his pioneering work on nuclear reactors.
* Alison Haislip (born 1981), actress and correspondent for G4tv&#x27;s &quot;Attack of the Show!&quot;
* Andrew Horowitz (born 1983), musician/singer in Tally Hall
* Kamine family, owners of Olympic horse Royal Kaliber.
* Charlie Murphy (1959–2017), actor and comedian
* Joe Piscopo (born 1951), actor and comedian
* Webster B. Todd (1899–1989), businessman, Republican leader, and father of Christine Todd Whitman
* Frederica von Stade (born 1945), opera singer
* George David Weiss (1921–2010), songwriter and former President of the Songwriters Guild of America
* Christine Todd Whitman (born 1946), 50th Governor of New Jersey
* John Whitman (1944–2015), businessman, investment banker and husband of Christine Todd Whitman
* Kate Whitman Annis (born ), general manager of the Metropolitan Riveters of the National Women&#x27;s Hockey League
==References==
==External links==
* Tewksbury Township website
* Tewksbury Historical Society
* Hunterdon County webpage for Tewksbury Township
* Tewksbury Township Schools
* School Data for the Tewksbury Township Schools, National Center for Education Statistics
* North Hunterdon-Voorhees Regional High School District
* Tewksbury Rescue Squad – STATION 24
* Tewksbury Open Records website (&quot;not Town sponsored&quot;)
* Hunterdon Land Trust Alliance
* Somerset Hills Handicapped Riding Center 
* Tewksbury 5 Miler</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3016994" start="0" end="18" title="Tewksbury Township, New Jersey" label="Tewksbury Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q7830213" start="24" end="32" title="Township (New Jersey)" label="township"/>
<link wikidata="Q502451" start="44" end="60" title="Hunterdon County, New Jersey" label="Hunterdon County"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="69" end="79" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="83" end="93" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q683705" start="120" end="146" title="New York Metropolitan Area" label="New York Metropolitan Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="158" end="183" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="262" end="273" title="2010 United States census" label="2010 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q166998" start="371" end="382" title="2000 United States census" label="2000 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q463769" start="492" end="517" title="American Community Survey" label="American Community Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q16930465" start="525" end="531" title="NJ.com" label="NJ.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q1940707" start="608" end="631" title="median household income" label="median household income"/>
<link wikidata="Q1940707" start="712" end="735" title="median household income" label="median household income"/>
<link wikidata="Q749287" start="819" end="840" title="Raritan River" label="Raritan Valley region"/>
<link wikidata="Q498163" start="912" end="918" title="Morris County, New Jersey" label="Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q502414" start="923" end="931" title="Somerset County, New Jersey" label="Somerset"/>
<link wikidata="Q6481985" start="943" end="958" title="Lamington River" label="Lamington River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000717" start="1017" end="1027" title="Tewkesbury" label="Tewkesbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="1029" end="1036" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q184711" start="1080" end="1087" title="Twin towns and sister cities" label="twinned"/>
<link wikidata="Q82048" start="1141" end="1147" title="Lenape" label="Lenape"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="1148" end="1164" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="Native Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q6273074" start="1314" end="1325" title="West Jersey" label="West Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3015934" start="1465" end="1481" title="Lebanon Township, New Jersey" label="Lebanon Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q2867079" start="1649" end="1671" title="New Jersey Legislature" label="New Jersey Legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q515694" start="1738" end="1753" title="Califon, New Jersey" label="Califon borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q3017759" start="1815" end="1834" title="Readington Township, New Jersey" label="Readington Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q3016644" start="1886" end="1902" title="Clinton Township, New Jersey" label="Clinton Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q42406" start="1961" end="1968" title="English people" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q42884" start="2009" end="2015" title="Germans" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="2223" end="2234" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q257270" start="2319" end="2326" title="Oldwick, New Jersey" label="Oldwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q565165" start="2376" end="2385" title="Victorian architecture" label="Victorian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125300" start="2412" end="2420" title="Georgian architecture" label="Georgian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719" start="2479" end="2515" title="National Register of Historic Places" label="National Register of Historic Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q7247928" start="2693" end="2745" title="Professional Association of Therapeutic Horsemanship" label="Professional Association of Therapeutic Horsemanship"/>
<link wikidata="Q290912" start="2783" end="2811" title="therapeutic horseback riding" label="therapeutic horseback riding"/>
<link wikidata="Q125349769" start="2870" end="2896" title="2024 New Jersey earthquake" label="2024 New Jersey earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q24460" start="2954" end="2980" title="Northeastern United States" label="Northeastern United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="2991" end="3004" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="3009" end="3021" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="3056" end="3083" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q515694" start="3188" end="3195" title="Califon, New Jersey" label="Califon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3016644" start="3197" end="3213" title="Clinton Township, New Jersey" label="Clinton Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q3015934" start="3215" end="3231" title="Lebanon Township, New Jersey" label="Lebanon Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q3017759" start="3236" end="3255" title="Readington Township, New Jersey" label="Readington Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q3014459" start="3277" end="3293" title="Chester Township, New Jersey" label="Chester Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q3015373" start="3298" end="3317" title="Washington Township, Morris County, New Jersey" label="Washington Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q498163" start="3321" end="3334" title="Morris County, New Jersey" label="Morris County"/>
<link wikidata="Q813922" start="3340" end="3359" title="Bedminster Township, New Jersey" label="Bedminster Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q502414" start="3363" end="3378" title="Somerset County, New Jersey" label="Somerset County"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3381" end="3407" title="Local government in New Jersey#Unincorporated communities" label="Unincorporated communities"/>
<link wikidata="Q5141732" start="3526" end="3535" title="Cokesbury, New Jersey" label="Cokesbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q257270" start="3634" end="3641" title="Oldwick, New Jersey" label="Oldwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q3476494" start="3643" end="3655" title="Pottersville, New Jersey" label="Pottersville"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="3716" end="3741" title="2010 United States census" label="2010 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="3822" end="3840" title="population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4005" end="4010" title="White (U.S. census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4023" end="4048" title="Black (U.S. census)" label="Black or African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4060" end="4075" title="Native American (U.S. census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4089" end="4094" title="Asian (U.S. census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4106" end="4122" title="Pacific Islander (U.S. census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4140" end="4151" title="Race and ethnicity in the United States census#Race" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4192" end="4210" title="Hispanic (U.S. census)" label="Hispanic or Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q463769" start="4989" end="5014" title="American Community Survey" label="American Community Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q311198" start="5036" end="5054" title="inflation adjustment" label="inflation-adjusted"/>
<link wikidata="Q1940707" start="5064" end="5087" title="median household income" label="median household income"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="5296" end="5313" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="5422" end="5434" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q166998" start="5536" end="5561" title="2000 United States census" label="2000 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="5741" end="5754" title="Race and ethnicity in the United States census" label="racial makeup"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="6056" end="6071" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="6876" end="6893" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="6989" end="7001" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053974" start="7181" end="7211" title="Central Railroad of New Jersey" label="Central Railroad of New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5754964" start="7212" end="7230" title="High Bridge Branch" label="High Bridge Branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5149878" start="7315" end="7329" title="Columbia Trail" label="Columbia Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q6388034" start="7373" end="7391" title="Ken Lockwood Gorge" label="Ken Lockwood Gorge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7830213" start="7474" end="7482" title="Township (New Jersey)" label="Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q3682992" start="7670" end="7678" title="at-large" label="at-large"/>
<link wikidata="Q30185" start="8116" end="8121" title="Mayor" label="Mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q327591" start="8136" end="8137" title="Independent politician" label="I"/>
<link wikidata="Q581817" start="8204" end="8216" title="Deputy Mayor" label="Deputy Mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="8235" end="8236" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="R"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="8855" end="8864" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="8899" end="8910" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republicans"/>
<link wikidata="Q5354776" start="8948" end="8960" title="Unaffiliated (New Jersey)" label="Unaffiliated"/>
<link wikidata="Q558334" start="8996" end="9008" title="Libertarian Party (United States)" label="Libertarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q849158" start="9012" end="9018" title="Green Party (United States)" label="Greens"/>
<link wikidata="Q22923830" start="9028" end="9054" title="2020 United States presidential election" label="2020 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="9067" end="9079" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q6279" start="9158" end="9167" title="Joe Biden" label="Joe Biden"/>
<link wikidata="Q699872" start="9221" end="9247" title="2016 United States presidential election" label="2016 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="9260" end="9272" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q6294" start="9351" end="9373" title="Hillary Rodham Clinton" label="Hillary Rodham Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q17100287" start="9428" end="9454" title="United States presidential election in New Jersey, 2012" label="2012 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q4496" start="9467" end="9478" title="Mitt Romney" label="Mitt Romney"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="9538" end="9550" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738441" start="9713" end="9720" title="Spoilt vote" label="spoiled"/>
<link wikidata="Q16959334" start="9754" end="9780" title="2008 United States presidential election in New Jersey" label="2008 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q10390" start="9793" end="9804" title="John McCain" label="John McCain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892945" start="10053" end="10079" title="United States presidential election in New Jersey, 2004" label="2004 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="10092" end="10106" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q22316" start="10176" end="10186" title="John Kerry" label="John Kerry"/>
<link wikidata="Q15134831" start="10377" end="10404" title="2013 New Jersey gubernatorial election" label="2013 gubernatorial election"/>
<link wikidata="Q63879" start="10417" end="10431" title="Chris Christie" label="Chris Christie"/>
<link wikidata="Q4858790" start="10491" end="10504" title="Barbara Buono" label="Barbara Buono"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586264" start="10706" end="10733" title="2009 New Jersey gubernatorial election" label="2009 gubernatorial election"/>
<link wikidata="Q380570" start="10828" end="10839" title="Jon Corzine" label="Jon Corzine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5106343" start="10876" end="10889" title="Chris Daggett" label="Chris Daggett"/>
<link wikidata="Q7707211" start="11077" end="11103" title="Tewksbury Township Schools" label="Tewksbury Township Schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q7239239" start="11158" end="11174" title="pre-kindergarten" label="pre-kindergarten"/>
<link wikidata="Q5349142" start="11183" end="11195" title="eighth grade" label="eighth grade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543700" start="11337" end="11340" title="full-time equivalent" label="FTE"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595370" start="11355" end="11376" title="student–teacher ratio" label="student–teacher ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1966994" start="11450" end="11490" title="National Center for Education Statistics" label="National Center for Education Statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q6971043" start="11678" end="11696" title="National Blue Ribbon Schools Program" label="Blue Ribbon School"/>
<link wikidata="Q861556" start="11704" end="11741" title="United States Department of Education" label="United States Department of Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q7039258" start="12082" end="12087" title="ninth grade" label="ninth"/>
<link wikidata="Q986388" start="12096" end="12109" title="twelfth grade" label="twelfth grade"/>
<link wikidata="Q14705907" start="12118" end="12138" title="Voorhees High School" label="Voorhees High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q515694" start="12239" end="12254" title="Califon, New Jersey" label="Califon Borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087569" start="12256" end="12276" title="Glen Gardner, New Jersey" label="Glen Gardner Borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086532" start="12278" end="12293" title="Hampton, New Jersey" label="Hampton Borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086813" start="12295" end="12314" title="High Bridge, New Jersey" label="High Bridge Borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q3015934" start="12319" end="12335" title="Lebanon Township, New Jersey" label="Lebanon Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543700" start="12453" end="12456" title="full-time equivalent" label="FTE"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595370" start="12471" end="12492" title="student–teacher ratio" label="student–teacher ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q14705816" start="12530" end="12584" title="North Hunterdon-Voorhees Regional High School District" label="North Hunterdon-Voorhees Regional High School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q542454" start="12620" end="12638" title="Bethlehem Township, New Jersey" label="Bethlehem Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087573" start="12640" end="12652" title="Clinton, New Jersey" label="Clinton Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q3016644" start="12654" end="12670" title="Clinton Township, New Jersey" label="Clinton Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q5491960" start="12672" end="12689" title="Franklin Township, Hunterdon County, New Jersey" label="Franklin Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083772" start="12691" end="12706" title="Lebanon, New Jersey" label="Lebanon Borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q7886242" start="12711" end="12725" title="Union Township, Hunterdon County, New Jersey" label="Union Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q7055674" start="12737" end="12764" title="North Hunterdon High School" label="North Hunterdon High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084050" start="12768" end="12777" title="Annandale, New Jersey" label="Annandale"/>
<link wikidata="Q5944694" start="12903" end="12946" title="Hunterdon County Vocational School District" label="Hunterdon County Vocational School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q3017068" start="13051" end="13067" title="Raritan Township, New Jersey" label="Raritan Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q39768624" start="13192" end="13217" title="Oldwick Historic District" label="Oldwick Historic District"/>
<link wikidata="Q1620797" start="13232" end="13249" title="historic district (United States)" label="historic district"/>
<link wikidata="Q858846" start="13264" end="13280" title="County Route 517 (New Jersey)" label="County Route 517"/>
<link wikidata="Q257270" start="13360" end="13367" title="Oldwick, New Jersey" label="Oldwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1513688" start="13679" end="13692" title="Greek Revival style" label="Greek revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q5148367" start="13767" end="13783" title="Colonial Revival architecture" label="Colonial Revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q744373" start="13860" end="13870" title="Romanesque Revival style" label="Romanesque"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719" start="13924" end="13960" title="National Register of Historic Places" label="National Register of Historic Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q76321820" start="14068" end="14090" title="contributing buildings" label="contributing buildings"/>
<link wikidata="Q913956" start="14192" end="14226" title="Historic American Buildings Survey" label="Historic American Buildings Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q867675" start="14393" end="14432" title="New Jersey Department of Transportation" label="New Jersey Department of Transportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q811194" start="14490" end="14503" title="Interstate 78 in New Jersey" label="Interstate 78"/>
<link wikidata="Q858928" start="14569" end="14585" title="County Route 523 (New Jersey)" label="County Route 523"/>
<link wikidata="Q858846" start="14599" end="14615" title="County Route 517 (New Jersey)" label="County Route 517"/>
<link wikidata="Q3040664" start="14777" end="14790" title="Harriet Adams" label="Harriet Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q6625963" start="14804" end="14812" title="novelist" label="novelist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3972943" start="14817" end="14826" title="publisher" label="publisher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076932" start="14883" end="14893" title="Nancy Drew" label="Nancy Drew"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044648" start="14928" end="14941" title="Carolyn Keene" label="Carolyn Keene"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471089" start="14966" end="14976" title="Hardy Boys" label="Hardy Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q369206" start="15011" end="15028" title="Franklin W. Dixon" label="Franklin W. Dixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6280956" start="15032" end="15054" title="Joseph Alexander Adams" label="Joseph Alexander Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q498820" start="15079" end="15088" title="John Amos" label="John Amos"/>
<link wikidata="Q33999" start="15102" end="15107" title="actor" label="actor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5213274" start="15110" end="15124" title="Dan Cocoziello" label="Dan Cocoziello"/>
<link wikidata="Q5417006" start="15169" end="15182" title="Everett Fagan" label="Everett Fagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918841" start="15244" end="15255" title="Eileen Ford" label="Eileen Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374433" start="15283" end="15327" title="Ford Modeling Agency" label="Ford Modeling Agency, now called Ford Models"/>
<link wikidata="Q5550185" start="15330" end="15344" title="Gerard W. Ford" label="Gerard W. Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374433" start="15372" end="15416" title="Ford Modeling Agency" label="Ford Modeling Agency, now called Ford Models"/>
<link wikidata="Q308722" start="15419" end="15435" title="James Gandolfini" label="James Gandolfini"/>
<link wikidata="Q33999" start="15449" end="15454" title="actor" label="actor"/>
<link wikidata="Q23633" start="15491" end="15494" title="HBO" label="HBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q23628" start="15508" end="15520" title="The Sopranos" label="The Sopranos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1809188" start="15529" end="15548" title="Lawrence R. Hafstad" label="Lawrence R. Hafstad"/>
<link wikidata="Q43035" start="15562" end="15581" title="electrical engineer" label="electrical engineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q169470" start="15586" end="15595" title="physicist" label="physicist"/>
<link wikidata="Q4727086" start="15651" end="15665" title="Alison Haislip" label="Alison Haislip"/>
<link wikidata="Q33999" start="15679" end="15686" title="actress" label="actress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006978" start="15709" end="15713" title="G4tv" label="G4tv"/>
<link wikidata="Q4817981" start="15727" end="15746" title="Attack of the Show!" label="Attack of the Show!"/>
<link wikidata="Q564968" start="15755" end="15770" title="Tally Hall (band)" label="Andrew Horowitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q564968" start="15803" end="15813" title="Tally Hall (band)" label="Tally Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q16960826" start="15855" end="15868" title="Royal Kaliber" label="Royal Kaliber"/>
<link wikidata="Q559074" start="15872" end="15886" title="Charlie Murphy (actor)" label="Charlie Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q33999" start="15900" end="15905" title="actor" label="actor"/>
<link wikidata="Q245068" start="15910" end="15918" title="comedian" label="comedian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2474995" start="15921" end="15932" title="Joe Piscopo" label="Joe Piscopo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7978888" start="15967" end="15982" title="Webster B. Todd" label="Webster B. Todd"/>
<link wikidata="Q435267" start="16042" end="16064" title="Christine Todd Whitman" label="Christine Todd Whitman"/>
<link wikidata="Q265872" start="16067" end="16086" title="Frederica von Stade" label="Frederica von Stade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507215" start="16115" end="16133" title="George David Weiss" label="George David Weiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q7561648" start="16186" end="16214" title="Songwriters Guild of America" label="Songwriters Guild of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q435267" start="16217" end="16239" title="Christine Todd Whitman" label="Christine Todd Whitman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112728" start="16258" end="16280" title="Governor of New Jersey" label="Governor of New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q6263884" start="16283" end="16295" title="John Whitman (businessman)" label="John Whitman"/>
<link wikidata="Q435267" start="16355" end="16377" title="Christine Todd Whitman" label="Christine Todd Whitman"/>
<link wikidata="Q102080603" start="16380" end="16398" title="Kate Whitman Annis" label="Kate Whitman Annis"/>
<link wikidata="Q20647984" start="16431" end="16452" title="Metropolitan Riveters" label="Metropolitan Riveters"/>
<link wikidata="Q19865669" start="16460" end="16495" title="National Women&amp;#x27;s Hockey League" label="National Women&amp;#x27;s Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1966994" start="16719" end="16759" title="National Center for Education Statistics" label="National Center for Education Statistics"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="125370" wikidata="Q7886242" url="?curid=125370" title="Union Township, Hunterdon County, New Jersey">
<text>Union Township is a township in Hunterdon County, in the U.S. state of New Jersey. The southwest half of the township lies on what is known as the Hunterdon Plateau, the northwest corner consists of the Musconetcong Ridge and the northeast section is part of the lower-lying Newark Basin around Spruce Run Reservoir. As of the 2020 United States census, the township&#x27;s population was 6,507, its highest ever decennial count and an increase of 599 (+10.1%) from the 2010 census count of 5,908, which in turn reflected a decline of 252 (−4.1%) from the 6,160 counted in the 2000 census.

Union was incorporated as a township by an act of the New Jersey Legislature on February 17, 1853, from portions of Bethlehem Township. Clinton Town was formed on April 5, 1865, within portions of the township, and became an independent municipality in 1895. The township was named for Union Furnace, which was producing iron from 1742 until the 1780s. The name &quot;Union&quot; was chosen over the alternative &quot;Rockhill&quot;, which was a community at the southern end of the township.

Union Furnace and its forge produced cannonballs for the Revolutionary War and shoes for horses and oxen, as well as farm implements. Farms and fields were established in areas where trees were felled to provide fuel for the furnace. A farm community developed, together with basket making and tanning industries.

&quot;New Jersey Monthly&quot; magazine ranked Union Township 21st in its 2008 rankings of the &quot;Best Places To Live&quot; in New Jersey.

==Geography==
According to the United States Census Bureau, township had a total area of 20.63 square miles (53.43 km2), including 18.77 square miles (48.60 km2) of land and 1.86 square miles (4.83 km2) of water (9.03%).

Unincorporated communities, localities and place names located partially or completely within the township include Coles Mills, Grandin, Hensfoot, Jutland, Kingtown, Mechlings Corner, Mount Salem, Norton, Pattenburg, Perryville, Polktown and Van Syckel.

Pittstown is an unincorporated community that is also spread across Alexandria Township and Franklin Township.

The township borders the Hunterdon County municipalities of Alexandria Township, Bethlehem Township, Clinton, Clinton Township, Franklin Township and Lebanon Township.

==Demographics==

Two large state facilities in the township, the Edna Mahan Correctional Facility for Women (with 650 inmates in 2018) and Hunterdon Developmental Center (which had 480 residents as of 2017), account for almost 20% of the residents counted by the Census Bureau. Their inclusion skews the township&#x27;s demographic characteristics. The unusual ratio of 100 females there vs. 77.5 males and the presence of 12.5% of residents but no families being below the poverty linen is largely due to the nature of the residents of these two facilities.

===2010 census===
The 2010 United States census counted 5,908 people, 1,752 households, and 1,221 families in the township. The population density was 315.3 per square mile (121.7/km2). There were 1,830 housing units at an average density of 97.7 per square mile (37.7/km2). The racial makeup was 83.21% (4,916) White, 9.06% (535) Black or African American, 0.15% (9) Native American, 4.13% (244) Asian, 0.05% (3) Pacific Islander, 1.61% (95) from other races, and 1.79% (106) from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 6.08% (359) of the population.

Of the 1,752 households, 33.8% had children under the age of 18; 61.6% were married couples living together; 5.5% had a female householder with no husband present and 30.3% were non-families. Of all households, 24.8% were made up of individuals and 7.2% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.57 and the average family size was 3.12.

18.4% of the population were under the age of 18, 6.5% from 18 to 24, 27.8% from 25 to 44, 37.6% from 45 to 64, and 9.6% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 43.7 years. For every 100 females, the population had 77.5 males. For every 100 females ages 18 and older there were 73.2 males.

The Census Bureau&#x27;s 2006–2010 American Community Survey showed that (in 2010 inflation-adjusted dollars) median household income was $103,304 (with a margin of error of +/− $11,761) and the median family income was $126,157 (+/− $23,039). Males had a median income of $97,548 (+/− $31,580) versus $62,130 (+/− $7,607) for females. The per capita income for the borough was $33,753 (+/− $7,431). About none of families and 12.5% of the population were below the poverty line, including none of those under age 18 and 13.8% of those age 65 or over.

===2000 census===
As of the 2000 United States census there were 6,160 people, 1,666 households, and 1,162 families residing in the township. The population density was . There were 1,725 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the township was 81.83% White, 13.36% African American, 0.18% Native American, 1.59% Asian, 0.02% Pacific Islander, 1.59% from other races, and 1.43% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 5.13% of the population.

There were 1,666 households, out of which 35.9% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 62.4% were married couples living together, 4.6% had a female householder with no husband present, and 30.2% were non-families. 24.3% of all households were made up of individuals, and 5.4% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.61 and the average family size was 3.18.

In the township the population was spread out, with 19.2% under the age of 18, 5.9% from 18 to 24, 43.4% from 25 to 44, 25.0% from 45 to 64, and 6.6% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 38 years. For every 100 females, there were 71.0 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 65.2 males.

The median income for a household in the township was $81,089, and the median income for a family was $102,146. Males had a median income of $64,375 versus $41,795 for females. The per capita income for the township was $29,535. About 0.4% of families and 1.6% of the population were below the poverty line, including 1.3% of those under age 18 and 4.2% of those age 65 or over.

==Government==
===Local government===
Union Township is governed under the Township form of New Jersey municipal government, one of 141 municipalities (of the 564) statewide that use this form, the second-most commonly used form of government in the state. The Township Committee is comprised of five members, who are elected directly by the voters at-large in partisan elections to serve three-year terms of office on a staggered basis, with either one or two seats coming up for election each year as part of the November general election in a three-year cycle. At an annual reorganization meeting, the Township Committee selects one of its members to serve as Mayor and another as Deputy Mayor.

, members of the Union Township Committee are Mayor David DeGiralamo (R, term on committee ends December 31, 2024; term as mayor ends 2023), Deputy Mayor Page Stiger (R, term on committee ends 2025; term as deputy mayor ends 2023), Bruce R. Hirt (R, 2023), Richard Lordi (R, 2024) and Frank T. Mazza (R, 2023).

In February 2019, the Township Committee selected Page Stiger from a list of three candidates nominated by the Republican municipal committee to fill the seat expiring in December 2019 that was vacated by Michael Sroka when he resigned from office the previous month.

In 2010, the Township&#x27;s Environmental Commission earned Union Township the distinction of becoming the first community in Hunterdon County to achieve certification under the Sustainable Jersey program, which works to help communities reduce waste, cut greenhouse gas emissions and improve environmental equity.

===Federal, state and county representation===
Union Township is located in the 7th Congressional District and is part of New Jersey&#x27;s 23rd state legislative district.



Two state facilities, the New Jersey Department of Corrections Edna Mahan Correctional Facility for Women (with 650 inmates in 2018), and the New Jersey Department of Human Services Hunterdon Developmental Center (which had 480 residents as of 2017), are located in Union Township.

===Politics===
As of March 2011, there were a total of 3,226 registered voters in Union Township, of which 1,335 (41.4%) were registered as Republicans, 574 (17.8%) were registered as Democrats, and 1,312 (40.7%) were registered as Unaffiliated. There were five voters registered as Libertarians or Greens.

In the 2012 presidential election, Republican Mitt Romney received 60.8% of the vote (1,545 cast), ahead of Democrat Obama with 37.6% (955 votes), and other candidates with 1.7% (42 votes), among the 2,560 ballots cast by the township&#x27;s 3,416 registered voters (18 ballots were spoiled), for a turnout of 74.9%. In the 2008 presidential election, Republican John McCain received 58.9% of the vote here (1,568 cast), ahead of Democrat Barack Obama with 38.7% (1,030 votes) and other candidates with 1.3% (35 votes), among the 2,662 ballots cast by the township&#x27;s 3,265 registered voters, for a turnout of 81.5%. In the 2004 presidential election, Republican George W. Bush received 64.3% of the vote here (1,566 ballots cast), outpolling Democrat John Kerry with 35.3% (860 votes) and other candidates with 1.1% (34 votes), among the 2,437 ballots cast by the township&#x27;s 2,992 registered voters, for a turnout percentage of 81.5.




In the 2013 gubernatorial election, Republican Chris Christie received 77.2% of the vote (1,179 cast), ahead of Democrat Barbara Buono with 21.0% (321 votes), and other candidates with 1.8% (28 votes), among the 1,549 ballots cast by the township&#x27;s 3,409 registered voters (21 ballots were spoiled), for a turnout of 45.4%. In the 2009 gubernatorial election, Republican Chris Christie received 70.9% of the vote here (1,303 ballots cast), ahead of Democrat Jon Corzine with 19.9% (366 votes), Independent Chris Daggett with 7.6% (139 votes) and other candidates with 0.4% (7 votes), among the 1,837 ballots cast by the township&#x27;s 3,214 registered voters, yielding a 57.2% turnout.

==Education==
The Union Township School District serves students in pre-kindergarten through eighth grade. As of the 2018–19 school year, the district, comprised of two schools, had an enrollment of 436 students and 44.8 classroom teachers (on an FTE basis), for a student–teacher ratio of 9.7:1. Schools in the district (with 2018–2019 enrollment data from the National Center for Education Statistics) are 
Union Township Elementary School with 207 students in grades K–4 and 
Union Township Middle School with 225 students in grades 5–8.

Public school students in ninth through twelfth grades attend North Hunterdon High School in Annandale, which also serves students from Bethlehem Township, Clinton Town, Clinton Township, Franklin Township and Lebanon Borough. As of the 2018–19 school year, the high school had an enrollment of 1,584 students and 123.2 classroom teachers (on an FTE basis), for a student–teacher ratio of 12.9:1. The school is part of the North Hunterdon-Voorhees Regional High School District, which also includes students from Califon, Glen Gardner, Hampton, High Bridge, Lebanon Township and Tewksbury Township, who attend Voorhees High School in Lebanon Township.

Eighth grade students from all of Hunterdon County are eligible to apply to attend the high school programs offered by the Hunterdon County Vocational School District, a county-wide vocational school district that offers career and technical education at its campuses in Raritan Township and at programs sited at local high schools, with no tuition charged to students for attendance.

==Transportation==
===Roads and highways===

, the township had a total of of roadways, of which were maintained by the municipality, by Hunterdon County and by the New Jersey Department of Transportation.

Union is accessible by a variety of roads. The most prominent roadway is Interstate 78 / U.S. 22, which run concurrently through Union Township. Route 173 passes through the center and eventually merges briefly with both. County Route 513 runs along the southeastern border while County Route 579 goes along the southwestern border.

===Rail service===
The Norfolk Southern Railway&#x27;s Lehigh Line (formerly the mainline of the Lehigh Valley Railroad), runs through Union Township.

==Notable people==

People who were born in, residents of, or otherwise closely associated with Union Township include:

* Scott Bradlee (born 1981), musician, pianist, composer, and arranger best known for his viral videos on YouTube, including his work under the moniker Postmodern Jukebox
* Daniel Karcher (born 1964), is an NPR host and filmmaker, best known as host for WBGO, where he serves as the station&#x27;s &quot;full-time substitute host&quot;
* John Penn (1729–1795), last colonial governor of Pennsylvania
* Charles Rinehart (1875–1933), football player, engineer and businessman who was elected to the College Football Hall of Fame in 1964
* Lloyd Wescott (1907–1990), agriculturalist, civil servant, and philanthropist
* Glenway Wescott (1911–1987), novelist during the 1920s and 1930s and a figure in the American expatriate literary community in Paris during the 1920s

==References==
==External links==
*Township website
*Web page for Union Township, Hunterdon County, New Jersey
*Union Township School
*Union Township Environmental Association Facebook page
*Data for the Union Township School, National Center for Education Statistics
*North Hunterdon-Voorhees Regional High School District
*NY-NJTC: Hoffman Park Details and Info</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7886242" start="0" end="14" title="Union Township, Hunterdon County, New Jersey" label="Union Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q7830213" start="20" end="28" title="Township (New Jersey)" label="township"/>
<link wikidata="Q502451" start="32" end="48" title="Hunterdon County, New Jersey" label="Hunterdon County"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="57" end="67" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="71" end="81" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5944705" start="147" end="164" title="Hunterdon Plateau" label="Hunterdon Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q6940353" start="203" end="221" title="Musconetcong Mountain" label="Musconetcong Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7016614" start="275" end="287" title="Newark Basin" label="Newark Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q14705877" start="295" end="315" title="Spruce Run Reservoir" label="Spruce Run Reservoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="327" end="352" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345528" start="413" end="428" title="United States census" label="decennial count"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="470" end="481" title="2010 United States census" label="2010 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q166998" start="577" end="588" title="2000 United States census" label="2000 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2867079" start="645" end="667" title="New Jersey Legislature" label="New Jersey Legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q542454" start="707" end="725" title="Bethlehem Township, New Jersey" label="Bethlehem Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087573" start="727" end="739" title="Clinton, New Jersey" label="Clinton Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="1142" end="1159" title="American Revolutionary War" label="Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7009265" start="1406" end="1424" title="New Jersey Monthly" label="New Jersey Monthly"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="1574" end="1601" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1765" end="1791" title="Local government in New Jersey#Unincorporated communities" label="Unincorporated communities"/>
<link wikidata="Q19462050" start="1893" end="1900" title="Grandin, New Jersey" label="Grandin"/>
<link wikidata="Q19462652" start="1912" end="1919" title="Jutland, New Jersey" label="Jutland"/>
<link wikidata="Q20657469" start="1962" end="1968" title="Norton, New Jersey" label="Norton"/>
<link wikidata="Q20657545" start="1970" end="1980" title="Pattenburg, New Jersey" label="Pattenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q7199513" start="2020" end="2029" title="Pittstown, New Jersey" label="Pittstown"/>
<link wikidata="Q3017769" start="2088" end="2107" title="Alexandria Township, New Jersey" label="Alexandria Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q5491960" start="2112" end="2129" title="Franklin Township, Hunterdon County, New Jersey" label="Franklin Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q542454" start="2213" end="2231" title="Bethlehem Township, New Jersey" label="Bethlehem Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087573" start="2233" end="2240" title="Clinton, New Jersey" label="Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3016644" start="2242" end="2258" title="Clinton Township, New Jersey" label="Clinton Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q3015934" start="2282" end="2298" title="Lebanon Township, New Jersey" label="Lebanon Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q5340067" start="2367" end="2409" title="Edna Mahan Correctional Facility for Women" label="Edna Mahan Correctional Facility for Women"/>
<link wikidata="Q5944697" start="2441" end="2471" title="Hunterdon Developmental Center" label="Hunterdon Developmental Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="2884" end="2909" title="2010 United States census" label="2010 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="2990" end="3008" title="population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3174" end="3179" title="White (U.S. census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3193" end="3218" title="Black (U.S. census)" label="Black or African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3230" end="3245" title="Native American (U.S. census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3259" end="3264" title="Asian (U.S. census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3276" end="3292" title="Pacific Islander (U.S. census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3310" end="3321" title="Race and ethnicity in the United States census#Race" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3363" end="3381" title="Hispanic (U.S. census)" label="Hispanic or Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q463769" start="4159" end="4184" title="American Community Survey" label="American Community Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q311198" start="4206" end="4224" title="inflation adjustment" label="inflation-adjusted"/>
<link wikidata="Q1940707" start="4234" end="4257" title="median household income" label="median household income"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="4464" end="4481" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="4590" end="4602" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q166998" start="4705" end="4730" title="2000 United States census" label="2000 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4951" end="4956" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4965" end="4981" title="African American (U.S. Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4989" end="5004" title="Native American (U.S. Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="5012" end="5017" title="Asian (U.S. Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="5025" end="5041" title="Pacific Islander (U.S. Census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="5054" end="5065" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="5101" end="5109" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="5113" end="5119" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="5273" end="5288" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="6090" end="6107" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="6203" end="6215" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q7830213" start="6364" end="6372" title="Township (New Jersey)" label="Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q3682992" start="6638" end="6646" title="at-large" label="at-large"/>
<link wikidata="Q30185" start="7034" end="7039" title="Mayor" label="Mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="7058" end="7059" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="R"/>
<link wikidata="Q17110270" start="7748" end="7766" title="Sustainable Jersey" label="Sustainable Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q16203915" start="8088" end="8124" title="New Jersey Department of Corrections" label="New Jersey Department of Corrections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5340067" start="8125" end="8167" title="Edna Mahan Correctional Facility for Women" label="Edna Mahan Correctional Facility for Women"/>
<link wikidata="Q30283790" start="8204" end="8243" title="New Jersey Department of Human Services" label="New Jersey Department of Human Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q5944697" start="8244" end="8274" title="Hunterdon Developmental Center" label="Hunterdon Developmental Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="8485" end="8496" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republicans"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="8529" end="8538" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q5354776" start="8577" end="8589" title="Unaffiliated (New Jersey)" label="Unaffiliated"/>
<link wikidata="Q558334" start="8628" end="8640" title="Libertarian Party (United States)" label="Libertarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q849158" start="8644" end="8650" title="Green Party (United States)" label="Greens"/>
<link wikidata="Q17100287" start="8660" end="8686" title="United States presidential election in New Jersey, 2012" label="2012 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q4496" start="8699" end="8710" title="Mitt Romney" label="Mitt Romney"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="8770" end="8775" title="Barack Obama" label="Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738441" start="8936" end="8943" title="Spoilt vote" label="spoiled"/>
<link wikidata="Q45578" start="8977" end="9003" title="2008 United States presidential election" label="2008 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q10390" start="9016" end="9027" title="John McCain" label="John McCain"/>
<link wikidata="Q464075" start="9281" end="9307" title="2004 United States presidential election" label="2004 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="9320" end="9334" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q22316" start="9409" end="9419" title="John Kerry" label="John Kerry"/>
<link wikidata="Q15134831" start="9608" end="9635" title="New Jersey gubernatorial election, 2013" label="2013 gubernatorial election"/>
<link wikidata="Q63879" start="9648" end="9662" title="Chris Christie" label="Chris Christie"/>
<link wikidata="Q4858790" start="9722" end="9735" title="Barbara Buono" label="Barbara Buono"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586264" start="9937" end="9964" title="New Jersey gubernatorial election, 2009" label="2009 gubernatorial election"/>
<link wikidata="Q63879" start="9977" end="9991" title="Chris Christie" label="Chris Christie"/>
<link wikidata="Q380570" start="10064" end="10075" title="Jon Corzine" label="Jon Corzine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5106343" start="10112" end="10125" title="Chris Daggett" label="Chris Daggett"/>
<link wikidata="Q7886352" start="10312" end="10342" title="Union Township School District" label="Union Township School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q7239239" start="10362" end="10378" title="pre-kindergarten" label="pre-kindergarten"/>
<link wikidata="Q5349142" start="10387" end="10399" title="eighth grade" label="eighth grade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543700" start="10541" end="10544" title="full-time equivalent" label="FTE"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595370" start="10559" end="10580" title="student–teacher ratio" label="student–teacher ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1966994" start="10656" end="10696" title="National Center for Education Statistics" label="National Center for Education Statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7039258" start="10862" end="10867" title="ninth grade" label="ninth"/>
<link wikidata="Q986388" start="10876" end="10889" title="twelfth grade" label="twelfth grade"/>
<link wikidata="Q7055674" start="10898" end="10925" title="North Hunterdon High School" label="North Hunterdon High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084050" start="10929" end="10938" title="Annandale, New Jersey" label="Annandale"/>
<link wikidata="Q542454" start="10972" end="10990" title="Bethlehem Township, New Jersey" label="Bethlehem Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087573" start="10992" end="11004" title="Clinton, New Jersey" label="Clinton Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q3016644" start="11006" end="11022" title="Clinton Township, New Jersey" label="Clinton Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q5491960" start="11024" end="11041" title="Franklin Township, Hunterdon County, New Jersey" label="Franklin Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083772" start="11046" end="11061" title="Lebanon, New Jersey" label="Lebanon Borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543700" start="11182" end="11185" title="full-time equivalent" label="FTE"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595370" start="11200" end="11221" title="student–teacher ratio" label="student–teacher ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q14705816" start="11259" end="11313" title="North Hunterdon-Voorhees Regional High School District" label="North Hunterdon-Voorhees Regional High School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q515694" start="11349" end="11356" title="Califon, New Jersey" label="Califon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087569" start="11358" end="11370" title="Glen Gardner, New Jersey" label="Glen Gardner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086532" start="11372" end="11379" title="Hampton, New Jersey" label="Hampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086813" start="11381" end="11392" title="High Bridge, New Jersey" label="High Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3015934" start="11394" end="11410" title="Lebanon Township, New Jersey" label="Lebanon Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q3016994" start="11415" end="11433" title="Tewksbury Township, New Jersey" label="Tewksbury Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q14705907" start="11446" end="11466" title="Voorhees High School" label="Voorhees High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5944694" start="11612" end="11655" title="Hunterdon County Vocational School District" label="Hunterdon County Vocational School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q3017068" start="11760" end="11776" title="Raritan Township, New Jersey" label="Raritan Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q867675" start="12040" end="12079" title="New Jersey Department of Transportation" label="New Jersey Department of Transportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q811194" start="12155" end="12168" title="Interstate 78 in New Jersey" label="Interstate 78"/>
<link wikidata="Q811410" start="12171" end="12178" title="U.S. Route 22 in New Jersey" label="U.S. 22"/>
<link wikidata="Q827316" start="12227" end="12236" title="New Jersey Route 173" label="Route 173"/>
<link wikidata="Q858781" start="12304" end="12320" title="County Route 513 (New Jersey)" label="County Route 513"/>
<link wikidata="Q859457" start="12362" end="12378" title="County Route 579 (New Jersey)" label="County Route 579"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321054" start="12439" end="12463" title="Norfolk Southern Railway" label="Norfolk Southern Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q16981160" start="12471" end="12482" title="Lehigh Line (Norfolk Southern)" label="Lehigh Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q490228" start="12513" end="12535" title="Lehigh Valley Railroad" label="Lehigh Valley Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q16199988" start="12691" end="12704" title="Scott Bradlee" label="Scott Bradlee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030329" start="12779" end="12790" title="viral video" label="viral video"/>
<link wikidata="Q866" start="12795" end="12802" title="YouTube" label="YouTube"/>
<link wikidata="Q27734858" start="12862" end="12876" title="Daniel Karcher" label="Daniel Karcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q671510" start="12896" end="12899" title="NPR" label="NPR"/>
<link wikidata="Q3564621" start="12943" end="12947" title="WBGO" label="WBGO"/>
<link wikidata="Q6252491" start="13027" end="13036" title="John Penn (governor)" label="John Penn"/>
<link wikidata="Q6611764" start="13055" end="13088" title="List of colonial governors of Pennsylvania" label="colonial governor of Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q5082062" start="13091" end="13107" title="Charles Rinehart" label="Charles Rinehart"/>
<link wikidata="Q747833" start="13186" end="13215" title="College Football Hall of Fame" label="College Football Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q6662809" start="13226" end="13239" title="Lloyd Wescott" label="Lloyd Wescott"/>
<link wikidata="Q347890" start="13306" end="13321" title="Glenway Wescott" label="Glenway Wescott"/>
<link wikidata="Q502451" start="13539" end="13567" title="Hunterdon County, New Jersey" label="Hunterdon County, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1966994" start="13684" end="13724" title="National Center for Education Statistics" label="National Center for Education Statistics"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="125371" wikidata="Q940913" url="?curid=125371" title="Continuous track">
<text>Continuous track or tracked treads are a system of vehicle propulsion used in tracked vehicles, running on a continuous band of treads or track plates driven by two or more wheels. The large surface area of the tracks distributes the weight of the vehicle better than steel or rubber tyres on an equivalent vehicle, enabling continuous tracked vehicles to traverse soft ground with less likelihood of becoming stuck due to sinking.

Modern continuous tracks can be made with soft belts of synthetic rubber, reinforced with steel wires, in the case of lighter agricultural machinery. The more common classical type is a solid chain track made of steel plates (with or without rubber pads), also called caterpillar tread or tank tread, which is preferred for robust and heavy construction vehicles and military vehicles.

The prominent treads of the metal plates are both hard-wearing and damage resistant, especially in comparison to rubber tyres. The aggressive treads of the tracks provide good traction in soft surfaces but can damage paved surfaces, so some metal tracks can have rubber pads installed for use on paved surfaces. Other than soft rubber belts, most chain tracks apply a stiff mechanism to distribute the load equally over the entire space between the wheels for minimal deformation, so that even the heaviest vehicles can move easily, just like a train on its straight tracks.

The stiff mechanism was first given a physical form by Hornsby &amp; Sons in 1904 and then made popular by Caterpillar Tractor Company, with tanks emerging during World War I. Today, they are commonly used on a variety of vehicles, including snowmobiles, tractors, bulldozers, excavators and tanks.
The idea of continuous tracks can be traced back as far as the 1830s, however.

== History ==
The British polymath Sir George Cayley patented a continuous track, which he called a &quot;universal railway&quot; in 1825. Polish mathematician and inventor Józef Maria Hoene-Wroński designed caterpillar vehicles in the 1830s to compete with the railways. In 1837, Russian army captain Dmitry Andreevich Zagryazhsky (1807 – after 1860) designed a &quot;carriage with mobile tracks&quot; which he patented the same year but, due to a lack of funds and interest from manufacturers, he was unable to build a working prototype, and his patent was voided in 1839.

=== Heathcote&#x27;s Steam Plough ===
Patented in 1832 by John Heathcoat (also Heathcote), M.P. for Tiverton, the Heathcote steam plough was demonstrated in 1837 and press coverage fortunately provided a woodcut of the unusual tracked vehicle. The continuous tracks were made of sections of wood bolted to continuous iron bands which were driven by &quot;drums&quot; at each end. A strong chassis provided the bearings for the drums, and carried the steam engine, fuel and winch. The chassis was supported on &quot;numerous small wheels or rollers&quot; which ran upon the lower iron bands, which &quot;thus form a perfectly portable and smooth road for the platform&quot;.

The drums were in diameter, apart. The tracks were each wide with a gap in-between giving an overall width of . The twin-cylinder steam engine could be used either to drive the plough winch or to drive the vehicle along, at a speed of up to . Although the machine weighed 30 tons complete with 6 tons of fuel, its ground pressure was only , considerably less than a man. 

The successful demonstration was carried out on 20 April 1837, at Red Moss at Bolton-le-Moors. The steam plough was lost when it sank into a swamp by accident and was then abandoned, because the inventor did not have the funds to continue development.

=== Dreadnaught wheel by Boydell (1846) ===

Although not a continuous track in the form encountered today, a dreadnaught wheel or &quot;endless railway wheel&quot; was patented by the British Engineer James Boydell in 1846. In Boydell&#x27;s design, a series of flat feet are attached to the periphery of the wheel, spreading the weight. A number of horse-drawn wagons, carts and gun carriages were successfully deployed in the Crimean War, waged between October 1853 and February 1856, the Royal Arsenal at Woolwich manufacturing dreadnaught wheels. A letter of recommendation was signed by Sir William Codrington, the General commanding the troops at Sebastopol.

Boydell patented improvements to his wheel in 1854 (No. 431) – the year his dreadnaught wheel was first applied to a steam engine – and 1858 (No. 356), the latter an impracticable palliative measure involving the lifting one or other of the driving wheels to facilitate turning.

A number of manufacturers including Richard Bach, Richard Garrett &amp; Sons, Charles Burrell &amp; Sons and Clayton &amp; Shuttleworth applied the Boydell patent under licence. The British military were interested in Boydell&#x27;s invention from an early date. One of the objectives was to transport Mallet&#x27;s Mortar, a giant 36 inch weapon which was under development, but, by the end of the Crimean War, the mortar was not ready for service. A detailed report of the tests on steam traction, carried out by a select Committee of the Board of Ordnance, was published in June 1856, by which date the Crimean War was over, consequently the mortar and its transportation became irrelevant. In those tests, a Garrett engine was put through its paces on Plumstead Common. The Garrett engine featured in the Lord Mayor&#x27;s show in London, and in the following month that engine was shipped to Australia. A steam tractor employing dreadnaught wheels was built at Bach&#x27;s Birmingham works, and was used between 1856 and 1858 for ploughing in Thetford; and the first generation of Burrell/Boydell engines was built at the St. Nicholas works in 1856, again, after the close of the Crimean War.

Between late 1856 and 1862 Burrell manufactured not less than a score of engines fitted with dreadnaught wheels. In April 1858, the journal &quot;The Engineer&quot; gave a brief description of a Clayton &amp; Shuttleworth engine fitted with dreadnaught wheels, which was supplied not to the Western Allies, but to the Russian government for heavy artillery haulage in Crimea in the post-war period. Steam tractors fitted with dreadnaught wheels had a number of shortcomings and, notwithstanding the creations of the late 1850s, were never used extensively.

=== Endless Railway by John Fowler (1858) ===
In August 1858, more than two years after the end of the Crimean War, John Fowler filed British Patent No. 1948 on another form of &quot;Endless Railway&quot;. In his illustration of the invention, Fowler used a pair of wheels of equal diameter on each side of his vehicle, around which pair of toothed wheels ran a &#x27;track&#x27; of eight jointed segments, with a smaller jockey/drive wheel between each pair of wheels, to support the &#x27;track&#x27;. Comprising only eight sections, the &#x27;track&#x27; sections are essentially &#x27;longitudinal&#x27;, as in Boydell&#x27;s initial design. Fowler&#x27;s arrangement is a precursor to the multi-section caterpillar track in which a relatively large number of short &#x27;transverse&#x27; treads are used, as proposed by Sir George Caley in 1825, rather than a small number of relatively long &#x27;longitudinal&#x27; treads.

Further to Fowler&#x27;s patent of 1858, in 1877, a Russian, Fyodor Blinov, created a tracked vehicle called &quot;wagon moved on endless rails&quot;. It lacked self-propulsion and was pulled by horses. Blinov received a patent for his &quot;wagon&quot; in 1878. From 1881 to 1888 he developed a steam-powered caterpillar-tractor. This self-propelled crawler was successfully tested and featured at a farmers&#x27; exhibition in 1896.

=== 20th century efforts ===
Steam traction engines were used at the end of the 19th century in the Boer Wars. But neither dreadnaught wheels nor continuous tracks were used, rather &quot;roll-out&quot; wooden plank roads were thrown under the wheels as required.
In short, whilst the development of the continuous track engaged the attention of a number of inventors in the 18th and 19th centuries, the general use and exploitation of the continuous track belonged to the 20th century, mainly in the United States and England.

A little-known American inventor, Henry Thomas Stith (1839–1916), had developed a continuous track prototype which was, in multiple forms, patented in 1873, 1880, and 1900. The last was for the application of the track to a prototype off-road bicycle built for his son. The 1900 prototype is retained by his surviving family.

Frank Beamond (1870–1941), a less-commonly known but significant British inventor, designed and built caterpillar tracks, and was granted patents for them in a number of countries, in 1900 and 1907.

=== First commercial success (1901) ===
An effective continuous track was invented and implemented by Alvin Orlando Lombard for the Lombard Steam Log Hauler. He was granted a patent in 1901 and built the first steam-powered log hauler at the Waterville Iron Works in Waterville, Maine, the same year. In all, 83 Lombard steam log haulers are known to have been built up to 1917, when production switched entirely to internal combustion engine powered machines, ending with a Fairbanks diesel-powered unit in 1934. Alvin Lombard may also have been the first commercial manufacturer of the tractor crawler.

At least one of Lombard&#x27;s steam-powered machines apparently remains in working order. A gasoline-powered Lombard hauler is on display at the Maine State Museum in Augusta. In addition, there may have been up to twice as many Phoenix Centipede versions of the steam log hauler built under license from Lombard, with vertical instead of horizontal cylinders. In 1903, the founder of Holt Manufacturing, Benjamin Holt, paid Lombard $60,000 for the right to produce vehicles under his patent.

=== The stiff chain by Hornsby &amp; Sons (1904) ===
At about the same time a British agricultural company, Hornsby in Grantham, developed a continuous track which was patented in 1905. The design differed from modern tracks in that it flexed in only one direction, with the effect that the links locked together to form a solid rail on which the road wheels ran. Hornsby&#x27;s tracked vehicles were given trials as artillery tractors by the British Army on several occasions between 1905 and 1910, but not adopted.

The Hornsby tractors pioneered a track-steer clutch arrangement, which is the basis of the modern crawler operation. The patent was purchased by Holt.

=== Holt and the Caterpillar ===

The name &quot;Caterpillar&quot; came from a soldier during the tests on the Hornsby crawler, &quot;trials began at Aldershot in July 1907. The soldiers immediately christened the 70bhp No.2 machine the &#x27;caterpillar&#x27;.&quot;
Holt adopted that name for his &quot;crawler&quot; tractors. Holt began moving from steam to gasoline-powered designs, and in 1908 brought out the &quot;Holt Model 40 Caterpillar&quot;. Holt incorporated the Holt Caterpillar Company, in early 1910, later that year trademarked the name &quot;Caterpillar&quot; for his continuous tracks.

Caterpillar Tractor Company began in 1925 from a merger of the Holt Manufacturing Company and the C. L. Best Tractor Company, an early successful manufacturer of crawler tractors.

With the Caterpillar D10 in 1977, Caterpillar resurrected a design by Holt and Best, the high-sprocket-drive, since known as the &quot;High Drive&quot;, which had the advantage of keeping the main drive shaft away from ground shocks and dirt,
and is still used in their larger dozers.

=== Snow vehicles ===
In a memorandum of 1908, Antarctic explorer Robert Falcon Scott presented his view that man-hauling to the South Pole was impossible and that motor traction was needed. Snow vehicles did not yet exist however, and so his engineer Reginald Skelton developed the idea of a caterpillar track for snow surfaces. These tracked motors were built by the Wolseley Tool and Motor Car Company in Birmingham, tested in Switzerland and Norway, and can be seen in action in Herbert Ponting&#x27;s 1911 documentary film of Scott&#x27;s Antarctic Terra Nova Expedition. Scott died during the expedition in 1912, but expedition member and biographer Apsley Cherry-Garrard credited Scott&#x27;s &quot;motors&quot; with the inspiration for the British World War I tanks, writing: &quot;Scott never knew their true possibilities; for they were the direct ancestors of the &#x27;tanks&#x27; in France.&quot;

In time, however, a wide array of vehicles were developed for snow and ice, including ski slope grooming machines, snowmobiles, and countless commercial and military vehicles.

=== Military application ===
Continuous track was first applied to a military vehicle on the British prototype tank Little Willie. British Army officers, Colonel Ernest Swinton and Colonel Maurice Hankey, became convinced that it was possible to develop a fighting vehicle that could provide protection from machine gun fire.

During World War I, Holt tractors were used by the British and Austro-Hungarian armies to tow heavy artillery and stimulated the development of tanks in several countries. The first tanks to go into action, the Mark I, built by Great Britain, were designed from scratch and were inspired by, but not directly based on, the Holt. The slightly later French and German tanks were built on modified Holt running gear.

== Patent history ==
A long line of patents disputes who was the &quot;originator&quot; of continuous tracks. There were a number of designs that attempted to achieve a track laying mechanism, although these designs do not generally resemble modern tracked vehicles.

In 1877 Russian inventor Fyodor Abramovich Blinov created a horse-drawn tracked vehicle called &quot;wagon moved on endless rails&quot;, which received a patent the next year. In 1881–1888 he created a steam-powered caterpillar-tractor. This self-propelled crawler was successfully tested and showed at a farmers&#x27; exhibition in 1896.

According to &quot;Scientific American&quot;, Charles Dinsmoor of Warren, Pennsylvania invented a &quot;vehicle&quot; on endless tracks, patented as No. 351,749 on November 2, 1886. The article gives a detailed description of the endless tracks.

Alvin O. Lombard of Waterville, Maine was issued a patent in 1901 for the Lombard Steam Log Hauler that resembles a regular railroad steam locomotive with sled steerage on front and crawlers in rear for hauling logs in the Northeastern United States and Canada. The s allowed pulp to be taken to rivers in the winter. Prior to then, horses could be used only until snow depths made hauling impossible. Lombard began commercial production which lasted until around 1917 when focus switched entirely to gasoline powered machines. A gasoline-powered hauler is on display at the Maine State Museum in Augusta, Maine.
After Lombard began operations, Hornsby in England manufactured at least two full length &quot;track steer&quot; machines, and their patent was later purchased by Holt in 1913, allowing Holt to claim to be the &quot;inventor&quot; of the crawler tractor. Since the &quot;tank&quot; was a British concept it is more likely that the Hornsby, which had been built and unsuccessfully pitched to their military, was the inspiration.

In a patent dispute involving rival crawler builder Best, testimony was brought in from people including Lombard, that Holt had inspected a Lombard log hauler shipped out to a western state by people who would later build the Phoenix log hauler in Eau Claire, Wisconsin, under license from Lombard. The Phoenix Centipeed typically had a fancier wood cab, steering wheel tipped forward at a 45 degree angle and vertical instead of horizontal cylinders.
=== Linn ===
In the meantime, a gasoline-powered motor home was built by Lombard for Holman Harry (Flannery) Linn of Old Town, Maine to pull the equipment wagon of his dog &amp; pony show, resembling a trolley car only with wheels in front and Lombard crawlers in rear. Linn had experimented with gasoline and steam-powered vehicles and six-wheel drive before this, and at some point entered Lombard&#x27;s employment as a demonstrator, mechanic and sales agent. This resulted in a question of proprietorship of patent rights after a single rear-tracked gasoline-powered road engine of tricycle arrangement was built to replace the larger motor home in 1909 on account of problems with the old picturesque wooden bridges. This dispute resulted in Linn departing Maine and relocating to Morris, New York, to build an improved, contour following flexible lag tread or crawler with independent suspension of halftrack type, gasoline and later diesel powered. Although several were delivered for military use between 1917 and 1946, Linn never received any large military orders. Most of the production between 1917 and 1952, approximately 2500 units, was sold directly to highway departments and contractors. Steel tracks and payload capacity allowed these machines to work in terrain that would typically cause the poorer quality rubber tyres that existed before the mid-1930s to spin uselessly, or shred completely.

Linn was a pioneer in snow removal before the practice was embraced in rural areas, with a nine-foot steel v-plow and sixteen foot adjustable leveling wings on either side. Once the highway system became paved, snowplowing could be done by four wheel drive trucks equipped by improving tyre designs, and the Linn became an off highway vehicle, for logging, mining, dam construction, arctic exploration, etc.

== Engineering ==
=== Construction and operation ===
Modern tracks are built from modular chain links which together compose a closed chain. The links are jointed by a hinge, which allows the track to be flexible and wrap around a set of wheels to make an endless loop. The chain links are often broad, and can be made of manganese alloy steel for high strength, hardness, and abrasion resistance.

Track construction and assembly is dictated by the application. Military vehicles use a track shoe that is integral to the structure of the chain in order to reduce track weight. Reduced weight allows the vehicle to move faster and decreases overall vehicle weight to ease transportation. Since track weight is completely unsprung, reducing it improves suspension performance at speeds where the track&#x27;s momentum is significant. In contrast, agricultural and construction vehicles opt for a track with shoes that attach to the chain with bolts and do not form part of the chain&#x27;s structure. This allows track shoes to break without compromising the ability of the vehicle to move and decrease productivity but increases the overall weight of the track and vehicle.

The vehicle&#x27;s weight is transferred to the bottom length of track by a number of road wheels, or sets of wheels called bogies. While tracked construction equipment typically lacks suspension due to the vehicle only moving at low speeds, in military vehicles road wheels are typically mounted on some form of suspension to cushion the ride over rough ground. Suspension design in military vehicles is a major area of development; the very early designs were often completely unsprung. Later-developed road wheel suspension offered only a few inches of travel using springs, whereas modern hydro-pneumatic systems allow several feet of travel and include shock absorbers. Torsion-bar suspension has become the most common type of military vehicle suspension. Construction vehicles have smaller road wheels that are designed primarily to prevent track derailment and they are normally contained in a single bogie that includes the idler-wheel and sometimes the sprocket.

==== Overlapping road wheels ====
Many World War II German military vehicles, initially (starting in the late 1930s) including all vehicles originally designed to be half-tracks and all later tank designs (after the Panzer IV), had slack-track systems, usually driven by a front-located drive sprocket, the track returning along the tops of a design of overlapping and sometimes interleaved large diameter road wheels, as on the suspension systems of the Tiger I and Panther tanks, generically known by the term &quot;Schachtellaufwerk&quot; (interleaved or overlapping running gear) in German, for both half-track and fully tracked vehicles. There were suspensions with single or sometimes doubled wheels per axle, alternately supporting the inner and outer side of the track, and interleaved suspensions with two or three road wheels per axle, distributing the load over the track.

The choice of overlapping/interleaved road wheels allowed the use of slightly more transverse-orientation torsion bar suspension members, allowing any German tracked military vehicle with such a setup to have a noticeably smoother ride over challenging terrain, leading to reduced wear, ensuring greater traction and more accurate fire. However, on the Russian front, mud and snow would become lodged between the overlapping wheels, freeze, and immobilize the vehicle. As a tracked vehicle moves, the load of each wheel moves over the track, pushing down and forward that part of the earth or snow underneath it, similarly to a wheeled vehicle but to a lesser extent because the tread helps distribute the load. On some surfaces, this can consume enough energy to slow the vehicle down significantly. Overlapped and interleaved wheels improve performance (including fuel consumption) by loading the track more evenly. It also must have extended the life of the tracks and possibly of the wheels. The wheels also better protect the vehicle from enemy fire, and mobility is improved when some wheels are missing.

This relatively complicated approach has not been used since World War II ended. This may be related more to maintenance than to original cost. The torsion bars and bearings may stay dry and clean, but the wheels and tread work in mud, sand, rocks, snow, and other surfaces. In addition, the outer wheels (up to nine of them, some double) had to be removed to access the inner ones. In WWII, vehicles typically had to be maintained for a few months before being destroyed or captured, but in peacetime, vehicles must train several crews over a period of decades.

==== Drive train ====
Transfer of power to the track is accomplished by a drive wheel, or &quot;drive sprocket&quot;, driven by the motor and engaging with holes in the track links or with pegs on them to drive the track. In military vehicles, the drive wheel is typically mounted well above the contact area on the ground, allowing it to be fixed in position. In agricultural crawlers it is normally incorporated as part of the bogie. Placing suspension on the sprocket is possible, but is mechanically more complicated. A non-powered wheel, an &quot;idler&quot;, is placed at the opposite end of the track, primarily to tension the track, since loose track could be easily thrown (slipped) off the wheels. To prevent throwing, the inner surface of the track links usually have vertical guide horns engaging grooves, or gaps between the doubled road and idler/sprocket wheels. In military vehicles with a rear sprocket, the idler wheel is placed higher than the road wheels to allow it to climb over obstacles. Some track arrangements use return rollers to keep the top of the track running straight between the drive sprocket and idler. Others, called &quot;slack track&quot;, allow the track to droop and run along the tops of large road wheels. This was a feature of the Christie suspension, leading to occasional misidentification of other slack track-equipped vehicles.

==== Steering ====
Continuous track vehicles steer by applying more or less drive torque to one side of the vehicle than the other, and this can be implemented in a variety of ways.
=== &quot;Live&quot; and &quot;dead&quot; track ===
Tracks may be broadly categorized as &quot;live&quot; or &quot;dead&quot; track. &quot;Dead&quot; track is a simple design in which each track plate is connected to the rest with hinge-type pins. These dead tracks will lie flat if placed on the ground; the drive sprocket pulls the track around the wheels with no assistance from the track itself. &quot;Live&quot; track is slightly more complex, with each link connected to the next by a bushing which causes the track to bend slightly inward. A length of live track left on the ground will curl upward slightly at each end. Although the drive sprocket must still pull the track around the wheels, the track itself tends to bend inward, slightly assisting the sprocket and somewhat conforming to the wheels.

=== Rubber track pads ===
Tracks are often equipped with rubber pads to improve travel on paved surfaces more quickly, smoothly and quietly. While these pads slightly reduce a vehicle&#x27;s cross-country traction, they prevent damage to any pavement. Some pad systems are designed to remove easily for cross-country military combat.
=== Rubber tracks ===
Starting from late 1980s, many manufacturers provide rubber tracks instead of steel, especially for agricultural applications. Rather than a track made of linked steel plates, a reinforced rubber belt with treads is used.

In comparison to steel tracks, rubber tracks are lighter, waste less power on internal friction, make less noise and do not damage paved roads. However, they impose &quot;more&quot; ground pressure below the wheels, as they are not able to equalize pressure as well as the stiff mechanism of track plates, especially the spring loaded &quot;live&quot; tracks. Another disadvantage is that they are not disassemblable into tracks and therefore cannot be repaired, having to be discarded as whole if once damaged.

Previous belt-like systems, such as those used for half-tracks in World War II, were not as strong, and during military actions were easily damaged. The first rubber track was invented and constructed by Adolphe Kégresse and patented in 1913; in historic context rubber tracks are often called Kégresse tracks. First rubber-tracked agricultural tracked was Oliver Farm Equipment HGR in 1945-1948, which was ahead of its time and only seen small-scale production.

=== Advantages ===
* Tracked vehicles are much less likely than wheeled vehicles to get stuck in soft ground, mud or snow, since the tracks distribute the weight of the vehicle over a larger contact area, decreasing its ground pressure. The seventy-ton M1 Abrams tank has an average ground pressure of just over . Since tyre air pressure is approximately equal to average ground pressure, a typical car will have an average ground pressure of to .
* Tracked vehicles have better mobility over rough terrain than those with wheels: they smooth out the bumps, glide over small obstacles and are capable of crossing trenches or breaks in the terrain. Riding in a fast tracked-vehicle feels just like riding in a boat over heavy swells.
* The larger contact area, coupled with the cleats, or grousers, on the track shoes, allows vastly superior traction that results in a much better ability to push or pull large loads where wheeled vehicles would dig in. Bulldozers, which are most often tracked, use this attribute to rescue other vehicles (such as wheel loaders) which have become stuck in, or sunk into, the ground.
* Tracks cannot be punctured or torn and are more resilient in military combat. Should a track be broken, it often can be repaired immediately using special tools and spare parts, without the need for special facilities; this may be crucial in combat situations.

=== Disadvantages ===

The disadvantages of tracks are lower top speed, much greater mechanical complexity, shorter life and the damage that their all-steel versions cause to the surface on which they pass: They often cause damage to less firm terrain such as lawns, gravel roads, and farm fields, as the sharp edges of the track easily rout the turf. Accordingly, vehicle laws and local ordinances often require rubberised tracks or track pads. A compromise between all-steel and all-rubber tracks exists: attaching rubber pads to individual track links ensures that continuous track vehicles can travel more smoothly, quickly, and quietly on paved surfaces. While these pads slightly reduce a vehicle&#x27;s cross-country traction, in theory they prevent damage to any pavement.

Additionally, the loss of a single segment in a track immobilizes the entire vehicle, which can be a disadvantage in situations where high reliability is important. Tracks can also ride off their guide wheels, idlers or sprockets, which can cause them to jam or to come completely off the guide system (this is called a &quot;thrown&quot; track). Jammed tracks may become so tight that the track may need to be broken before a repair is possible, which requires either explosives or special tools. Multi-wheeled vehicles, for example, 8 X 8 military vehicles, may often continue driving even after the loss of one or more non-sequential wheels, depending on the base wheel pattern and drive train.

Prolonged use places enormous strain on the drive transmission and the mechanics of the tracks, which must be overhauled or replaced regularly. It is common to see tracked vehicles such as bulldozers or tanks transported long distances by a wheeled carrier such as a tank transporter or train, though technological advances have made this practice less common among tracked military vehicles than it once was.

== Gallery ==
== Current manufacturers ==
The pioneer manufacturers have been replaced mostly by large tractor companies such as AGCO, Liebherr Group, John Deere, Yanmar, New Holland, Kubota, Case, Caterpillar Inc., CLAAS. Also, there are some crawler tractor companies specialising in niche markets. Examples are Otter Mfg. Co. and Struck Corporation., with many wheeled vehicle conversion kits available from the American Mattracks firm of Minnesota since the mid-1990s.

Russian off-road vehicles are built by companies such as ZZGT and Vityaz.

== In nature ==
* &quot;Navicula&quot; diatoms are known for their ability to creep about on each other and on hard surfaces such as microscope slides. It is thought that around the outside of the navicula&#x27;s shell is a girdle of protoplasm that can flow and thus act as a continuous track.

== See also ==
* Excavator
* Half-track
* Kégresse track
* Pedrail wheel
* Recreational products
* Screw-propelled vehicle
* Snowcat
* Snowmobile
* Undercarriage
* Airoll
== References ==
== External links ==
* Scale model of Hornsby Chain Tractor at 2005 Harrogate Model Engineering Show
* Dedication to the only commercially-sold Hornsby caterpillar crawler
* Hornsby Steam Chain Tractor website

=== Video clips ===
* Hornsby Chain Tractor Promotion-Video (6:17, 1908) (British Film Institute)
* Scale Model Hornsby Traktor (Stapleford Steam, Leicestershire, 2008)
* 1/3 Scale Hornsby Traktor</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q940913" start="0" end="16" title="Continuous track" label="Continuous track"/>
<link wikidata="Q940913" start="20" end="34" title="Continuous track" label="tracked treads"/>
<link wikidata="Q2583685" start="51" end="69" title="vehicle propulsion" label="vehicle propulsion"/>
<link wikidata="Q940913" start="78" end="94" title="Continuous track" label="tracked vehicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q623755" start="480" end="485" title="Belt (mechanical)" label="belts"/>
<link wikidata="Q6714735" start="489" end="505" title="synthetic rubber" label="synthetic rubber"/>
<link wikidata="Q16000047" start="559" end="581" title="agricultural machinery" label="agricultural machinery"/>
<link wikidata="Q940913" start="625" end="636" title="Continuous track" label="chain track"/>
<link wikidata="Q940913" start="701" end="718" title="Continuous track" label="caterpillar tread"/>
<link wikidata="Q940913" start="722" end="732" title="Continuous track" label="tank tread"/>
<link wikidata="Q874311" start="774" end="795" title="Heavy equipment" label="construction vehicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1184840" start="800" end="816" title="military vehicle" label="military vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q446" start="1269" end="1274" title="wheel" label="wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7326545" start="1451" end="1469" title="Hornsby &amp;amp; Sons" label="Hornsby &amp;amp; Sons"/>
<link wikidata="Q459965" start="1503" end="1530" title="Caterpillar Tractor Company" label="Caterpillar Tractor Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q12876" start="1537" end="1541" title="tank" label="tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="1559" end="1570" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q17240" start="1638" end="1648" title="snowmobile" label="snowmobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q39495" start="1651" end="1658" title="tractor" label="tractor"/>
<link wikidata="Q131677" start="1661" end="1670" title="bulldozer" label="bulldozer"/>
<link wikidata="Q182661" start="1673" end="1682" title="excavator" label="excavator"/>
<link wikidata="Q12876" start="1688" end="1692" title="tank" label="tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q270141" start="1801" end="1809" title="polymath" label="polymath"/>
<link wikidata="Q319362" start="1814" end="1827" title="George Cayley" label="George Cayley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6594410" start="1914" end="1934" title="Polish mathematician" label="Polish mathematician"/>
<link wikidata="Q331856" start="1948" end="1973" title="Józef Maria Hoene-Wroński" label="Józef Maria Hoene-Wroński"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="2056" end="2062" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3181720" start="2409" end="2423" title="John Heathcoat" label="John Heathcoat"/>
<link wikidata="Q7810397" start="2451" end="2459" title="Tiverton (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Tiverton"/>
<link wikidata="Q173242" start="2555" end="2562" title="woodcut" label="woodcut"/>
<link wikidata="Q7304620" start="3465" end="3473" title="Red Moss, Greater Manchester" label="Red Moss"/>
<link wikidata="Q4940251" start="3477" end="3492" title="Bolton-le-Moors" label="Bolton-le-Moors"/>
<link wikidata="Q15841534" start="3762" end="3779" title="dreadnaught wheel" label="dreadnaught wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6130081" start="3854" end="3867" title="James Boydell" label="James Boydell"/>
<link wikidata="Q254106" start="4081" end="4092" title="Crimean War" label="Crimean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494441" start="4649" end="4675" title="Richard Garrett &amp;amp; Sons" label="Richard Garrett &amp;amp; Sons"/>
<link wikidata="Q5075914" start="4677" end="4703" title="Charles Burrell &amp;amp; Sons" label="Charles Burrell &amp;amp; Sons"/>
<link wikidata="Q5130176" start="4708" end="4734" title="Clayton &amp;amp; Shuttleworth" label="Clayton &amp;amp; Shuttleworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1985404" start="4901" end="4921" title="Mallet&amp;#x27;s Mortar" label="Mallet&amp;#x27;s Mortar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7905205" start="5015" end="5021" title="mortar (weapon)" label="mortar"/>
<link wikidata="Q382477" start="5509" end="5522" title="steam tractor" label="steam tractor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7835" start="6166" end="6172" title="Crimea" label="Crimea"/>
<link wikidata="Q254106" start="6459" end="6470" title="Crimean War" label="Crimean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1700095" start="6472" end="6483" title="John Fowler (agricultural engineer)" label="John Fowler"/>
<link wikidata="Q431149" start="7348" end="7361" title="Fyodor Blinov" label="Fyodor Blinov"/>
<link wikidata="Q859281" start="7402" end="7407" title="wagon" label="wagon"/>
<link wikidata="Q63531700" start="7752" end="7774" title="Steam traction engines" label="Steam traction engines"/>
<link wikidata="Q215112" start="7823" end="7831" title="Boer War" label="Boer War"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="8224" end="8237" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="8242" end="8249" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q4738188" start="8881" end="8902" title="Alvin Orlando Lombard" label="Alvin Orlando Lombard"/>
<link wikidata="Q6669361" start="8911" end="8935" title="Lombard Steam Log Hauler" label="Lombard Steam Log Hauler"/>
<link wikidata="Q4027579" start="9791" end="9804" title="Benjamin Holt" label="Benjamin Holt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7326545" start="9988" end="9995" title="Richard Hornsby &amp;amp; Sons" label="Hornsby"/>
<link wikidata="Q846683" start="9999" end="10007" title="Grantham" label="Grantham"/>
<link wikidata="Q2016578" start="10297" end="10314" title="artillery tractor" label="artillery tractor"/>
<link wikidata="Q222595" start="10323" end="10335" title="British Army" label="British Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q4713735" start="10700" end="10709" title="Aldershot Garrison" label="Aldershot"/>
<link wikidata="Q459965" start="11156" end="11183" title="Caterpillar Tractor Company" label="Caterpillar Tractor Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q9293385" start="11219" end="11245" title="Holt Manufacturing Company" label="Holt Manufacturing Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q5006643" start="11254" end="11280" title="C. L. Best" label="C. L. Best Tractor Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q5051942" start="11346" end="11361" title="Caterpillar D10" label="Caterpillar D10"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11472" end="11482" title="Caterpillar D10#High Drive system" label="High Drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q102527" start="11689" end="11708" title="Robert Falcon Scott" label="Robert Falcon Scott"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11814" end="11826" title="Snow vehicle" label="Snow vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2393768" start="11875" end="11891" title="Reginald Skelton" label="Reginald Skelton"/>
<link wikidata="Q530099" start="11992" end="12027" title="Wolseley Motors" label="Wolseley Tool and Motor Car Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q127805" start="12106" end="12121" title="Herbert Ponting" label="Herbert Ponting"/>
<link wikidata="Q973919" start="12177" end="12198" title="Terra Nova Expedition" label="Terra Nova Expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q498976" start="12279" end="12300" title="Apsley Cherry-Garrard" label="Apsley Cherry-Garrard"/>
<link wikidata="Q17242" start="12620" end="12647" title="snowcat" label="ski slope grooming machines"/>
<link wikidata="Q17240" start="12649" end="12659" title="snowmobile" label="snowmobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q943358" start="12827" end="12840" title="Little Willie" label="Little Willie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3847508" start="12873" end="12887" title="Ernest Swinton" label="Ernest Swinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q335480" start="12900" end="12914" title="Maurice Hankey" label="Maurice Hankey"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="13045" end="13056" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q12876" start="13182" end="13186" title="tank" label="tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q105272093" start="13249" end="13255" title="British heavy tanks of World War I" label="Mark I"/>
<link wikidata="Q431149" start="13746" end="13770" title="Fyodor Blinov" label="Fyodor Abramovich Blinov"/>
<link wikidata="Q859281" start="13822" end="13827" title="wagon" label="wagon"/>
<link wikidata="Q39379" start="14080" end="14099" title="Scientific American" label="Scientific American"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14107" end="14123" title="Charles Dinsmoor" label="Charles Dinsmoor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1184834" start="14127" end="14147" title="Warren, Pennsylvania" label="Warren, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q997170" start="14328" end="14345" title="Waterville, Maine" label="Waterville, Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6669361" start="14382" end="14406" title="Lombard Steam Log Hauler" label="Lombard Steam Log Hauler"/>
<link wikidata="Q93301" start="14447" end="14457" title="locomotive" label="locomotive"/>
<link wikidata="Q39558" start="14809" end="14817" title="gasoline" label="gasoline"/>
<link wikidata="Q28206" start="14905" end="14919" title="Augusta, Maine" label="Augusta, Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7326545" start="14953" end="14960" title="Richard Hornsby &amp;amp; Sons" label="Hornsby"/>
<link wikidata="Q245656" start="15791" end="15800" title="cylinder (engine)" label="cylinders"/>
<link wikidata="Q13553228" start="15851" end="15861" title="motor home" label="motor home"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642029" start="15919" end="15934" title="Old Town, Maine" label="Old Town, Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3407658" start="16004" end="16011" title="tram" label="trolley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1310203" start="16681" end="16703" title="independent suspension" label="independent suspension"/>
<link wikidata="Q941081" start="16707" end="16716" title="halftrack" label="halftrack"/>
<link wikidata="Q174174" start="16742" end="16748" title="Diesel engine" label="diesel"/>
<link wikidata="Q14976" start="17428" end="17439" title="snow plow" label="snowplowing"/>
<link wikidata="Q214833" start="17457" end="17473" title="four wheel drive" label="four wheel drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q845249" start="17565" end="17572" title="logging" label="logging"/>
<link wikidata="Q44497" start="17574" end="17580" title="mining" label="mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516897" start="17600" end="17618" title="arctic exploration" label="arctic exploration"/>
<link wikidata="Q2405703" start="18347" end="18355" title="Unsprung mass" label="unsprung"/>
<link wikidata="Q217421" start="18925" end="18930" title="bogie" label="bogie"/>
<link wikidata="Q211251" start="19459" end="19473" title="shock absorber" label="shock absorber"/>
<link wikidata="Q668566" start="19476" end="19498" title="Torsion-bar suspension" label="Torsion-bar suspension"/>
<link wikidata="Q5989142" start="19734" end="19745" title="idler-wheel" label="idler-wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q12186" start="19991" end="20000" title="Panzer IV" label="Panzer IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q151221" start="20230" end="20237" title="Tiger I" label="Tiger I"/>
<link wikidata="Q151960" start="20242" end="20249" title="Panther tank" label="Panther"/>
<link wikidata="Q668566" start="20766" end="20777" title="torsion bar" label="torsion bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q17144600" start="22410" end="22421" title="drive wheel" label="drive wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154740" start="22438" end="22446" title="sprocket" label="sprocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q513614" start="23611" end="23630" title="Christie suspension" label="Christie suspension"/>
<link wikidata="Q18891017" start="23758" end="23763" title="steering" label="steer"/>
<link wikidata="Q198" start="25024" end="25039" title="military combat" label="military combat"/>
<link wikidata="Q5610964" start="25468" end="25483" title="ground pressure" label="ground pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q941081" start="25850" end="25860" title="half-track" label="half-track"/>
<link wikidata="Q365757" start="26003" end="26019" title="Adolphe Kégresse" label="Adolphe Kégresse"/>
<link wikidata="Q4367094" start="26093" end="26107" title="Kégresse track" label="Kégresse track"/>
<link wikidata="Q7087526" start="26156" end="26177" title="Oliver Farm Equipment" label="Oliver Farm Equipment"/>
<link wikidata="Q5610964" start="26483" end="26498" title="ground pressure" label="ground pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q173684" start="26516" end="26525" title="M1 Abrams" label="M1 Abrams"/>
<link wikidata="Q86518041" start="27051" end="27058" title="grouser" label="grouser"/>
<link wikidata="Q131677" start="27216" end="27225" title="Bulldozer" label="Bulldozer"/>
<link wikidata="Q217416" start="27311" end="27323" title="wheel loader" label="wheel loader"/>
<link wikidata="Q198" start="27443" end="27458" title="military combat" label="military combat"/>
<link wikidata="Q5348944" start="28961" end="28966" title="8 X 8" label="8 X 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q16259746" start="29175" end="29187" title="Transmission (mechanics)" label="transmission"/>
<link wikidata="Q2467617" start="29392" end="29408" title="tank transporter" label="tank transporter"/>
<link wikidata="Q870" start="29412" end="29417" title="train" label="train"/>
<link wikidata="Q292292" start="29665" end="29669" title="AGCO" label="AGCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q662090" start="29671" end="29685" title="Liebherr Group" label="Liebherr Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q496302" start="29687" end="29697" title="John Deere" label="John Deere"/>
<link wikidata="Q520763" start="29699" end="29705" title="Yanmar" label="Yanmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423217" start="29707" end="29718" title="New Holland Agriculture" label="New Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514221" start="29720" end="29726" title="Kubota Corporation" label="Kubota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046940" start="29728" end="29732" title="Case CE" label="Case"/>
<link wikidata="Q459965" start="29734" end="29750" title="Caterpillar Inc." label="Caterpillar Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q704756" start="29752" end="29757" title="CLAAS" label="CLAAS"/>
<link wikidata="Q17108443" start="29960" end="29969" title="Mattracks Inc." label="Mattracks"/>
<link wikidata="Q150693" start="30109" end="30117" title="Navicula" label="Navicula"/>
<link wikidata="Q162678" start="30124" end="30130" title="diatom" label="diatom"/>
<link wikidata="Q111180" start="30319" end="30329" title="protoplasm" label="protoplasm"/>
<link wikidata="Q182661" start="30398" end="30407" title="Excavator" label="Excavator"/>
<link wikidata="Q941081" start="30410" end="30420" title="Half-track" label="Half-track"/>
<link wikidata="Q4367094" start="30423" end="30437" title="Kégresse track" label="Kégresse track"/>
<link wikidata="Q7159369" start="30440" end="30453" title="Pedrail wheel" label="Pedrail wheel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30456" end="30477" title="Bombardier Recreational Products#Snowmobiles" label="Recreational products"/>
<link wikidata="Q4525831" start="30480" end="30503" title="Screw-propelled vehicle" label="Screw-propelled vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q17242" start="30506" end="30513" title="Snowcat" label="Snowcat"/>
<link wikidata="Q17240" start="30516" end="30526" title="Snowmobile" label="Snowmobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q15694042" start="30529" end="30542" title="Undercarriage (disambiguation)" label="Undercarriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q96371603" start="30545" end="30551" title="Airoll" label="Airoll"/>
<link wikidata="Q260528" start="30854" end="30876" title="British Film Institute" label="British Film Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q23106" start="30927" end="30941" title="Leicestershire" label="Leicestershire"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="125372" wikidata="Q3016070" url="?curid=125372" title="West Amwell Township, New Jersey">
<text>West Amwell Township is a township in Hunterdon County, in the U.S. state of New Jersey. As of the 2020 United States census, the township&#x27;s population was 3,005, a decrease of 835 (−21.7%) from the 2010 census count of 3,840, which in turn reflected an increase of 1,457 (+61.1%) from the 2,383 counted in the 2000 census.

West Amwell was incorporated as a township by an act of the New Jersey Legislature on April 6, 1846, when Amwell Township was split, also creating East Amwell Township at the same time. Portions of the township were taken to form Lambertville town on March 1, 1849. In 1896, the township annexed portions of Delaware Township, East Amwell Township and Raritan Township. The township was named for Amwell Township, which in turn was named for Great Amwell/Little Amwell, Hertfordshire in England.

==History==
The earliest settlers of the area were the Delaware Native Americans, who had a path through the woods from Lambertville through Mount Airy, Ringoes and Reaville to Newark which would later become the route followed by the Old York Road.

In 1935, local farmers signed a declaration against the Potato Control Law, which established federal controls on the growth of the crop, stating &quot;[t]hat we protest against and declare that we will not be bound by the &#x27;Potato Control Law,&#x27; an unconstitutional measure recently enacted by the United States Congress. We shall produce on our own land such potatoes as we may wish to produce and will dispose of them in such manner as we may deem proper.&quot;

==Geography==
The northern areas of West Amwell are in Amwell Valley, while the southern sections are in The Sourlands region. The Delaware River separates West Amwell from the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.

According to the United States Census Bureau, the township had a total area of 21.84 square miles (56.58 km2), including 21.65 square miles (56.07 km2) of land and 0.20 square miles (0.51 km2) of water (0.90%).

Unincorporated communities, localities and place names located partially or completely within the township include Alexauken, Bowlryville, Bowne, Linvale (historically known as New Market), Mount Airy, Oakdale and Rocktown.

The township borders Delaware Township, East Amwell Township and Lambertville in Hunterdon County; Hopewell Township, in Mercer County; along with New Hope and Solebury Township across the Delaware River in Bucks County in Pennsylvania.

==Demographics==
===2010 census===
The 2010 United States census counted 3,840 people, 1,102 households, and 839 families in the township. The population density was . There were 1,157 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup was 82.58% (3,171) White, 13.39% (514) Black or African American, 0.05% (2) Native American, 1.46% (56) Asian, 0.05% (2) Pacific Islander, 1.12% (43) from other races, and 1.35% (52) from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 4.84% (186) of the population.

Of the 1,102 households, 30.9% had children under the age of 18; 66.9% were married couples living together; 5.2% had a female householder with no husband present and 23.9% were non-families. Of all households, 19.5% were made up of individuals and 9.2% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.58 and the average family size was 2.95.

16.5% of the population were under the age of 18, 11.8% from 18 to 24, 30.1% from 25 to 44, 30.2% from 45 to 64, and 11.4% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 40.8 years. For every 100 females, the population had 155.1 males. For every 100 females ages 18 and older there were 165.5 males.

The Census Bureau&#x27;s 2006–2010 American Community Survey showed that (in 2010 inflation-adjusted dollars) median household income was $101,094 (with a margin of error of +/− $16,403) and the median family income was $115,595 (+/− $19,328). Males had a median income of $86,875 (+/− $26,080) versus $53,438 (+/− $17,350) for females. The per capita income for the borough was $54,485 (+/− $9,741). About 4.2% of families and 4.4% of the population were below the poverty line, including 3.2% of those under age 18 and 4.9% of those age 65 or over.

===2000 census===
As of the 2000 United States census there were 2,383 people, 949 households, and 696 families residing in the township. The population density was . There were 984 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the township was 98.07% White, 0.63% African American, 0.08% Native American, 0.71% Asian, 0.04% from other races, and 0.46% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 0.71% of the population.

There were 949 households, out of which 29.1% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 65.3% were married couples living together, 5.1% had a female householder with no husband present, and 26.6% were non-families. 21.3% of all households were made up of individuals, and 8.7% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.51 and the average family size was 2.93.

In the township, the population was spread out, with 21.1% under the age of 18, 4.5% from 18 to 24, 28.3% from 25 to 44, 32.1% from 45 to 64, and 13.8% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 43 years. For every 100 females, there were 100.3 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 101.2 males.

The median income for a household in the township was $73,380, and the median income for a family was $79,605. Males had a median income of $49,539 versus $33,333 for females. The per capita income for the township was $33,877. About 0.6% of families and 1.6% of the population were below the poverty line, including none of those under age 18 and 1.2% of those age 65 or over.

== Government ==

===Local government===
West Amwell Township is governed under the Township form of New Jersey municipal government, one of 141 municipalities (of the 564) statewide that use this form, the second-most commonly used form of government in the state. The governing body is comprised of a three-member Township Committee, whose members are elected directly by the voters at-large in partisan elections to serve three-year terms of office on a staggered basis, with either one seat coming up for election each year as part of the November general election in a three-year cycle. At an annual reorganization meeting, the Township Committee selects one of its members to serve as Mayor and another as Deputy Mayor for terms of one year.

, members of the West Amwell Township Committee are Mayor Gary Hoyer (R, term on committee ends December 31, 2024; term as mayor ends 2023), Deputy Mayor Stephen Bergenfeld (R, term on committee ends 2024; term as deputy mayor ends 2023), James Cally (R, 2025), John C. Dale (R, 2023) and Megan Hudson (D, 2025).

After voters passed a non-binding referendum in November 2014 supporting the expansion of the Township Committee from three to five members, the Township Committee addressed the process of following through with the expansion, which would involve gathering petitions of 147 voters after which the committee could approve the expansion or a referendum could be put on the ballot. In February 2016, the Township Committee voted to approve the expansion by ordinance.

=== Federal, state and county representation ===
West Amwell Township is located in the 7th Congressional District and is part of New Jersey&#x27;s 15th state legislative district.



===Politics===
As of March 2011, there were a total of 2,071 registered voters in West Amwell Township, of which 498 (24.0%) were registered as Democrats, 830 (40.1%) were registered as Republicans and 741 (35.8%) were registered as Unaffiliated. There were 2 voters registered as either Libertarians or Greens.

In the 2012 presidential election, Republican Mitt Romney received 52.3% of the vote (827 cast), ahead of Democrat Barack Obama with 46.4% (733 votes), and other candidates with 1.3% (20 votes), among the 1,587 ballots cast by the township&#x27;s 2,178 registered voters (7 ballots were spoiled), for a turnout of 72.9%. In the 2008 presidential election, Republican John McCain received 50.8% of the vote (878 cast), ahead of Democrat Barack Obama with 47.1% (814 votes) and other candidates with 1.4% (24 votes), among the 1,730 ballots cast by the township&#x27;s 2,101 registered voters, for a turnout of 82.3%. In the 2004 presidential election, Republican George W. Bush received 55.6% of the vote (899 ballots cast), outpolling Democrat John Kerry with 43.2% (698 votes) and other candidates with 1.1% (22 votes), among the 1,616 ballots cast by the township&#x27;s 1,940 registered voters, for a turnout percentage of 83.3.




In the 2013 gubernatorial election, Republican Chris Christie received 70.9% of the vote (675 cast), ahead of Democrat Barbara Buono with 26.2% (249 votes), and other candidates with 2.9% (28 votes), among the 979 ballots cast by the township&#x27;s 2,149 registered voters (27 ballots were spoiled), for a turnout of 45.6%. In the 2009 gubernatorial election, Republican Chris Christie received 56.7% of the vote (764 ballots cast), ahead of Democrat Jon Corzine with 34.3% (462 votes), Independent Chris Daggett with 6.6% (89 votes) and other candidates with 0.4% (6 votes), among the 1,348 ballots cast by the township&#x27;s 2,074 registered voters, yielding a 65.0% turnout.

== Education == 
The South Hunterdon Regional School District serves students in pre-kindergarten through twelfth grade from Lambertville, Stockton and West Amwell Township. Each of the three municipalities had their own school through sixth grade, until the Stockton school was closed after the end of the 2017–18 school year; public school students in seventh through twelfth grades attend a shared high school in Lambertville. As of the 2022–23 school year, the district, comprised of three schools, had an enrollment of 827 students and 108.1 classroom teachers (on an FTE basis), for a student–teacher ratio of 7.7:1. Schools in the district (with 2022–23 enrollment data from the National Center for Education Statistics) are
South Hunterdon Regional Elementary School for grades PreK–4 (was Lambertville Public School, which had 221 students in grades PreK–6),
South Hunterdon Regional Middle School for grades 5–8 (was West Amwell School, with 170 students in grades K–6) and 
South Hunterdon Regional High School for grades 9–12 (which had 417 students in grades 7–12). The township is assigned three of the nine seats on the regional district&#x27;s board of education.

In a special election held in September 2013, voters from Lambertville, Stockton and West Amwell Township passed referendums to dissolve the South Hunterdon Regional High School District and to combine the three existing school districts from each municipality (Lambertville City School District, Stockton Borough School District and West Amwell Township School District), with majorities in each community passing both ballot items. A single combined regional Pre-K–12 district was created, with property taxes levied under a formula in which 57% is based on property values and 43% on the number of students. The executive county superintendent appointed an interim board of education for the new regional district, which was responsible for implementing the merger.

Eighth grade students from all of Hunterdon County are eligible to apply to attend the high school programs offered by the Hunterdon County Vocational School District, a county-wide vocational school district that offers career and technical education at its campuses in Raritan Township and at programs sited at local high schools, with no tuition charged to students for attendance.

==Historic district==
The Pleasant Valley Historic District is a historic district located along Pleasant Valley Road, Valley Road, Woodens Lane and Hunter Road in the community of Pleasant Valley in Hopewell Township in Mercer County that extends into West Amwell Township. The district was added to the National Register of Historic Places on June 14, 1991, for its significance in agriculture, architecture, and exploration/settlement. It includes 52 contributing buildings, 7 contributing structures, and 22 contributing sites.

Central to the district is the Howell Living History Farm, which is a living open-air museum located in the Hopewell Township side of the district, just north of Titusville. The farm was added to the National Register of Historic Places on May 2, 1977, for its significance in agriculture and architecture. The farm was included in the Pleasant Valley Historic District on June 14, 1991. The farm was first created by Joseph Phillips, a blacksmith, who purchased from William Bryant in 1732. By 1800, Henry Phillips, Joseph&#x27;s son, had enlarged the farm by . The current buildings on the property date to the 19th century, primarily before the American Civil War. The final private owner of the farm was the Howell family, who donated the land to Mercer County in 1974 for use as a museum. The museum shows farm life from the year 1900.

==Transportation==
===Roads and highways===
, the township had a total of of roadways, of which were maintained by the municipality, by Hunterdon County and by the New Jersey Department of Transportation.

Route 29 passes through the southwestern part of the municipality, but without any roads that connect to the heart of the township. Route 31 passes along the eastern border with East Amwell. Route 179 and U.S. Route 202 pass through around the northwestern part of the municipality. Major county roads that go through the township include County Route 518 and County Route 579. The closest interstate highway is Interstate 295 which is outside the township in neighboring Hopewell.

===Public transportation===
NJ Transit offers bus service to Trenton on the 608 route.

==References==
==External links==

*West Amwell Township website
*South Hunterdon Regional School District
*School Data for the South Hunterdon Regional School District, National Center for Education Statistics
*Hunterdon Land Trust Alliance</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3016070" start="0" end="20" title="West Amwell Township, New Jersey" label="West Amwell Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q7830213" start="26" end="34" title="Township (New Jersey)" label="township"/>
<link wikidata="Q502451" start="38" end="54" title="Hunterdon County, New Jersey" label="Hunterdon County"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="63" end="73" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="77" end="87" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="99" end="124" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="204" end="215" title="2010 United States census" label="2010 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q166998" start="316" end="327" title="2000 United States census" label="2000 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2867079" start="390" end="412" title="New Jersey Legislature" label="New Jersey Legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q4749037" start="436" end="451" title="Amwell Township, New Jersey" label="Amwell Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q3016094" start="477" end="497" title="East Amwell Township, New Jersey" label="East Amwell Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086436" start="560" end="577" title="Lambertville, New Jersey" label="Lambertville town"/>
<link wikidata="Q614185" start="638" end="655" title="Delaware Township, Hunterdon County, New Jersey" label="Delaware Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q3017068" start="682" end="698" title="Raritan Township, New Jersey" label="Raritan Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q4749041" start="772" end="784" title="Great Amwell" label="Great Amwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q24640646" start="785" end="798" title="Little Amwell" label="Little Amwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q82048" start="882" end="890" title="Delaware (tribe)" label="Delaware"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="891" end="907" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="Native Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086436" start="947" end="959" title="Lambertville, New Jersey" label="Lambertville"/>
<link wikidata="Q11183236" start="980" end="987" title="Ringoes, New Jersey" label="Ringoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q25395" start="1004" end="1010" title="Newark, New Jersey" label="Newark"/>
<link wikidata="Q3399959" start="1134" end="1152" title="Potato Control Law" label="Potato Control Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q4749038" start="1607" end="1620" title="Amwell Valley" label="Amwell Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7765535" start="1657" end="1670" title="The Sourlands" label="The Sourlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q143762" start="1683" end="1697" title="Delaware River" label="Delaware River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400" start="1729" end="1757" title="Pennsylvania" label="Commonwealth of Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="1777" end="1804" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1972" end="1998" title="Local government in New Jersey#Unincorporated communities" label="Unincorporated communities"/>
<link wikidata="Q3016070" start="2087" end="2096" title="Alexauken, New Jersey" label="Alexauken"/>
<link wikidata="Q19059390" start="2111" end="2116" title="Bowne, New Jersey" label="Bowne"/>
<link wikidata="Q20657190" start="2118" end="2125" title="Linvale, New Jersey" label="Linvale"/>
<link wikidata="Q20657379" start="2162" end="2172" title="Mount Airy, New Jersey" label="Mount Airy"/>
<link wikidata="Q614185" start="2218" end="2235" title="Delaware Township, Hunterdon County, New Jersey" label="Delaware Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q3016094" start="2237" end="2257" title="East Amwell Township, New Jersey" label="East Amwell Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086436" start="2262" end="2274" title="Lambertville, New Jersey" label="Lambertville"/>
<link wikidata="Q5900433" start="2296" end="2313" title="Hopewell Township, Mercer County, New Jersey" label="Hopewell Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q496886" start="2318" end="2331" title="Mercer County, New Jersey" label="Mercer County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1182069" start="2344" end="2352" title="New Hope, Pennsylvania" label="New Hope"/>
<link wikidata="Q46211" start="2357" end="2374" title="Solebury Township, Pennsylvania" label="Solebury Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q143762" start="2386" end="2400" title="Delaware River" label="Delaware River"/>
<link wikidata="Q494192" start="2404" end="2416" title="Bucks County, Pennsylvania" label="Bucks County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400" start="2420" end="2432" title="Pennsylvania" label="Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="2474" end="2499" title="2010 United States census" label="2010 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2698" end="2703" title="White (U.S. census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2718" end="2743" title="Black (U.S. census)" label="Black or African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2755" end="2770" title="Native American (U.S. census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2783" end="2788" title="Asian (U.S. census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2800" end="2816" title="Pacific Islander (U.S. census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2834" end="2845" title="Race and ethnicity in the United States census#Race" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2886" end="2904" title="Hispanic (U.S. census)" label="Hispanic or Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q463769" start="3686" end="3711" title="American Community Survey" label="American Community Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q311198" start="3733" end="3751" title="inflation adjustment" label="inflation-adjusted"/>
<link wikidata="Q1940707" start="3761" end="3784" title="median household income" label="median household income"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="3992" end="4009" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="4117" end="4129" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q166998" start="4231" end="4256" title="2000 United States census" label="2000 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4471" end="4476" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4484" end="4500" title="African American (U.S. Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4508" end="4523" title="Native American (U.S. Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4531" end="4536" title="Asian (U.S. Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4549" end="4560" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4596" end="4604" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4608" end="4614" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="4766" end="4781" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="5586" end="5603" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="5699" end="5711" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q7830213" start="5869" end="5877" title="Township (New Jersey)" label="Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q3682992" start="6170" end="6178" title="at-large" label="at-large"/>
<link wikidata="Q30185" start="6586" end="6591" title="Mayor" label="Mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="6604" end="6605" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="R"/>
<link wikidata="Q581817" start="6675" end="6687" title="Deputy Mayor" label="Deputy Mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="6837" end="6838" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="D"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="7642" end="7651" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="7684" end="7695" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republicans"/>
<link wikidata="Q5354776" start="7731" end="7743" title="Unaffiliated (New Jersey)" label="Unaffiliated"/>
<link wikidata="Q558334" start="7786" end="7798" title="Libertarian Party (United States)" label="Libertarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q849158" start="7802" end="7808" title="Green Party (United States)" label="Greens"/>
<link wikidata="Q17100287" start="7818" end="7844" title="United States presidential election in New Jersey, 2012" label="2012 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q4496" start="7857" end="7868" title="Mitt Romney" label="Mitt Romney"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="7926" end="7938" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738441" start="8098" end="8105" title="Spoilt vote" label="spoiled"/>
<link wikidata="Q16959334" start="8139" end="8165" title="United States presidential election in New Jersey, 2008" label="2008 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q10390" start="8178" end="8189" title="John McCain" label="John McCain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892945" start="8434" end="8460" title="United States presidential election in New Jersey, 2004" label="2004 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="8473" end="8487" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q22316" start="8555" end="8565" title="John Kerry" label="John Kerry"/>
<link wikidata="Q15134831" start="8754" end="8781" title="New Jersey gubernatorial election, 2013" label="2013 gubernatorial election"/>
<link wikidata="Q63879" start="8794" end="8808" title="Chris Christie" label="Chris Christie"/>
<link wikidata="Q4858790" start="8866" end="8879" title="Barbara Buono" label="Barbara Buono"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586264" start="9079" end="9106" title="New Jersey gubernatorial election, 2009" label="2009 gubernatorial election"/>
<link wikidata="Q380570" start="9199" end="9210" title="Jon Corzine" label="Jon Corzine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5106343" start="9247" end="9260" title="Chris Daggett" label="Chris Daggett"/>
<link wikidata="Q18648781" start="9449" end="9489" title="South Hunterdon Regional School District" label="South Hunterdon Regional School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q7239239" start="9509" end="9525" title="pre-kindergarten" label="pre-kindergarten"/>
<link wikidata="Q986388" start="9534" end="9547" title="twelfth grade" label="twelfth grade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086436" start="9553" end="9565" title="Lambertville, New Jersey" label="Lambertville"/>
<link wikidata="Q46216" start="9567" end="9575" title="Stockton, New Jersey" label="Stockton"/>
<link wikidata="Q43791171" start="9782" end="9789" title="seventh grade" label="seventh"/>
<link wikidata="Q986388" start="9798" end="9811" title="twelfth grade" label="twelfth grade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543700" start="10001" end="10004" title="full-time equivalent" label="FTE"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595370" start="10019" end="10040" title="student–teacher ratio" label="student–teacher ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1966994" start="10114" end="10154" title="National Center for Education Statistics" label="National Center for Education Statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7567513" start="10413" end="10449" title="South Hunterdon Regional High School" label="South Hunterdon Regional High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q399541" start="10588" end="10606" title="board of education" label="board of education"/>
<link wikidata="Q6481393" start="10871" end="10904" title="Lambertville City School District" label="Lambertville City School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q7618221" start="10906" end="10938" title="Stockton Borough School District" label="Stockton Borough School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q7984307" start="10943" end="10979" title="West Amwell Township School District" label="West Amwell Township School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q5944694" start="11502" end="11545" title="Hunterdon County Vocational School District" label="Hunterdon County Vocational School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q3017068" start="11650" end="11666" title="Raritan Township, New Jersey" label="Raritan Township"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11791" end="11824" title="Pleasant Valley, Mercer County, New Jersey#Historic district" label="Pleasant Valley Historic District"/>
<link wikidata="Q1620797" start="11830" end="11847" title="historic district (United States)" label="historic district"/>
<link wikidata="Q20657577" start="11946" end="11961" title="Pleasant Valley, Mercer County, New Jersey" label="Pleasant Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5900433" start="11965" end="11982" title="Hopewell Township, Mercer County, New Jersey" label="Hopewell Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q496886" start="11986" end="11999" title="Mercer County, New Jersey" label="Mercer County"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719" start="12070" end="12106" title="National Register of Historic Places" label="National Register of Historic Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q76321820" start="12219" end="12241" title="contributing buildings" label="contributing buildings"/>
<link wikidata="Q5921752" start="12329" end="12355" title="Howell Living History Farm" label="Howell Living History Farm"/>
<link wikidata="Q756102" start="12375" end="12390" title="open-air museum" label="open-air museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7810345" start="12460" end="12470" title="Titusville, New Jersey" label="Titusville"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719" start="12498" end="12534" title="National Register of Historic Places" label="National Register of Historic Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="12946" end="12964" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q496886" start="13049" end="13062" title="Mercer County, New Jersey" label="Mercer County"/>
<link wikidata="Q867675" start="13304" end="13343" title="New Jersey Department of Transportation" label="New Jersey Department of Transportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q822300" start="13346" end="13354" title="New Jersey Route 29" label="Route 29"/>
<link wikidata="Q822339" start="13478" end="13486" title="New Jersey Route 31" label="Route 31"/>
<link wikidata="Q827445" start="13537" end="13546" title="New Jersey Route 179" label="Route 179"/>
<link wikidata="Q811458" start="13551" end="13565" title="U.S. Route 202 in New Jersey" label="U.S. Route 202"/>
<link wikidata="Q858853" start="13685" end="13701" title="County Route 518 (New Jersey)" label="County Route 518"/>
<link wikidata="Q859457" start="13706" end="13722" title="County Route 579 (New Jersey)" label="County Route 579"/>
<link wikidata="Q798013" start="13758" end="13772" title="Interstate 295 (Delaware–Pennsylvania)" label="Interstate 295"/>
<link wikidata="Q498553" start="13857" end="13867" title="NJ Transit" label="NJ Transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q25330" start="13890" end="13897" title="Trenton, New Jersey" label="Trenton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6591822" start="13905" end="13908" title="608 (New Jersey bus)" label="608"/>
<link wikidata="Q1966994" start="14087" end="14127" title="National Center for Education Statistics" label="National Center for Education Statistics"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="125374" wikidata="Q1088302" url="?curid=125374" title="Whitehouse Station, New Jersey">
<text>Whitehouse Station, also spelled White House Station, is an unincorporated community and census-designated place (CDP) located within Readington Township, in Hunterdon County, New Jersey. At the 2010 United States Census, the CDP&#x27;s population was 2,089. Whitehouse Station takes its name from Whitehouse and Abraham Van Horne&#x27;s 18th century tavern.

New Jersey Transit offers service on the Raritan Valley Line at White House Station.

==History==
The area, which is now served only by New Jersey Transit&#x27;s Raritan Valley Line, used to be a railroad junction, serving as the endpoint of the ill-fated Rockaway Valley Railroad, which ceased operation in 1913.

Whitehouse Station was home to the global headquarters of pharmaceutical giant Merck, which was housed in the modernist Merck Headquarters Building for more than two decades. Merck has shifted its base of operations to Rahway.

On April 5, 2024, at 10:23 AM, the community was struck by a magnitude 4.8 earthquake. The quake saw no major damage and no injuries. At 5:59 PM, on the same day, a second earthquake recorded at magnitude 3.8 struck east of the community in Gladstone, New Jersey.

==Geography==
According to the United States Census Bureau, the CDP had a total area of , including of land and of water (3.20%).

==Demographics==
===2010 census===

The 2010 United States census counted 2,089 people, 963 households, and 553 families in the CDP. The population density was . There were 989 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup was 91.53% (1,912) White, 2.82% (59) Black or African American, 0.05% (1) Native American, 3.06% (64) Asian, 0.00% (0) Pacific Islander, 1.15% (24) from other races, and 1.39% (29) from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 5.27% (110) of the population.

Of the 963 households, 23.2% had children under the age of 18; 46.0% were married couples living together; 8.9% had a female householder with no husband present and 42.6% were non-families. Of all households, 37.1% were made up of individuals and 17.1% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.17 and the average family size was 2.87.

19.6% of the population were under the age of 18, 4.3% from 18 to 24, 23.1% from 25 to 44, 31.5% from 45 to 64, and 21.4% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 46.6 years. For every 100 females, the population had 82.6 males. For every 100 females ages 18 and older there were 77.3 males.

===2000 census===
At the 2000 United States Census there were 1,951 people, 878 households and 531 families living in the CDP. The population density was . There were 905 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the CDP was 96.05% White, 0.87% African American, 0.97% Asian, 0.56% from other races, and 1.54% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 2.56% of the population.

There were 878 households, of which 24.9% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 47.4% were married couples living together, 10.4% had a female householder with no husband present, and 39.5% were non-families. 34.1% of all households were made up of individuals, and 11.3% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.22 and the average family size was 2.86.

Age distribution was 19.9% under the age of 18, 5.1% from 18 to 24, 33.5% from 25 to 44, 26.4% from 45 to 64, and 15.1% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 40 years. For every 100 females there were 87.4 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 79.7 males.

The median household income was $75,111, and the median family income was $92,793. Males had a median income of $60,673 versus $43,438 for females. The per capita income for the CDP was $38,627. None of the families and 1.4% of the population were living below the poverty line, including no under eighteens and 2.9% of those over 64.

==Points of interest==
There are several nearby points of interest.

* The Rockaway Reformed Church is the third building of the congregation founded in Whitehouse.
* Memorial Park Cemetery in Whitehouse is near the site of Abraham Van Horne&#x27;s &quot;White House&quot; tavern. It is maintained by the local chapter of the Daughters of the American Revolution.
* The Whitehouse–Mechanicsville Historic District was added to the National Register of Historic Places in 2015 for its significance in architecture and community development.

==Notable people==

People who were born in, residents of, or otherwise closely associated with Whitehouse Station include:
* Taissa Farmiga (born 1994), actress.
* Robyn Kenney (born 1979), field hockey player.
* Tom Malloy (born 1974), actor and filmmaker.
* Ed Martin, politician who served as Chair of the Missouri Republican Party.
* James N. Pidcock (1836–1899), represented in the United States House of Representatives from 1885 to 1889.

==References==
==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1088302" start="0" end="18" title="Whitehouse Station, New Jersey" label="Whitehouse Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088302" start="33" end="52" title="Whitehouse Station, New Jersey" label="White House Station"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="60" end="84" title="Local government in New Jersey#Unincorporated communities" label="unincorporated community"/>
<link wikidata="Q498162" start="89" end="112" title="census-designated place" label="census-designated place"/>
<link wikidata="Q3017759" start="134" end="153" title="Readington Township, New Jersey" label="Readington Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q502451" start="158" end="186" title="Hunterdon County, New Jersey" label="Hunterdon County, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="195" end="220" title="2010 United States Census" label="2010 United States Census"/>
<link wikidata="Q7996090" start="298" end="308" title="Whitehouse, New Jersey" label="Whitehouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q498553" start="360" end="378" title="New Jersey Transit" label="New Jersey Transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7294577" start="401" end="420" title="Raritan Valley Line" label="Raritan Valley Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q7994852" start="424" end="443" title="White House (NJT station)" label="White House Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q7354963" start="616" end="640" title="Rockaway Valley Railroad" label="Rockaway Valley Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q247489" start="754" end="759" title="Merck &amp;amp; Co." label="Merck"/>
<link wikidata="Q6818514" start="795" end="822" title="Merck Headquarters Building" label="Merck Headquarters Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003082" start="894" end="900" title="Rahway, New Jersey" label="Rahway"/>
<link wikidata="Q125349769" start="962" end="988" title="2024 New Jersey earthquake" label="a magnitude 4.8 earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q3476628" start="1144" end="1165" title="Gladstone, New Jersey" label="Gladstone, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="1199" end="1226" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="1339" end="1364" title="2010 United States census" label="2010 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="1436" end="1454" title="population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1554" end="1559" title="White (U.S. census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1572" end="1597" title="Black (U.S. census)" label="Black or African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1609" end="1624" title="Native American (U.S. census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1637" end="1642" title="Asian (U.S. census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1654" end="1670" title="Pacific Islander (U.S. census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1688" end="1699" title="Race and ethnicity in the United States census#Race" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1740" end="1758" title="Hispanic (U.S. census)" label="Hispanic or Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q166998" start="2526" end="2551" title="2000 United States Census" label="2000 United States Census"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="2632" end="2650" title="population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2753" end="2758" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2766" end="2782" title="African American (U.S. Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2790" end="2795" title="Asian (U.S. Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2808" end="2819" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2855" end="2863" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2867" end="2873" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="3021" end="3036" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="3780" end="3797" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="3893" end="3905" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541947" start="4290" end="4326" title="Daughters of the American Revolution" label="Daughters of the American Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q27048710" start="4334" end="4377" title="Whitehouse–Mechanicsville Historic District" label="Whitehouse–Mechanicsville Historic District"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719" start="4395" end="4431" title="National Register of Historic Places" label="National Register of Historic Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q389017" start="4631" end="4645" title="Taissa Farmiga" label="Taissa Farmiga"/>
<link wikidata="Q7353605" start="4670" end="4682" title="Robyn Kenney" label="Robyn Kenney"/>
<link wikidata="Q7816696" start="4719" end="4729" title="Tom Malloy" label="Tom Malloy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5335120" start="4766" end="4775" title="Ed Martin (Missouri politician)" label="Ed Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6879610" start="4815" end="4840" title="Missouri Republican Party" label="Missouri Republican Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1680876" start="4844" end="4860" title="James N. Pidcock" label="James N. Pidcock"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="4893" end="4931" title="United States House of Representatives" label="United States House of Representatives"/>
</links>
</doc>
