<doc id="1329090" wikidata="Q5152" url="?curid=1329090" title="Mustafa Kemal Atatürk">
<text>Mustafa Kemal Atatürk, also known as Mustafa Kemal Pasha until 1921, and Ghazi Mustafa Kemal from 1921 until the Surname Law of 1934 ( 1881 – 10 November 1938), was a Turkish field marshal, revolutionary statesman, author, and a founding father of the Republic of Turkey, serving as its first president from 1923 until his death in 1938. He undertook sweeping progressive reforms, which modernized Turkey into a secular, industrializing nation. Ideologically a secularist and nationalist, his policies and socio-political theories became known as Kemalism (Atatürkism).

Atatürk began his revolutionary career in the Ottoman Empire as a Young Turk when he joined the Committee of Union and Progress, playing an important part in the 31 March Incident. He came to prominence for his role in securing the Ottoman victory at the Battle of Gallipoli (1915) during World War I. During this time, the Ottoman Empire perpetrated genocides against its Greek, Armenian and Assyrian subjects; Atatürk&#x27;s role in their aftermath was the subject of discussion. Following the defeat of the Ottoman Empire after World War I, he led the Turkish National Movement, which resisted the Empire&#x27;s partition among the victorious Allied powers. Establishing a provisional government in the present-day Turkish capital Ankara, he defeated the forces sent by the Allies, thus emerging victorious from what was later referred to as the Turkish War of Independence. He subsequently proceeded to abolish the Ottoman sultanate in 1922 and proclaimed the foundation of the Turkish Republic in its place the following year.

As the president of the newly formed Turkish Republic, Atatürk initiated a rigorous program of political, economic, and cultural reforms with the ultimate aim of building a republican and secular nation-state. He made primary education free and compulsory, opening thousands of new schools all over the country. He also introduced the Latin-based Turkish alphabet, replacing the old Ottoman Turkish alphabet. Turkish women received equal civil and political rights during Atatürk&#x27;s presidency. In particular, women were given voting rights in local elections by Act no. 1580 on 3 April 1930 and a few years later, in 1934, full universal suffrage. His government carried out a policy of Turkification, trying to create a homogeneous, unified and above all secular nation under the Turkish banner. Under Atatürk, the minorities in Turkey were ordered to speak Turkish in public, but were allowed to maintain their own languages in private and within their own communities; non-Turkish toponyms were replaced and non-Turkish families were ordered to adopt a Turkish surname. The Turkish Parliament granted him the surname Atatürk in 1934, which means &quot;Father of the Turks&quot;, in recognition of the role he played in building the modern Turkish Republic. He died on 10 November 1938 at Dolmabahçe Palace in Istanbul, at the age of 57; he was succeeded as president by his long-time prime minister İsmet İnönü, and was honored with a state funeral.

In 1981, the centennial of Atatürk&#x27;s birth, his memory was honoured by the United Nations and UNESCO, which declared it &quot;The Atatürk Year in the World&quot; and adopted the Resolution on the Atatürk Centennial, describing him as &quot;the leader of the first struggle given against colonialism and imperialism&quot; and a &quot;remarkable promoter of the sense of understanding between peoples and durable peace between the nations of the world and that he worked all his life for the development of harmony and cooperation between peoples without distinction&quot;. Atatürk was also credited for his peace-in-the-world oriented foreign policy and friendship with neighboring countries such as Iran, Yugoslavia, Iraq, and Greece, as well as the creation of the Balkan Pact that resisted the expansionist aggressions of Fascist Italy and Tsarist Bulgaria.

==Name==
Atatürk was born Mustafa. His second name Kemal (meaning &quot;perfection&quot; or &quot;maturity&quot; in Arabic) was given to him by his mathematics teacher, Captain Üsküplü Mustafa Efendi. According to Afet İnan, his teacher gave this name &quot;in admiration of [Atatürk&#x27;s] capability and maturity.&quot; According to other sources, his teacher wanted to distinguish Atatürk from another student who was also named Mustafa. Andrew Mango suggests that he may have chosen the name himself as a tribute to the nationalist poet Namık Kemal. According to Alkan, Atatürk seems to have embraced the name Kemal during his army years.

After receiving the surname Atatürk on his first ID card in 1934, his name appeared as Kemal Atatürk, while the given name Mustafa had disappeared altogether. In February 1935, Atatürk began to use the Old Turkic name Kamâl. According to &quot;Tarama Dergisi&quot; (1934), &quot;kamal&quot; meant &quot;fortification&quot;, &quot;fortress&quot;, &quot;army&quot;, and &quot;shield&quot;. On 4 February 1935, the government&#x27;s official news agency Anadolu Agency gave the following explanation:

However, Atatürk returned to the old spelling of Kemal from May 1937 and onwards. To make a soft transition, he avoided using the name as much as he could, either by not using it at all or by signing documents as &#x27;K. Atatürk&#x27;. An official explanation was never given, but it is widely agreed that the issue with Atatürk&#x27;s name was linked to the Turkish language reform.

==Early life==
Atatürk was born either in the Ahmet Subaşı neighbourhood or at a house (preserved as a museum) in Islahhane Street (now Apostolou Pavlou Street) in the Koca Kasım Pasha neighbourhood in Salonica (), Ottoman Empire. His parents were Ali Rıza Efendi, a military officer originally from Kodžadžik (), title deed clerk and lumber trader, and Zübeyde Hanım. Only one of Mustafa&#x27;s siblings, a sister named Makbule (Atadan) survived childhood; she died in 1956.

Claims and theories about Atatürk&#x27;s ancestry are strikingly varied and contrasting. According to Andrew Mango, his family was Muslim, Turkish-speaking and precariously middle-class. His father Ali Rıza is thought to have been of Albanian origin by some authors; however, according to Falih Rıfkı Atay, Vamık D. Volkan, Norman Itzkowitz, Müjgân Cunbur, Numan Kartal and Hasan İzzettin Dinamo, Ali Rıza&#x27;s ancestors were Turks, ultimately descending from Söke in Aydın Province of Anatolia. His mother Zübeyde is thought to have been of Turkish origin, and according to Şevket Süreyya Aydemir, she was of Turkic Yörük ancestry. According to some various claims, she descended from Albanians, Macedonian Torbeši, or Muslim Bulgarians. Due to the large Jewish community of Salonica in the Ottoman period, many of his Islamist opponents who were disturbed by his reforms claimed that Atatürk had Jewish Dönme ancestors.

In his early years, his mother encouraged Atatürk to attend a religious school, something he did reluctantly and only briefly. Later, he attended the Şemsi Efendi School (a private school with a more secular curriculum) at the direction of his father. When he was seven years old, his father died. His mother wanted him to learn a trade, but without consulting them, Atatürk took the entrance exam for the Salonica Military School (&quot;Selanik Askeri Rüştiyesi&quot;) in 1893. In 1896, he enrolled in the Monastir Military High School (in modern Bitola, North Macedonia) where he excelled at mathematics. On 14 March 1899, he enrolled at the Ottoman Military Academy in the neighbourhood of Pangaltı within the Şişli district of the Ottoman capital city Constantinople (modern Istanbul) and graduated in 1902. He later graduated from the Ottoman Military College in Constantinople on 11 January 1905.

==Military career==
===Early years===
Shortly after graduation, he was arrested by the police for his anti-monarchist activities. Following confinement for several months he was released only with the support of Rıza Pasha, his former school director. After his release, Atatürk was assigned to the Fifth Army based in Damascus as a Staff Captain in the company of Ali Fuat (Cebesoy) and Lütfi Müfit (Özdeş). He joined a small secret revolutionary society of reformist officers led by a merchant Mustafa Elvan (Cantekin) called Vatan ve Hürriyet (&quot;Motherland and Liberty&quot;). On 20 June 1907, he was promoted to the rank of Senior Captain (&quot;Kolağası&quot;) and on 13 October 1907, was assigned to the headquarters of the Third Army in Manastır. He joined the Committee of Union and Progress, with membership number 322, although in later years he became known for his opposition to, and frequent criticism of, the policies pursued by the CUP leadership. On 22 June 1908, he was appointed the Inspector of the Ottoman Railways in Eastern Rumelia (&quot;Doğu Rumeli Bölgesi Demiryolları Müfettişi&quot;). In July 1908, he played a role in the Young Turk Revolution which seized power from Sultan Abdülhamid II and restored the constitutional monarchy.

He proposed depoliticization in the army, a proposal which was disliked by the leaders of the CUP. As a result, he was sent away to Tripolitania Vilayet (present Libya, then an Ottoman territory) under the pretext of suppressing a tribal rebellion towards the end of 1908. According to Mikush however, he volunteered for this mission. He suppressed the revolt and returned to Constantinople in January 1909.

In April 1909 in Constantinople, a group of soldiers began a counter-revolution (see 31 March Incident). Atatürk was instrumental in suppressing the revolt.

In 1910, he was called to the Ottoman provinces in Albania. At that time Isa Boletini was leading Albanian uprisings in Kosovo, and there were revolts in Albania as well. In 1910, Atatürk met with Eqrem Vlora, the Albanian lord, politician, writer, and one of the delegates of the Albanian Declaration of Independence.

Later, in the autumn of 1910, he was among the Ottoman military observers who attended the Picardie army manoeuvres in France, and in 1911, served at the Ministry of War (&quot;Harbiye Nezareti&quot;) in Constantinople for a short time.

===Italo-Turkish War (1911–12)===


In 1911, he volunteered to fight in the Italo-Turkish War in the Ottoman Tripolitania Vilayet (present-day Libya). He served mainly in the areas near Derna and Tobruk. The invading Italian army had a strength of 150,000 men; it was opposed by 20,000 Bedouins and 8,000 Turks. A short time before Italy declared war, many of the Ottoman troops in Libya were sent to the Ottoman province of Yemen Vilayet to put down the rebellion there, so the Ottoman government was caught with inadequate resources to counter the Italians in Libya. Britain, which controlled the Ottoman provinces of Egypt and Sudan, did not allow additional Ottoman troops to reach Libya through Egypt. Ottoman soldiers like Atatürk went to Libya either dressed as Arabs (risking imprisonment if noticed by the British authorities in Egypt) or by the very few available ferries (the Italians, who had superior naval forces, effectively controlled the sea routes to Tripoli). However, despite all the hardships, Atatürk&#x27;s forces in Libya managed to repel the Italians on a number of occasions, such as at the Battle of Tobruk on 22 December 1911.

During the Battle of Derna on 16–17 January 1912, while Atatürk was assaulting the Italian-controlled fortress of Kasr-ı Harun, two Italian planes dropped bombs on the Ottoman forces; a limestone splinter from a damaged building&#x27;s rubble struck Atatürk&#x27;s left eye, causing permanent tissue damage, but not total loss of sight. He received medical treatment for nearly a month; he attempted to leave the Red Crescent&#x27;s health facilities after only two weeks, but when his eye&#x27;s situation worsened, he had to return and resume treatment. On 6 March 1912, Atatürk became the Commander of the Ottoman forces in Derna. He managed to defend and retain the city and its surrounding region until the end of the Italo-Turkish War on 18 October 1912. Atatürk, Enver Bey, Fethi Bey, and the other Ottoman military commanders in Libya had to return to Ottoman Europe following the outbreak of the Balkan Wars on 8 October 1912. Having lost the war, the Ottoman government had to surrender Tripolitania, Fezzan, and Cyrenaica (three provinces forming present-day Libya) to the Kingdom of Italy in the Treaty of Lausanne (1912) signed ten days later, on 18 October 1912. Since 1923, historians have preferred to name this treaty as the &quot;Treaty of Ouchy&quot;, after the Château d&#x27;Ouchy in Lausanne where it was signed, to distinguish it from the later Treaty of Lausanne (1923) signed between the Allies of World War I and the Grand National Assembly of Turkey in Ankara (at that time known as Angora).

===Balkan Wars (1912–13)===
On 1 December 1912, Atatürk arrived at his new headquarters on the Gallipoli peninsula and, during the First Balkan War, he took part in the amphibious landing at Bulair on the coast of Thrace under Binbaşı Fethi Bey, but this offensive was repulsed during the Battle of Bulair by Georgi Todorov&#x27;s 7th Rila Infantry Division under the command of Stiliyan Kovachev&#x27;s Bulgarian Fourth Army.

In June 1913, during the Second Balkan War, he took part in the Ottoman Army forces commanded by Kaymakam Enver Bey that recovered Dimetoka and Edirne (Adrianople, the capital city of the Ottoman Empire between 1365 and 1453, thus of utmost historic importance for the Turks) together with most of eastern Thrace from the Bulgarians.

In 1913, he was appointed the Ottoman military attaché to all Balkan states (his office was in Sofia, Bulgaria) and promoted to the rank of Kaymakam (Lieutenant Colonel / Colonel) on 1 March 1914. While in Bulgaria, he met with Dimitrina Kovacheva, the daughter of Bulgarian general Stiliyan Kovachev (against whose forces he had fought during the Balkan Wars), who had recently completed her education in Switzerland, during a New Year&#x27;s Eve ball in Sofia and fell in love with her. The two danced at the ball and started to secretly date in the following days. Atatürk twice asked Dimitrina&#x27;s parents for their permission to marry her (the second time was in 1915, during World War I) and was twice refused, which left him with a lifelong sadness.

===First World War (1914–18)===


In 1914, the Ottoman Empire entered the European and Middle Eastern theatres of World War I allied with the Central Powers. Atatürk was given the task of organizing and commanding the 19th Division attached to the Fifth Army during the Battle of Gallipoli. He became the front-line commander after correctly anticipating where the Allies would attack, and held his position until they retreated. Following the Battle of Gallipoli, Atatürk served in Edirne until 14 January 1916. He was then assigned to the command of the XVI Corps of the Second Army and sent to the Caucasus Campaign after the massive Russian offensive had reached key Anatolian cities. On 7 August, he rallied his troops and mounted a counteroffensive. Two of his divisions captured Bitlis and Muş, upsetting the calculations of the Russian Command.

Following this victory, the CUP government in Constantinople proposed to establish a new army in Hejaz (&quot;Hicaz Kuvve-i Seferiyesi&quot;) and appoint Atatürk to its command, but he refused the proposal and this army was never established. Instead, on 7 March 1917, Atatürk was promoted from the command of the XVI Corps to the overall command of the Second Army, although the Czar&#x27;s armies were soon withdrawn when the Russian Revolution erupted.

In July 1917, he was appointed to the command of the Seventh Army, replacing Fevzi Pasha on 7 August 1917, who was under the command of the German general Erich von Falkenhayn&#x27;s Yildirim Army Group (after the British forces of General Edmund Allenby captured Jerusalem in December 1917, Erich von Falkenhayn was replaced by Otto Liman von Sanders who became the new commander of the Yıldırım Army Group in early 1918.) Atatürk did not get along well with General von Falkenhayn and, together with Miralay İsmet Bey, wrote a report to Grand Vizier Talaat Pasha regarding the grim situation and lack of adequate resources in the Palestinian front. However, Talaat Pasha ignored their observations and refused their suggestion to form a stronger defensive line to the north, in Ottoman Syria (in parts of the Beirut Vilayet, Damascus Vilayet, and Aleppo Vilayet), with Turks instead of Germans in command. Following the rejection of his report, Atatürk resigned from the Seventh Army and returned to Constantinople. There, he was assigned with the task of accompanying the crown prince (and future sultan) Mehmed Vahideddin during his train trip to Austria-Hungary and Germany. While in Germany, Atatürk visited the German lines on the Western Front and concluded that the Central Powers would soon lose the war. He did not hesitate to openly express this opinion to Kaiser Wilhelm II and his high-ranking generals in person. During the return trip, he briefly stayed in Karlsbad and Vienna for medical treatment between 30 May and 28 July 1918.

When Mehmed VI became the new Sultan of the Ottoman Empire in July 1918, he called Atatürk to Constantinople, and after several meetings in the months July and August 1918, reassigned him to the command of the Seventh Army in Palestine. Atatürk arrived in Aleppo on 26 August 1918, then continued south to his headquarters in Nablus. The Seventh Army was holding the central sector of the front lines. On 19 September, at the beginning of the Battle of Megiddo, the Eighth Army was holding the coastal flank but fell apart and Liman Pasha ordered the Seventh Army to withdraw to the north in order to prevent the British from conducting a short envelopment to the Jordan River. The Seventh Army retired towards the Jordan River but was destroyed by British aerial bombardment during its retreat from Nablus on 21 September 1918. Nevertheless, Atatürk managed to form a defence line to the north of Aleppo. According to Lord Kinross, Atatürk was the only Turkish general in the war who never suffered a defeat.

The war ended with the Armistice of Mudros which was signed on 30 October 1918, and all German and Austro-Hungarian troops in the Ottoman Empire were granted ample time to withdraw. On 31 October, Atatürk was appointed to the command of the Yıldırım Army Group, replacing Liman von Sanders. Atatürk organized the distribution of weapons to the civilians in Antep in case of a defensive conflict against the invading Allies.

Atatürk&#x27;s last active service in the Ottoman Army was organizing the return of the Ottoman troops left behind to the south of the defensive line. In early November 1918, the Yıldırım Army Group was officially dissolved, and Atatürk returned to an occupied Constantinople, the Ottoman capital, on 13 November 1918. For a period of time, he worked at the headquarters of the Ministry of War (&quot;Harbiye Nezareti&quot;) in Constantinople and continued his activities in this city until 16 May 1919. Along the established lines of the partitioning of the Ottoman Empire, the Allies (British, Italian, French and Greek forces) occupied Anatolia. The occupation of Constantinople, followed by the occupation of İzmir (the two largest Ottoman cities at the time) sparked the establishment of the Turkish National Movement and the Turkish War of Independence.

=== Ottoman genocides (1913–1924) and Atatürk ===
At the time of the late Ottoman genocides reportedly committed by the CUP and the declining Ottoman Empire, but now controversial, Atatürk was a member of the CUP, and to that extent, a Young Turk, but so had many Arabs, Albanians, Jews, and initially, Armenians and Greeks, as it was then simply an anti-Abdul Hamid movement. As for the actual occurrences of the genocides, Atatürk had since divested from the movement and was serving as a relatively junior Lieutenant Colonel fighting in Gallipoli and Western Thrace during the Armenian genocide. Historical evidence shows that he was not involved with the killings, and that he later went on to condemn them. One such explicit condemnation was in September 1919, when Atatürk met with the United States Army General James Harbord, the leader of the Harbord Commission into the genocides, in Sivas. Harbord would later recall that Atatürk told him of his disapproval of the Armenian genocide, and that he had allegedly stated that &quot;the massacre and deportation of Armenians was the work of a small committee who had seized power&quot;, rather than by the government in actuality. In 1920, before the Turkish Parliament, Atatürk called the genocides a &quot;shameful act&quot; but did not publicly deny them at that time.

Atatürk&#x27;s relations with Enver Pasha, a key perpetrator of the genocides, has also been controversial but poorly understood. While the two men may have been close at times, Atatürk held a personal dislike of Enver Pasha; he once said to a confidant that Enver Pasha was a dangerous figure who might lead the country to ruin.

The primary concern towards Atatürk was the Turkish government&#x27;s involvement with and reaction to the burning of Smyrna in 1922, which saw Muslim Turkish mobs and paramilitaries openly engaged in mass murder of Greeks and Armenians and destroy the city&#x27;s Greek and Armenian quarters, killing an estimated 100,000 people. Whether these atrocities, including the fire, was part of the genocides of Asia Minor&#x27;s Christian minorities that the Turkish army and government carried out during WWI is unclear, responsibility remains a contentious debate and it is unclear if the Turks entered the city with these intentions. Many Turkish apologists argue that the regular Turkish Army did not play a role in these events. At the time, Atatürk was commander of the Turkish armed forces, and sent a telegram to the Minister of Foreign Affairs Yusuf Kemal that described the official version of events in the city. In the telegram, he alleged the Greek and Armenian minorities had &quot;pre-arranged plans&quot; to &quot;destroy İzmir&quot;. There are allegations Atatürk chose to do little about the Greek and Armenian victims of the fires caused by Muslim rioters in order to rebuild the city as Turkish-dominated İzmir.

Although Atatürk was critical of the Armenian genocide and Kemalists had pledged to prosecute those involved with the genocide, on March 31, 1923, a general amnesty was declared for those who had been convicted of court-martial and by the municipal courts after the defeat of the Ottoman forces. Turkey also refused to deliver those involved with the crimes to the Allies, arguing that it would violate Turkish sovereignty. Some of the war criminals were also invited to the government of the new Turkish republic.

===Turkish War of Independence (1919–1923)===


On 30 April 1919, Fahri Yaver-i Hazret-i Şehriyari (&quot;Honorary Aide-de-camp to His Majesty Sultan&quot;) with the rank of Mirliva, Atatürk was assigned as the inspector of the Ninth Army Troops Inspectorate to reorganize what remained of the Ottoman military units and to improve internal security. On 19 May 1919, he reached Samsun. His first goal was the establishment of an organized national movement against the occupying forces. In June 1919, he issued the Amasya Circular, declaring the independence of the country was in danger. He resigned from the Ottoman Army on 8 July, and the Ottoman government issued a warrant for his arrest. But Kâzım Karabekir and other military commanders active in Eastern Anatolia followed Atatürk&#x27;s lead and acknowledged him as their leader.

On 4 September 1919, he assembled a congress in Sivas. Those who opposed the Allies in various provinces in Turkey issued a declaration named &quot;Misak-ı Millî&quot; (&quot;National Pact&quot;). Atatürk was appointed as the head of the executive committee of the Congress, which gave him the legitimacy he needed for his future politics.

The last election to the Ottoman parliament held in December 1919 gave a sweeping majority to candidates of the &quot;Association for Defence of Rights for Anatolia and Roumelia&quot; (&quot;Anadolu ve Rumeli Müdafaa-i Hukuk Cemiyeti&quot;), headed by Atatürk, who himself remained in Angora, now known as Ankara. The fourth (and last) term of the parliament opened in Constantinople on 12 January 1920. It was dissolved by British forces on 18 March 1920, shortly after it adopted the &quot;Misak-ı Millî&quot; (&quot;National Pact&quot;). Atatürk called for a national election to establish a new Turkish Parliament seated in Angora. – the &quot;Grand National Assembly&quot; (GNA). On 23 April 1920, the GNA opened with Atatürk as the speaker; this act effectively created the situation of diarchy in the country. In May 1920, the power struggle between the two governments led to a death sentence in absentia for Atatürk by the Turkish courts-martial. Halide Edib (Adıvar) and Ali Fuat (Cebesoy) were also sentenced to death alongside Atatürk.

On 10 August 1920, the Ottoman Grand Vizier Damat Ferid Pasha signed the Treaty of Sèvres, finalizing plans for the partitioning of the Ottoman Empire, including the regions that Turkish nationals viewed as their heartland. Atatürk insisted on the country&#x27;s complete independence and the safeguarding of interests of the Turkish majority on &quot;Turkish soil&quot;. He persuaded the GNA to gather a National Army. The GNA army faced the Caliphate army propped up by the Allied occupation forces and had the immediate task of fighting the Armenian forces in the Eastern Front and the Greek forces advancing eastward from Smyrna (today known as İzmir) that they had occupied in May 1919, on the Western Front.

The GNA military successes against the Democratic Republic of Armenia in the autumn of 1920 and later against the Greeks were made possible by a steady supply of gold and armaments to the Kemalists from the Russian Bolshevik government from the autumn of 1920 onwards.

After a series of battles during the Greco-Turkish War, the Greek army advanced as far as the Sakarya River, just eighty kilometers west of Ankara. On 5 August 1921, Atatürk was promoted to commander in chief of the forces by the GNA. The ensuing Battle of the Sakarya was fought from 23 August–13 September 1921 and ended with the defeat of the Greeks. After this victory, Atatürk was given the rank of Mareşal and the title of Gazi by the Grand National Assembly on 19 September 1921. The Allies, ignoring the extent of Atatürk&#x27;s successes, hoped to impose a modified version of the Treaty of Sèvres as a peace settlement on Angora, but the proposal was rejected. In August 1922, Atatürk launched an all-out attack on the Greek lines at Afyonkarahisar in the Battle of Dumlupınar, and Turkish forces regained control of İzmir on 9 September 1922. On 10 September 1922, Atatürk sent a telegram to the League of Nations stating that the Turkish population was so worked up that the Ankara Government would not be responsible for the ensuing massacres.

===Establishment of the Republic of Turkey===
The Conference of Lausanne began on 21 November 1922. Turkey, represented by İsmet İnönü of the GNA, refused any proposal that would compromise Turkish sovereignty, such as the control of Turkish finances, the Capitulations, the Straits and other issues. Although the conference paused on 4 February, it continued after 23 April mainly focusing on the economic issues. On 24 July 1923, the Treaty of Lausanne was signed by the Powers with the GNA, thus recognising the latter as the government of Turkey.

On 29 October 1923, the Republic of Turkey was proclaimed. Since then, Republic Day has been celebrated as a national holiday on that date.

==Presidency==


With the establishment of the Republic of Turkey, efforts to modernise the country started. The new government analyzed the institutions and constitutions of Western states such as France, Sweden, Italy, and Switzerland and adapted them to the needs and characteristics of the Turkish nation. Highlighting the public&#x27;s lack of knowledge regarding Atatürk&#x27;s intentions, the public cheered: &quot;We are returning to the days of the first caliphs.&quot; Atatürk placed Fevzi Çakmak, Kâzım Özalp, and İsmet İnönü in political positions where they could institute his reforms. He capitalized on his reputation as an efficient military leader and spent the following years, up until his death in 1938, instituting political, economic, and social reforms. In doing so, he transformed Turkish society from perceiving itself as a Muslim part of a vast Empire into a modern, democratic, and secular nation-state. This had a positive influence on human capital because from then on, what mattered at school was science and education; Islam was concentrated in mosques and religious places.

===Domestic policies===

Atatürk&#x27;s driving goal was the complete independence of the country. He clarified his position:

He led wide-ranging reforms in social, cultural, and economic aspects, establishing the new Republic&#x27;s backbone of legislative, judicial, and economic structures. Though he was later idealized by some as an originator of sweeping reforms, many of his reformist ideas were already common in Ottoman intellectual circles at the turn of the 20th century and were expressed more openly after the Young Turk Revolution.

Atatürk created a banner to mark the changes between the old Ottoman and the new republican rule. Each change was symbolized as an arrow in this banner. This defining ideology of the Republic of Turkey is referred to as the &quot;Six Arrows&quot;, or Kemalism. Kemalism is based on Atatürk&#x27;s conception of realism and pragmatism. The fundamentals of nationalism, populism, and statism were all defined under the Six Arrows. These fundamentals were not new in world politics or, indeed, among the elite of Turkey. What made them unique was that these interrelated fundamentals were explicitly formulated for Turkey&#x27;s needs. A good example is the definition and application of secularism; the Kemalist secular state significantly differed from predominantly Christian states.

====Emergence of the state, 1923–1924====
Atatürk&#x27;s private journal entries dated before the establishment of the republic in 1923 show that he believed in the importance of the sovereignty of the people. In forging the new republic, the Turkish revolutionaries turned their back on the perceived corruption and decadence of cosmopolitan Constantinople and its Ottoman heritage. For instance, they made Ankara (as Angora has been known in English since 1930), the country&#x27;s new capital and reformed the Turkish postal service. Once a provincial town deep in Anatolia, the city was thus turned into the center of the independence movement. Atatürk wanted a &quot;direct government by the Assembly&quot; and visualized a representative democracy, parliamentary sovereignty, where the National Parliament would be the ultimate source of power.

In the following years, he altered his stance somewhat; the country needed an immense amount of reconstruction, and &quot;direct government by the Assembly&quot; could not survive in such an environment. The revolutionaries faced challenges from the supporters of the old Ottoman regime, and also from the supporters of newer ideologies such as communism and fascism. Atatürk saw the consequences of fascist and communist doctrines in the 1920s and 1930s and rejected both. He prevented the spread into Turkey of the totalitarian party rule which held sway in the Soviet Union, Germany, and Italy. Some perceived his opposition and silencing of these ideologies as a means of eliminating competition; others believed it was necessary to protect the young Turkish state from succumbing to the instability of new ideologies and competing factions. Under Atatürk, the arrest process known as the 1927 Detentions (&quot;1927 Tevkifatı&quot;) was launched, and a widespread arrest policy was put in place against the Communist Party of Turkey members. Communist political figures such as Hikmet Kıvılcımlı, Nâzım Hikmet, and Şefik Hüsnü were tried and sentenced to prison terms. Then, in 1937, a delegation headed by Atatürk decided to censor the writings of Kıvılcımlı as harmful communist propaganda.
The heart of the new republic was the GNA, established during the Turkish War of Independence by Atatürk. The elections were free and used an egalitarian electoral system that was based on a general ballot. Deputies at the GNA served as the voice of Turkish society by expressing its political views and preferences. It had the right to select and control both the government and the Prime Minister. Initially, it also acted as a legislative power, controlling the executive branch and, if necessary, served as an organ of scrutiny under the Turkish Constitution of 1921. The Turkish Constitution of 1924 set a loose separation of powers between the legislative and the executive organs of the state, whereas the separation of these two within the judiciary system was a strict one. Atatürk, then the President, occupied a dominant position in this political system.

The one-party regime was established &quot;de facto&quot; in 1925 after the adoption of the 1924 constitution. The only political party of the GNA was the &quot;People&#x27;s Party&quot;, founded by Atatürk on 9 September 1923. (But according to the party culture the foundation date was the opening day of Sivas Congress on 4 September 1919). On 10 November 1924, it was renamed &quot;Cumhuriyet Halk Fırkası&quot; or Republican People&#x27;s Party (the word &quot;fırka&quot; was replaced by the word &quot;parti&quot; in 1935).

====Civic independence and the Caliphate, 1924–1925====

The abolition of the caliphate and other cultural reforms were met with fierce opposition. The conservative elements were not appreciative, and they launched attacks on the Kemalist reformists. This was an important dimension in Atatürk&#x27;s drive to reform the political system and to promote national sovereignty. By the consensus of the Muslim majority in early centuries, the caliphate was the core political concept of Sunni Islam. Abolishing the sultanate was easier because the survival of the caliphate at the time satisfied the partisans of the sultanate. This produced a split system with the new republic on one side and an Islamic form of government with the Caliph on the other side, and Atatürk and İnönü worried that &quot;it nourished the expectations that the sovereign would return under the guise of Caliph.&quot; Caliph Abdülmecid II was elected after the abolition of the sultanate (1922).

The caliph had his own personal treasury and also had a personal service that included military personnel; Atatürk said that there was no &quot;religious&quot; or &quot;political&quot; justification for this. He believed that Caliph Abdülmecid II was following in the steps of the sultans in domestic and foreign affairs: accepting of and responding to foreign representatives and reserve officers, and participating in official ceremonies and celebrations. He wanted to integrate the powers of the caliphate into the powers of the GNA. His initial activities began on 1 January 1924, when İnönü, Çakmak, and Özalp consented to the abolition of the caliphate. The caliph made a statement to the effect that he would not interfere with political affairs. On 1 March 1924, at the Assembly, Atatürk said:

On 3 March 1924, the caliphate was officially abolished and its powers within Turkey were transferred to the GNA. Other Muslim nations debated the validity of Turkey&#x27;s unilateral abolition of the caliphate as they decided whether they should confirm the Turkish action or appoint a new caliph. A &quot;Caliphate Conference&quot; was held in Cairo in May 1926 and a resolution was passed declaring the caliphate &quot;a necessity in Islam&quot;, but failed to implement this decision.

Two other Islamic conferences were held in Mecca (1926) and Jerusalem (1931), but failed to reach a consensus. Turkey did not accept the re-establishment of the caliphate and perceived it as an attack to its basic existence. Meanwhile, Atatürk and the reformists continued their own way.

On 8 April 1924, sharia courts were abolished with the law &quot;Mehakim-i Şer&#x27;iyenin İlgasına ve Mehakim Teşkilatına Ait Ahkamı Muaddil Kanun&quot;.

====Educational reform====
The removal of the caliphate was followed by an extensive effort to establish the separation of governmental and religious affairs. Education was the cornerstone in this effort. In 1923, there were three main educational groups of institutions. The most common institutions were medreses based on Arabic, the Qur&#x27;an, and memorization. The second type of institution was idadî and sultanî, the reformist schools of the Tanzimat era. The last group included colleges and minority schools in foreign languages that used the latest teaching models in educating pupils. The old medrese education was modernized. Atatürk changed the classical Islamic education for a vigorously promoted reconstruction of educational institutions. He linked educational reform to the liberation of the nation from dogma, which he believed was more important than the Turkish War of Independence. He declared:

In the summer of 1924, Atatürk invited American educational reformer John Dewey to Ankara to advise him on how to reform Turkish education. His public education reforms aimed to prepare citizens for roles in public life through increasing public literacy. He wanted to institute compulsory primary education for both girls and boys; since then this effort has been an ongoing task for the republic. He pointed out that one of the main targets of education in Turkey had to be raising a generation nourished with what he called the &quot;public culture&quot;. The state schools established a common curriculum which became known as the &quot;unification of education&quot;.

Unification of education was put into force on 3 March 1924 by the Law on Unification of Education (No. 430). With the new law, education became inclusive, organized on a model of the civil community. In this new design, all schools submitted their curriculum to the &quot;Ministry of National Education&quot;, a government agency modeled after other countries&#x27; ministries of education. Concurrently, the republic abolished the two ministries and made clergy subordinate to the department of religious affairs, one of the foundations of secularism in Turkey. The unification of education under one curriculum ended &quot;clerics or clergy of the Ottoman Empire&quot;, but was not the end of religious schools in Turkey; they were moved to higher education until later governments restored them to their former position in secondary after Atatürk&#x27;s death.

====Western attire====

Beginning in the fall of 1925, Atatürk encouraged the Turks to wear modern European attire. He was determined to force the abandonment of the sartorial traditions of the Middle East and finalize a series of dress reforms, which were originally started by Mahmud II. The fez was established by Sultan Mahmud II in 1826 as part of the Ottoman Empire&#x27;s modernization effort. The Hat Law of 1925 introduced the use of Western-style hats instead of the fez. Atatürk first made the hat compulsory for civil servants. The guidelines for the proper dressing of students and state employees were passed during his lifetime; many civil servants adopted the hat willingly. In 1925, Atatürk wore a Panama hat during a public appearance in Kastamonu, one of the most conservative towns in Anatolia, to explain that the hat was the headgear of civilized nations. The last part of reform on dress emphasized the need to wear modern Western suits with neckties as well as Fedora and Derby-style hats instead of antiquated religion-based clothing such as the veil and turban in the .

Even though he personally promoted modern dress for women, Atatürk never made specific reference to women&#x27;s clothing in the law, as he believed that women would adapt to the new clothing styles of their own free will. He was frequently photographed on public business with his wife Lâtife Uşaklıgil, who covered her head in accordance with Islamic tradition. He was also frequently photographed on public business with women wearing modern Western clothes. But it was Atatürk&#x27;s adopted daughters, Sabiha Gökçen and Afet İnan, who provided the real role model for the Turkish women of the future. He wrote: &quot;The religious covering of women will not cause difficulty ... This simple style [of headcovering] is not in conflict with the morals and manners of our society.&quot;

====Religious insignia====

On 30 August 1925, Atatürk&#x27;s view on religious insignia used outside places of worship was introduced in his . This speech also had another position. He said: 

On 2 September, the government issued a decree closing down all Sufi orders, the tekkes and other religious ideological lodges. Atatürk ordered the dervish lodges to be converted to museums, such as Mevlana Museum in Konya. The institutional expression of religious ideologies became illegal in Turkey; a politically neutral form of any religious ideology, functioning as social associations, was permitted to exist.

====Opposition to Atatürk in 1924–1927====
In 1924, while the &quot;Issue of Mosul&quot; was on the table, Sheikh Said began to organize the Sheikh Said Rebellion. Sheikh Said was a wealthy Kurdish tribal chief of a local Naqshbandi order in Diyarbakır. He emphasized the issue of religion; he not only opposed the abolition of the Caliphate, but also the adoption of civil codes based on Western models, the closure of religious orders, the ban on polygamy, and the new obligatory civil marriage. Sheikh stirred up his followers against the policies of the government, which he considered anti-Islamic. In an effort to restore Islamic law, Sheik&#x27;s forces moved through the countryside, seized government offices and marched on the important cities of Elazığ and Diyarbakır. Members of the government saw the Sheikh Said Rebellion as an attempt at a counter-revolution. They urged immediate military action to prevent its spread. With the support of Atatürk, the acting prime minister Ali Fethi (Okyar) was replaced with İsmet Pasha (İnönü), who on 3 March 1925 ordered the invocation of the &quot;Law for the Maintenance of Order&quot; in order to deal with the rebellion. It gave the government exceptional powers and included the authority to shut down subversive groups. The law was repealed in March 1927.

There were also parliamentarians in the GNA who were not happy with these changes. So many members were denounced as opposition sympathizers at a private meeting of the Republican People&#x27;s Party (CHP) that Atatürk expressed his fear of being among the minority in his own party. He decided not to purge this group. After a censure motion gave the chance to have a breakaway group, Kâzım Karabekir, along with his friends, established such a group on 17 October 1924. The censure became a confidence vote at the CHP for Atatürk. On 8 November, the motion was rejected by 148 votes to 18, and 41 votes were absent. The CHP held all but one seat in the parliament. After the majority of the CHP chose him, Atatürk said, &quot;the Turkish nation is firmly determined to advance fearlessly on the path of the republic, civilization and progress&quot;.

On 17 November 1924, the breakaway group established the Progressive Republican Party (PRP) with 29 deputies and the first multi-party system began. Some of Atatürk&#x27;s closest associates who had supported him in the early days of the War of Independence such as Rauf Bey (later Rauf Orbay), Refet Pasha, and Ali Fuat Pasha (later Ali Fuat Cebesoy) were among the members of the new party. The PRP&#x27;s economic program suggested liberalism, in contrast to the statism of the CHP, and its social program was based on conservatism in contrast to the modernism of the CHP. Leaders of the party strongly supported the Kemalist revolution in principle, but had different opinions on the cultural revolution and the principle of secularism. The PRP was not against Atatürk&#x27;s main positions as declared in its program; they supported establishing secularism in the country and the civil law, or as stated, &quot;the needs of the age&quot; (article 3) and the uniform system of education (article 49). These principles were set by the leaders at the onset. The only legal opposition became a home for all kinds of differing views.

During 1926, a plot to assassinate Atatürk was uncovered in Smyrna (İzmir). It originated with a former deputy who had opposed the abolition of the Caliphate. What originally was an inquiry into the planners shifted to a sweeping investigation. Ostensibly, its aims were to uncover subversive activities, but in truth, the investigation was used to undermine those disagreeing with Atatürk&#x27;s cultural reforms. The investigation brought a number of political activists before the tribunal, including Karabekir, the leader of the PRP. A number of surviving leaders of the Committee of Union and Progress, including Mehmet Cavid, Ahmed Şükrü, and İsmail Canbulat, were found guilty of treason and hanged. Because the investigation found a link between the members of the PRP and the Sheikh Said Rebellion, the PRP was dissolved following the outcomes of the trial. The pattern of organized opposition was broken; this action was to be the only broad political purge during Atatürk&#x27;s presidency. Atatürk&#x27;s statement, &quot;My mortal body will turn into dust, but the Republic of Turkey will last forever,&quot; was regarded as a will after the assassination attempt.

====Modernization efforts, 1926–1930====
In the years following 1926, Atatürk introduced a radical departure from previous reformations established by the Ottoman Empire. For the first time in history, Islamic law was separated from secular law and restricted to matters of religion. He stated:

On 1 March 1926, the Turkish penal code, modelled after the Italian penal code, was passed. On 4 October 1926, Islamic courts were closed. Establishing the civic law needed time, so Atatürk delayed the inclusion of the principle of laïcité (the constitutional principle of secularism in France) until 5 February 1937.

In keeping with the Islamic practice of sex segregation, Ottoman practice discouraged social interaction between men and women. Atatürk began developing social reforms to address this issue very early, as was evident in his personal journal. He and his staff discussed issues such as abolishing the veiling of women and integrating women into the outside world. His plans to surmount the task were written in his journal in November 1915:

Atatürk needed a new civil code to establish his second major step of giving freedom to women. The first part was the education of girls, a feat established with the unification of education. On 4 October 1926, the new Turkish civil code, modelled after the Swiss Civil Code, was passed. Under the new code, women gained equality with men in such matters as inheritance and divorce, since Atatürk did not consider gender a factor in social organization. According to his view, society marched towards its goal with men and women united. He believed that it was scientifically impossible for Turkey to achieve progress and become civilized if Ottoman gender separation persisted. During a meeting he declaimed:

Additionally, the Kemalist one-party period of Turkey&#x27;s labor participation rate was as high as 70%. The participation rate continued to decline after the democratization of Turkey due to the backlash of conservative norms in Turkish society.

In 1927, the State Art and Sculpture Museum (&quot;Ankara Resim ve Heykel Müzesi&quot;) opened its doors. The museum highlighted sculpture, which was rarely practised in Turkey due to the Islamic tradition of avoiding idolatry. Atatürk believed that &quot;culture is the foundation of the Turkish Republic,&quot; and described modern Turkey&#x27;s ideological thrust as &quot;a creation of patriotism blended with a lofty humanist ideal.&quot; He included both his own nation&#x27;s creative legacy and what he saw as the admirable values of global civilization. The pre-Islamic culture of the Turks became the subject of extensive research, and particular emphasis was placed on the widespread Turkish culture before the Seljuk and Ottoman civilizations. He instigated study of Anatolian civilizations – Phrygians, Lydians, Sumerians, and Hittites. To attract public attention to past cultures, he personally named the banks &quot;Sümerbank&quot; (1932) after the Sumerians and &quot;Etibank&quot; (1935) after the Hittites. He also stressed the folk arts of the countryside as a wellspring of Turkish creativity.

At the time, the republic used the Ottoman Turkish language written in the Arabic script with Arabic and Persian loan vocabulary. However, as little as 10% of the population was literate. Furthermore, the American reformer John Dewey, invited by Atatürk to assist in educational reform, found that learning how to read and write Turkish in the traditional Arabic script took roughly three years. In the spring of 1928, Atatürk met in Ankara with several linguists and professors from all over Turkey to unveil his plan to implement a new alphabet for the written Turkish language, based on a modified Latin alphabet. The new Turkish alphabet would serve as a replacement for the old Arabic script and a solution to the literacy problem, since the new alphabet did not retain the complexities of the Arabic script and could be learned within a few months. When Atatürk asked the language experts how long it would take to implement the new alphabet into the Turkish language, most of the professors and linguists said between three and five years. Atatürk was said to have scoffed and openly stated, &quot;We shall do it in three to five months&quot;.

Over the next several months, Atatürk pressed for the introduction of the new Turkish alphabet and made public announcements of the upcoming overhaul. The creation of the alphabet was undertaken by the Language Commission (&quot;Dil Encümeni&quot;) with the initiative of Atatürk. On 1 November 1928, he introduced the new Turkish alphabet and abolished the use of the Arabic script. The first Turkish newspaper using the new alphabet was published on 15 December 1928. Atatürk himself travelled the countryside in order to teach citizens the new alphabet. After vigorous campaigns, the literacy rate more than doubled from 10.6% in 1927 to 22.4% in 1940. To supplement the literacy reform, a number of congresses were organized on scientific issues, education, history, economics, arts and language. Libraries were systematically developed, and mobile libraries and book transport systems were set up to serve remote districts. Literacy reform was also supported by strengthening the private publishing sector with a new law on copyrights.

Atatürk promoted modern teaching methods at the primary education level, and Dewey proved integral to the effort. Dewey presented a paradigmatic set of recommendations designed for developing societies moving towards modernity in his &quot;Report and Recommendation for the Turkish educational system&quot;. He was interested in adult education with the goal of forming a skill base in the country. Turkish women were taught not only child care, dress-making, and household management but also skills necessary for joining the economy outside the home. Atatürk&#x27;s unified education program became a state-supervised system, which was designed to create a skill base for the social and economic progress of the country by educating responsible citizens as well as useful and appreciated members of society. In addition, Turkish education became an integrative system, aimed to alleviate poverty and used female education to establish gender equality. Atatürk himself put special emphasis on the education of girls and supported coeducation, introducing it at university level in 1923–24 and establishing it as the norm throughout the educational system by 1927. Atatürk&#x27;s reforms on education made it significantly more accessible: between 1923 and 1938, the number of students attending primary schools increased by 224% (from 342,000 to 765,000), the number of students attending middle schools increased by 12.5 times (from around 6,000 to 74,000), and the number of students attending high schools increased by almost 17 times (from 1,200 to 21,000).

Atatürk generated media attention to propagate modern education during this period. He instigated official education meetings called &quot;Science Boards&quot; and &quot;Education Summits&quot; to discuss the quality of education, training issues, and certain basic educational principles. He said, &quot;our [schools&#x27; curriculum] should aim to provide opportunities for all pupils to learn and to achieve.&quot; He was personally engaged with the development of two textbooks. The first one, &quot;Vatandaş İçin Medeni Bilgiler&quot; (Civic knowledge for the citizens, 1930), introduced the science of comparative government and explained the means of administering public trust by explaining the rules of governance as applied to the new state institutions. The second, &quot;Geometri&quot; (Geometry, 1937), was a text for high schools and introduced many of the terms currently used in Turkey to describe geometry.

====Opposition to Atatürk in 1930–1931====
On 11 August 1930, Atatürk decided to try a multiparty movement once again and asked Fethi Okyar to establish a new party. Atatürk insisted on the protection of secular reforms. The brand-new Liberal Republican Party succeeded all around the country. However, without the establishment of a real political spectrum, the party became the center to opposition of Atatürk&#x27;s reforms, particularly in regard to the role of religion in public life. On 23 December 1930, a chain of violent incidents occurred, instigated by the rebellion of Islamic fundamentalists in Menemen, a small town in the Aegean Region. The Menemen Incident came to be considered a serious threat against secular reforms.

In November 1930, Ali Fethi Okyar dissolved his own party. A more lasting multi-party period of the Republic of Turkey began in 1945. In 1950, the CHP ceded the majority position to the Democratic Party. This came amidst arguments that Atatürk&#x27;s single-party rule did not promote direct democracy. The reason experiments with pluralism failed during this period was that not all groups in the country had agreed to a minimal consensus regarding shared values (mainly secularism) and shared rules for conflict resolution. In response to such criticisms, Atatürk&#x27;s biographer Andrew Mango writes: &quot;between the two wars, democracy could not be sustained in many relatively richer and better-educated societies. Atatürk&#x27;s enlightened authoritarianism left a reasonable space for free private lives. More could not have been expected in his lifetime.&quot; Even though, at times, he did not appear to be a democrat in his actions, Atatürk always supported the idea of building a civil society: a system of voluntary civic and social organizations and institutions as opposed to the force-backed structures of the state. In one of his many speeches about the importance of democracy, Atatürk said in 1933:

====Modernization efforts, 1931–1938====

In 1931, Atatürk established the Turkish Language Association (&quot;Türk Dil Kurumu&quot;) for conducting research works in the Turkish language. The Turkish Historical Society (&quot;Türk Tarih Kurumu&quot;) was established in 1931, and began maintaining archives in 1932 for conducting research works on the history of Turkey. On 1 January 1928, he established the Turkish Education Association, which supported intelligent and hard-working children in financial need, as well as material and scientific contributions to the educational life. In 1933, Atatürk ordered the reorganization of Istanbul University into a modern institution and later established Ankara University in the capital city.

Atatürk dealt with the translation of scientific terminology into Turkish. He wanted the Turkish language reform to be methodologically based. Any attempt to &quot;cleanse&quot; the Turkish language of foreign influence without modelling the integral structure of the language was inherently wrong to him. He personally oversaw the development of the Sun Language Theory (&quot;Güneş Dil Teorisi&quot;), which was a linguistic theory which proposed that all human languages were descendants of one Central Asian primal language. His ideas could be traced to the work by the French scientist Hilaire de Barenton titled &quot;L&#x27;Origine des Langues, des Religions et des Peuples&quot;, which postulates that all languages originated from hieroglyphs and cuneiform used by Sumerians, and the paper by Austrian linguist Hermann F. Kvergić of Vienna titled &quot;La psychologie de quelques éléments des langues Turques&quot; (&quot;the psychology of some elements of the Turkic Languages&quot;). Atatürk formally introduced the Sun Language Theory into Turkish political and educational circles in 1935, although he did later correct the more extremist practices.

Saffet Arıkan, a politician who was the head of the Turkish Language Association, said &quot;Ulu Önderimiz Ata Türk Mustafa Kemal&quot; (&quot;Our Great Leader Ata Türk Mustafa Kemal&quot;) in the opening speech of the 2nd Language Day on 26 September 1934. Later, the surname &quot;Atatürk&quot; (&quot;father of the Turks&quot;) was accepted as the surname of Mustafa Kemal after the adoption of the Surname Law in 1934.

Beginning in 1932, several hundred &quot;People&#x27;s Houses&quot; (&quot;Halkevleri&quot;) and &quot;People&#x27;s Rooms&quot; (&quot;Halkodaları&quot;) across the country allowed greater access to a wide variety of artistic activities, sports, and other cultural events. Atatürk supported and encouraged the visual and the plastic arts, which had been suppressed by Ottoman leaders, who regarded depiction of the human form as idolatry. Many museums opened, architecture began to follow modern trends, and classical Western music, opera, ballet, and theatre took greater hold in the country. Book and magazine publications increased as well, and the film industry began to grow.

Almost all Qur&#x27;ans in Turkey before the 1930s were printed in Old Arabic. However, in 1924, three Turkish translations of the Qur&#x27;an were published in Istanbul, and several renderings of the Qur&#x27;an in the Turkish language were read in front of the public, creating significant controversy. These Turkish Qur&#x27;ans were fiercely opposed by members of the religious community, and the incident impelled many leading Muslim modernists to call upon the Turkish Parliament to sponsor a Qur&#x27;an translation of suitable quality. With the support of Atatürk, the Parliament approved the project and the Directorate of Religious Affairs appointed Mehmet Akif (Ersoy) to compose a Qur&#x27;an translation, and the Islamic scholar Elmalılı Hamdi Yazır to author a Turkish language Qur&#x27;anic commentary (tafsir) titled &quot;Hak Dini Kur&#x27;an Dili&quot; (The Qur&#x27;an: the Tongue of the Religion of Truth). However, it was only in 1935 that the version of Yazır&#x27;s work read in public found its way to print. In 1932, Atatürk justified the translation of the Qur&#x27;an by stating how he wanted to &quot;teach religion in Turkish to Turkish people who had been practising Islam without understanding it for centuries.&quot; Atatürk believed that the understanding of religion and its texts was too important to be left to a small group of people. Thus, his objective was to make the Qur&#x27;an accessible to a broader demographic by translating it into modern languages.

In 1934, Atatürk commissioned the first Turkish operatic work, &quot;Özsoy&quot;. The opera, staged at the People&#x27;s House in Ankara, was composed by Adnan Saygun and performed by soprano Semiha Berksoy.

On 5 December 1934, Turkey moved to grant full political rights to women. The equal rights of women in marriage had already been established in the earlier Turkish civil code. The role of women in Atatürk&#x27;s cultural reforms was expressed in the civic book prepared under his supervision. In it, he stated:

The 1935 general elections yielded 18 female MPs out of a total of 395 representatives, compared to nine out of 615 members in the British House of Commons and six out of 435 in the US House of Representatives inaugurated that year.

====Unification and nationalisation efforts====

When the modern Republic of Turkey was founded in 1923, nationalism and secularism were two of the founding principles. Atatürk aimed to create a nation state (&quot;ulus devlet&quot;) from the Turkish remnants of the Ottoman Empire. Kemalism defines the &quot;Turkish People&quot; as &quot;those who protect and promote the moral, spiritual, cultural and humanistic values of the Turkish Nation.&quot; One of the goals of the establishment of the new Turkish state was to ensure &quot;the domination of Turkish national identity in every aspect of social life from the language that people speak in the streets to the language to be taught at schools, from the education to the industrial life, from the trade to the cadres of state officials, from the civil law to the settlement of citizens to particular regions.&quot; The process of unification through Turkification continued and was fostered under Atatürk&#x27;s government with such policies as Citizen speak Turkish! (&quot;Vatandaş Türkçe konuş!&quot;), an initiative created in the 1930s by law students but sponsored by the government. This campaign aimed to put pressure on non-Turkish speakers to speak Turkish in public. However, the campaign went beyond the measures of a mere policy of speaking Turkish to an outright prevention of any other language.

Another example of nationalisation was the Surname Law, which obligated the Turkish people to adopt fixed, hereditary surnames and forbade names that contained connotations of foreign cultures, nations, tribes, and religions. As a result, many ethnic Armenians, Greeks, and Kurds changed their surnames. Non-Turkish surnames ending with &quot;yan, of, ef, viç, is, dis, poulos, aki, zade, shvili, madumu, veled, bin&quot; could not be registered and were replaced by &quot;-oğlu&quot;. Furthermore, the geographical name changes initiative by the Turkish government replaced non-Turkish geographical and topographic names within the Turkish Republic with Turkish names. The main proponent of the initiative had been a Turkish homogenization social-engineering campaign which aimed to assimilate geographical or topographical names that were deemed foreign and divisive against Turkish unity. The names that were considered foreign were usually of Armenian, Greek, Laz, Bulgarian, Kurdish, Assyrian, or Arabic origin.

The 1934 Resettlement Law was a policy adopted by the Turkish government which set forth the basic principles of immigration. The law, however, is regarded by some as a policy of assimilation of non-Turkish minorities through a forced and collective resettlement.

====Social policy reforms and economic progress====
Atatürk was also credited for his transformational change in Turkish agriculture and ecological development. The Kemalist government planted four million trees, modernized the Turkish agricultural mechanism, implemented flood controls, opened schools in rural areas with rural institutions such as agricultural banks, and implemented land reform that removed heavy taxes on peasants of the Ottoman era. He was described as the &quot;Father of Turkish Agriculture&quot;. Atatürk also massively boomed the Turkish economy with heavy industrial production increased by 150% and GDP per capita rose from 800 USD to around 2000 USD by late 1930s, on par with Japan.

Atatürk&#x27;s regime also passed the 1936 Labor Law, which gave substantial wage increases and improved the working conditions of workers in Turkish enterprises.

===Foreign policies===
Atatürk&#x27;s foreign policy followed his motto &quot;Peace at home, peace in the world&quot;, a perception of peace linked to his project of civilization and modernization. The outcomes of Atatürk&#x27;s policies depended on the power of the parliamentary sovereignty established by the Republic. The Turkish War of Independence was the last time Atatürk used his military might in dealing with other countries. Foreign issues were resolved by peaceful methods during his presidency.

====Issue of Mosul====

The Issue of Mosul, a dispute with the United Kingdom over control of Mosul Vilayet, was one of the first foreign affairs-related controversies of the new Republic. During the Mesopotamian campaign, Lieutenant General William Marshall followed the British War Office&#x27;s instruction that &quot;every effort was to be made to score as heavily as possible on the Tigris before the whistle blew&quot;, capturing Mosul three days after the signature of the Armistice of Mudros (30 October 1918). In 1920, the &quot;Misak-ı Milli&quot;, which consolidated the &quot;Turkish lands&quot;, declared that Mosul Vilayet was a part of the historic Turkish heartland. The British were in a precarious situation with the Issue of Mosul and were adopting almost equally desperate measures to protect their interests. For example, the Iraqi revolt against the British was suppressed by the RAF Iraq Command during the summer of 1920. From the British perspective, if Atatürk stabilized Turkey, he would then turn his attention to Mosul and penetrate Mesopotamia, where the native population would likely join his cause. Such an event would result in an insurgent and hostile Muslim nation in close proximity to British territory in India.

In 1923, Atatürk tried to persuade the GNA that accepting the arbitration of the League of Nations at the Treaty of Lausanne did not signify relinquishing Mosul, but rather waiting for a time when Turkey might be stronger. Nevertheless, the artificially drawn border had an unsettling effect on the population on both sides. Later, it was claimed that Turkey began where the oil ends, as the border was drawn by the British geophysicists based on locations of oil reserves. Atatürk did not want this separation. To address Atatürk&#x27;s concerns, the British Foreign Secretary George Curzon attempted to disclaim the existence of oil in the Mosul area. On 23 January 1923, Curzon argued that the existence of oil was no more than hypothetical. However, according to the biographer H. C. Armstrong, &quot;England wanted Mosul and its oil. The Kurds were the key to Mosul and the oil of Irak.&quot;

While three inspectors from the League of Nations Committee were sent to the region to oversee the situation in 1924, the Sheikh Said rebellion (1924–1927) set out to establish a new government positioned to cut Turkey&#x27;s link to Mesopotamia. The relationship between the rebels and Britain was investigated. In fact, British assistance was sought after the rebels decided that the rebellion could not stand by itself.

In 1925, the League of Nations formed a three-member committee to study the case while the Sheikh Said Rebellion was on the rise. Partly because of the continuing uncertainties along the northern frontier (present-day northern Iraq), the committee recommended that the region should be connected to Iraq with the condition that the UK would hold the British Mandate of Mesopotamia. By the end of March 1925, the necessary troop movements were completed, and the whole area of the Sheikh Said rebellion was encircled. As a result of these manoeuvres, the revolt was put down. Britain, Iraq, and Atatürk made a treaty on 5 June 1926, which mostly followed the decisions of the League Council. The agreement left a large section of the Kurdish population and the Iraqi Turkmen on the non-Turkish side of the border.

====Relations with the Russian SFSR/Soviet Union====


In his 26 April 1920 message to Vladimir Lenin, the Bolshevik leader and head of the Russian SFSR&#x27;s government, Atatürk promised to coordinate his military operations with the Bolsheviks&#x27; &quot;fight against imperialist governments&quot; and requested 5 million lira in gold as well as armaments &quot;as first aid&quot; to his forces. In 1920 alone, the Lenin government supplied the Kemalists with 6,000 rifles, over 5 million rifle cartridges, 17,600 projectiles as well as 200.6 kg of gold bullion. In the subsequent two years, the amount of aid increased.

In March 1921, the GNA representatives in Moscow signed the Treaty of Moscow (&quot;Friendship and Brotherhood&quot; Treaty) with Soviet Russia, which was a major diplomatic breakthrough for the Kemalists. The Treaty of Moscow, followed by the identical Treaty of Kars in October the same year, gave Turkey a favourable settlement of its north-eastern frontier at the expense of the Armenian Soviet Socialist Republic, then nominally an independent state.

Relations between the two countries were friendly but were based on the fact that they were against a common enemy: Britain and the West. In 1920, Atatürk toyed with the idea of using a state-controlled Turkish Communist Party to forestall the perceived spread of communist ideas in the country and gain access to the Comintern&#x27;s financing.

Despite his relations with the Soviet Union, Atatürk was not willing to commit Turkey to communism. &quot;Friendship with Russia,&quot; he said, &quot;is not to adopt their ideology of communism for Turkey.&quot; Moreover, Atatürk declared, &quot;Communism is a social issue. Social conditions, religion, and national traditions of our country confirm the opinion that Russian Communism is not applicable in Turkey.&quot; And in a speech on 1 November 1924, he said, &quot;Our amicable relations with our old friend the Soviet Russian Republic are developing and progressing every day. As in past our Republican Government regards genuine and extensive good relations with Soviet Russia as the keystone of our foreign policy.&quot;

After the Turks withdrew their delegation from Geneva on 16 December 1925, they left the League of Nations Council to grant a mandate for the Mosul region to Britain without their consent. Atatürk countered by concluding a non-aggression pact with the USSR on 17 December. In 1935, the pact was prolonged for another 10 years.

In 1933, the Soviet Defence Minister Kliment Voroshilov visited Turkey and attended the tenth year celebrations of the Republic. Atatürk explained his position regarding the realization of his plan for a Balkan Federation economically uniting Turkey, Greece, Romania, Yugoslavia and Bulgaria.

During the second half of the 1930s, Atatürk tried to establish a closer relationship with Britain and other major Western powers, which caused displeasure on the part of the Soviets. The second edition of the Great Soviet Encyclopedia (Volume 20, 1953) was unequivocally critical of Atatürk&#x27;s policies in the last years of his rule, calling his domestic policies &quot;anti-popular&quot; and his foreign course as aimed at rapprochement with the &quot;imperialist powers&quot;.

====Turkish-Greek alliance====

The post-war leader of Greece, Eleftherios Venizelos, was also determined to establish normal relations between his country and Turkey. The war had devastated Western Anatolia, and the financial burden of Ottoman Muslim refugees from Greece blocked rapprochement. Venizelos moved forward with an agreement with Turkey, despite accusations of conceding too much on the issues of naval armaments and the properties of Ottoman Greeks from Turkey. In spite of Turkish animosity against the Greeks, Atatürk resisted the pressures of historic enmities and was sensitive towards past tensions; at one point, he ordered the removal of a painting showing a Turkish soldier plunging his bayonet into a Greek soldier by stating, &quot;What a revolting scene!&quot;

Greece renounced all its claims over Turkish territory, and the two sides concluded an agreement on 30 April 1930. On 25 October, Venizelos visited Turkey and signed a treaty of friendship. Venizelos even forwarded Atatürk&#x27;s name for the 1934 Nobel Peace Prize. Even after Venizelos&#x27; fall from power, Greco-Turkish relations remained cordial. Indeed, Venizelos&#x27; successor Panagis Tsaldaris came to visit Atatürk in September 1933 and signed a more comprehensive agreement called the &quot;Entente Cordiale&quot; between Greece and Turkey, which was a stepping stone for the Balkan Pact.

Greek Premier Ioannis Metaxas once stated, with regard to Atatürk, that &quot;...Greece, which has the highest estimation of the renowned leader, heroic soldier, and enlightened creator of Turkey. We will never forget that President Atatürk was the true founder of the Turkish-Greek alliance based on a framework of common ideals and peaceful cooperation. He developed ties of friendship between the two nations which it would be unthinkable to dissolve. Greece will guard its fervent memories of this great man, who determined an unalterable future path for the noble Turkish nation.&quot;

====Neighbours to the east====
From 1919, Afghanistan was in the midst of a reformation period under Amanullah Khan. Afghan Foreign Minister Mahmud Tarzi was a follower of Atatürk&#x27;s domestic policy. Tarzi encouraged Amanullah Khan in social and political reform but urged that reforms should built on a strong government. During the late 1920s, Anglo-Afghan relations soured over British fears of an Afghan-Soviet friendship. On 20 May 1928, Anglo-Afghan politics gained a positive perspective, when Amanullah Khan and his wife, Queen Soraya Tarzi, were received by Atatürk in Istanbul. This meeting was followed by a Turkey-Afghanistan Friendship and Cooperation pact on 22 May 1928. Atatürk supported Afghanistan&#x27;s integration into international organizations. In 1934, Afghanistan&#x27;s relations with the international community improved significantly when it joined the League of Nations. Mahmud Tarzi received Atatürk&#x27;s personal support until he died on 22 November 1933 in Istanbul.

Atatürk and Reza Shah, leader of Iran, had a common approach regarding British imperialism and its influence in their countries, resulting in a slow but continuous rapprochement between Ankara and Tehran. Both governments sent diplomatic missions and messages of friendship to each other during the Turkish War of Independence. The policy of the Ankara government in this period was to give moral support in order to reassure Iranian independence and territorial integrity. The relations between the two countries were strained after the abolishment of the Caliphate. Iran&#x27;s Shi&#x27;a clergy did not accept Atatürk&#x27;s stance, and Iranian religious power centres perceived the real motive behind Atatürk&#x27;s reforms was to undermine the power of the clergy. By the mid-1930s, Reza Shah&#x27;s efforts had upset the clergy throughout Iran, thus widening the gap between religion and government. As Russia and Great Britain strengthened their holds in the Middle East, Atatürk feared the occupation and dismemberment of Iran as a multi-ethnic society by these European powers. Like Atatürk, Reza Shah wanted to secure Iran&#x27;s borders, and in 1934, the Shah visited Atatürk.

In 1935, the draft of what would become the Treaty of Saadabad was paragraphed in Geneva, but its signing was delayed due to the border dispute between Iran and Iraq. On 8 July 1937, Turkey, Iraq, Iran and Afghanistan signed the Saadabad Pact at Tehran. The signatories agreed to preserve their common frontiers, to consult together in all matters of common interest, and to commit no aggression against one another&#x27;s territory. The treaty united the Afghan King Zahir Shah&#x27;s call for greater Oriental-Middle Eastern cooperation, Reza Shah&#x27;s goal in securing relations with Turkey that would help free Iran from Soviet and British influence, and Atatürk&#x27;s foreign policy of ensuring stability in the region. The treaty&#x27;s immediate outcome, however, was deterring Italian leader Mussolini from interfering in the Middle East.

====Turkish Straits====
On 24 July 1923, the Treaty of Lausanne included the Lausanne Straits Agreement. The Lausanne Straits Agreement stated that the Dardanelles should remain open to all commercial vessels: seizure of foreign military vessels was subject to certain limitations during peacetime, and, even as a neutral state, Turkey could not limit any military passage during wartime. The Lausanne Straits Agreement stated that the waterway was to be demilitarised and its management left to the Straits Commission. The demilitarised zone heavily restricted Turkey&#x27;s domination and sovereignty over the Straits, and the defence of Istanbul was impossible without sovereignty over the water that passed through it.

In March 1936, Hitler&#x27;s reoccupation of the Rhineland gave Atatürk the opportunity to resume full control over the Straits. &quot;The situation in Europe&quot;, Atatürk declared &quot;is highly appropriate for such a move. We shall certainly achieve it&quot;. Tevfik Rüştü Aras, Turkey&#x27;s foreign minister, initiated a move to revise the Straits&#x27; regime. Aras claimed that he was directed by Atatürk, rather than the Prime Minister, İsmet İnönü. İnönü was worried about harming relations with Britain, France, and Balkan neighbors over the Straits. However, the signatories of the Treaty of Lausanne agreed to join the conference, since unlimited military passage had become unfavourable to Turkey with the changes in world politics. Atatürk demanded that the members of the Turkish Foreign Office devise a solution that would transfer full control of the waterway to Turkey.

On 20 July 1936, the Montreux Convention was signed by Bulgaria, Great Britain, Australia, France, Japan, Romania, the Soviet Union, Turkey, Yugoslavia and Greece. It became the primary instrument governing the passage of commercial and war vessels through the Dardanelles Strait. The agreement was ratified by the GNAT on 31 July 1936 and went into effect on 9 November 1936.

====Balkan Pact====

Until the early 1930s, Turkey followed a neutral foreign policy with the West by developing joint friendship and neutrality agreements. These bilateral agreements aligned with Atatürk&#x27;s worldview. By the end of 1925, Turkey had signed fifteen joint agreements with Western states.

In the early 1930s, changes and developments in world politics required Turkey to make multilateral agreements to improve its security. Atatürk strongly believed that close cooperation between the Balkan states based on the principle of equality would have an important effect on European politics. These states had been ruled by the Ottoman Empire for centuries and had proved to be a powerful force. While the origins of the Balkan agreement may date as far back as 1925, the Balkan Pact came into being in the mid-1930s. Several important developments in Europe helped the original idea materialise, such as improvements in the Turkish-Greek alliance and the rapprochement between Bulgaria and Yugoslavia. The most important factor in driving Turkish foreign policy from the mid-1930s onwards was the fear of Italy. Benito Mussolini had frequently proclaimed his intention to place the entire Mediterranean under Italian control. Both the Turks and the various Balkan states felt threatened by Italian ambitions.

The Balkan Pact was negotiated by Atatürk with Greece, Romania, and Yugoslavia. This mutual-defence agreement intended to guarantee the signatories&#x27; territorial integrity and political independence against attack from another Balkan state such as Bulgaria or Albania. It countered the increasingly aggressive foreign policy of fascist Italy and the effect of a potential Bulgarian alignment with Nazi Germany. Atatürk thought of the Balkan Pact as a medium of balance in Turkey&#x27;s relations with the European countries. He was particularly anxious to establish a region of security and alliances to the west of Turkey in Europe, which the Balkan Pact helped achieve.

The Balkan Pact provided for regular military and diplomatic consultations. The importance of the agreement is best seen in a message Atatürk sent to the Greek Premier Ioannis Metaxas:

The Balkan Pact was signed by the GNA on 28 February. The Greek and Yugoslav Parliaments ratified the agreement a few days later. The unanimously ratified Balkan pact was formally adopted on 18 May 1935 and lasted until 1940.

The Balkan Pact turned out to be ineffective for reasons that were beyond Atatürk&#x27;s control. The pact failed when Bulgaria attempted to raise the Dobruja issue, only to end with the Italian invasion of Albania on 7 April 1939. These conflicts spread rapidly, eventually triggering World War II. The goal of Atatürk to protect southeast Europe failed with the dissolution of the pact. In 1938, the Turkish Army at peacetime strength consisted of 174,000 soldiers and 20,000 officers forming 11 army corps, 23 divisions, one armoured brigade, 3 cavalry brigades, and 7 frontier commands.

====Issue of Hatay====
During the second half of the 1930s, Atatürk tried to form a closer relationship with Britain. The risks of this policy change put the two men at odds. The Hatay issue and the Lyon agreement were two important developments in foreign policy that played a significant role in severing relations between Atatürk and İnönü.

In 1936, Atatürk raised the &quot;Issue of Hatay&quot; at the League of Nations. Hatay was based on the old administrative unit of the Ottoman Empire called the Sanjak of Alexandretta. On behalf of the League of Nations, the representatives of France, the United Kingdom, the Netherlands, Belgium, and Turkey prepared a constitution for Hatay, which established it as an autonomous sanjak within Syria. Despite some inter-ethnic violence, an election was conducted in 1938 by the local legislative assembly. The cities of Antakya (Antioch) and İskenderun (Alexandretta) joined Turkey in 1939. 

===Economic policies===

Atatürk instigated economic policies to develop small and large scale businesses, but also to create social strata (i.e. industrial bourgeoisie coexisting with the peasantry of Anatolia) that were virtually non-existent during the Ottoman Empire. The primary problem faced by the politics of his period was the lag in the development of political institutions and social classes which would steer such social and economic changes. Atatürk&#x27;s vision regarding early Turkish economic policy was apparent during the İzmir Economic Congress of 1923. The initial choices of Atatürk&#x27;s economic policies reflected the realities of his time. After World War I, due to the lack of any real potential investors to fund private sector industry, Atatürk established many state-owned factories for agriculture, machinery, and textile industries.

====State intervention, 1923–1929====
Atatürk and İsmet İnönü&#x27;s pursuit of state-controlled economic policies was guided by a national vision; their goal was to knit the country together, eliminate foreign control of the economy, and improve communications within Turkey. Resources were channeled away from Istanbul, a trading port with international foreign enterprises, in favor of other, less developed cities in order to achieve a more balanced economic development throughout the country.

For Atatürk and his supporters, tobacco remained wedded to his pursuit of economic independence. Turkish tobacco was an important industrial crop, but its cultivation and manufacture had been under French monopolies granted by capitulations of the Ottoman Empire. The tobacco and cigarette trade was controlled by two French companies: the Regie Company and Narquileh Tobacco. The Ottoman Empire had given the tobacco monopoly to the Ottoman Bank as a limited company under the Council of the Public Debt. Regie, as part of the council, had control over tobacco production, storage, and distribution (including export) with unchallenged price control. Consequently, Turkish farmers were dependent on the company for their livelihoods. In 1925, Regie was taken over by the state and named Tekel. Government control of tobacco was one of the greatest achievements of the Kemalist political machinery&#x27;s &quot;nationalization&quot; of the economy for a country that did not produce oil. Kemalists accompanied this achievement with the development of the country&#x27;s cotton industry, which peaked during the early 1930s. Cotton was the second most important industrial crop in Turkey at the time.

In 1924, with the initiative of Atatürk, the first Turkish bank İş Bankası was established, with Atatürk as the bank&#x27;s first member. The bank&#x27;s creation was a response to the growing need for a truly national establishment and a banking system which was capable of backing up economic activities, managing funds accumulated through policies of savings incentives, and offering resources where necessary to trigger industrial impetus.

In 1927, Turkish State Railways was established. Because Atatürk considered the development of a national rail network as another important step in industrialisation, railways were given high priority. The Turkish State Railway developed an extensive railway network in a very short time.

The Turkish government under Atatürk developed many economic and infrastructure projects within the first decade of the republic. However, the Turkish economy was still largely agrarian, with primitive tools and methods. Roads and transportation facilities were still far from sufficient, and management of the economy was inefficient. The Great Depression brought many changes to this picture.

====Great Depression, 1929–1931====

The young republic, like the rest of the world, found itself in a deep economic crisis during the Great Depression. Atatürk reacted to conditions of this period by moving toward integrated economic policies and establishing a central bank to control exchange rates. However, Turkey could not finance essential imports; its currency was shunned, and zealous revenue officials seized the meagre possessions of peasants who could not pay their taxes.

In 1929, Atatürk signed a treaty that resulted in the restructuring of Turkey&#x27;s debt with the Ottoman Public Debt Administration. At the time, Atatürk not only had to deal with the payment of the Ottoman public debt but also the turbulent economic issues of the Great Depression. For example, until the early 1930s, Turkish private business could not acquire exchange credits. It was impossible to integrate the Turkish economy without a solution to these problems.

In 1931, the Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey was established. The bank&#x27;s primary purpose was to control the exchange rate and Ottoman Bank&#x27;s role during its initial years as a central bank was phased out. Later specialized banks such as the Sümerbank (1932) and the Etibank (1935) were founded.

From the political economy perspective, Atatürk faced the problem of political upheaval. The establishment of a new party with a different economic perspective was necessary; he asked Ali Fethi Okyar to meet this end. The Liberal Republican Party (August 1930) was founded with a liberal program and proposed that state monopolies should be ended, foreign capital should be attracted, and state investment should be curtailed. Nevertheless, Atatürk maintained the view that &quot;it is impossible to attract foreign capital for essential development,&quot; and state capitalism became the dominant agenda during the depression era. In 1931, Atatürk proclaimed: &quot;In the economic area ...the programme of the party is statism.&quot; However, the effect of free republicans was felt strongly and state intervention became more moderate and more akin to a form of state capitalism. One of Atatürk&#x27;s radical left-wing supporters, Yakup Kadri Karaosmanoğlu from the Kadro (The Cadre) movement, claimed that Atatürk found a third way between capitalism and socialism.
====Liberalization and planned growth, 1931–1939====
The first (1929–1933) and second five-year economic plans were enacted under the supervision of Atatürk. The first five-year economic plan promoted consumer substitution industries. However, these economic plans changed drastically with the death of Atatürk and the rise of World War II. Subsequent governments took measures that harmed the economic productivity of Turkey in various ways. The achievements of the 1930s were credited to early 1920s implementations of the economic system based on Atatürk&#x27;s national policies.

In 1931, Atatürk watched the development of the first national aircraft, MMV-1. He realised the important role of aviation and stated, &quot;the future lies in the skies&quot;. The Turkish Aeronautical Association was founded on 16 February 1925 by his directive. He also ordered the establishment of the Turkish Aircraft Association Lottery. Instead of the traditional raffle prizes, this new lottery paid money prizes. Most of the lottery income was used to establish a new factory and fund aviation projects. However, Atatürk did not live to see the flight of the first Turkish military aircraft built at that factory. Operational American Curtiss Hawk fighters were being produced in Turkey soon after his death and before the onset of World War II.
In 1932, liberal economist Celâl Bayar became the Minister of Economy at Atatürk&#x27;s request and served until 1937. During this period, the country moved toward a mixed economy with its first private initiatives. Textile, sugar, paper, and steel factories (financed by a loan from Britain) were the private sectors of the period. Besides these businesses, government-owned power plants, banks, and insurance companies were established. In this period, Atatürk promoted public-private sector cooperation and the expansion of private businesses with private shareholders firms allowed to purchase shares in state-owned enterprises. 

In 1935, the first Turkish cotton print factory &quot;Nazilli Calico print factory&quot; opened. As part of the industrialization process, cotton planting was promoted to furnish raw material for future factory settlements. By 1935, Nazilli became a major industrial center beginning with the establishment of cotton mills followed by a calico print factory.
In 1936, Turkish industrialist Nuri Demirağ established the first Turkish aircraft factory in the Beşiktaş district of Istanbul. The first Turkish airplanes, Nu D.36 and Nu D.38, were produced in this factory.

On 25 October 1937, Atatürk appointed Celâl Bayar as the prime minister of the 9th government. Integrated economic policies reached their peak with the signing of the 1939 Treaty with Britain and France. The treaty signaled a turning point in Turkish history since it was the first step towards an alliance with the West. After İsmet İnönü became president in 1938, the differences between İnönü (who promoted state control) and Bayar (who was liberal) came to the forefront. On 25 January 1939, Prime Minister Bayar resigned.

Atatürk also supported the establishment of the automobile industry. The Turkish Automobile Association was founded in 1923, and its motto was: &quot;The Turkish driver is a man of the most exquisite sensitivities.&quot;

In 1935, Turkey was becoming an industrial society based on the Western European model set by Atatürk. However, the gap between Atatürk&#x27;s goals and the achievements of the socio-political structure of the country had not yet been closed.

==Personal life==

Atatürk&#x27;s name is associated with four women: Eleni Karinte, Fikriye Hanım, Dimitrina Kovacheva, and Latife Uşaki. After the Turkish army entered İzmir in 1922, Atatürk met Latife while staying at the house of her father, the shipping magnate Muammer Uşakizade (later Uşaklı). Latife fell in love with Atatürk; again the extent to which this was reciprocated is unknown, but Atatürk was impressed by Latife&#x27;s intellect: she was a graduate of the Sorbonne and was studying English in London when the war broke out. On 29 January 1923, they were married. Latife was jealous of Fikriye and demanded that she leave the house in Çankaya; Fikriye was devastated and immediately left in a carriage. According to official accounts, she shot herself with a pistol Atatürk had given her as a present.

The triangle of Atatürk, Fikriye, and Latife became the subject of a manuscript by Atatürk&#x27;s close friend, Salih Bozok, though the work remained unpublished until 2005. Latife was briefly and literally the face of the new Turkish woman, appearing in public in Western clothing with her husband. However, their marriage was not happy; after frequent arguments, the two were divorced on 5 August 1925.

During his lifetime, Atatürk adopted thirteen children: a boy and twelve girls. Of these, the most famous is Sabiha Gökçen, Turkey&#x27;s first female pilot and the world&#x27;s first female fighter pilot.

Atatürk&#x27;s religious beliefs became a subject of debate. Some researchers have emphasized that his discourses about religion are periodic and that his positive views related to this subject are limited in the early 1920s. Some Turkish sources claim he was a devout Muslim. However, according to other sources, Atatürk himself was an agnostic, i.e. non-doctrinaire deist, or even an atheist, who was antireligious and anti-Islamic in general.

==Illness and death==
Throughout most of his life, Atatürk was a moderate-to-heavy drinker, often consuming half a litre of rakı a day; he also smoked tobacco, predominantly in the form of cigarettes. During 1937, indications that Atatürk&#x27;s health was worsening started to appear. In early 1938, while on a trip to Yalova, he suffered from a serious illness. He went to Istanbul for treatment, where he was diagnosed with cirrhosis. During his stay in Istanbul, he made an effort to keep up with his regular lifestyle, but eventually succumbed to his illness. He died on 10 November 1938, at the age of 57, in the Dolmabahçe Palace. 

Atatürk&#x27;s funeral called forth both sorrow and pride in Turkey, and 17 countries sent special representatives, while nine contributed armed detachments to the cortège. Atatürk&#x27;s remains were originally laid to rest in the Ethnography Museum of Ankara, but they were transferred on 10 November 1953 (15 years after his death) in a 42-ton sarcophagus to a mausoleum overlooking Ankara, Anıtkabir.

In his will, Atatürk donated all of his possessions to the Republican People&#x27;s Party, provided that the yearly interest of his funds would be used to look after his sister Makbule and his adopted children, and fund the higher education of İsmet İnönü&#x27;s children. The remainder was willed to the Turkish Language Association and the Turkish Historical Society.

==Legacy==

===Turkey===

Kemal Atatürk is commemorated by many memorials throughout Turkey, such as the Atatürk International Airport in Istanbul, the Atatürk Bridge over the Golden Horn (Haliç), the Atatürk Dam, and Atatürk Stadium. Atatürk statues have been erected in all Turkish cities by the Turkish Government, and most towns have their own memorial to him. His face and name are seen and heard everywhere in Turkey; his portrait can be seen in public buildings, in schools, on all Turkish lira banknotes, and in the homes of many Turkish families. At 9:05 am on every 10 November, at the exact time of Atatürk&#x27;s death, most vehicles and people in the country&#x27;s streets pause for one minute in remembrance.

In 1951, the Democrat Party-controlled Turkish parliament led by Prime Minister Adnan Menderes (despite being the conservative opposition to Atatürk&#x27;s own Republican People&#x27;s Party) issued a law (Law on Crimes Committed Against Atatürk) outlawing insults to his memory (&quot;hatırasına alenen hakaret&quot;) and destruction of objects representing him. The demarcation between a criticism and an insult was defined as a political argument, and the Minister of Justice (a political position) was to execute the law rather than the public prosecutor. A government website was created to denounce websites that violate this law.

In 2010, the French-based NGO Reporters Without Borders objected to the Turkish laws protecting the memory of Atatürk, arguing that they contradict the current European Union standards of freedom of speech in news media.

===Worldwide===

In 1981, the centennial of Atatürk&#x27;s birth, his memory was honoured by the United Nations and UNESCO, which declared it &quot;The Atatürk Year in the World&quot; and adopted the Resolution on the Atatürk Centennial. The Atatürk Monument in Mexico City on Paseo de la Reforma; the Atatürk Monument in Baku, Azerbaijan; the Atatürk Monument in Almaty, Kazakhstan; the Atatürk Memorial in Wellington, New Zealand (which also serves as a memorial to the ANZAC troops who died at Gallipoli); the Atatürk Memorial in the place of honour on Anzac Parade in Canberra, Australia; and squares called the Plaza Mustafa Kemal Atatürk in Santiago, Chile and the Largo Mustafa Kemal Atatürk in Rome, Italy are a few examples of Atatürk memorials outside Turkey. He has roads named after him in several countries, such as the Kemal Atatürk Marg in New Delhi, India; the Kamal Atatürk Avenues in Dhaka and Chittagong in Bangladesh; the Atatürk Avenue in the heart of Islamabad, Pakistan; the Atatürk Road in the southern city of Larkana in Sindh, Pakistan; Mustafa Kemal Atatürk Street in Tunis, Tunisia; Mustafá Kemal Atatürk Street in the Naco district of Santo Domingo, Dominican Republic; and the street and memorial Atatürk in the Amsterdam-Noord borough of Amsterdam, Netherlands. In addition, the entrance to Princess Royal Harbour in Albany, Western Australia is named Atatürk Channel. There are many statues and streets named after Atatürk in Northern Cyprus. 

Despite his radical secular reforms, Atatürk remained broadly popular in the Muslim world. He is remembered for being the creator of a new, fully independent Muslim country at a time of encroachment by Christian powers, and for having prevailed in a struggle against Western imperialism. When he died, the All-India Muslim League eulogised him as a &quot;truly great personality in the Islamic world, a great general, and a great statesman&quot;, declaring that his memory would &quot;inspire Muslims all over the world with courage, perseverance, and manliness&quot;.

The range of Atatürk&#x27;s admirers extends from the British Prime Minister Winston Churchill, his opponent in World War I, to the German Nazi leader and dictator Adolf Hitler, who called Atatürk a &quot;star in the darkness&quot;. Some presidents of the United States, including Franklin D. Roosevelt and John F. Kennedy, also respected Atatürk. President Kennedy paid tribute to Atatürk in 1963 on the 25th anniversary of his death.

As a role model that encouraged national sovereignty, Atatürk was especially revered in countries of the so-called Third World, which saw him as the pioneer of independence from colonial powers. The leaders of such countries included Atatürk&#x27;s Iranian contemporary Reza Shah Pahlavi, the Indian Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru, the Tunisian President Habib Bourguiba, and the Egyptian President Anwar Sadat. The Pakistani poet and philosopher Muhammad Iqbal and the Bangladeshi national poet Kazi Nazrul Islam wrote poems in his honor.

The Twelfth International Women Conference was held in Istanbul, Turkey on 18 April 1935, and Egyptian nationalist-feminist Huda Sha&#x27;arawi was elected by the conference as the vice-president of the International Women&#x27;s Union. Huda considered Atatürk as a role model for her actions and wrote in her memoirs: 

In the epilogue of &quot;Grey Wolf, Mustafa Kemal: An Intimate Study of a Dictator&quot;, first published in 1932 and the first biography of Atatürk published in his lifetime, H. C. Armstrong wrote these words: 

However, Atatürk&#x27;s acclaim is not universal. As the leader of the national movement of 1919–1923, Atatürk was described by the Allies and Istanbul journalist Ali Kemal (who believed the liberation efforts would fail and cause a more severe punishment by the Allies) as a &quot;bandit chief&quot;. Lord Balfour in this context called him the &quot;most terrible of all the terrible Turks&quot;.

== Works ==

* &quot;Cumalı Ordugâhı - Süvâri: Bölük, Alay, Liva Tâlim ve Manevraları&quot; &quot;[Cumalı Camp - Cavalry: Company, Regiment, Brigade Training and Maneuvers]&quot;, Thessaloniki, 1909.
* &quot;Ta’biye ve Tatbîkat Seyahati [Organization and Application Trip]&quot;, Selanik Askeri Matbaası, 1911.
* &quot;Ta’biye Mes’elesinin Halli ve Emirlerin Sûret-i Tahrîrine Dâir Nasâyih [Advice on the Solution to the Problem of Organization and the Methods of Recording Orders]&quot;, Edirne Sanayi Mektebi Matbaası, 1916.
* &quot;Taʼlîm ve Terbiye-i Askeriyye Hakkında Nokta-i Nazarlar [Points of View on Instruction and Military Training]&quot;, Edirne Sanayi Mektebi Matbaası, 1916.
* &quot;Zâbit ve Kumandan ile Hasb-ı Hâl&quot; &quot;[Discourse with an Officer and a Commander]&quot;, Minber Matbaası, 1918.
* &quot;Nutuk&quot; &quot;[Speech]&quot;, Turkish Aeronautical Association, Ankara, 1927.
* &quot;Vatandaş için Medeni Bilgiler&quot; &quot;[Civic Information for Citizens]&quot;, Milliyet Matbaası, İstanbul, 1930.
* &quot;Geometri [Geometry]&quot;, 1937.

=== Translations ===

* &quot;Takımın Muharebe Tâlimi&quot; &quot;[Combat Training for the Squad]&quot;, Selanik Asır Matbaası, Thessaloniki, 1908. (From German)
* &quot;Bölüğün Muharebe Tâlimi [Combat Training for the Company]&quot;, 1912. (From German)

==Awards and decorations==

He received awards and decorations before, during, and after World War I.

===Ottoman Empire and Republic of Turkey===
* : Fifth Class Knight Order of the Medjidie awarded by Abdul Hamid II (25 December 1906)
* : Silver Imtiyaz Medal awarded by Mehmed V (30 April 1915)
* : Silver Liakat Medal awarded by Mehmed V (1 September 1915)
* : Golden Liakat Medal awarded by Mehmed V (17 January 1916)
* : Second Class Knight Order of Osmanieh awarded by Mehmed V (1 February 1916)
* : Second Class Knight Order of the Medjidie awarded by Mehmed V (12 December 1916)
* : Golden Imtiyaz Medal awarded by Mehmed V (23 September 1917)
* : First Class Knight Order of the Medjidie awarded by Mehmed V (16 December 1917)
* : Gallipoli Star awarded by Mehmed VI (11 May 1918)
* : Medal of Independence awarded by Grand National Assembly of Turkey (21 November 1923)
* : Murassa Order awarded by Turkish Aeronautical Association (20 May 1925)

===Foreign honours===
* : Commander Grand Cross Order of Saint Alexander awarded by Ferdinand I (1915)
* : Iron Cross of the German Empire awarded by Wilhelm II (1915)
* : Military Merit Medal (Austria-Hungary) awarded by Franz Joseph I (1916)
* : 2nd Class Military Merit Cross (Austria-Hungary) awarded by Charles I (1916)
* : 3rd Class Military Merit Cross (Austria-Hungary) awarded by Franz Joseph I (27 July 1916)
* : 1st Class Iron Cross of the German Empire awarded by Wilhelm II (1917)
* : 2nd Class Iron Cross of the German Empire awarded by Wilhelm II (9 September 1917)
* : 1st Class Order of the Crown Prussia awarded by Wilhelm II (1918)
* : Alüyülala Order of Kingdom of Afghanistan awarded by Amānullāh Khān (27 March 1923)

==See also==

* Atatürk Forest Farm and Zoo
* European interwar dictatorships
* &quot;İleri&quot;
* Kemalist historiography
* Law on Crimes Committed Against Atatürk
* List of covers of &quot;Time&quot; magazine (1920s) – 24 March 1923 and 21 February 1927
* Sun Language Theory
* Timeline of Mustafa Kemal Atatürk
* Turkish History Thesis
* Turkish War of Independence
** List of high-ranking commanders of the Turkish War of Independence
** Timeline of the Turkish War of Independence

==Notes==
==References==
==Bibliography==

;Prints
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
;Journals
* 
* 
* 
* 


== External links ==
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5152" start="0" end="21" title="Mustafa Kemal Atatürk" label="Mustafa Kemal Atatürk"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152" start="37" end="56" title="Mustafa Kemal Atatürk" label="Mustafa Kemal Pasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152" start="73" end="92" title="Mustafa Kemal Atatürk" label="Ghazi Mustafa Kemal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144837" start="113" end="132" title="Surname Law (Turkey)" label="Surname Law of 1934"/>
<link wikidata="Q16151507" start="175" end="188" title="Mareşal (Turkey)" label="field marshal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6302107" start="190" end="203" title="Turkish National Movement" label="revolutionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q343436" start="229" end="244" title="founding father" label="founding father"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="252" end="270" title="Republic of Turkey" label="Republic of Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1922067" start="293" end="302" title="President of Turkey" label="president"/>
<link wikidata="Q6103634" start="319" end="328" title="Death and state funeral of Mustafa Kemal Atatürk" label="his death"/>
<link wikidata="Q780048" start="372" end="379" title="Atatürk&amp;#x27;s reforms" label="reforms"/>
<link wikidata="Q3177034" start="412" end="419" title="secularism in Turkey" label="secular"/>
<link wikidata="Q216920" start="461" end="471" title="Secularism" label="secularist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3568928" start="476" end="487" title="Turkish nationalism" label="nationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q780048" start="489" end="501" title="Atatürk&amp;#x27;s reforms" label="his policies"/>
<link wikidata="Q269443" start="547" end="555" title="Kemalism" label="Kemalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="617" end="631" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q83896" start="637" end="647" title="Young Turks" label="Young Turk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1559352" start="667" end="698" title="Committee of Union and Progress" label="Committee of Union and Progress"/>
<link wikidata="Q2073490" start="733" end="750" title="31 March incident" label="31 March Incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q164983" start="826" end="845" title="Battle of Gallipoli" label="Battle of Gallipoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="860" end="871" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q104901608" start="922" end="931" title="Late Ottoman genocides" label="genocides"/>
<link wikidata="Q911233" start="944" end="949" title="Greek genocide" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q80034" start="951" end="959" title="Armenian genocide" label="Armenian"/>
<link wikidata="Q852236" start="964" end="981" title="Sayfo" label="Assyrian subjects"/>
<link wikidata="Q6302107" start="1126" end="1151" title="Turkish National Movement" label="Turkish National Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q215669" start="1217" end="1230" title="Allies of World War I" label="Allied powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2949827" start="1247" end="1269" title="Government of the Grand National Assembly" label="provisional government"/>
<link wikidata="Q3640" start="1305" end="1311" title="Ankara" label="Ankara"/>
<link wikidata="Q234738" start="1420" end="1447" title="Turkish War of Independence" label="Turkish War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q3809270" start="1478" end="1507" title="Abolition of the Ottoman sultanate" label="abolish the Ottoman sultanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q31187690" start="1520" end="1569" title="Proclamation of the Republic of Turkey" label="proclaimed the foundation of the Turkish Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="1641" end="1657" title="Turkey" label="Turkish Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q637405" start="1951" end="1967" title="Turkish alphabet" label="Turkish alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1992372" start="1987" end="2011" title="Ottoman Turkish alphabet" label="Ottoman Turkish alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q223569" start="2036" end="2068" title="Women&amp;#x27;s rights" label="equal civil and political rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q8031500" start="2118" end="2148" title="Women in Turkish politics" label="women were given voting rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q756921" start="2296" end="2309" title="Turkification" label="Turkification"/>
<link wikidata="Q859563" start="2365" end="2379" title="secular nation" label="secular nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2737076" start="2425" end="2445" title="minorities in Turkey" label="minorities in Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5122606" start="2462" end="2475" title="Citizen, speak Turkish!" label="speak Turkish"/>
<link wikidata="Q4411706" start="2593" end="2601" title="Place name changes in Turkey" label="toponyms"/>
<link wikidata="Q274918" start="2686" end="2704" title="Grand National Assembly of Turkey" label="Turkish Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q6103634" start="2869" end="2876" title="Death and state funeral of Mustafa Kemal Atatürk" label="He died"/>
<link wikidata="Q274141" start="2900" end="2917" title="Dolmabahçe Palace" label="Dolmabahçe Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q406" start="2921" end="2929" title="Istanbul" label="Istanbul"/>
<link wikidata="Q183297" start="3011" end="3022" title="İsmet İnönü" label="İsmet İnönü"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052001" start="3047" end="3060" title="state funeral" label="state funeral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="3143" end="3157" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="3162" end="3168" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q4812884" start="3246" end="3282" title="Atatürk Centennial" label="Resolution on the Atatürk Centennial"/>
<link wikidata="Q7167" start="3355" end="3366" title="colonialism" label="colonialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7260" start="3371" end="3382" title="imperialism" label="imperialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269720" start="3674" end="3692" title="Peace at Home, Peace in the World" label="peace-in-the-world"/>
<link wikidata="Q167396" start="3834" end="3845" title="Balkan Pact" label="Balkan Pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q48742118" start="3892" end="3905" title="Fascist Italy (1922–1943)" label="Fascist Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q17063024" start="3910" end="3926" title="Tsardom of Bulgaria" label="Tsarist Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q4308518" start="3955" end="3962" title="Mustafa" label="Mustafa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1738438" start="3980" end="3985" title="Kemal (name)" label="Kemal"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="4045" end="4051" title="Arabic" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q382163" start="4143" end="4152" title="Afet İnan" label="Afet İnan"/>
<link wikidata="Q439283" start="4371" end="4383" title="Andrew Mango" label="Andrew Mango"/>
<link wikidata="Q337500" start="4471" end="4482" title="Namık Kemal" label="Namık Kemal"/>
<link wikidata="Q101352" start="4594" end="4601" title="surname" label="surname"/>
<link wikidata="Q202444" start="4686" end="4696" title="given name" label="given name"/>
<link wikidata="Q34988" start="4776" end="4786" title="Old Turkic" label="Old Turkic"/>
<link wikidata="Q477436" start="5025" end="5039" title="Anadolu Agency" label="Anadolu Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q3458382" start="5433" end="5456" title="Turkish language reform" label="Turkish language reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q17151" start="5661" end="5669" title="Thessaloniki" label="Salonica"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="5674" end="5688" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2372811" start="5707" end="5722" title="Ali Rıza Efendi" label="Ali Rıza Efendi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778268" start="5759" end="5768" title="Kodžadžik" label="Kodžadžik"/>
<link wikidata="Q2473445" start="5813" end="5826" title="Zübeyde Hanım" label="Zübeyde Hanım"/>
<link wikidata="Q4275586" start="5880" end="5896" title="Makbule Atadan" label="Makbule (Atadan)"/>
<link wikidata="Q256" start="6075" end="6091" title="Turkish language" label="Turkish-speaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q179248" start="6170" end="6178" title="Albanians" label="Albanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920160" start="6225" end="6241" title="Falih Rıfkı Atay" label="Falih Rıfkı Atay"/>
<link wikidata="Q348812" start="6243" end="6258" title="Vamık Volkan" label="Vamık D. Volkan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7052387" start="6260" end="6276" title="Norman Itzkowitz" label="Norman Itzkowitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q84072" start="6364" end="6369" title="Turkish people" label="Turks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012854" start="6398" end="6402" title="Söke" label="Söke"/>
<link wikidata="Q79846" start="6406" end="6420" title="Aydın Province" label="Aydın Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="6424" end="6432" title="Anatolia" label="Anatolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q84072" start="6480" end="6487" title="Turkish people" label="Turkish"/>
<link wikidata="Q8082501" start="6513" end="6535" title="Şevket Süreyya Aydemir" label="Şevket Süreyya Aydemir"/>
<link wikidata="Q83328" start="6548" end="6554" title="Turkic peoples" label="Turkic"/>
<link wikidata="Q170056" start="6555" end="6560" title="Yörüks" label="Yörük"/>
<link wikidata="Q179248" start="6624" end="6633" title="Albanians" label="Albanians"/>
<link wikidata="Q2436423" start="6635" end="6645" title="Macedonians (ethnic group)" label="Macedonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262476" start="6646" end="6653" title="Torbeši" label="Torbeši"/>
<link wikidata="Q1117056" start="6658" end="6675" title="Bulgarian Muslims" label="Muslim Bulgarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q2368712" start="6694" end="6700" title="History of the Jews in the Ottoman Empire" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q189746" start="6758" end="6766" title="Islamism" label="Islamist"/>
<link wikidata="Q780048" start="6799" end="6810" title="Atatürk&amp;#x27;s reforms" label="his reforms"/>
<link wikidata="Q48741620" start="6811" end="6818" title="Conspiracy theories in Turkey" label="claimed"/>
<link wikidata="Q14192963" start="6843" end="6848" title="Dönmeh" label="Dönme"/>
<link wikidata="Q3624140" start="7368" end="7397" title="Monastir Military High School" label="Monastir Military High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q157246" start="7409" end="7415" title="Bitola" label="Bitola"/>
<link wikidata="Q221" start="7417" end="7432" title="North Macedonia" label="North Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7855290" start="7505" end="7529" title="Ottoman Military Academy" label="Ottoman Military Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q390637" start="7574" end="7579" title="Şişli" label="Şişli"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7617" end="7631" title="History of Istanbul#Ottoman Empire" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q406" start="7640" end="7648" title="Istanbul" label="Istanbul"/>
<link wikidata="Q7109936" start="7701" end="7725" title="Ottoman Military College" label="Ottoman Military College"/>
<link wikidata="Q2565174" start="8064" end="8074" title="Fifth Army (Ottoman Empire)" label="Fifth Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q3766" start="8084" end="8092" title="Damascus" label="Damascus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6813432" start="8098" end="8103" title="Staff (military)" label="Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q19100" start="8104" end="8111" title="Captain (land and air)" label="Captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q983601" start="8130" end="8138" title="Ali Fuat Cebesoy" label="Ali Fuat"/>
<link wikidata="Q6711573" start="8153" end="8164" title="Lütfi Müfit Özdeş" label="Lütfi Müfit"/>
<link wikidata="Q11158600" start="8261" end="8274" title="Mustafa Cantekin" label="Mustafa Elvan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3099404" start="8293" end="8310" title="Vatan ve Hürriyet" label="Vatan ve Hürriyet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5773337" start="8397" end="8411" title="Senior Captain" label="Senior Captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2034332" start="8499" end="8509" title="Third Army (Ottoman Empire)" label="Third Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q157246" start="8513" end="8521" title="Bitola" label="Manastır"/>
<link wikidata="Q1559352" start="8537" end="8568" title="Committee of Union and Progress" label="Committee of Union and Progress"/>
<link wikidata="Q459780" start="8807" end="8822" title="Eastern Rumelia" label="Eastern Rumelia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4298662" start="8919" end="8940" title="Young Turk Revolution" label="Young Turk Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q134817" start="8972" end="8985" title="Abdülhamid II" label="Abdülhamid II"/>
<link wikidata="Q233486" start="9003" end="9026" title="Second Constitutional Era (Ottoman Empire)" label="constitutional monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1529261" start="9161" end="9181" title="Tripolitania Vilayet" label="Tripolitania Vilayet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016" start="9191" end="9196" title="Libya" label="Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q2073490" start="9523" end="9540" title="31 March Incident" label="31 March Incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q372199" start="9626" end="9654" title="History of Ottoman Albania" label="Ottoman provinces in Albania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280502" start="9669" end="9681" title="Isa Boletini" label="Isa Boletini"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246" start="9716" end="9722" title="Kosovo" label="Kosovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4709163" start="9739" end="9757" title="Albanian Revolt of 1910" label="revolts in Albania"/>
<link wikidata="Q3250016" start="9793" end="9804" title="Eqrem Vlora" label="Eqrem Vlora"/>
<link wikidata="Q281097" start="9877" end="9913" title="Albanian Declaration of Independence" label="Albanian Declaration of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249603" start="10007" end="10015" title="Picardy" label="Picardie"/>
<link wikidata="Q203824" start="10230" end="10247" title="Italo-Turkish War" label="Italo-Turkish War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1529261" start="10263" end="10283" title="Tripolitania Vilayet" label="Tripolitania Vilayet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016" start="10297" end="10302" title="Libya" label="Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q211866" start="10340" end="10345" title="Derna, Libya" label="Derna"/>
<link wikidata="Q182092" start="10350" end="10356" title="Tobruk" label="Tobruk"/>
<link wikidata="Q172579" start="10486" end="10491" title="Kingdom of Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q784972" start="10579" end="10592" title="Yemen Vilayet" label="Yemen Vilayet"/>
<link wikidata="Q127861" start="10753" end="10789" title="Khedivate of Egypt" label="Ottoman provinces of Egypt and Sudan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3579" start="11123" end="11130" title="Tripoli, Libya" label="Tripoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q2624980" start="11271" end="11287" title="Battle of Tobruk (1911)" label="Battle of Tobruk"/>
<link wikidata="Q23757" start="11496" end="11505" title="limestone" label="limestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7178" start="11723" end="11735" title="International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement" label="Red Crescent"/>
<link wikidata="Q153899" start="12080" end="12089" title="İsmail Enver" label="Enver Bey"/>
<link wikidata="Q366292" start="12091" end="12100" title="Fethi Okyar" label="Fethi Bey"/>
<link wikidata="Q184002" start="12170" end="12184" title="Ottoman territories in Europe" label="Ottoman Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q165725" start="12215" end="12226" title="Balkan Wars" label="Balkan Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q192435" start="12307" end="12319" title="Tripolitania" label="Tripolitania"/>
<link wikidata="Q188258" start="12321" end="12327" title="Fezzan" label="Fezzan"/>
<link wikidata="Q165198" start="12333" end="12342" title="Cyrenaica" label="Cyrenaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q172579" start="12394" end="12410" title="Kingdom of Italy" label="Kingdom of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q203824" start="12418" end="12443" title="Treaty of Ouchy" label="Treaty of Lausanne (1912)"/>
<link wikidata="Q668559" start="12591" end="12611" title="Château d&amp;#x27;Ouchy" label="Château d&amp;#x27;Ouchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q807" start="12615" end="12623" title="Lausanne" label="Lausanne"/>
<link wikidata="Q193258" start="12678" end="12703" title="Treaty of Lausanne" label="Treaty of Lausanne (1923)"/>
<link wikidata="Q215669" start="12723" end="12744" title="Allies of World War I" label="Allies of World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q274918" start="12753" end="12786" title="Grand National Assembly of Turkey" label="Grand National Assembly of Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3640" start="12790" end="12796" title="Ankara" label="Ankara"/>
<link wikidata="Q192860" start="12925" end="12934" title="Gallipoli" label="Gallipoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q177918" start="12961" end="12977" title="First Balkan War" label="First Balkan War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2987585" start="13021" end="13027" title="Bolayır" label="Bulair"/>
<link wikidata="Q41741" start="13044" end="13050" title="Thrace" label="Thrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q5770104" start="13057" end="13064" title="Binbashi" label="Binbaşı"/>
<link wikidata="Q366292" start="13065" end="13074" title="Fethi Okyar" label="Fethi Bey"/>
<link wikidata="Q842670" start="13119" end="13135" title="Battle of Bulair" label="Battle of Bulair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352383" start="13139" end="13153" title="Georgi Todorov (general)" label="Georgi Todorov"/>
<link wikidata="Q4822413" start="13209" end="13226" title="Stiliyan Kovachev" label="Stiliyan Kovachev"/>
<link wikidata="Q5475994" start="13234" end="13255" title="Fourth Army (Bulgaria)" label="Bulgarian Fourth Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q184183" start="13283" end="13300" title="Second Balkan War" label="Second Balkan War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137527" start="13355" end="13363" title="Kaymakam" label="Kaymakam"/>
<link wikidata="Q153899" start="13364" end="13373" title="İsmail Enver" label="Enver Bey"/>
<link wikidata="Q932648" start="13389" end="13397" title="Dimetoka" label="Dimetoka"/>
<link wikidata="Q43387" start="13402" end="13408" title="Edirne" label="Edirne"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="13446" end="13460" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q41741" start="13564" end="13570" title="Thrace" label="Thrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q23522" start="13651" end="13668" title="Balkans" label="all Balkan states"/>
<link wikidata="Q472" start="13688" end="13693" title="Sofia" label="Sofia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137527" start="13733" end="13741" title="Kaymakam" label="Kaymakam"/>
<link wikidata="Q493898" start="13743" end="13761" title="Lieutenant Colonel" label="Lieutenant Colonel"/>
<link wikidata="Q104680" start="13764" end="13771" title="Colonel" label="Colonel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4822413" start="13876" end="13893" title="Stiliyan Kovachev" label="Stiliyan Kovachev"/>
<link wikidata="Q165725" start="13941" end="13952" title="Balkan Wars" label="Balkan Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="13999" end="14010" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q11269" start="14021" end="14040" title="New Year&amp;#x27;s Eve" label="New Year&amp;#x27;s Eve"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="14277" end="14288" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q2410539" start="14428" end="14436" title="European theatre of World War I" label="European"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765465" start="14441" end="14464" title="Middle Eastern theatre of World War I" label="Middle Eastern theatres"/>
<link wikidata="Q152283" start="14496" end="14510" title="Central Powers" label="Central Powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2565174" start="14602" end="14612" title="Fifth Army (Ottoman Empire)" label="Fifth Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q164983" start="14624" end="14643" title="Gallipoli Campaign" label="Battle of Gallipoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q43387" start="14837" end="14843" title="Edirne" label="Edirne"/>
<link wikidata="Q8042545" start="14910" end="14919" title="XVI Corps (Ottoman Empire)" label="XVI Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q2659760" start="14927" end="14938" title="Second Army (Ottoman Empire)" label="Second Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q523154" start="14955" end="14972" title="Caucasus Campaign" label="Caucasus Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632850" start="15140" end="15146" title="Battle of Bitlis" label="Bitlis"/>
<link wikidata="Q118995" start="15151" end="15154" title="Muş" label="Muş"/>
<link wikidata="Q1559352" start="15236" end="15239" title="Committee of Union and Progress" label="CUP"/>
<link wikidata="Q169977" start="15305" end="15310" title="Hejaz" label="Hejaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2457082" start="15588" end="15606" title="Russian Caucasus Army (World War I)" label="Czar&amp;#x27;s armies"/>
<link wikidata="Q8729" start="15636" end="15654" title="Russian Revolution of 1917" label="Russian Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2081606" start="15718" end="15730" title="Seventh Army (Ottoman Empire)" label="Seventh Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q328331" start="15742" end="15753" title="Fevzi Çakmak" label="Fevzi Pasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q57153" start="15820" end="15840" title="Erich von Falkenhayn" label="Erich von Falkenhayn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1593571" start="15848" end="15867" title="Yildirim Army Group" label="Yildirim Army Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q334846" start="15905" end="15919" title="Edmund Allenby" label="Edmund Allenby"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218" start="15929" end="15938" title="Jerusalem" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q57470" start="15994" end="16016" title="Otto Liman von Sanders" label="Otto Liman von Sanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q183297" start="16167" end="16184" title="İsmet İnönü" label="Miralay İsmet Bey"/>
<link wikidata="Q18811" start="16204" end="16216" title="Grand Vizier" label="Grand Vizier"/>
<link wikidata="Q315888" start="16217" end="16229" title="Talaat Pasha" label="Talaat Pasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q3076765" start="16445" end="16458" title="Ottoman Syria" label="Ottoman Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1162983" start="16476" end="16490" title="Beirut Vilayet" label="Beirut Vilayet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1372503" start="16492" end="16508" title="Syria Vilayet" label="Damascus Vilayet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493892" start="16514" end="16528" title="Aleppo Vilayet" label="Aleppo Vilayet"/>
<link wikidata="Q162543" start="16773" end="16790" title="Mehmed VI" label="Mehmed Vahideddin"/>
<link wikidata="Q28513" start="16816" end="16831" title="Austria-Hungary" label="Austria-Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q152989" start="16903" end="16916" title="Western Front (World War I)" label="Western Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q152283" start="16940" end="16954" title="Central Powers" label="Central Powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2677" start="17041" end="17051" title="Wilhelm II, German Emperor" label="Wilhelm II"/>
<link wikidata="Q384544" start="17138" end="17146" title="Karlovy Vary" label="Karlsbad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741" start="17151" end="17157" title="Vienna" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q162543" start="17219" end="17228" title="Mehmed VI" label="Mehmed VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q41183" start="17470" end="17476" title="Aleppo" label="Aleppo"/>
<link wikidata="Q214178" start="17540" end="17546" title="Nablus" label="Nablus"/>
<link wikidata="Q199371" start="17657" end="17674" title="Battle of Megiddo (1918)" label="Battle of Megiddo"/>
<link wikidata="Q40059" start="17878" end="17890" title="Jordan River" label="Jordan River"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17950" end="17989" title="Battle of Megiddo (1918)#Destruction of the Ottoman Seventh Army" label="destroyed by British aerial bombardment"/>
<link wikidata="Q41183" start="18112" end="18118" title="Aleppo" label="Aleppo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4077113" start="18133" end="18145" title="Patrick Balfour, 3rd Baron Kinross" label="Lord Kinross"/>
<link wikidata="Q328499" start="18248" end="18267" title="Armistice of Mudros" label="Armistice of Mudros"/>
<link wikidata="Q93338" start="18582" end="18587" title="Antep" label="Antep"/>
<link wikidata="Q2854228" start="18902" end="18925" title="Occupation of Constantinople" label="occupied Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145246" start="19189" end="19223" title="partitioning of the Ottoman Empire" label="partitioning of the Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q215669" start="19229" end="19235" title="Allies of World War I" label="Allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="19289" end="19297" title="Anatolia" label="Anatolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2451365" start="19349" end="19368" title="occupation of Smyrna" label="occupation of İzmir"/>
<link wikidata="Q6302107" start="19447" end="19472" title="Turkish National Movement" label="Turkish National Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q104901608" start="19580" end="19602" title="late Ottoman genocides" label="late Ottoman genocides"/>
<link wikidata="Q339452" start="19677" end="19690" title="Genocide denial" label="controversial"/>
<link wikidata="Q83896" start="19747" end="19757" title="Young Turks" label="Young Turk"/>
<link wikidata="Q35323" start="19775" end="19780" title="Arabs" label="Arabs"/>
<link wikidata="Q179248" start="19782" end="19791" title="Albanians" label="Albanians"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="19793" end="19797" title="Jews" label="Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q79797" start="19814" end="19823" title="Armenians" label="Armenians"/>
<link wikidata="Q539051" start="19828" end="19834" title="Greeks" label="Greeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q134817" start="19866" end="19877" title="Abdul Hamid II" label="Abdul Hamid"/>
<link wikidata="Q192860" start="20051" end="20060" title="Gallipoli" label="Gallipoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192701" start="20065" end="20079" title="Western Thrace" label="Western Thrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q80034" start="20091" end="20108" title="Armenian genocide" label="Armenian genocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="20303" end="20321" title="United States Army" label="United States Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q3161134" start="20330" end="20343" title="James Harbord" label="James Harbord"/>
<link wikidata="Q3684739" start="20363" end="20381" title="Harbord Commission" label="Harbord Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q107401" start="20405" end="20410" title="Sivas" label="Sivas"/>
<link wikidata="Q153899" start="20870" end="20881" title="Enver Pasha" label="Enver Pasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205622" start="21278" end="21295" title="burning of Smyrna" label="burning of Smyrna"/>
<link wikidata="Q104870554" start="21688" end="21702" title="Responsibility for the burning of Smyrna" label="responsibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q6097845" start="22019" end="22030" title="Yusuf Kemal Tengirşenk" label="Yusuf Kemal"/>
<link wikidata="Q35997" start="22391" end="22396" title="İzmir" label="İzmir"/>
<link wikidata="Q4833532" start="23089" end="23096" title="Mirliva" label="Mirliva"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23143" end="23173" title="Ninth Army (Ottoman Empire)#After Mudros" label="Ninth Army Troops Inspectorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q160450" start="23293" end="23299" title="Samsun" label="Samsun"/>
<link wikidata="Q6302107" start="23354" end="23371" title="Turkish National Movement" label="national movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916517" start="23430" end="23445" title="Amasya Circular" label="Amasya Circular"/>
<link wikidata="Q269182" start="23613" end="23628" title="Kâzım Karabekir" label="Kâzım Karabekir"/>
<link wikidata="Q2573094" start="23790" end="23798" title="Sivas Congress" label="congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q107401" start="23802" end="23807" title="Sivas" label="Sivas"/>
<link wikidata="Q643030" start="23902" end="23915" title="Misak-ı Millî" label="Misak-ı Millî"/>
<link wikidata="Q12811899" start="24099" end="24112" title="1919 Ottoman general election" label="last election"/>
<link wikidata="Q3333555" start="24120" end="24138" title="Parliament of the Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q3640" start="24401" end="24407" title="Ankara" label="Ankara"/>
<link wikidata="Q274918" start="24743" end="24766" title="Grand National Assembly of Turkey" label="Grand National Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q20473788" start="24829" end="24840" title="List of Speakers of the Parliament of Turkey" label="the speaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q936648" start="24888" end="24895" title="diarchy" label="diarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4465878" start="25027" end="25049" title="Turkish courts-martial of 1919–1920" label="Turkish courts-martial"/>
<link wikidata="Q234289" start="25051" end="25062" title="Halide Edib Adıvar" label="Halide Edib"/>
<link wikidata="Q983601" start="25076" end="25084" title="Ali Fuat Cebesoy" label="Ali Fuat"/>
<link wikidata="Q18811" start="25175" end="25187" title="Grand Vizier" label="Grand Vizier"/>
<link wikidata="Q943478" start="25188" end="25205" title="Damat Ferid Pasha" label="Damat Ferid Pasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q182515" start="25217" end="25233" title="Treaty of Sèvres" label="Treaty of Sèvres"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145246" start="25260" end="25294" title="partitioning of the Ottoman Empire" label="partitioning of the Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2760925" start="25587" end="25601" title="Kuva-yi Inzibatiye" label="Caliphate army"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25688" end="25703" title="Democratic Republic of Armenia#Military" label="Armenian forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q957586" start="25711" end="25724" title="Turkish–Armenian War" label="Eastern Front"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25733" end="25745" title="Hellenic Army#History" label="Greek forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379299" start="25770" end="25776" title="Smyrna" label="Smyrna"/>
<link wikidata="Q35997" start="25793" end="25798" title="İzmir" label="İzmir"/>
<link wikidata="Q2451365" start="25810" end="25822" title="Occupation of Smyrna" label="had occupied"/>
<link wikidata="Q87138" start="25843" end="25856" title="Greco-Turkish War (1919–22)" label="Western Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q139670" start="25898" end="25928" title="Democratic Republic of Armenia" label="Democratic Republic of Armenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q83372" start="26074" end="26083" title="Bolshevik" label="Bolshevik"/>
<link wikidata="Q87138" start="26166" end="26183" title="Greco-Turkish War (1919-1922)" label="Greco-Turkish War"/>
<link wikidata="Q217466" start="26223" end="26236" title="Sakarya River" label="Sakarya River"/>
<link wikidata="Q380782" start="26319" end="26337" title="commander in chief" label="commander in chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q594015" start="26376" end="26397" title="Battle of the Sakarya" label="Battle of the Sakarya"/>
<link wikidata="Q16151507" start="26533" end="26540" title="Mareşal (Turkey)" label="Mareşal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6128777" start="26558" end="26562" title="Ghazi (warrior)" label="Gazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q274918" start="26570" end="26593" title="Grand National Assembly of Turkey" label="Grand National Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q166824" start="26873" end="26887" title="Afyonkarahisar" label="Afyonkarahisar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2445317" start="26895" end="26915" title="Battle of Dumlupınar" label="Battle of Dumlupınar"/>
<link wikidata="Q38130" start="27036" end="27053" title="League of Nations" label="League of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q2949827" start="27116" end="27133" title="Government of the Grand National Assembly" label="Ankara Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205622" start="27167" end="27174" title="Great fire of Smyrna" label="ensuing"/>
<link wikidata="Q17008541" start="27175" end="27184" title="List of massacres during the Greco-Turkish War (1919–22)" label="massacres"/>
<link wikidata="Q2261995" start="27237" end="27259" title="Lausanne Conference of 1922–23" label="Conference of Lausanne"/>
<link wikidata="Q183297" start="27310" end="27321" title="İsmet İnönü" label="İsmet İnönü"/>
<link wikidata="Q1728629" start="27443" end="27456" title="Capitulations of the Ottoman Empire" label="Capitulations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051401" start="27462" end="27469" title="Turkish Straits" label="Straits"/>
<link wikidata="Q193258" start="27623" end="27641" title="Treaty of Lausanne (1923)" label="Treaty of Lausanne"/>
<link wikidata="Q31187690" start="27786" end="27796" title="Proclamation of the Republic of Turkey" label="proclaimed"/>
<link wikidata="Q803181" start="27810" end="27822" title="Republic Day (Turkey)" label="Republic Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q180465" start="28338" end="28351" title="The first four Sunni Caliphs and the Sunnah" label="first caliphs"/>
<link wikidata="Q328331" start="28374" end="28386" title="Fevzi Çakmak" label="Fevzi Çakmak"/>
<link wikidata="Q925035" start="28388" end="28399" title="Kâzım Özalp" label="Kâzım Özalp"/>
<link wikidata="Q183297" start="28405" end="28416" title="İsmet İnönü" label="İsmet İnönü"/>
<link wikidata="Q780048" start="28471" end="28478" title="Atatürk&amp;#x27;s reforms" label="reforms"/>
<link wikidata="Q165687" start="28844" end="28857" title="human capital" label="human capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q4298662" start="29512" end="29533" title="Young Turk Revolution" label="Young Turk Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q6030041" start="29554" end="29560" title="The Six Arrows" label="banner"/>
<link wikidata="Q269443" start="29787" end="29795" title="Kemalism" label="Kemalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q471183" start="29847" end="29854" title="Realism (international relations)" label="realism"/>
<link wikidata="Q126692" start="29859" end="29869" title="pragmatism" label="pragmatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q322294" start="29918" end="29925" title="statism" label="statism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3640" start="30729" end="30735" title="Ankara" label="Ankara"/>
<link wikidata="Q971204" start="30834" end="30856" title="Postage stamps and postal history of Turkey" label="Turkish postal service"/>
<link wikidata="Q188759" start="31050" end="31074" title="representative democracy" label="representative democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813642" start="31076" end="31101" title="parliamentary sovereignty" label="parliamentary sovereignty"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="31518" end="31527" title="communism" label="communism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6223" start="31532" end="31539" title="fascism" label="fascism"/>
<link wikidata="Q128135" start="31690" end="31702" title="totalitarian" label="totalitarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6080451" start="32066" end="32081" title="1927 Detentions" label="1927 Detentions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889194" start="32185" end="32210" title="Communist Party of Turkey (historical)" label="Communist Party of Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2029391" start="32256" end="32273" title="Hikmet Kıvılcımlı" label="Hikmet Kıvılcımlı"/>
<link wikidata="Q184906" start="32275" end="32287" title="Nâzım Hikmet" label="Nâzım Hikmet"/>
<link wikidata="Q847806" start="33013" end="33041" title="Turkish Constitution of 1921" label="Turkish Constitution of 1921"/>
<link wikidata="Q1535453" start="33047" end="33075" title="Turkish Constitution of 1924" label="Turkish Constitution of 1924"/>
<link wikidata="Q79896" start="33088" end="33108" title="separation of powers" label="separation of powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q19079" start="33758" end="33788" title="Republican People&amp;#x27;s Party" label="Republican People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q131401" start="33949" end="33958" title="caliphate" label="caliphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q483654" start="34354" end="34365" title="Sunni Islam" label="Sunni Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q203768" start="34770" end="34783" title="Abdülmecid II" label="Abdülmecid II"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35680" end="35700" title="Ottoman Caliphate#Abolition" label="officially abolished"/>
<link wikidata="Q2821698" start="35829" end="35855" title="Abolition of the Caliphate" label="abolition of the caliphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q85" start="35991" end="35996" title="Cairo" label="Cairo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5806" start="36178" end="36183" title="Mecca" label="Mecca"/>
<link wikidata="Q923679" start="36195" end="36204" title="World Islamic Congress" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q482752" start="36441" end="36447" title="sharia" label="sharia"/>
<link wikidata="Q132834" start="36886" end="36893" title="medrese" label="medrese"/>
<link wikidata="Q330961" start="37030" end="37038" title="Tanzimat" label="Tanzimat"/>
<link wikidata="Q620749" start="37403" end="37408" title="dogma" label="dogma"/>
<link wikidata="Q131805" start="37568" end="37578" title="John Dewey" label="John Dewey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1080794" start="37643" end="37659" title="public education" label="public education"/>
<link wikidata="Q898130" start="37945" end="37964" title="education in Turkey" label="education in Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359675" start="38446" end="38476" title="Ministry of National Education (Turkey)" label="Ministry of National Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231793" start="38656" end="38687" title="Presidency of Religious Affairs" label="department of religious affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3177034" start="38715" end="38735" title="secularism in Turkey" label="secularism in Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q4560931" start="39131" end="39153" title="1920s in Western fashion" label="modern European attire"/>
<link wikidata="Q174791" start="39318" end="39327" title="Mahmud II" label="Mahmud II"/>
<link wikidata="Q189862" start="39333" end="39336" title="Fez (hat)" label="fez"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261500" start="39444" end="39459" title="Hat Revolution" label="Hat Law of 1925"/>
<link wikidata="Q741814" start="39754" end="39764" title="Panama hat" label="Panama hat"/>
<link wikidata="Q155915" start="39795" end="39804" title="Kastamonu" label="Kastamonu"/>
<link wikidata="Q638335" start="40024" end="40030" title="Fedora" label="Fedora"/>
<link wikidata="Q464994" start="40423" end="40439" title="Lâtife Uşaklıgil" label="Lâtife Uşaklıgil"/>
<link wikidata="Q459104" start="40643" end="40656" title="Sabiha Gökçen" label="Sabiha Gökçen"/>
<link wikidata="Q382163" start="40661" end="40670" title="Afet İnan" label="Afet İnan"/>
<link wikidata="Q9603" start="41184" end="41188" title="Sufism" label="Sufi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001465" start="41201" end="41207" title="Zawiyya" label="tekkes"/>
<link wikidata="Q487865" start="41268" end="41275" title="dervish" label="dervish"/>
<link wikidata="Q902957" start="41319" end="41333" title="Mevlana Museum" label="Mevlana Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284161" start="41606" end="41620" title="Mosul question" label="Issue of Mosul"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395698" start="41645" end="41656" title="Sheikh Said" label="Sheikh Said"/>
<link wikidata="Q619712" start="41679" end="41700" title="Sheikh Said Rebellion" label="Sheikh Said Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259323" start="41736" end="41748" title="tribal chief" label="tribal chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q32078" start="41760" end="41770" title="Naqshbandi" label="Naqshbandi"/>
<link wikidata="Q83081" start="41780" end="41790" title="Diyarbakır Province" label="Diyarbakır"/>
<link wikidata="Q174060" start="42295" end="42301" title="Elazığ" label="Elazığ"/>
<link wikidata="Q83387" start="42306" end="42316" title="Diyarbakır" label="Diyarbakır"/>
<link wikidata="Q366292" start="42528" end="42545" title="Fethi Okyar" label="Ali Fethi (Okyar)"/>
<link wikidata="Q183297" start="42564" end="42583" title="İsmet İnönü" label="İsmet Pasha (İnönü)"/>
<link wikidata="Q19079" start="43024" end="43054" title="Republican People&amp;#x27;s Party" label="Republican People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q5058947" start="43183" end="43197" title="Censure" label="censure motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q269182" start="43241" end="43256" title="Kâzım Karabekir" label="Kâzım Karabekir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1858420" start="43765" end="43793" title="Progressive Republican Party (Turkey)" label="Progressive Republican Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q282179" start="43974" end="43982" title="Rauf Orbay" label="Rauf Bey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422996" start="44003" end="44014" title="Refet Bele" label="Refet Pasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q983601" start="44020" end="44034" title="Ali Fuat Cebesoy" label="Ali Fuat Pasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q322294" start="44174" end="44181" title="statism" label="statism"/>
<link wikidata="Q878985" start="44262" end="44271" title="modernism" label="modernism"/>
<link wikidata="Q216920" start="44437" end="44447" title="secularism" label="secularism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6104568" start="44858" end="44885" title="Attempted assassination of Mustafa Kemal Atatürk" label="plot to assassinate Atatürk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1559352" start="45418" end="45449" title="Committee of Union and Progress" label="Committee of Union and Progress"/>
<link wikidata="Q4808954" start="45461" end="45473" title="Mehmet Cavit Bey" label="Mehmet Cavid"/>
<link wikidata="Q146491" start="46347" end="46357" title="Criminal law" label="penal code"/>
<link wikidata="Q482752" start="46429" end="46443" title="Sharia" label="Islamic courts"/>
<link wikidata="Q3220111" start="46550" end="46557" title="laïcité" label="laïcité"/>
<link wikidata="Q5531018" start="46677" end="46692" title="sex segregation and Islam" label="sex segregation"/>
<link wikidata="Q172317" start="46936" end="46952" title="Hijab" label="veiling of women"/>
<link wikidata="Q6062185" start="47296" end="47314" title="Turkish civil code (1926)" label="Turkish civil code"/>
<link wikidata="Q206834" start="47335" end="47351" title="Swiss Civil Code" label="Swiss Civil Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q727409" start="47815" end="47841" title="One-party period of the Republic of Turkey" label="one-party period of Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818221" start="48050" end="48080" title="State Art and Sculpture Museum" label="State Art and Sculpture Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q11634" start="48166" end="48175" title="sculpture" label="sculpture"/>
<link wikidata="Q83328" start="48616" end="48636" title="Turkic peoples" label="culture of the Turks"/>
<link wikidata="Q3708255" start="48759" end="48765" title="Seljuq dynasty" label="Seljuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="48770" end="48777" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman"/>
<link wikidata="Q339564" start="48816" end="48839" title="History of Anatolia" label="Anatolian civilizations"/>
<link wikidata="Q149386" start="48842" end="48851" title="Phrygians" label="Phrygians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778719" start="48853" end="48860" title="Lydians" label="Lydians"/>
<link wikidata="Q35355" start="48862" end="48871" title="Sumerians" label="Sumerians"/>
<link wikidata="Q5406" start="48877" end="48885" title="Hittites" label="Hittites"/>
<link wikidata="Q4832315" start="48969" end="48978" title="Sümerbank" label="Sümerbank"/>
<link wikidata="Q5404525" start="49022" end="49029" title="Etibank" label="Etibank"/>
<link wikidata="Q36730" start="49188" end="49212" title="Ottoman Turkish language" label="Ottoman Turkish language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1828555" start="49228" end="49241" title="Arabic script" label="Arabic script"/>
<link wikidata="Q9168" start="49258" end="49265" title="Persian language" label="Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q131805" start="49376" end="49386" title="John Dewey" label="John Dewey"/>
<link wikidata="Q256" start="49716" end="49732" title="Turkish language" label="Turkish language"/>
<link wikidata="Q41670" start="49754" end="49768" title="Latin alphabet" label="Latin alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q637405" start="49778" end="49794" title="Turkish alphabet" label="Turkish alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341333" start="50699" end="50716" title="Turkish newspapers" label="Turkish newspaper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813494" start="51371" end="51386" title="teaching method" label="teaching method"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319035" start="51676" end="51691" title="adult education" label="adult education"/>
<link wikidata="Q7535186" start="51719" end="51729" title="Skill (labor)" label="skill base"/>
<link wikidata="Q15675634" start="52254" end="52270" title="female education" label="female education"/>
<link wikidata="Q113453" start="52284" end="52299" title="gender equality" label="gender equality"/>
<link wikidata="Q541394" start="52378" end="52389" title="coeducation" label="coeducation"/>
<link wikidata="Q8087" start="53825" end="53833" title="geometry" label="geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q366292" start="53964" end="53975" title="Fethi Okyar" label="Fethi Okyar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3366695" start="54071" end="54095" title="Liberal Republican Party (Turkey)" label="Liberal Republican Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2152404" start="54445" end="54452" title="Menemen" label="Menemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q155564" start="54474" end="54487" title="Aegean Region" label="Aegean Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q3287150" start="54493" end="54509" title="Menemen Incident" label="Menemen Incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q6934483" start="54649" end="54693" title="multi-party period of the Republic of Turkey" label="multi-party period of the Republic of Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186034" start="54761" end="54777" title="Democratic Party (Turkey, historical)" label="Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q171174" start="54860" end="54876" title="direct democracy" label="direct democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q333024" start="54906" end="54915" title="Pluralism (political philosophy)" label="pluralism"/>
<link wikidata="Q439283" start="55159" end="55171" title="Andrew Mango" label="Andrew Mango"/>
<link wikidata="Q181865" start="55569" end="55582" title="civil society" label="civil society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569712" start="55871" end="55899" title="Turkish Language Association" label="Turkish Language Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q256" start="55967" end="55983" title="Turkish language" label="Turkish language"/>
<link wikidata="Q374071" start="55989" end="56015" title="Turkish Historical Society" label="Turkish Historical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q190876" start="56149" end="56166" title="history of Turkey" label="history of Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7855268" start="56206" end="56235" title="Turkish Education Association" label="Turkish Education Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q192964" start="56431" end="56450" title="Istanbul University" label="Istanbul University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060621" start="56499" end="56516" title="Ankara University" label="Ankara University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1725664" start="56588" end="56599" title="terminology" label="terminology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193977" start="56890" end="56909" title="Sun Language Theory" label="Sun Language Theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q8162" start="56955" end="56965" title="linguistics" label="linguistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q27275" start="57037" end="57050" title="Central Asian" label="Central Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3135540" start="57130" end="57149" title="Hilaire de Barenton" label="Hilaire de Barenton"/>
<link wikidata="Q132659" start="57279" end="57289" title="hieroglyph" label="hieroglyph"/>
<link wikidata="Q401" start="57295" end="57304" title="cuneiform" label="cuneiform"/>
<link wikidata="Q106684907" start="57359" end="57377" title="Hermann Feodor Kvergiç" label="Hermann F. Kvergić"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741" start="57381" end="57387" title="Vienna" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q34090" start="57509" end="57525" title="Turkic Languages" label="Turkic Languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q6084264" start="57703" end="57716" title="Saffet Arıkan" label="Saffet Arıkan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569712" start="57755" end="57783" title="Turkish Language Association" label="Turkish Language Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144837" start="58105" end="58116" title="Surname Law (Turkey)" label="Surname Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q3826858" start="58168" end="58188" title="Halkevleri" label="People&amp;#x27;s Houses"/>
<link wikidata="Q30324338" start="58230" end="58248" title="People&amp;#x27;s Room" label="People&amp;#x27;s Room"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078913" start="58453" end="58465" title="plastic arts" label="plastic arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q840665" start="58557" end="58565" title="idolatry" label="idolatry"/>
<link wikidata="Q17723" start="58636" end="58659" title="Classical period (music)" label="classical Western music"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="59011" end="59046" title="List of translations of the Qur&amp;#x27;an#Turkish" label="Qur&amp;#x27;an in the Turkish language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1236219" start="59503" end="59526" title="Qur&amp;#x27;an translation" label="Qur&amp;#x27;an translation"/>
<link wikidata="" start="59552" end="59572" title=":tr:Elmalılı Hamdi Yazır" label="Elmalılı Hamdi Yazır"/>
<link wikidata="Q335414" start="59628" end="59634" title="tafsir" label="tafsir"/>
<link wikidata="Q6082964" start="59649" end="59674" title="Hak Dīni Kur&amp;#x27;an Dili" label="Hak Dini Kur&amp;#x27;an Dili"/>
<link wikidata="Q4358454" start="60377" end="60382" title="Özsoy" label="Özsoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q401118" start="60462" end="60474" title="Adnan Saygun" label="Adnan Saygun"/>
<link wikidata="Q7449431" start="60500" end="60514" title="Semiha Berksoy" label="Semiha Berksoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2053573" start="60833" end="60855" title="1935 Turkish general election" label="1935 general elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q918378" start="60960" end="60984" title="1935 United Kingdom general election" label="British House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q4450420" start="61011" end="61038" title="1934 United States House of Representatives elections" label="US House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="61128" end="61146" title="Turkey" label="Republic of Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q756921" start="61970" end="61983" title="Turkification" label="Turkification"/>
<link wikidata="Q5122606" start="62065" end="62087" title="Citizen speak Turkish!" label="Citizen speak Turkish!"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144837" start="62475" end="62486" title="Surname Law (Turkey)" label="Surname Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q4411706" start="62935" end="62960" title="Geographical name changes in Turkey" label="geographical name changes"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="63065" end="63081" title="Turkey" label="Turkish Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q256" start="63087" end="63094" title="Turkish language" label="Turkish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160372" start="63396" end="63399" title="Laz language" label="Laz"/>
<link wikidata="Q16000672" start="63454" end="63475" title="1934 Turkish Resettlement Law" label="1934 Resettlement Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269720" start="64671" end="64704" title="Peace at home, peace in the world" label="Peace at home, peace in the world"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969497" start="65197" end="65210" title="Mosul Vilayet" label="Mosul Vilayet"/>
<link wikidata="Q18937" start="65303" end="65324" title="Mesopotamian campaign" label="Mesopotamian campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q152951" start="65326" end="65344" title="Lieutenant General" label="Lieutenant General"/>
<link wikidata="Q3120148" start="65345" end="65361" title="William Marshall (British Army officer)" label="William Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q328499" start="65583" end="65602" title="Armistice of Mudros" label="Armistice of Mudros"/>
<link wikidata="Q643030" start="65641" end="65654" title="Misak-ı Milli" label="Misak-ı Milli"/>
<link wikidata="Q616851" start="65950" end="65982" title="Iraqi revolt against the British" label="Iraqi revolt against the British"/>
<link wikidata="Q7275406" start="66005" end="66021" title="RAF Iraq Command" label="RAF Iraq Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q38130" start="66436" end="66453" title="League of Nations" label="League of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q193258" start="66461" end="66479" title="Treaty of Lausanne (1923)" label="Treaty of Lausanne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371091" start="66907" end="66932" title="British Foreign Secretary" label="British Foreign Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q271878" start="66933" end="66946" title="George Curzon, 1st Marquess Curzon of Kedleston" label="George Curzon"/>
<link wikidata="Q51438154" start="67137" end="67152" title="Harold Courtenay Armstrong" label="H. C. Armstrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q619712" start="67376" end="67397" title="Sheikh Said rebellion" label="Sheikh Said rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q16824470" start="68028" end="68058" title="British Mandate of Mesopotamia" label="British Mandate of Mesopotamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165171" start="68438" end="68451" title="Iraqi Turkmen" label="Iraqi Turkmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394" start="68579" end="68593" title="Vladimir Lenin" label="Vladimir Lenin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2184" start="68632" end="68644" title="Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic" label="Russian SFSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q7260" start="68765" end="68776" title="Imperialism" label="imperialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q172872" start="68819" end="68823" title="Turkish lira" label="lira"/>
<link wikidata="Q124072" start="68963" end="68968" title="rifle" label="rifle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7333267" start="68986" end="69001" title="rifle cartridge" label="rifle cartridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q557709" start="69051" end="69058" title="bullion" label="bullion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2607023" start="69179" end="69243" title="Treaty of Moscow (1921)" label="Treaty of Moscow (&amp;quot;Friendship and Brotherhood&amp;quot; Treaty)"/>
<link wikidata="Q935881" start="69373" end="69387" title="Treaty of Kars" label="Treaty of Kars"/>
<link wikidata="Q132856" start="69502" end="69536" title="Armenian Soviet Socialist Republic" label="Armenian Soviet Socialist Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5154458" start="69779" end="69802" title="Turkish Communist Party (official)" label="Turkish Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q163931" start="69894" end="69903" title="Comintern" label="Comintern"/>
<link wikidata="Q71" start="70703" end="70709" title="Geneva" label="Geneva"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412901" start="70879" end="70898" title="non-aggression pact" label="non-aggression pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q2367317" start="70997" end="71020" title="Soviet Defence Minister" label="Soviet Defence Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q186185" start="71021" end="71039" title="Kliment Voroshilov" label="Kliment Voroshilov"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262881" start="71188" end="71205" title="Balkan Federation" label="Balkan Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q234535" start="71488" end="71513" title="Great Soviet Encyclopedia" label="Great Soviet Encyclopedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q987363" start="71707" end="71720" title="rapprochement" label="rapprochement"/>
<link wikidata="Q205545" start="71826" end="71847" title="Eleftherios Venizelos" label="Eleftherios Venizelos"/>
<link wikidata="Q155564" start="71954" end="71970" title="Aegean Region" label="Western Anatolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q131017" start="72000" end="72023" title="Population exchange between Greece and Turkey" label="Ottoman Muslim refugees"/>
<link wikidata="Q35637" start="72798" end="72815" title="Nobel Peace Prize" label="Nobel Peace Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q728895" start="72937" end="72954" title="Panagis Tsaldaris" label="Panagis Tsaldaris"/>
<link wikidata="Q167396" start="73139" end="73150" title="Balkan Pact" label="Balkan Pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q189139" start="73167" end="73182" title="Ioannis Metaxas" label="Ioannis Metaxas"/>
<link wikidata="Q10952572" start="73821" end="73839" title="reforms of Amanullah Khan and civil war" label="reformation period"/>
<link wikidata="Q153620" start="73846" end="73860" title="Amānullāh Khān" label="Amanullah Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q153640" start="73886" end="73898" title="Mahmud Tarzi" label="Mahmud Tarzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2976698" start="74285" end="74297" title="Soraya Tarzi" label="Soraya Tarzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q182921" start="74764" end="74773" title="Reza Shah" label="Reza Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="74823" end="74842" title="British imperialism" label="British imperialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7495966" start="75332" end="75349" title="Shi&amp;#x27;a clergy" label="Shi&amp;#x27;a clergy"/>
<link wikidata="Q537143" start="75985" end="76003" title="Treaty of Saadabad" label="Treaty of Saadabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2682071" start="76070" end="76106" title="Iran-Iraq border" label="border dispute between Iran and Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q537143" start="76170" end="76183" title="Treaty of Saadabad" label="Saadabad Pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q3616" start="76187" end="76193" title="Tehran" label="Tehran"/>
<link wikidata="Q152265" start="76409" end="76419" title="Zahir Shah" label="Zahir Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q23559" start="76744" end="76753" title="Mussolini" label="Mussolini"/>
<link wikidata="Q193258" start="76837" end="76855" title="Treaty of Lausanne (1923)" label="Treaty of Lausanne"/>
<link wikidata="Q6514" start="76944" end="76955" title="Dardanelles" label="Dardanelles"/>
<link wikidata="Q406" start="77432" end="77440" title="Istanbul" label="Istanbul"/>
<link wikidata="Q697659" start="77545" end="77574" title="Remilitarization of the Rhineland" label="reoccupation of the Rhineland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2376406" start="77781" end="77798" title="Tevfik Rüştü Aras" label="Tevfik Rüştü Aras"/>
<link wikidata="Q869500" start="78428" end="78447" title="Montreux Convention Regarding the Regime of the Turkish Straits" label="Montreux Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q274918" start="78722" end="78726" title="Grand National Assembly of Turkey" label="GNAT"/>
<link wikidata="Q23559" start="79912" end="79928" title="Benito Mussolini" label="Benito Mussolini"/>
<link wikidata="Q1922873" start="79989" end="80024" title="Mare Nostrum" label="Mediterranean under Italian control"/>
<link wikidata="Q167396" start="80114" end="80125" title="Balkan Pact" label="Balkan Pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q189139" start="80955" end="80970" title="Ioannis Metaxas" label="Ioannis Metaxas"/>
<link wikidata="Q182660" start="81351" end="81358" title="Dobruja" label="Dobruja"/>
<link wikidata="Q714644" start="81387" end="81414" title="Italian invasion of Albania" label="Italian invasion of Albania"/>
<link wikidata="Q714999" start="81438" end="81447" title="Causes of World War II" label="conflicts"/>
<link wikidata="Q501053" start="81602" end="81614" title="Turkish Armed Forces" label="Turkish Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q189290" start="81678" end="81686" title="Officer (armed forces)" label="officers"/>
<link wikidata="Q188497" start="81698" end="81708" title="army corps" label="army corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q169534" start="81713" end="81721" title="Division (military)" label="division"/>
<link wikidata="Q102356" start="81737" end="81744" title="brigade" label="brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q47315" start="81748" end="81755" title="cavalry" label="cavalry"/>
<link wikidata="Q146761" start="82218" end="82223" title="Hatay State" label="Hatay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1657225" start="82298" end="82320" title="Sanjak of Alexandretta" label="Sanjak of Alexandretta"/>
<link wikidata="Q330425" start="82519" end="82525" title="sanjak" label="sanjak"/>
<link wikidata="Q80561" start="82659" end="82666" title="Antakya" label="Antakya"/>
<link wikidata="Q174341" start="82681" end="82691" title="İskenderun" label="İskenderun"/>
<link wikidata="Q8080263" start="83274" end="83297" title="İzmir Economic Congress" label="İzmir Economic Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q183297" start="83650" end="83661" title="İsmet İnönü" label="İsmet İnönü"/>
<link wikidata="Q4357899" start="84197" end="84212" title="Turkish tobacco" label="Turkish tobacco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1728629" start="84327" end="84362" title="capitulations of the Ottoman Empire" label="capitulations of the Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7308360" start="84440" end="84453" title="Regie Company" label="Regie Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q2041453" start="84534" end="84546" title="Ottoman Bank" label="Ottoman Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q358779" start="84578" end="84604" title="Ottoman Public Debt Administration" label="Council of the Public Debt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3784942" start="84888" end="84893" title="Tekel" label="Tekel"/>
<link wikidata="Q178564" start="85011" end="85026" title="nationalization" label="nationalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q6979827" start="85083" end="85086" title="Nationalization of oil supplies" label="oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q909613" start="85365" end="85375" title="İş Bankası" label="İş Bankası"/>
<link wikidata="Q499967" start="85755" end="85777" title="Turkish State Railways" label="Turkish State Railways"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565868" start="85852" end="85864" title="Rail transport" label="rail network"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="86376" end="86392" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="86567" end="86583" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364290" start="86972" end="87007" title="debt restructuring" label="restructuring of Turkey&amp;#x27;s debt"/>
<link wikidata="Q358779" start="87017" end="87051" title="Ottoman Public Debt Administration" label="Ottoman Public Debt Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q7109974" start="87119" end="87138" title="Ottoman public debt" label="Ottoman public debt"/>
<link wikidata="Q580829" start="87403" end="87441" title="Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey" label="Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2041453" start="87528" end="87540" title="Ottoman Bank" label="Ottoman Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q4832315" start="87648" end="87657" title="Sümerbank" label="Sümerbank"/>
<link wikidata="Q5404525" start="87673" end="87680" title="Etibank" label="Etibank"/>
<link wikidata="Q47555" start="87712" end="87729" title="political economy" label="political economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3366695" start="87925" end="87949" title="Liberal Republican Party (Turkey)" label="Liberal Republican Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q548235" start="88568" end="88584" title="state capitalism" label="state capitalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151724" start="88638" end="88663" title="Yakup Kadri Karaosmanoğlu" label="Yakup Kadri Karaosmanoğlu"/>
<link wikidata="Q6041857" start="88673" end="88678" title="Kadro" label="Kadro"/>
<link wikidata="Q7855222" start="89540" end="89572" title="Turkish Aeronautical Association" label="Turkish Aeronautical Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q26261745" start="90002" end="90014" title="Curtiss Hawk" label="Curtiss Hawk"/>
<link wikidata="Q151735" start="90140" end="90151" title="Celâl Bayar" label="Celâl Bayar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132695" start="90810" end="90816" title="Calico (textile)" label="Calico"/>
<link wikidata="Q637120" start="90981" end="90988" title="Nazilli" label="Nazilli"/>
<link wikidata="Q946725" start="91058" end="91069" title="cotton mill" label="cotton mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q372862" start="91138" end="91150" title="Nuri Demirağ" label="Nuri Demirağ"/>
<link wikidata="Q459495" start="91205" end="91213" title="Beşiktaş" label="Beşiktaş"/>
<link wikidata="Q406" start="91226" end="91234" title="Istanbul" label="Istanbul"/>
<link wikidata="Q7070109" start="91265" end="91272" title="Nuri Demirağ Nu D.36" label="Nu D.36"/>
<link wikidata="Q7070111" start="91277" end="91284" title="Nuri Demirağ Nu D.38" label="Nu D.38"/>
<link wikidata="Q151735" start="91356" end="91367" title="Celâl Bayar" label="Celâl Bayar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7829076" start="91919" end="91949" title="Turkish Automobile Association" label="Turkish Automobile Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q5359175" start="92382" end="92395" title="Eleni Karinte" label="Eleni Karinte"/>
<link wikidata="Q6098264" start="92397" end="92410" title="Fikriye" label="Fikriye Hanım"/>
<link wikidata="Q464994" start="92437" end="92449" title="Latife Uşaki" label="Latife Uşaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q209842" start="92787" end="92795" title="University of Paris" label="Sorbonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q459104" start="93648" end="93661" title="Sabiha Gökçen" label="Sabiha Gökçen"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="94015" end="94021" title="Muslim" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q620629" start="94114" end="94119" title="Deism" label="deist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7066" start="94132" end="94139" title="Atheism" label="atheist"/>
<link wikidata="Q638290" start="94317" end="94321" title="rakı" label="rakı"/>
<link wikidata="Q1578" start="94382" end="94391" title="cigarette" label="cigarette"/>
<link wikidata="Q205942" start="94513" end="94519" title="Yalova" label="Yalova"/>
<link wikidata="Q147778" start="94620" end="94629" title="cirrhosis" label="cirrhosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q274141" start="94812" end="94829" title="Dolmabahçe Palace" label="Dolmabahçe Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q21067567" start="94997" end="95004" title="cortège" label="cortège"/>
<link wikidata="Q4533056" start="95065" end="95093" title="Ethnography Museum of Ankara" label="Ethnography Museum of Ankara"/>
<link wikidata="Q48634" start="95180" end="95191" title="sarcophagus" label="sarcophagus"/>
<link wikidata="Q615404" start="95227" end="95236" title="Anıtkabir" label="Anıtkabir"/>
<link wikidata="Q155656" start="95246" end="95250" title="Will and testament" label="will"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569712" start="95544" end="95572" title="Turkish Language Association" label="Turkish Language Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q374071" start="95581" end="95607" title="Turkish Historical Society" label="Turkish Historical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q86473" start="95715" end="95744" title="Atatürk International Airport" label="Atatürk International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q4812886" start="95762" end="95776" title="Atatürk Bridge" label="Atatürk Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q179839" start="95786" end="95797" title="Golden Horn" label="Golden Horn"/>
<link wikidata="Q753776" start="95811" end="95822" title="Atatürk Dam" label="Atatürk Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q221122" start="95828" end="95843" title="Atatürk Olympic Stadium" label="Atatürk Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q172872" start="96099" end="96111" title="Turkish lira" label="Turkish lira"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186034" start="96348" end="96362" title="Democrat Party (Turkey, historical)" label="Democrat Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q238745" start="96415" end="96429" title="Adnan Menderes" label="Adnan Menderes"/>
<link wikidata="Q19079" start="96495" end="96525" title="Republican People&amp;#x27;s Party" label="Republican People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519065" start="96534" end="96581" title="Law on Crimes Committed Against Atatürk" label="a law (Law on Crimes Committed Against Atatürk)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="96592" end="96613" title="Law on Crimes Committed Against Atatürk#1.1" label="insults to his memory"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="96658" end="96680" title="Law on Crimes Committed Against Atatürk#1.2" label="destruction of objects"/>
<link wikidata="Q4294877" start="96794" end="96813" title="Ministry of Justice (Turkey)" label="Minister of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q600751" start="96876" end="96893" title="public prosecutor" label="public prosecutor"/>
<link wikidata="Q154330" start="97003" end="97028" title="Reporters Without Borders" label="Reporters Without Borders"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="97133" end="97147" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q22692" start="97161" end="97178" title="freedom of speech" label="freedom of speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="97292" end="97306" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="97311" end="97317" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q4812884" start="97395" end="97431" title="Atatürk Centennial" label="Resolution on the Atatürk Centennial"/>
<link wikidata="Q42395047" start="97437" end="97468" title="Mustafa Kemal Atatürk Monument, Mexico City" label="Atatürk Monument in Mexico City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478843" start="97472" end="97491" title="Paseo de la Reforma" label="Paseo de la Reforma"/>
<link wikidata="Q65276152" start="97497" end="97521" title="Mustafa Kemal Atatürk Monument, Baku" label="Atatürk Monument in Baku"/>
<link wikidata="Q227" start="97523" end="97533" title="Azerbaijan" label="Azerbaijan"/>
<link wikidata="Q35493" start="97559" end="97565" title="Almaty" label="Almaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q232" start="97567" end="97577" title="Kazakhstan" label="Kazakhstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q23661" start="97603" end="97613" title="Wellington" label="Wellington"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="97615" end="97626" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q6386817" start="97708" end="97763" title="Kemal Atatürk Memorial, Canberra" label="Atatürk Memorial in the place of honour on Anzac Parade"/>
<link wikidata="Q3114" start="97767" end="97775" title="Canberra" label="Canberra"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="97777" end="97786" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2887" start="97842" end="97850" title="Santiago" label="Santiago"/>
<link wikidata="Q298" start="97852" end="97857" title="Chile" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="97897" end="97901" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="97903" end="97908" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q987" start="98050" end="98059" title="New Delhi" label="New Delhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="98061" end="98066" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q131933468" start="98072" end="98092" title="Kamal Atatürk Avenue" label="Kamal Atatürk Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354" start="98097" end="98102" title="Dhaka" label="Dhaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q376749" start="98107" end="98117" title="Chittagong" label="Chittagong"/>
<link wikidata="Q902" start="98121" end="98131" title="Bangladesh" label="Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362" start="98168" end="98177" title="Islamabad" label="Islamabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="98179" end="98187" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q696605" start="98230" end="98237" title="Larkana" label="Larkana"/>
<link wikidata="Q37211" start="98241" end="98246" title="Sindh" label="Sindh"/>
<link wikidata="Q3572" start="98290" end="98295" title="Tunis" label="Tunis"/>
<link wikidata="Q948" start="98297" end="98304" title="Tunisia" label="Tunisia"/>
<link wikidata="Q34820" start="98359" end="98372" title="Santo Domingo" label="Santo Domingo"/>
<link wikidata="Q786" start="98374" end="98392" title="Dominican Republic" label="Dominican Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q15884099" start="98398" end="98429" title="Atatürk residential area" label="the street and memorial Atatürk"/>
<link wikidata="Q478607" start="98437" end="98452" title="Amsterdam-Noord" label="Amsterdam-Noord"/>
<link wikidata="Q727" start="98464" end="98473" title="Amsterdam" label="Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="98475" end="98486" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q704257" start="98543" end="98568" title="Albany, Western Australia" label="Albany, Western Australia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="98578" end="98593" title="Princess Royal Harbour#History" label="Atatürk Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q23681" start="98653" end="98668" title="Northern Cyprus" label="Northern Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q223898" start="98978" end="99001" title="All-India Muslim League" label="All-India Muslim League"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016" start="99319" end="99336" title="Winston Churchill" label="Winston Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="99354" end="99365" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="99381" end="99385" title="Nazism" label="Nazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="99406" end="99418" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="99523" end="99544" title="Franklin D. Roosevelt" label="Franklin D. Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q9696" start="99549" end="99564" title="John F. Kennedy" label="John F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q180194" start="99794" end="99805" title="Third World" label="Third World"/>
<link wikidata="Q182921" start="99949" end="99966" title="Reza Shah" label="Reza Shah Pahlavi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047" start="99994" end="100010" title="Jawaharlal Nehru" label="Jawaharlal Nehru"/>
<link wikidata="Q643348" start="100035" end="100050" title="Habib Bourguiba" label="Habib Bourguiba"/>
<link wikidata="Q42013" start="100079" end="100090" title="Anwar Sadat" label="Anwar Sadat"/>
<link wikidata="Q484141" start="100127" end="100141" title="Muhammad Iqbal" label="Muhammad Iqbal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4855428" start="100150" end="100161" title="Bangladeshis" label="Bangladeshi"/>
<link wikidata="Q334818" start="100176" end="100193" title="Kazi Nazrul Islam" label="Kazi Nazrul Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q406" start="100276" end="100284" title="Istanbul" label="Istanbul"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="100286" end="100292" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2423343" start="100345" end="100364" title="Huda Sha&amp;#x27;arawi" label="Huda Sha&amp;#x27;arawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q51438154" start="100718" end="100733" title="Harold Courtenay Armstrong" label="H. C. Armstrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q6302107" start="100826" end="100856" title="Turkish National Movement" label="national movement of 1919–1923"/>
<link wikidata="Q215669" start="100887" end="100893" title="Allies of World War I" label="Allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q349199" start="100918" end="100927" title="Ali Kemal" label="Ali Kemal"/>
<link wikidata="Q19008" start="101057" end="101069" title="Arthur Balfour" label="Lord Balfour"/>
<link wikidata="Q2005693" start="101980" end="101985" title="Nutuk" label="Nutuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q7855222" start="102014" end="102046" title="Turkish Aeronautical Association" label="Turkish Aeronautical Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="102574" end="102585" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q599024" start="102636" end="102676" title="Order of the Medjidie" label="Fifth Class Knight Order of the Medjidie"/>
<link wikidata="Q134817" start="102688" end="102702" title="Abdul Hamid II" label="Abdul Hamid II"/>
<link wikidata="Q343913" start="102726" end="102746" title="Imtiyaz Medal" label="Silver Imtiyaz Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q151494" start="102758" end="102766" title="Mehmed V" label="Mehmed V"/>
<link wikidata="Q2379392" start="102787" end="102806" title="Liakat Medal" label="Silver Liakat Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q151494" start="102818" end="102826" title="Mehmed V" label="Mehmed V"/>
<link wikidata="Q2379392" start="102850" end="102869" title="Liakat Medal" label="Golden Liakat Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q151494" start="102881" end="102889" title="Mehmed V" label="Mehmed V"/>
<link wikidata="Q1882991" start="102912" end="102949" title="Order of Osmanieh" label="Second Class Knight Order of Osmanieh"/>
<link wikidata="Q151494" start="102961" end="102969" title="Mehmed V" label="Mehmed V"/>
<link wikidata="Q599024" start="102992" end="103033" title="Order of the Medjidie" label="Second Class Knight Order of the Medjidie"/>
<link wikidata="Q151494" start="103045" end="103053" title="Mehmed V" label="Mehmed V"/>
<link wikidata="Q343913" start="103077" end="103097" title="Imtiyaz Medal" label="Golden Imtiyaz Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q151494" start="103109" end="103117" title="Mehmed V" label="Mehmed V"/>
<link wikidata="Q599024" start="103142" end="103182" title="Order of the Medjidie" label="First Class Knight Order of the Medjidie"/>
<link wikidata="Q151494" start="103194" end="103202" title="Mehmed V" label="Mehmed V"/>
<link wikidata="Q1313499" start="103226" end="103240" title="Gallipoli Star (Ottoman Empire)" label="Gallipoli Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q162543" start="103252" end="103261" title="Mehmed VI" label="Mehmed VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q344339" start="103280" end="103301" title="Medal of Independence (Turkey)" label="Medal of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q274918" start="103313" end="103346" title="Grand National Assembly of Turkey" label="Grand National Assembly of Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7855222" start="103395" end="103427" title="Turkish Aeronautical Association" label="Turkish Aeronautical Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q983760" start="103469" end="103515" title="Orders, decorations, and medals of Bulgaria" label="Commander Grand Cross Order of Saint Alexander"/>
<link wikidata="Q151667" start="103527" end="103538" title="Ferdinand I of Bulgaria" label="Ferdinand I"/>
<link wikidata="Q154554" start="103550" end="103560" title="Iron Cross" label="Iron Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="103568" end="103581" title="German Empire" label="German Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2677" start="103593" end="103603" title="Wilhelm II, German Emperor" label="Wilhelm II"/>
<link wikidata="Q666722" start="103615" end="103653" title="Military Merit Medal (Austria-Hungary)" label="Military Merit Medal (Austria-Hungary)"/>
<link wikidata="Q51056" start="103665" end="103679" title="Franz Joseph I of Austria" label="Franz Joseph I"/>
<link wikidata="Q666722" start="103691" end="103739" title="Military Merit Medal (Austria-Hungary)" label="2nd Class Military Merit Cross (Austria-Hungary)"/>
<link wikidata="Q51068" start="103751" end="103760" title="Charles I of Austria" label="Charles I"/>
<link wikidata="Q701262" start="103772" end="103820" title="Military Merit Cross (Austria-Hungary)" label="3rd Class Military Merit Cross (Austria-Hungary)"/>
<link wikidata="Q51056" start="103832" end="103846" title="Franz Joseph I of Austria" label="Franz Joseph I"/>
<link wikidata="Q154554" start="103866" end="103886" title="Iron Cross" label="1st Class Iron Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="103894" end="103907" title="German Empire" label="German Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2677" start="103919" end="103929" title="Wilhelm II, German Emperor" label="Wilhelm II"/>
<link wikidata="Q154554" start="103941" end="103961" title="Iron Cross" label="2nd Class Iron Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="103969" end="103982" title="German Empire" label="German Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2677" start="103994" end="104004" title="Wilhelm II, German Emperor" label="Wilhelm II"/>
<link wikidata="Q585238" start="104028" end="104064" title="Order of the Crown (Prussia)" label="1st Class Order of the Crown Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2677" start="104076" end="104086" title="Wilhelm II, German Emperor" label="Wilhelm II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138904" start="104117" end="104139" title="Kingdom of Afghanistan" label="Kingdom of Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q153620" start="104151" end="104165" title="Amānullāh Khān" label="Amānullāh Khān"/>
<link wikidata="Q4811611" start="104199" end="104226" title="Atatürk Forest Farm and Zoo" label="Atatürk Forest Farm and Zoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q106982795" start="104229" end="104260" title="European interwar dictatorships" label="European interwar dictatorships"/>
<link wikidata="Q6024206" start="104269" end="104274" title="İleri" label="İleri"/>
<link wikidata="Q104821857" start="104283" end="104306" title="Kemalist historiography" label="Kemalist historiography"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519065" start="104309" end="104348" title="Law on Crimes Committed Against Atatürk" label="Law on Crimes Committed Against Atatürk"/>
<link wikidata="Q6633147" start="104351" end="104402" title="List of covers of Time magazine (1920s)" label="List of covers of &amp;quot;Time&amp;quot; magazine (1920s)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193977" start="104442" end="104461" title="Sun Language Theory" label="Sun Language Theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7805835" start="104464" end="104497" title="Timeline of Mustafa Kemal Atatürk" label="Timeline of Mustafa Kemal Atatürk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2464801" start="104500" end="104522" title="Turkish History Thesis" label="Turkish History Thesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q234738" start="104525" end="104552" title="Turkish War of Independence" label="Turkish War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q6622278" start="104556" end="104622" title="List of high-ranking commanders of the Turkish War of Independence" label="List of high-ranking commanders of the Turkish War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q7806414" start="104626" end="104669" title="Timeline of the Turkish War of Independence" label="Timeline of the Turkish War of Independence"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1329096" wikidata="Q7337568" url="?curid=1329096" title="River Leach">
<text>The River Leach is a river tributary to the River Thames, in England which runs mostly in Gloucestershire. It is approximately 18 miles (29 km) long, springing from the limestone uplands of the Cotswolds. In parts of its course it becomes a seasonal bourn, only running above ground when there is sufficient rainfall. Despite its small size it gives its name to two towns and a pair of villages.

==Sources==
The source of the Leach is in the village of Hampnett, about ten miles east of Cheltenham just south of the A40 road. The source spring is enclosed by stonework and pours from a pipe. It seems likely that this spring in a sheltered valley on the Cotswold uplands was the original reason for the existence of the village of Hampnett. According to residents, this section runs all year round.

==Early stream==
After running a mile down its limestone valley, the Leach reaches Northleach, the first settlement to which it gives its name. The river enters Northleach to the south west, where it gushes out of a Victorian conduit just below the Fosse Way. At this point it is also known as the Seven Springs. The site of the first watermill on the river is in a part of Northleach called Mill End. A section of the river is confined into mill race type stonework, close to the churchyard and runs behind houses marking the town boundary. The river can next be seen at a road bridge at the end of the town. It is still little more than ditch-sized, and as such continues down the valley to the hamlet of Eastington running alongside a lane before passing through a culvert and away through grazing land.

==Seasonal bourn==
The river runs behind Lodge Park, a National Trust property, and through Larkethill Wood, where it flows under another lane, before passing Kilkenny Farm. The Leach valley shows as a substantial dip in the B4425 Cirencester-Burford road. The river has an embankment at the bottom of the valley, but has not increased in size. Through all this section the river is often nearly invisible under summer vegetation. It then passes Swyre Farm with another road crossing, then Dean Farm, before reaching a very picturesque winding valley, crossed by the Westwell-Hatherop road. This section is notably a bourn in an unremarkable depression, which normally runs in the winter, but often disappears in the summer. (In recent dry winters - writing at summer 2007 - this section remained dry. Even more unusually, as of July 2007, it was running which has not happened during the summer for many years. The bourn section had been running continuously for long enough to have taken on the appearance of a river, with a scoured bed and water plants.)

==River==
Between this road crossing and the paired villages of Eastleach Martin and Eastleach Turville is the point at which the bourn becomes an all year river. Here it is crossed by a stone slab clapper bridge on a footpath close to a wide marshy area. A small spring rises close to the bridge. By the time the river passes between the Eastleach villages, each with their parish churches just a few hundred yards apart, the Leach has become a &quot;proper&quot; river, several yards (metres) wide. Between the villages a road bridge and another &quot;clapper&quot; footbridge cross the river. It passes another old mill between the Eastleaches and Southrop (pronounced &quot;Suth-er-op&quot;) then skirts the hamlet of Fyfield. At the bridge at Southrop it divides into several channels, making a very attractive effect. From Southrop, the Leach forms the border between Gloucestershire and Oxfordshire.

==Final section and confluence==
There are three large watermills (none working) on the river in fairly quick succession, firstly at Little Faringdon close to Lechlade the second town named after the river, then at Lechlade Mill, and finally Priory Mill which is situated on the Kelmscott road. A few hundred yards (metres) later the Leach discharges from the northern bank into the Thames on the reach above Buscot Lock. It joins at the corner of the camping field behind The Trout Inn.

==Water quality==
The Environment Agency measure water quality of the river systems in England. Each is given an overall ecological status, which may be one of five levels: high, good, moderate, poor and bad. There are several components that are used to determine this, including biological status, which looks at the quantity and varieties of invertebrates, angiosperms and fish. Chemical status, which compares the concentrations of various chemicals against known safe concentrations, is rated good or fail.

Water quality of the River Leach in 2019:
==See also==
*Tributaries of the River Thames
*List of rivers in England

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7337568" start="4" end="15" title="River Leach" label="River Leach"/>
<link wikidata="Q4022" start="21" end="26" title="river" label="river"/>
<link wikidata="Q159675" start="27" end="36" title="tributary" label="tributary"/>
<link wikidata="Q19686" start="44" end="56" title="River Thames" label="River Thames"/>
<link wikidata="Q23165" start="90" end="105" title="Gloucestershire" label="Gloucestershire"/>
<link wikidata="Q301833" start="194" end="203" title="Cotswolds" label="Cotswolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q20081228" start="454" end="462" title="Hampnett" label="Hampnett"/>
<link wikidata="Q206988" start="488" end="498" title="Cheltenham" label="Cheltenham"/>
<link wikidata="Q3400528" start="517" end="525" title="A40 road" label="A40 road"/>
<link wikidata="Q1242893" start="884" end="894" title="Northleach" label="Northleach"/>
<link wikidata="Q185187" start="1136" end="1145" title="watermill" label="watermill"/>
<link wikidata="Q5330699" start="1508" end="1518" title="Eastington, Cotswold" label="Eastington"/>
<link wikidata="Q6666314" start="1650" end="1660" title="Lodge Park and Sherborne Estate" label="Lodge Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q333515" start="1664" end="1678" title="National Trust for Places of Historic Interest or Natural Beauty" label="National Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q4837006" start="1834" end="1839" title="B4425 road" label="B4425"/>
<link wikidata="Q852772" start="1840" end="1851" title="Cirencester" label="Cirencester"/>
<link wikidata="Q2019274" start="1852" end="1859" title="Burford" label="Burford"/>
<link wikidata="Q5330746" start="2732" end="2748" title="Eastleach Martin" label="Eastleach Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5330746" start="2753" end="2771" title="Eastleach Turville" label="Eastleach Turville"/>
<link wikidata="Q265881" start="2866" end="2880" title="clapper bridge" label="clapper bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2687777" start="3319" end="3327" title="Southrop" label="Southrop"/>
<link wikidata="Q23169" start="3562" end="3573" title="Oxfordshire" label="Oxfordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2352517" start="3709" end="3725" title="Little Faringdon" label="Little Faringdon"/>
<link wikidata="Q939609" start="3735" end="3743" title="Lechlade" label="Lechlade"/>
<link wikidata="Q2078223" start="3855" end="3864" title="Kelmscott" label="Kelmscott"/>
<link wikidata="Q5001320" start="3985" end="3996" title="Buscot Lock" label="Buscot Lock"/>
<link wikidata="Q17361873" start="4049" end="4062" title="Trout Inn, Lechlade" label="The Trout Inn"/>
<link wikidata="Q43806" start="4410" end="4422" title="invertebrate" label="invertebrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q25314" start="4425" end="4435" title="angiosperm" label="angiosperm"/>
<link wikidata="Q7840500" start="4634" end="4665" title="Tributaries of the River Thames" label="Tributaries of the River Thames"/>
<link wikidata="Q3280413" start="4667" end="4692" title="List of rivers in England" label="List of rivers in England"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1329097" wikidata="Q16000854" url="?curid=1329097" title="Effect of the 2004 Indian Ocean earthquake on India">
<text>According to official estimates in India, 10,749 people were killed, 5,640 people were missing and thousands of people became homeless when a tsunami triggered by the [[2004 Indian Ocean earthquake and tsunami|2004 Indian Ocean earthquake]] near the Indonesian island of Sumatra struck the southern coast on 26 December 2004. The earthquake registered 9.1–9.3 Mw and was the largest in five decades. It was followed by strong aftershocks on the Andaman and Nicobar Islands. The death toll of the earthquake was 1,500 people.

==Affected states and regions==


This disaster affected a total of fourteen regions. The Andaman and Nicobar Islands comprise 572 islands (land masses at low and high tide), of which 38 are inhabited by people from the mainland and indigenous tribes. The islands were just north of the earthquake epicentre, and the tsunami reached a height of in the southern Nicobar Islands. The official death toll was 1,310, with about 5,600 missing. The unofficial death toll (including those missing and presumed dead) was estimated at 7,000. This ocean earthquake goes down in history as the deadliest of all time. It took the lives of over 230,000 victims throughout the fourteen regions and wounded more than double this number.
The Great Nicobar and Car Nicobar islands were the worst hit among all the islands because of their proximity to the quake and relatively flat terrain. Aftershocks rocked the area,
and one-fifth of the population of the Nicobar Islands was reported dead, injured or missing. Chowra Island lost two-thirds of its population of 1,500. Entire islands were submerged, and Trinket Island was divided in two. Communications were cut to the Nancowry group of islands, some of which were submerged.

On Car Nicobar, 111 Indian Air Force personnel and their family members were washed away when the tsunami severely damaged their air base. St. Thomas Cathedral (also known as the &quot;John Richardson church&quot; after John Richardson, a missionary and member of parliament) was washed away. The church, established in 1930 was one of the oldest and prominent churches in the region. A cricket stadium named after John Richardson and a statue dedicated to him were also washed away.

Most of the population of the Andaman Islands are people from the mainland, primarily West Bengal and Tamil Nadu. The natives of the Andaman and Nicobar Islands are endangered tribal groups, such as the Jarawa, Sentinelese, Shompen, Onge and the Great Andamanese. They are anthropologically-significant as some of the world&#x27;s most primitive tribes. Most have maintained their lifestyle for centuries, and government policy is one of non-interference. Most of the native islanders reportedly survived the tsunami because they lived on higher ground or far from the coast. The Onge (with a 2001 census population of 96), Jarawa (240), Sentinelese (39) and Great Andamanese (43) were reached by survey teams. The Sentinelese, on an island reserve, are hostile to outsiders and shot arrows at helicopters sent to check on them. On the Nicobar Islands the Nicobarese, a tribe with a Southeast Asian heritage (2001 population 28,653), lost about 656 lives with 3,000 missing. Surveys were conducted on the Shompen (2001 census count of 398) located on Great Nicobar island.

India&#x27;s only active volcano, Barren 1 (on Barren Island northeast of Port Blair), erupted on 30 December due to increased seismic activity. The population was evacuated, and there were no casualties. Indira Point (6°45’10″N and 93°49’36″E), the southernmost point of the Great Nicobar Island and India itself, subsided in the tsunami and its lighthouse was damaged.

==Meteorological and seismic reports==
The Indian Meteorological Department warned people in coastal areas to exercise caution due to rough seas and tsunami. The Indian government issued a tsunami alert across India&#x27;s coastal areas, triggering a panic which required clarifications.

==&quot;Ex gratia&quot; payments==
==See also==
* Disaster management in India
* Disaster Management Act, 2005

==References==
==External links==
* Rediff.com
* BBC coverage (includes video footage)
* GlobalSecurity.org
* CRISP, Singapore
* Rediff photos, set 1 Photo set 2
* &quot;Times of India&quot; photos
* &quot;The Hindu&quot; photos 
* BBC photos
* &quot;Tribune India&quot; photos
* National Oceanic &amp; Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), U.S. Tsunami page</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q8070" start="142" end="149" title="tsunami" label="tsunami"/>
<link wikidata="Q16000854" start="167" end="240" title="Effect of the 2004 Indian Ocean earthquake on India" label="[[2004 Indian Ocean earthquake and tsunami|2004 Indian Ocean earthquake]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="250" end="259" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492" start="271" end="278" title="Sumatra" label="Sumatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q201605" start="360" end="362" title="Moment magnitude scale" label="Mw"/>
<link wikidata="Q40888" start="445" end="472" title="Andaman and Nicobar Islands" label="Andaman and Nicobar Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q40888" start="616" end="643" title="Andaman and Nicobar Islands" label="Andaman and Nicobar Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q106032" start="824" end="833" title="epicentre" label="epicentre"/>
<link wikidata="Q219774" start="1252" end="1265" title="Great Nicobar" label="Great Nicobar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035273" start="1270" end="1281" title="Car Nicobar" label="Car Nicobar"/>
<link wikidata="Q308442" start="1400" end="1410" title="Aftershock" label="Aftershock"/>
<link wikidata="Q157286" start="1468" end="1483" title="Nicobar Islands" label="Nicobar Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076829" start="1523" end="1536" title="Chowra Island" label="Chowra Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649204" start="1616" end="1630" title="Trinket Island" label="Trinket Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1964467" start="1682" end="1690" title="Nancowry Island" label="Nancowry"/>
<link wikidata="Q330658" start="1760" end="1776" title="Indian Air Force" label="Indian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q219477" start="1979" end="1989" title="missionary" label="missionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q486839" start="1994" end="2014" title="member of parliament" label="member of parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375" start="2127" end="2134" title="cricket" label="cricket"/>
<link wikidata="Q186233" start="2255" end="2270" title="Andaman Islands" label="Andaman Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356" start="2311" end="2322" title="West Bengal" label="West Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1445" start="2327" end="2337" title="Tamil Nadu" label="Tamil Nadu"/>
<link wikidata="Q651164" start="2428" end="2434" title="Jarawa (Andaman Islands)" label="Jarawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q917695" start="2436" end="2447" title="Sentinelese people" label="Sentinelese"/>
<link wikidata="Q274386" start="2449" end="2456" title="Shompen people" label="Shompen"/>
<link wikidata="Q16115148" start="2458" end="2462" title="Onge people" label="Onge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548149" start="2471" end="2487" title="Great Andamanese" label="Great Andamanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q23404" start="2498" end="2515" title="anthropology" label="anthropologically"/>
<link wikidata="Q16115148" start="2805" end="2809" title="Onge people" label="Onge"/>
<link wikidata="Q651164" start="2849" end="2855" title="Jarawa (Andaman Islands)" label="Jarawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q917695" start="2863" end="2874" title="Sentinelese people" label="Sentinelese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548149" start="2884" end="2900" title="Great Andamanese" label="Great Andamanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q157286" start="3061" end="3076" title="Nicobar Islands" label="Nicobar Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q207750" start="3081" end="3091" title="Nicobarese people" label="Nicobarese"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="3108" end="3123" title="Southeast Asian" label="Southeast Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q274386" start="3230" end="3237" title="Shompen people" label="Shompen"/>
<link wikidata="Q248212" start="3346" end="3359" title="Barren Island (Andaman Islands)" label="Barren Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q203476" start="3373" end="3383" title="Port Blair" label="Port Blair"/>
<link wikidata="Q24952487" start="4010" end="4038" title="Disaster management in India" label="Disaster management in India"/>
<link wikidata="Q16257348" start="4041" end="4070" title="Disaster Management Act, 2005" label="Disaster Management Act, 2005"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1329100" wikidata="Q951398" url="?curid=1329100" title="Tommaso Grossi">
<text>Tommaso Grossi (20 January 179110 December 1853) was an Italian poet and novelist.

==Biography==
Grossi was born in Bellano, on Lake Como, and graduated in law at University of Pavia in 1810. He then went to Milan to exercise his profession but the Austrian government interfered with his career prospects. Consequently, Grossi was a notary all his life. That the suspicion was well grounded he soon showed by writing the battle poem &quot;La Prineide&quot; (1814) in Milanese, in which he described with vivid colours the tragical death of Giuseppe Prina, chief treasurer during the Empire, whom the people of Milan, instigated by Austrian agitators, had torn to pieces and dragged through the streets of the town (1814). The anonymous poem—subversive even in being an incunable of the surfacing Western Lombard dialect as a literary language— was first attributed to the celebrated Carlo Porta, but Grossi of his own accord acknowledged himself the author.

In 1816, he published other two poems, written likewise in Milanese: &quot;La Pioggia d&#x27;oro&quot; (&quot;The Shower of Gold&quot;) and &quot;La Fuggitiva&quot; (&quot;The Fugitive&quot;). These compositions secured him the friendship of Porta and Manzoni, and the three poets came to form a sort of literary triumvirate of Romanticism in Lombardy. Grossi took advantage of the popularity of his Milanese poems to try Italian verse, into which he sought to introduce the moving realism which had given such satisfaction in his earliest compositions; and in this he was entirely successful with his poem &quot;Ildegonda&quot; (1814).

Of the same period is the satirical dialect poem against Classicism, &quot;Matrimoni del sur cont Gabriell Verr&quot; (1819) written in collaboration with Carlo Porta.

He next wrote an epic poem, entitled &quot;The Lombards in the First Crusade&quot;, a work of which Manzoni makes honorable mention in &quot;I Promessi Sposi&quot;. This composition, which was published by subscription (1826), attained a success unequalled by that of any other Italian poem within the century; it provided the subject for Giuseppe Verdi&#x27;s success of 1843, &quot;I Lombardi alla prima crociata&quot;, premiered in Milan at La Scala.
The example of Manzoni induced Grossi to write an historical novel entitled &quot;Marco Visconti&quot; (1834), a work which contains passages of true description and deep pathos. A little later Grossi published a tale in verse, &quot;Ulrico e Lida&quot;, but with this publication his poetical activity ceased.

In 1834, he helped organise the &quot;Salotto Maffei,&quot; the liberal and patriotic literary salon in Milan hosted by Clara Maffei; there Verdi made his acquaintance. After his marriage in 1838 he continued to employ himself as a notary in Milan till his death.

== References ==
=== Notes ===
=== Sources ===
* 
* 

=== External links ===</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q951398" start="0" end="14" title="Tommaso Grossi" label="Tommaso Grossi"/>
<link wikidata="Q43032" start="117" end="124" title="Bellano" label="Bellano"/>
<link wikidata="Q15523" start="129" end="138" title="Lake Como" label="Lake Como"/>
<link wikidata="Q219317" start="164" end="183" title="University of Pavia" label="University of Pavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q547462" start="469" end="477" title="Milanese" label="Milanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q290171" start="542" end="556" title="Giuseppe Prina" label="Giuseppe Prina"/>
<link wikidata="Q3831132" start="798" end="844" title="Western Lombard literature" label="Western Lombard dialect as a literary language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248697" start="885" end="896" title="Carlo Porta" label="Carlo Porta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064" start="1213" end="1220" title="Alessandro Francesco Tommaso Antonio Manzoni" label="Manzoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q37068" start="1289" end="1300" title="Romanticism" label="Romanticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q170292" start="1656" end="1666" title="Classicism" label="Classicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q28491" start="1909" end="1925" title="The Betrothed (Manzoni novel)" label="I Promessi Sposi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7317" start="2107" end="2121" title="Giuseppe Verdi" label="Giuseppe Verdi"/>
<link wikidata="Q468625" start="2152" end="2182" title="I Lombardi alla prima crociata" label="I Lombardi alla prima crociata"/>
<link wikidata="Q5471" start="2212" end="2220" title="La Scala" label="La Scala"/>
<link wikidata="Q85783783" start="2304" end="2318" title="Marco Visconti (novel)" label="Marco Visconti"/>
<link wikidata="Q576342" start="2629" end="2634" title="salon (gathering)" label="salon"/>
<link wikidata="Q490" start="2638" end="2643" title="Milan" label="Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2975503" start="2654" end="2666" title="Clara Maffei" label="Clara Maffei"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1329101" wikidata="Q1982105" url="?curid=1329101" title="Paul-Loup Sulitzer">
<text>Paul Loup Karl Sulitzer (22 July 1946 – 6 February 2025) was a French financier and author. Before he turned seventeen, he was already a self-made millionaire. Sulitzer used his financial experience and knowledge in his books, which often related to the business world.

Many of his books were ghost-written by Loup Durand.

==Life and career==
Sulitzer&#x27;s father was a Jewish immigrant from Romania who died when Sulitzer was 10. Six years later Sulitzer joined a trading company that operated in the Middle East. According to his editor, he became the youngest CEO in France at age 21 and made his fortune selling gadgets (notably keychains that were very popular between the years 1960 and 1970) in the UK that he imported from the Far East. In 1968 he incorporated a holding company and established a financial consultant firm.

In 1980, Sulitzer pitched a literary genre concept he called “finance Western” to Denoël Publishers that would be a series of finance-fiction adventure novels. Loup Durand, a journalist and writer, did the writing. The book &quot;Money&quot; reached a large audience. This was followed by &quot;Cash!&quot; (1981) and &quot;Fortune&quot; (1982) which depicted the exploits and financial dreams of Franz Cimballi, a vigilante businessman.

After these thrillers of a new genre, the duo published &quot;Le Roi Vert&quot; (1983). It was a romantic saga that achieved considerable public success and was translated into 30 languages.

At the end of the 1980s, he was a lecturer, with François Spoerry, Jean-Pierre Thiollet and others, to an international meeting in Geneva of Amiic (World Real Estate Investment Organization).

In 2000, he was arrested, along with the son of the former socialist president François Mitterrand, for the illegal sale of weapons to Angola.

Sulitzer died from a stroke on 6 February 2025, at the age of 78.

==Bibliography==

===Novels===
===Comics===

During the early nineties, three of his novels were adapted into comics. The adaptions, in 12 volumes, were written by Jean Annestay, drawn by multiple artists and published between 1991 and 1995 by Belgian comics publisher Dupuis.

&quot;The Green King&quot; was adapted into a comic series from 1991 to 1995. The artist on the first issue, Jacques Armand, died 17 April 1991, before it was completed. His friends, Alexandre Coutelis, Christian Rossi and Gilles Mezzomo helped complete the album.
*&quot;Le Roi Vert – Le Traque&quot; (English: &quot;The Green King – The Revenge&quot;) (by Armand and Annestay) (1991)
*&quot;Le Roi Vert – Guaharibos&quot; (English: &quot;The Green King – Guaharibos&quot;) (by Mezzomo and Annestay) (1993)
*&quot;Le Roi Vert – Les Chiens Noirs&quot; (English: &quot;The Green King – The Black Dogs&quot;) (by Mezzomo and Annestay) (1994)
*&quot;Le Roi Vert – Charmian Page&quot; (English: &quot;The Green King – Charmian Page&quot;) (by Mezzomo and Annestay) (1994)
*&quot;Le Roi Vert – Le Royaume&quot; (English: &quot;The Green King – The Kingdom&quot;) (by Mezzomo and Annestay) (1995)

&quot;Rourke&quot; was adapted into a comic series from 1991 to 1994.
*01 – &quot;La Mort Est Toujours Bonne&quot; by Marvano
*02 – &quot;Le Bon Dieu Ne Dort Jamaims&quot; by Marvano and Rouffa
*03 – &quot;Le Trois Concubine&quot; by Marvano et Rouffa
*04 – &quot;Tigre d&#x27;Avril&quot; by Marvano et Rouffa

&quot;Hannah&quot; was adapted in three volumes from 1991 to 1993, drawn by Franz Drappier.

==Honors and awards==
*1981: Prize for the Book of the Summer for &quot;Cash!&quot; (Denoël, 1981)
*1987: Medal of Vermeil of the City of Paris
*1987: Knight of the National Order of Merit (later excluded by a decree published in the official journal on 28 November 2012)
*1996: Officier de l&#x27;Ordre national du Mérite (later excluded by a decree published in the official journal on 28 November 2012)
*Knight of Cahors
*Citizen of Honor of the Liège

==Legal affairs==
In October 2008 the Angolagate trial commenced in Paris, in which Sulitzer was indicted. By the decision of the Correctional Tribunal he was condemned for &quot;misuse of corporate assets&quot; and given 15 months in prison with a fine of 100,000 euros. This conviction led to his exclusion from the National Order of Merit in November 2012. In 2009 he published &quot;Angolagate, the chronicle of a state scandal&quot;, which had been written day by day during the process, from October 2008 to March 2009.

==References==
==External links==
* Paul-Loup Sulitzer. Ecrivain et financier français
* The New York Times</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1982105" start="0" end="23" title="Paul-Loup Sulitzer" label="Paul Loup Karl Sulitzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q623386" start="294" end="307" title="Ghostwriter" label="ghost-written"/>
<link wikidata="Q3263963" start="311" end="322" title="Loup Durand" label="Loup Durand"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="396" end="403" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="506" end="517" title="Middle East" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q42225" start="739" end="747" title="Far East" label="Far East"/>
<link wikidata="Q327258" start="1517" end="1533" title="François Spoerry" label="François Spoerry"/>
<link wikidata="Q982049" start="1535" end="1555" title="Jean-Pierre Thiollet" label="Jean-Pierre Thiollet"/>
<link wikidata="Q71" start="1599" end="1605" title="Geneva" label="Geneva"/>
<link wikidata="Q2038" start="1740" end="1759" title="François Mitterrand" label="François Mitterrand"/>
<link wikidata="Q916" start="1796" end="1802" title="Angola" label="Angola"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266653" start="2141" end="2147" title="Dupuis" label="Dupuis"/>
<link wikidata="Q652962" start="3597" end="3634" title="Knight of the National Order of Merit" label="Knight of the National Order of Merit"/>
<link wikidata="Q652962" start="3725" end="3768" title="Officier de l&amp;#x27;ordre national du Mérite" label="Officier de l&amp;#x27;Ordre national du Mérite"/>
<link wikidata="Q2535950" start="3940" end="3950" title="Mitterrand–Pasqua affair" label="Angolagate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3538855" start="4032" end="4053" title="Correctional Tribunal" label="Correctional Tribunal"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1329102" wikidata="Q6765630" url="?curid=1329102" title="Marissa">
<text>Marissa can refer to:

*Maresha or Marissa, an ancient city in Israel
*Marissa, Illinois, a town in Illinois
*Marissa Township, St. Clair County, Illinois
*Marissa (name), a female given name, including a list of persons and fictional characters with the name
*Vita Marissa (born 1981), Indonesian badminton player

== See also ==
*MS &quot;Princesa Marissa&quot;, a cruise ship operated by Louis Cruise Lines</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6765630" start="0" end="7" title="Marissa" label="Marissa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507676" start="24" end="31" title="Maresha" label="Maresha"/>
<link wikidata="Q2668778" start="71" end="88" title="Marissa, Illinois" label="Marissa, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q987819" start="110" end="154" title="Marissa Township, St. Clair County, Illinois" label="Marissa Township, St. Clair County, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q1304867" start="156" end="170" title="Marissa (name)" label="Marissa (name)"/>
<link wikidata="Q468329" start="261" end="273" title="Vita Marissa" label="Vita Marissa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6718162" start="332" end="363" title="MS Princesa Marissa" label="MS &amp;quot;Princesa Marissa&amp;quot;"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1329110" wikidata="Q3521576" url="?curid=1329110" title="Kumarakom">
<text>Kumarakom is a tourism destination located near the city of Kottayam (), in Kerala, India, known for its backwater tourism. It is set in the backdrop of the Vembanad Lake, the largest lake in the state of Kerala. In January 2023, when Kerala was listed by &quot;The New York Times&quot; in their &quot;52 places to go in 2023&quot; list, Kumarakom got a special mention for its backwater tourism.

==History==

Kumarakom was within the jurisdiction of the king of Thekkumkur while that kingdom existed, and it was usual to have fighting and competitions among local kings. Small boats called &quot;Chundan Vallam&quot; and &quot;Kettu Vallam&quot; were widely used among the local kings for their lightning attacks and fighting in central Travancore.

During those days, Vembanad&#x27;s lake area was a dangerous area; therefore the king of Thekkumcore kept soldiers in Kumarakom and constructed a fort at the entrance of Kottathodu in Kumarakom. Soldiers were kept in certain areas of Kumarakom for protection against enemy attacks; some of those places still have &quot;pada&quot; (meaning war) in their names, such as Padakkalam and Padanilam. The remains of the fort&#x27;s wall, six feet broad, can still be seen near the village office of Kumarakom.

==Environment==
Kumarakom is home to a wide variety of flora and fauna. Kumarakom Bird Sanctuary is a noted bird sanctuary where many species of migratory birds visit. The Vembanad Lake, the largest backwater in Kerala, is habitat for many marine and freshwater fish species and it teems with &quot;Karimeen&quot; (Pearl spot also known as Etroplus suratensis) shrimp (Metapenaeus dobsonii) common name Poovalan chemeen. The bird sanctuary extends over 14 acres (57,000 m2), and came into existence following preservation efforts from the government. It is a major tourist attraction.

==Climate==
Kumarakom has a moderate climate throughout the year. It is a balanced tropical climate, which has two monsoons-south west and north east. Some times heavy rain and some times summer

==Economy==
Fishing, agriculture and tourism are the major economic activities. Kumarakom&#x27;s perfectly balanced tropical climate is very conducive to cultivation. The place has expanses of mangrove forests, paddy fields and coconut groves. Fruits like Banana, Mango, Jackfruit, Ambazhanga, Puli (Tamarind), Chaambenga, Peraycka (Guava), Aathaycka and Pineapple grow here. Also, cocoa and coffee, chena(yam) and chembu (colocasia), grow well and were cultivated under the coconut trees. This rich agricultural environment is mainly irrigated using interspersed waterways and canals of the Meenachil river. The smaller canals are often lined by hibiscus plants which lean partly over the canals to form a green canopy, from which hang the lovely hibiscus flowers.

==Religion==
Main religions are Hinduism and Christianity, More than 70% of people belong to Ezhava caste under four SNDP of Sree Kumaramangalam Temple, and the rest of the people belong to Christian religion The famous church in Kumarakom is Attamangalam St John the Baptist church. The 1000-year-old Thazhathangady Juma Masjid, a mosque, is located nearby Kumarakom, almost away. The people of Kumarakom celebrate both the festivals of Temples and Churches equally without the discrimination of caste and religions.

==Fishing==
Fishing is mainly done using the small boats (vallams) and gill nets (gear). The main catches are black clam (Villorita cyprinoides), &quot;Karimeen&quot; (Pearl spot also known as Etroplus suratensis) and shrimp (Metapenaeus dobsonii).

==Boat race==
Elegant, special boats, like Kochu-odi Vallam, Odi-Vallam, Iruttukutthi Vallam, Churulan Vallam and Chundan Vallam, take part in the boat races around Onam time, including the Nehru Trophy boat race Alappuzha. There is a private sailing club in Kumarakom, located on the shore of the Vembanad lake.

==Modes of access==

One can access Kumarakom by many means:
* By air: via Cochin International Airport approximately .
* By rail: via Kottayam
* By road:KSRTC(10 kilometres) Buses and taxis are easily available at all times of the day from Kottayam.
* By boat: Public ferry by SWTD (Govt. of Kerala) to and from Muhamma (near Alappuzha) to Kumarakom Jetty. Public ferry is also available from Cheepunkal jetty located apart. Once can avail a public ferry and return to same spot in about 1.5 hours at cheap rate of Rs 20 on Kumarakom-Muhamma—Kumarakom route (across Vempanad lake). Also one can choose Cheepunkal-Maniaparambu-Cheepunkal to see Kuttanad like topography, agriculture, life along the river.
Ferry Timings:
==Tourism sightseeing==
Tourism in Kumarakom largely revolves -around the backwaters of the Vembanad Lake. Several luxury and budget resorts lined up on the shores of the lake provide tourists with facilities for boating, yachting and fishing, with panoramic views of the lake. The other major attraction is the Bird Sanctuary, which is open from 6 am to 6 pm and can be visited by canoes arranged by local fishermen at the entrance to the sanctuary. A two-hour rowing canoe trip is quite cheap, and is best undertaken in the evening or early morning to avoid the afternoon sun.

Furthermore, the Aruvikkuzhi Waterfall and its surrounding rubber plantation are a photographer&#x27;s delight. There is also the Bay Island Drift Museum near the Kumarakom beach for history lovers, open from 10 am – 5 pm on Tuesdays – Saturdays and from 11.30 am – 5 pm on Sundays.

Kumarakom is the first destination in India to Implement Responsible Tourism practices. Kerala Tourism was awarded for its path-breaking &#x27;Responsible Tourism&#x27; project in Kumarakom, which has successfully linked the local community with the hospitality industry and government departments, thereby creating a model for empowerment and development of the people in the area while sustaining eco-friendly tourism.

==Vivanta By Taj==
Earlier Taj Garden Retreat, now Vivanta By Taj, the first modern tourist resort in Kumarakom was established in the Victorian two storeyed bungalow built by Alfred George Baker in the year 1881 on huge pieces of teak wood rafters packed in mud as a base. This house on the lake at Kumarakom was the house of four generations of the Baker family, for over a hundred years. The bird Sanctuary and the two storeyed bungalow built by Mr.A G Baker on the muddy land are places of interest for tourists from all over the world. The bungalow still remains grand but silent reminder of an age and people whose hard work cannot be erased by time.

==Schools nearby==
* Sree Kumaramangalam Public School, Kumarakom
* Sree Kumaramangalam Higher Secondary School
* Government Higher Secondary School
* Govt U P School Pandan Bazar Kumarakom
* St. Mary&#x27;s LP school
* Maria Bhavan School
* Sacred Heart L.P School
* SB LP School
* Anie Baker memorial U P school Kavanatinkara

==In popular culture==
Arundhati Roy&#x27;s &quot;The God of Small Things&quot; is set in Ayemenem or Aymanam village, which adjoins Kumarakom. The explosive success of this novel has given some added tourism impetus to this area. The Taj Garden Retreat hotel complex is centered on a building that is called &quot;History House&quot; in the novel; it was built by British missionary Alfred George Baker, whom the locals called &quot;Kari Saipu&quot; (possibly an elided form of &quot;Baker Sahib&quot;), as in the novel. Four generations of Bakers lived in the house until 1962, speaking Malayalam, and even wearing the mundu. The Baker Memorial School, Kottayam, was started by a daughter of this family in 1925. The Baker family&#x27;s house is in ruins in the novel, as it was in reality before was developed into a hotel and has been restored by the Taj group. The Ayemenem house, where Arundhati Roy spent part of her childhood (like the twins in the story), can also be visited in the village, which can be reached by boat along the Meenachil river that figures prominently in the story.

==Special tourism zone==
Kumarakom has been declared a special tourism zone by the Kerala state government, as legislated for by Kerala Tourism Act, 2005. Development in the area is therefore now controlled by the guidelines written by the STZ committee, and published at http://www.keralatourism.org/specialtourism.php

==Awards and honours==

It had won top honours including the UNWTO Ulysses Award for Innovation in Public Policy and Governance. The Kumarakom initiative had earlier won the National Award for Best Responsible Tourism Project and also the PATA Grand Award for Environment.

== References ==
==External links==

* Kumarakom Backwaters
* Kumarakom - Kerala Tourism</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3521576" start="0" end="9" title="Kumarakom" label="Kumarakom"/>
<link wikidata="Q659887" start="60" end="68" title="Kottayam" label="Kottayam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186" start="76" end="82" title="Kerala" label="Kerala"/>
<link wikidata="Q2641899" start="157" end="170" title="Vembanad Lake" label="Vembanad Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="262" end="280" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q7780989" start="464" end="474" title="Thekkumkur" label="Thekkumkur"/>
<link wikidata="Q3534474" start="592" end="618" title="chundan vallam" label="&amp;quot;Chundan Vallam&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2089550" start="629" end="641" title="Kettuvallam" label="Kettu Vallam"/>
<link wikidata="Q150058" start="739" end="749" title="Travancore" label="Travancore"/>
<link wikidata="Q2641899" start="771" end="779" title="Vembanad" label="Vembanad"/>
<link wikidata="Q3929708" start="1136" end="1145" title="Padanilam" label="Padanilam"/>
<link wikidata="Q131449" start="1312" end="1317" title="flora" label="flora"/>
<link wikidata="Q104021" start="1322" end="1327" title="fauna" label="fauna"/>
<link wikidata="Q6443537" start="1329" end="1353" title="Kumarakom Bird Sanctuary" label="Kumarakom Bird Sanctuary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2721449" start="1365" end="1379" title="Wildlife sanctuaries of India" label="bird sanctuary"/>
<link wikidata="Q216507" start="1402" end="1417" title="migratory birds" label="migratory birds"/>
<link wikidata="Q2641899" start="1429" end="1437" title="Vembanad" label="Vembanad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519619" start="1572" end="1582" title="Pearl spot" label="Pearl spot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519619" start="1597" end="1616" title="Etroplus suratensis" label="Etroplus suratensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7937" start="1880" end="1887" title="climate" label="climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q42967" start="1958" end="1965" title="monsoon" label="monsoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q19756" start="2232" end="2240" title="mangrove" label="mangrove"/>
<link wikidata="Q45757" start="2310" end="2319" title="Jackfruit" label="Jackfruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q12284" start="2617" end="2623" title="canals" label="canals"/>
<link wikidata="Q13114102" start="2631" end="2640" title="Meenachil" label="Meenachil"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="2838" end="2846" title="Hinduism" label="Hinduism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="2851" end="2863" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q3520262" start="2899" end="2905" title="Ezhava" label="Ezhava"/>
<link wikidata="Q7711587" start="3108" end="3134" title="Thazhathangady Juma Masjid" label="Thazhathangady Juma Masjid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519619" start="3493" end="3503" title="Pearl spot" label="Pearl spot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519619" start="3518" end="3537" title="Etroplus suratensis" label="Etroplus suratensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517781" start="3543" end="3549" title="shrimp" label="shrimp"/>
<link wikidata="Q592172" start="3964" end="3992" title="Cochin International Airport Limited" label="Cochin International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q659887" start="4024" end="4032" title="Kottayam" label="Kottayam"/>
<link wikidata="Q679587" start="4043" end="4048" title="Kerala State Road Transport Corporation" label="KSRTC"/>
<link wikidata="Q659887" start="4130" end="4138" title="Kottayam" label="Kottayam"/>
<link wikidata="Q585026" start="4216" end="4225" title="Alappuzha" label="Alappuzha"/>
<link wikidata="Q171529" start="5079" end="5084" title="canoe" label="canoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7829160" start="5562" end="5576" title="Kerala Tourism" label="Kerala Tourism"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6622" end="6665" title="Sree Kumaramangalam Higher Secondary School" label="Sree Kumaramangalam Higher Secondary School"/>
<link wikidata="Q212801" start="6906" end="6919" title="Arundhati Roy" label="Arundhati Roy"/>
<link wikidata="Q378786" start="6933" end="6956" title="The God of Small Things" label="The God of Small Things"/>
<link wikidata="Q4831479" start="6985" end="6992" title="Aymanam" label="Aymanam"/>
<link wikidata="Q650250" start="7347" end="7353" title="Elision" label="elided"/>
<link wikidata="Q36236" start="7472" end="7481" title="Malayalam" label="Malayalam"/>
<link wikidata="Q13156645" start="7504" end="7509" title="mundu" label="mundu"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1329111" wikidata="Q806092" url="?curid=1329111" title="Bananas (film)">
<text>Bananas is a 1971 American comedy film directed by Woody Allen and starring Allen, Louise Lasser, and Carlos Montalban. Written by Allen and Mickey Rose, the film is about a bumbling New Yorker who, after being dumped by his activist girlfriend, travels to a tiny Latin American nation and becomes involved in its latest revolution. Parts of the plot are based on the book &quot;Don Quixote, U.S.A.&quot; by Richard P. Powell.

Filmed on location in New York City and Puerto Rico, the film was released to positive reviews from critics and was number 78 on Bravo&#x27;s &quot;100 Funniest Movies&quot; and number 69 on AFI&#x27;s 100 Years...100 Laughs in 2000.

==Plot==
The film opens with Howard Cosell&#x27;s coverage of the assassination of the president of the fictional &quot;banana republic&quot; of San Marcos and a coup d&#x27;état that brings Gen. Emilio Molina Vargas to power.

Fielding Mellish is a neurotic blue-collar man who tries to impress social activist Nancy by connecting with the revolution in San Marcos. He visits the republic and attempts to show his concern for the native people. However, Vargas secretly orders his men, disguised as Vargas&#x27;s opponents, to kill Mellish to make the rebels look bad so that the U.S. will send Vargas financial aid. Mellish evades Vargas&#x27;s assassins but is shortly captured by the real rebels. Vargas declares Mellish dead regardless, leaving Mellish no choice but to join the rebels for two months. Mellish then clumsily learns how to be a revolutionary. When the revolution is successful, Esposito, the Castro-style leader, goes mad. The rebels decide to replace him with Mellish as their president.

While traveling back to the U.S. to obtain financial aid, Mellish (sporting a long fake beard) reunites with Nancy and is exposed. In court, Mellish tries to defend himself from a series of incriminating witnesses, including a reigning Miss America and a middle-aged African-American woman claiming to be J. Edgar Hoover in disguise. One of the witnesses does provide testimony favorable to Mellish, but the court clerk, when asked to read back this testimony, replies with an entirely different, wholly unfavorable rendition. Mellish is eventually sentenced to prison, but his sentence is suspended on the condition that he does not move into the judge&#x27;s neighborhood. Nancy then agrees to marry him. The film ends with Howard Cosell&#x27;s coverage of the between-the-covers consummation of their marriage, an event that was over much more quickly than Nancy had anticipated, with Mellish anticipating a rematch in the early spring.

==Cast==

* Woody Allen as Fielding Mellish
* Louise Lasser as Nancy
* Carlos Montalban as Gen. Emilio Molina Vargas
* Natividad Abascal as Yolanda
* Howard Cosell as himself
* Jacobo Morales as Esposito
* Miguel Ángel Suárez as Luis
* David Ortiz as Sanchez
* René Enríquez as Diaz
* Jack Axelrod as Arroyo
* Roger Grimsby as himself
* Don Dunphy as himself
* Martha Greenhouse as Dr. Feigen
* Dan Frazer as Priest
* Stanley Ackerman as Dr. Mellish
* Charlotte Rae as Mrs. Mellish
* Axel Anderson as Tortured Man
* Dorothi Fox as J. Edgar Hoover
Eddie Barth and Nicholas Saunders make their theatrical film debuts as the characters Paul and Douglas, while comedian Conrad Bain plays Semple and actor Allen Garfield plays the Man on Cross. Uncredited appearances include Sylvester Stallone as a subway thug #1, Mary Jo Catlett as a woman in a hotel lobby and Tino García in an undisclosed role.

==Production==

===Development===
According to an interview in the notes of the film&#x27;s DVD release, Allen said that there is absolutely no blood in the film (even during executions) because he wanted to keep the light comedic tone of the film intact.

Allen and Lasser had been married from 1966 to 1970 and were divorced at the time the film was made.

The verdict in Mellish&#x27;s legal case is portrayed as the headline story of a Roger Grimsby newscast. Included in the scene is a parody television advertisement for New Testament cigarettes with a Catholic priest (Dan Frazer) promoting the fictitious brand while performing the sacrament of the Eucharist. The movie received a C (condemned) classification from the National Catholic Office for Motion Pictures because of the spoof.

===Title===
The title is a pun, &quot;bananas&quot; being slang for &quot;crazy&quot;, as well as being a reference to the phrase &quot;banana republic&quot; describing the film&#x27;s setting. When Allen was asked why the film was called &quot;Bananas&quot;, his reply was, &quot;Because there are no bananas in it.&quot; Some writers have made the connection between this and &quot;The Cocoanuts&quot;, the first film by the Marx Brothers, by whom Allen was heavily influenced at the time, and which featured no coconuts.

==Music==
* &quot;Quiero la Noche&quot;, words and music by Marvin Hamlisch
* &quot;Cause I Believe in Loving&quot;, music by Marvin Hamlisch, lyrics by Howard Liebling, sung by Jake Holmes
* &quot;1812 Overture in E Flat&quot;, Op.49 (1880), written by Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky
* &quot;Naughty Marietta&quot; (1910), music by Victor Herbert

==Reception==

===Critical response===
&quot;Bananas&quot; was well received by critics; receiving an 83% rating on Rotten Tomatoes based on 35 reviews with an average rating of 7.5/10.

Vincent Canby of &quot;The New York Times&quot; praised the film, saying: &quot;Allen&#x27;s view of the world is fraught with everything except pathos, and it&#x27;s a view I happen to find very funny. Here is no little man surviving with a wan smile and a shrug, but a runty, wise-mouthed guy whose initial impulses toward cowardice seem really heroic in the crazy order of the way things are.&quot; He concluded: &quot;Any movie that attempts to mix together love, Cuban revolution, the C.I.A., Jewish mothers, J. Edgar Hoover and a few other odds and ends (including a sequence in which someone orders 1,000 grilled cheese sandwiches) is bound to be a little weird—and most welcome.&quot; Gene Siskel of the &quot;Chicago Tribune&quot; gave the film three stars out of four and called the opening scene &quot;one of the funniest bits of film,&quot; though he thought the romance &quot;gets in the way&quot; and &quot;could have been omitted easily.&quot; Charles Champlin of the &quot;Los Angeles Times&quot; wrote: &quot;Allen seems to have been unable to figure a suitable finish for the plot, which does not so much peak as stop. Still the best jokes have a glorious insanity about them. Given the diminishing ability to laugh like blazing idiots these days, &quot;Bananas&quot; is welcome even if Allen is not quite at the top of his form.&quot; Gary Arnold of &quot;The Washington Post&quot; wrote that the film was &quot;in a word, hilarious,&quot; and &quot;an immense improvement&quot; over &quot;Take the Money and Run&quot;. Richard Combs of &quot;The Monthly Film Bulletin&quot; thought that &quot;the gags seem a little brighter than in &quot;Take the Money&quot;,&quot; but also found the scattershot humor &quot;too undisciplined and disparate.&quot; John Simon wrote of the film&#x27;s plot: &quot;None of it makes for sense or solidly developing humor, and much of it is in bad taste&quot;.

===Accolades===
The film is recognized by American Film Institute in these lists:
* 2000: AFI&#x27;s 100 Years...100 Laughs – #69

==References==
==External links==
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q157443" start="27" end="38" title="comedy film" label="comedy film"/>
<link wikidata="Q25089" start="51" end="62" title="Woody Allen" label="Woody Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q273532" start="83" end="96" title="Louise Lasser" label="Louise Lasser"/>
<link wikidata="Q5042394" start="102" end="118" title="Carlos Montalban" label="Carlos Montalban"/>
<link wikidata="Q12270304" start="141" end="152" title="Mickey Rose" label="Mickey Rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q12585" start="264" end="277" title="Latin America" label="Latin America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1307719" start="408" end="425" title="Richard P. Powell" label="Richard P. Powell"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="450" end="463" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183" start="468" end="479" title="Puerto Rico" label="Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q902771" start="557" end="562" title="Bravo (US TV channel)" label="Bravo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1767226" start="619" end="652" title="AFI&amp;#x27;s 100 Years...100 Laughs" label="AFI&amp;#x27;s 100 Years...100 Laughs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3882219" start="729" end="742" title="assassination" label="assassination"/>
<link wikidata="Q171751" start="783" end="798" title="banana republic" label="banana republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q45382" start="825" end="841" title="coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="coup d&amp;#x27;état"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191714" start="922" end="933" title="Blue-collar worker" label="blue-collar"/>
<link wikidata="Q203764" start="959" end="974" title="social activism" label="social activist"/>
<link wikidata="Q859497" start="1909" end="1921" title="Miss America" label="Miss America"/>
<link wikidata="Q210435" start="1978" end="1993" title="J. Edgar Hoover" label="J. Edgar Hoover"/>
<link wikidata="Q641208" start="2081" end="2092" title="court clerk" label="court clerk"/>
<link wikidata="Q25089" start="2626" end="2637" title="Woody Allen" label="Woody Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q273532" start="2660" end="2673" title="Louise Lasser" label="Louise Lasser"/>
<link wikidata="Q5042394" start="2685" end="2701" title="Carlos Montalban" label="Carlos Montalban"/>
<link wikidata="Q6969987" start="2733" end="2750" title="Nati Abascal" label="Natividad Abascal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472983" start="2764" end="2777" title="Howard Cosell" label="Howard Cosell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2839389" start="2791" end="2805" title="Jacobo Morales" label="Jacobo Morales"/>
<link wikidata="Q5259501" start="2820" end="2839" title="Miguel Ángel Suárez" label="Miguel Ángel Suárez"/>
<link wikidata="Q3426166" start="2875" end="2888" title="René Enríquez" label="René Enríquez"/>
<link wikidata="Q7358271" start="2924" end="2937" title="Roger Grimsby" label="Roger Grimsby"/>
<link wikidata="Q5292550" start="2951" end="2961" title="Don Dunphy" label="Don Dunphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6774413" start="2975" end="2992" title="Martha Greenhouse" label="Martha Greenhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1159067" start="3009" end="3019" title="Dan Frazer" label="Dan Frazer"/>
<link wikidata="Q266335" start="3066" end="3079" title="Charlotte Rae" label="Charlotte Rae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1383608" start="3098" end="3111" title="Axel Anderson" label="Axel Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q129468669" start="3130" end="3141" title="Dorothi Fox" label="Dorothi Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q210435" start="3145" end="3160" title="J. Edgar Hoover" label="J. Edgar Hoover"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282686" start="3161" end="3172" title="Eddie Barth" label="Eddie Barth"/>
<link wikidata="Q107016751" start="3177" end="3194" title="Nicholas Saunders (actor)" label="Nicholas Saunders"/>
<link wikidata="Q2731624" start="3280" end="3291" title="Conrad Bain" label="Conrad Bain"/>
<link wikidata="Q932204" start="3315" end="3329" title="Allen Garfield" label="Allen Garfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q40026" start="3385" end="3403" title="Sylvester Stallone" label="Sylvester Stallone"/>
<link wikidata="Q674255" start="3425" end="3440" title="Mary Jo Catlett" label="Mary Jo Catlett"/>
<link wikidata="Q21029473" start="3473" end="3484" title="Tino García" label="Tino García"/>
<link wikidata="Q1301203" start="3899" end="3909" title="legal case" label="legal case"/>
<link wikidata="Q7358271" start="3950" end="3963" title="Roger Grimsby" label="Roger Grimsby"/>
<link wikidata="Q170539" start="4001" end="4007" title="parody" label="parody"/>
<link wikidata="Q854995" start="4008" end="4032" title="television advertisement" label="television advertisement"/>
<link wikidata="Q18813" start="4037" end="4050" title="New Testament" label="New Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1578" start="4051" end="4060" title="cigarette" label="cigarette"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="4069" end="4077" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1159067" start="4086" end="4096" title="Dan Frazer" label="Dan Frazer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3233636" start="4150" end="4159" title="Sacraments of the Catholic Church" label="sacrament"/>
<link wikidata="Q5405829" start="4167" end="4176" title="Eucharist in the Catholic Church" label="Eucharist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2386940" start="4237" end="4281" title="National Catholic Office for Motion Pictures (NCOMP)" label="National Catholic Office for Motion Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q263668" start="4332" end="4335" title="pun" label="pun"/>
<link wikidata="Q8102" start="4363" end="4368" title="slang" label="slang"/>
<link wikidata="Q171751" start="4441" end="4456" title="banana republic" label="banana republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q581117" start="4689" end="4702" title="The Cocoanuts" label="The Cocoanuts"/>
<link wikidata="Q64450" start="4732" end="4745" title="Marx Brothers" label="Marx Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q337206" start="4890" end="4905" title="Marvin Hamlisch" label="Marvin Hamlisch"/>
<link wikidata="Q328665" start="5008" end="5019" title="Jake Holmes" label="Jake Holmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315" start="5084" end="5108" title="Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky" label="Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275145" start="5157" end="5171" title="Victor Herbert" label="Victor Herbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q105584" start="5289" end="5304" title="Rotten Tomatoes" label="Rotten Tomatoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q729113" start="5333" end="5347" title="Weighted arithmetic mean" label="average rating"/>
<link wikidata="Q716442" start="5360" end="5373" title="Vincent Canby" label="Vincent Canby"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="5383" end="5401" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q969105" start="6053" end="6064" title="Gene Siskel" label="Gene Siskel"/>
<link wikidata="Q47596" start="6078" end="6093" title="Chicago Tribune" label="Chicago Tribune"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063922" start="6319" end="6335" title="Charles Champlin" label="Charles Champlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q188515" start="6349" end="6366" title="Los Angeles Times" label="Los Angeles Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q166032" start="6735" end="6754" title="The Washington Post" label="The Washington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146315" start="6869" end="6891" title="Take the Money and Run (film)" label="Take the Money and Run"/>
<link wikidata="Q13107374" start="6922" end="6947" title="The Monthly Film Bulletin" label="The Monthly Film Bulletin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6257894" start="7129" end="7139" title="John Simon (critic)" label="John Simon"/>
<link wikidata="Q207460" start="7314" end="7337" title="American Film Institute" label="American Film Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1767226" start="7362" end="7395" title="AFI&amp;#x27;s 100 Years...100 Laughs" label="AFI&amp;#x27;s 100 Years...100 Laughs"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1329113" wikidata="Q4420070" url="?curid=1329113" title="Boca Raton station (Tri-Rail)">
<text>Boca Raton is a Tri-Rail commuter rail station in Boca Raton, Florida. The station is located at Yamato Road (SR 794), just east of Congress Avenue (SR 807) and west of I-95. Originally opened January 9, 1989, the station was moved and rebuilt following Hurricane Wilma, reopening to service November 4, 2005. The station is the southernmost Tri-Rail station in Palm Beach County, and offers parking. By 2014, it was considered the busiest station in the system with 1,600 riders a day, surpassing the Tri-Rail and Metrorail transfer station in Miami-Dade County. For this reason, a second Boca Raton Tri-Rail station at Glades Road has been long considered.

==Station layout==
The station has two side platforms, with a parking lot and bus loop west of the southbound platform. An overpass provides access to the northbound platform and the El Rio Trail, which provides direct pedestrian access to Yamato Road.

==See also==
*Boca Raton station (Brightline)

==References==
==External links==
*South Florida Regional Transportation Authority - Boca Raton station</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4420070" start="0" end="10" title="Boca Raton station (Tri-Rail)" label="Boca Raton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2452212" start="16" end="24" title="Tri-Rail" label="Tri-Rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412403" start="25" end="38" title="commuter rail" label="commuter rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q29422" start="50" end="69" title="Boca Raton, Florida" label="Boca Raton, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q2433073" start="97" end="117" title="Florida State Road 794" label="Yamato Road (SR 794)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2433088" start="132" end="156" title="Florida State Road 807" label="Congress Avenue (SR 807)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2448791" start="169" end="173" title="Interstate 95 in Florida" label="I-95"/>
<link wikidata="Q849719" start="254" end="269" title="Hurricane Wilma" label="Hurricane Wilma"/>
<link wikidata="Q4411105" start="502" end="541" title="Tri-Rail and Metrorail transfer station" label="Tri-Rail and Metrorail transfer station"/>
<link wikidata="Q468557" start="545" end="562" title="Miami-Dade County, Florida" label="Miami-Dade County"/>
<link wikidata="Q2433089" start="621" end="632" title="Florida State Road 808" label="Glades Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q2735706" start="699" end="712" title="side platform" label="side platform"/>
<link wikidata="Q2433073" start="900" end="911" title="Yamato Road" label="Yamato Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q97933314" start="928" end="959" title="Boca Raton station (Brightline)" label="Boca Raton station (Brightline)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1329114" wikidata="Q5101832" url="?curid=1329114" title="Chiral model">
<text>In nuclear physics, the chiral model, introduced by Feza Gürsey in 1960, is a phenomenological model describing effective interactions of mesons in the chiral limit (where the masses of the quarks go to zero), but without necessarily mentioning quarks at all. It is a nonlinear sigma model with the principal homogeneous space of a Lie group formula_1 as its target manifold. When the model was originally introduced, this Lie group was the SU(&quot;N&quot;), where &quot;N&quot; is the number of quark flavors. The Riemannian metric of the target manifold is given by a positive constant multiplied by the Killing form acting upon the Maurer–Cartan form of SU(&quot;N&quot;).

The internal global symmetry of this model is formula_2, the left and right copies, respectively; where the left copy acts as the left action upon the target space, and the right copy acts as the right action. Phenomenologically, the left copy represents flavor rotations among the left-handed quarks, while the right copy describes rotations among the right-handed quarks, while these, L and R, are completely independent of each other. The axial pieces of these symmetries are spontaneously broken so that the corresponding scalar fields are the requisite Nambu−Goldstone bosons.

The model was later studied in the two-dimensional case as an integrable system, in particular an integrable field theory. Its integrability was shown by Faddeev and Reshetikhin in 1982 through the quantum inverse scattering method. The two-dimensional principal chiral model exhibits signatures of integrability such as a Lax pair/zero-curvature formulation, an infinite number of symmetries, and an underlying quantum group symmetry (in this case, Yangian symmetry).

This model admits topological solitons called skyrmions.

Departures from exact chiral symmetry are dealt with in chiral perturbation theory.

== Mathematical formulation ==
On a manifold (considered as the spacetime) and a choice of compact Lie group , the field content is a function formula_3. This defines a related field formula_4, a formula_5-valued vector field (really, covector field) which is the Maurer–Cartan form. The principal chiral model is defined by the Lagrangian density 
formula_6
where formula_7 is a dimensionless coupling. In differential-geometric language, the field formula_8 is a section of a principal bundle formula_9 with fibres isomorphic to the principal homogeneous space for (hence why this defines the &quot;principal&quot; chiral model).

==Phenomenology==
===An outline of the original, 2-flavor model===
The chiral model of Gürsey (1960; also see Gell-Mann and Lévy) is now appreciated to be an effective theory of QCD with two light quarks, &quot;u&quot;, and &quot;d&quot;. The QCD Lagrangian is approximately invariant under independent global flavor rotations of the left- and right-handed quark fields,
:formula_10
where τ denote the Pauli matrices in the flavor space and θ&quot;L&quot;, θ&quot;R&quot; are the corresponding rotation angles.

The corresponding symmetry group formula_11 is the chiral group, controlled by the six conserved currents 
:formula_12
which can equally well be expressed in terms of the vector and axial-vector currents 
:formula_13

The corresponding conserved charges generate the algebra of the chiral group,
:formula_14
with &quot;I=L,R&quot;, or, equivalently, 
:formula_15

Application of these commutation relations to hadronic reactions dominated current algebra calculations in the early 1970s.

At the level of hadrons, pseudoscalar mesons, the ambit of the chiral model, the chiral formula_16 group is spontaneously broken down to formula_17, by the QCD vacuum. That is, it is realized &quot;nonlinearly&quot;, in the Nambu–Goldstone mode: The &quot;QV&quot; annihilate the vacuum, but the &quot;QA&quot; do not! This is visualized nicely through a geometrical argument based on the fact that the Lie algebra of formula_11 is isomorphic to that of SO(4). The unbroken subgroup, realized in the linear Wigner–Weyl mode, is formula_19 which is locally isomorphic to SU(2) (V: isospin). 
To construct a non-linear realization of SO(4), the representation describing four-dimensional rotations of a vector 
:formula_20 
for an infinitesimal rotation parametrized by six angles 
:formula_21
is given by
:formula_22
where 
:formula_23

The four real quantities define the smallest nontrivial chiral multiplet and represent the field content of the linear sigma model.

To switch from the above linear realization of SO(4) to the nonlinear one, we observe that, in fact, only three of the four components of are independent with respect to four-dimensional rotations. These three independent components 
correspond to coordinates on a hypersphere &quot;S&quot;3, where and are subjected to the constraint 
:formula_24
with &quot;F&quot; a (pion decay) constant of dimension mass.

Utilizing this to eliminate yields the following transformation properties of under SO(4),
:formula_25

The nonlinear terms (shifting ) on the right-hand side of the second equation underlie the nonlinear realization of SO(4). The chiral group formula_26 is realized nonlinearly on the triplet of pions— which, however, still transform linearly under isospin formula_27 rotations parametrized through the angles formula_28 By contrast, the formula_29 represent the nonlinear &quot;shifts&quot; (spontaneous breaking).

Through the spinor map, these four-dimensional rotations of can also be conveniently written using 2×2 matrix notation by introducing the unitary matrix 
:formula_30 
and requiring the transformation properties of &quot;U&quot; under chiral rotations to be
:formula_31 
where formula_32

The transition to the nonlinear realization follows,
:formula_33 
where formula_34 denotes the trace in the flavor space. This is a non-linear sigma model.

Terms involving formula_35 or formula_36 are not independent and can be brought to this form through partial integration. 
The constant &quot;F&quot;2/4 is chosen in such a way that the Lagrangian matches the usual free term for massless scalar fields when written in terms of the pions,
:formula_37

===Alternate Parametrization===

An alternative, equivalent (Gürsey, 1960), parameterization 
:formula_38
yields a simpler expression for &quot;U&quot;,
:formula_39

Note the reparameterized transform under 
:formula_40 
so, then, manifestly identically to the above under isorotations, ; and similarly to the above, as 
:formula_41 
under the broken symmetries, , the shifts. This simpler expression generalizes readily (Cronin, 1967) to light quarks, so formula_42

==Integrability==
===Integrable chiral model===
Introduced by Richard S. Ward, the integrable chiral model or Ward model is described in terms of a matrix-valued field formula_43 and is given by the partial differential equation
formula_44
It has a Lagrangian formulation with the expected kinetic term together with a term which resembles a Wess–Zumino–Witten term. It also has a formulation which is formally identical to the Bogomolny equations but with Lorentz signature. The relation between these formulations can be found in .

Many exact solutions are known.

===Two-dimensional principal chiral model===
Here the underlying manifold formula_45 is taken to be a Riemann surface, in particular the cylinder formula_46 or plane formula_47, conventionally given &quot;real&quot; coordinates formula_48, where on the cylinder formula_49 is a periodic coordinate. For application to string theory, this cylinder is the world sheet swept out by the closed string.

==== Global symmetries ====
The global symmetries act as internal symmetries on the group-valued field formula_50 as formula_51 and formula_52. The corresponding conserved currents from Noether&#x27;s theorem are
formula_53
The equations of motion turn out to be equivalent to conservation of the currents,
formula_54
The currents additionally satisfy the flatness condition,
formula_55
and therefore the equations of motion can be formulated entirely in terms of the currents.

==== Lax formulation ====
Consider the worldsheet in light-cone coordinates formula_56. The components of the appropriate Lax matrix are
formula_57
The requirement that the zero-curvature condition on formula_58 for all formula_59 is equivalent to the conservation of current and flatness of the current formula_60, that is, the equations of motion from the principal chiral model (PCM).

==See also==
* Sigma model
* Chirality (physics)

==References==
* 
*Georgi, H. (1984, 2009). &quot;Weak Interactions and Modern Particle Theory&quot; (Dover Books on Physics) online .
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q81197" start="3" end="18" title="nuclear physics" label="nuclear physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5101832" start="24" end="36" title="Chiral model" label="chiral model"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136035" start="52" end="63" title="Feza Gürsey" label="Feza Gürsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2993342" start="78" end="94" title="Phenomenology (particle physics)" label="phenomenological"/>
<link wikidata="Q281778" start="112" end="121" title="effective field theory" label="effective"/>
<link wikidata="Q102742" start="138" end="143" title="meson" label="meson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2305173" start="152" end="164" title="chiral symmetry" label="chiral limit"/>
<link wikidata="Q6718" start="190" end="195" title="quark" label="quark"/>
<link wikidata="Q924571" start="268" end="289" title="nonlinear sigma model" label="nonlinear sigma model"/>
<link wikidata="Q3755543" start="299" end="326" title="principal homogeneous space" label="principal homogeneous space"/>
<link wikidata="Q622679" start="332" end="341" title="Lie group" label="Lie group"/>
<link wikidata="Q924571" start="359" end="374" title="target manifold" label="target manifold"/>
<link wikidata="Q684363" start="441" end="458" title="special unitary group" label="SU(&amp;quot;N&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q874733" start="503" end="509" title="Flavour (particle physics)" label="flavor"/>
<link wikidata="Q632814" start="516" end="533" title="Riemannian metric" label="Riemannian metric"/>
<link wikidata="Q634557" start="607" end="619" title="Killing form" label="Killing form"/>
<link wikidata="Q552787" start="636" end="654" title="Maurer–Cartan form" label="Maurer–Cartan form"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455736" start="691" end="706" title="global symmetry" label="global symmetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q288465" start="808" end="819" title="Group action (mathematics)" label="left action"/>
<link wikidata="Q288465" start="874" end="886" title="Group action (mathematics)" label="right action"/>
<link wikidata="Q5101837" start="1157" end="1177" title="chiral symmetry breaking" label="spontaneously broken"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153441" start="1236" end="1258" title="Goldstone boson" label="Nambu−Goldstone bosons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1957758" start="1323" end="1340" title="integrable system" label="integrable system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030228" start="1415" end="1422" title="Ludwig Faddeev" label="Faddeev"/>
<link wikidata="Q452273" start="1427" end="1438" title="Nicolai Reshetikhin" label="Reshetikhin"/>
<link wikidata="Q17105415" start="1459" end="1492" title="quantum inverse scattering method" label="quantum inverse scattering method"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115796" start="1584" end="1592" title="Lax pair" label="Lax pair"/>
<link wikidata="Q2122223" start="1673" end="1686" title="quantum group" label="quantum group"/>
<link wikidata="Q8048582" start="1711" end="1718" title="Yangian" label="Yangian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770567" start="1749" end="1768" title="topological soliton" label="topological soliton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041630" start="1777" end="1785" title="skyrmion" label="skyrmion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3984130" start="1845" end="1871" title="chiral perturbation theory" label="chiral perturbation theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q203920" start="1910" end="1918" title="manifold" label="manifold"/>
<link wikidata="Q133327" start="1938" end="1947" title="spacetime" label="spacetime"/>
<link wikidata="Q1887083" start="1965" end="1972" title="compact group" label="compact"/>
<link wikidata="Q622679" start="1973" end="1982" title="Lie group" label="Lie group"/>
<link wikidata="Q186247" start="2087" end="2099" title="vector field" label="vector field"/>
<link wikidata="Q552787" start="2138" end="2156" title="Maurer–Cartan form" label="Maurer–Cartan form"/>
<link wikidata="Q505735" start="2203" end="2221" title="Lagrangian density" label="Lagrangian density"/>
<link wikidata="Q188444" start="2281" end="2303" title="differential geometry" label="differential-geometric"/>
<link wikidata="Q11703678" start="2339" end="2346" title="section (fiber bundle)" label="section"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365548" start="2352" end="2368" title="principal bundle" label="principal bundle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154996" start="2384" end="2389" title="fiber bundle" label="fibre"/>
<link wikidata="Q3755543" start="2409" end="2436" title="principal homogeneous space" label="principal homogeneous space"/>
<link wikidata="Q238170" start="2685" end="2688" title="QCD" label="QCD"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454725" start="3458" end="3473" title="current algebra" label="current algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q736716" start="3616" end="3636" title="spontaneous symmetry breaking" label="spontaneously broken"/>
<link wikidata="Q376309" start="3664" end="3674" title="QCD vacuum" label="QCD vacuum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153441" start="3732" end="3752" title="Goldstone boson" label="Nambu–Goldstone mode"/>
<link wikidata="Q17099449" start="4114" end="4136" title="Nonlinear realization" label="non-linear realization"/>
<link wikidata="Q7196620" start="4847" end="4857" title="Pion decay constant" label="pion decay"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5419" end="5429" title="Lorentz group#Relation to the Möbius group" label="spinor map"/>
<link wikidata="Q321102" start="5790" end="5795" title="Trace (linear algebra)" label="trace"/>
<link wikidata="Q924571" start="5827" end="5849" title="non-linear sigma model" label="non-linear sigma model"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425984" start="6683" end="6698" title="Richard S. Ward" label="Richard S. Ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q850946" start="6963" end="6986" title="Wess–Zumino–Witten model" label="Wess–Zumino–Witten term"/>
<link wikidata="Q16963296" start="7049" end="7068" title="Bogomolny equations" label="Bogomolny equations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142562" start="7078" end="7095" title="Lorentz signature" label="Lorentz signature"/>
<link wikidata="Q753035" start="7291" end="7306" title="Riemann surface" label="Riemann surface"/>
<link wikidata="Q33198" start="7507" end="7520" title="string theory" label="string theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q3505263" start="7543" end="7554" title="world sheet" label="world sheet"/>
<link wikidata="Q578555" start="7774" end="7796" title="Noether&amp;#x27;s theorem" label="Noether&amp;#x27;s theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q215007" start="7816" end="7835" title="equations of motion" label="equations of motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115796" start="8189" end="8199" title="Lax matrix" label="Lax matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q7512415" start="8471" end="8482" title="Sigma model" label="Sigma model"/>
<link wikidata="Q2305173" start="8485" end="8504" title="Chirality (physics)" label="Chirality (physics)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1329120" wikidata="Q285519" url="?curid=1329120" title="As-Salih Ismail al-Malik">
<text>Abu al-Fath Ismail bin Nur al-Din Mahmud bin Imad al-Din bin Aq Sunqur al-Zangi () commonly known as As-Salih Ismaʿil al-Malik () (Full name: (1163–1181) was the Zengid emir of Damascus and emir of Aleppo in 1174, the son of Nur ad-Din.

==Biography==
He was only eleven years old when his father died in 1174. As-Salih came under the protection of the eunuch Gümüshtekin and was taken to Aleppo, while Nur ad-Din&#x27;s officers competed for supremacy. In Egypt, Saladin recognized as-Salih as his lord, although he in fact was eager to unite Egypt and Syria under his own personal rule. In 1174, Saladin took Baalbek after a four-month siege and then entered Damascus, proclaiming himself to be Ismail&#x27;s true regent. In 1176, Saladin defeated the Zengids outside the city, married Ismat ad-Din Khatun, and was recognized as ruler of Syria. As-Salih died in 1181 of illness. Following his death, Saladin took control of Aleppo and added it to his rule under the expanding Ayyubid Sultanate. According to crusader legend, his mother was the sister of Bertrand of Toulouse, Razi Khatun, who had been captured by Nur ad-Din in the aftermath of the Second Crusade; a similar legend existed concerning the mother of Zengi, as-Salih&#x27;s grandfather.

==References==
==Bibliography==

&lt;br&gt;
&lt;BR&gt;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q285519" start="0" end="81" title="As-Salih Ismail al-Malik" label="Abu al-Fath Ismail bin Nur al-Din Mahmud bin Imad al-Din bin Aq Sunqur al-Zangi ("/>
<link wikidata="Q285519" start="81" end="82" title="As-Salih Ismail al-Malik" label=")"/>
<link wikidata="Q285519" start="101" end="126" title="As-Salih Ismail al-Malik" label="As-Salih Ismaʿil al-Malik"/>
<link wikidata="Q189545" start="162" end="168" title="Zengid" label="Zengid"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="169" end="185" title="List of rulers of Damascus#Zengid atabegs" label="emir of Damascus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="190" end="204" title="List of rulers of Aleppo#Zengid Dynasty" label="emir of Aleppo"/>
<link wikidata="Q312973" start="225" end="235" title="Nur ad-Din, atabeg of Aleppo" label="Nur ad-Din"/>
<link wikidata="Q104752880" start="360" end="371" title="Gümüshtekin" label="Gümüshtekin"/>
<link wikidata="Q41183" start="389" end="395" title="Aleppo" label="Aleppo"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="457" end="462" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q8581" start="464" end="471" title="Saladin" label="Saladin"/>
<link wikidata="Q858" start="554" end="559" title="Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q8581" start="598" end="605" title="Saladin" label="Saladin"/>
<link wikidata="Q178835" start="611" end="618" title="Baalbek" label="Baalbek"/>
<link wikidata="Q3766" start="661" end="669" title="Damascus" label="Damascus"/>
<link wikidata="Q8581" start="733" end="740" title="Saladin" label="Saladin"/>
<link wikidata="Q189545" start="754" end="761" title="Zengid dynasty" label="Zengids"/>
<link wikidata="Q6084969" start="788" end="807" title="Ismat ad-Din Khatun" label="Ismat ad-Din Khatun"/>
<link wikidata="Q8581" start="902" end="909" title="Saladin" label="Saladin"/>
<link wikidata="Q41183" start="926" end="932" title="Aleppo" label="Aleppo"/>
<link wikidata="Q180114" start="978" end="995" title="Ayyubid Sultanate" label="Ayyubid Sultanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q547970" start="1056" end="1076" title="Bertrand of Toulouse" label="Bertrand of Toulouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q51654" start="1151" end="1165" title="Second Crusade" label="Second Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q189550" start="1217" end="1222" title="Imad ad-Din Zengi" label="Zengi"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1329121" wikidata="Q442532" url="?curid=1329121" title="Parkwood">
<text>Parkwood or Park Wood may refer to:

==Places==
===Australia===
* Parkwood, Western Australia, a suburb of Perth
* Parkwood, Queensland
* Parkwood, New South Wales, a proposed NSW/Australian Capital Territory suburb

===Canada===
* Parkwood, Ontario, a community in Valley East, Greater Sudbury

===England===
* Park Wood, Bedford, a local nature reserve
* Park Wood, Cambridgeshire, a Site of Special Scientific Interest
* Park Wood, Chilham, Kent, a Site of Special Scientific Interest
* Park Wood, Maidstone, Kent
* Park Wood, Medway, a suburban area of Rainham, Kent
* Park Wood and Goulding&#x27;s Wood, a local nature reserve near Maidenhead, Berkshire
* Parkwood, Kent, a woodland wildlife and recreation area near Tenterden

===Ireland===
* Parkwood, County Offaly, a townland in Kilcumreragh civil parish, barony of Kilcoursey

===South Africa===
* Parkwood, Johannesburg

===United States===
* Parkwood, California, a census-designated place in Madera County
* Parkwood, Washington, a census-designated place in Kitsap County
* Parkwood (Decatur), a neighborhood in Decatur, Georgia
* Parkwood, Louisville, a neighborhood in Louisville, Kentucky
* Parkwood, Philadelphia, a neighborhood in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
* Parkwood Formation, a geologic formation in Alabama

==Education==
* Parkwood Christian Academy, Lilburn, Georgia, US
* Parkwood E-ACT Academy, Sheffield, England
* Parkwood Elementary School (disambiguation)
* Parkwood High School, Monroe, North Carolina, US
* Parkwood School International, Telangana, India
* Parkwood Secondary College, Ringwood North, Victoria, Australia
* Parkwood University, a University Degree Program diploma mill
* Park Wood, a student village and college at the University of Kent, UK

==Transport==
* Parkwood light rail station, Parkwood, Queensland, Australia
* Parkwood station, Charlotte, North Carolina, US
* Chevrolet Parkwood, a station wagon manufactured from 1959 to 1961

==Other uses==
* Parkwood Entertainment, a management and entertainment company founded by Beyoncé
* Parkwood Estate, a historic house in Oshawa, Ontario
* Parkwood Greyhound Stadium, a defunct greyhound racing and football stadium in Keighley, West Yorkshire, UK
* Parkwood Stable, a 1930s–1950 Thoroughbred racing stable near Oshawa, Ontario, Canada
* Parkwood (bandy club), a United States bandy champion

==See also==
* Parkwoods, a neighbourhood in Toronto, Ontario, Canada</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q442532" start="0" end="8" title="Parkwood" label="Parkwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q442532" start="12" end="21" title="Parkwood" label="Park Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q7138832" start="66" end="93" title="Parkwood, Western Australia" label="Parkwood, Western Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7138830" start="115" end="135" title="Parkwood, Queensland" label="Parkwood, Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q104834711" start="138" end="163" title="Parkwood, New South Wales" label="Parkwood, New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q3553865" start="232" end="249" title="Parkwood, Ontario" label="Parkwood, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q23018732" start="312" end="330" title="Park Wood, Bedford" label="Park Wood, Bedford"/>
<link wikidata="Q29019742" start="357" end="382" title="Park Wood, Cambridgeshire" label="Park Wood, Cambridgeshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q55098993" start="424" end="442" title="Park Wood, Chilham" label="Park Wood, Chilham"/>
<link wikidata="Q7138144" start="490" end="510" title="Park Wood, Maidstone" label="Park Wood, Maidstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q65088742" start="519" end="536" title="Park Wood, Medway" label="Park Wood, Medway"/>
<link wikidata="Q85792250" start="573" end="607" title="Park Wood and Goulding&amp;#x27;s Wood" label="Park Wood and Goulding&amp;#x27;s Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898539" start="661" end="675" title="Parkwood, Kent" label="Parkwood, Kent"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="749" end="772" title="Parkwood, County Offaly" label="Parkwood, County Offaly"/>
<link wikidata="Q22084057" start="788" end="800" title="Kilcumreragh" label="Kilcumreragh"/>
<link wikidata="Q7056289" start="858" end="880" title="Parkwood, Johannesburg" label="Parkwood, Johannesburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q3301618" start="904" end="924" title="Parkwood, California" label="Parkwood, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502856" start="971" end="991" title="Parkwood, Washington" label="Parkwood, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q7138831" start="1038" end="1056" title="Parkwood (Decatur)" label="Parkwood (Decatur)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7138828" start="1095" end="1115" title="Parkwood, Louisville" label="Parkwood, Louisville"/>
<link wikidata="Q7138829" start="1158" end="1180" title="Parkwood, Philadelphia" label="Parkwood, Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q18158232" start="1229" end="1247" title="Parkwood Formation" label="Parkwood Formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7138834" start="1298" end="1324" title="Parkwood Christian Academy" label="Parkwood Christian Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q15265484" start="1349" end="1371" title="Parkwood E-ACT Academy" label="Parkwood E-ACT Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q27787915" start="1394" end="1437" title="Parkwood Elementary School (disambiguation)" label="Parkwood Elementary School (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7138837" start="1440" end="1460" title="Parkwood High School" label="Parkwood High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7138841" start="1491" end="1520" title="Parkwood School International" label="Parkwood School International"/>
<link wikidata="Q14935270" start="1541" end="1567" title="Parkwood Secondary College" label="Parkwood Secondary College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7894675" start="1630" end="1655" title="University Degree Program" label="University Degree Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516684" start="1719" end="1737" title="University of Kent" label="University of Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q55075171" start="1759" end="1786" title="Parkwood light rail station" label="Parkwood light rail station"/>
<link wikidata="Q54933237" start="1822" end="1838" title="Parkwood station" label="Parkwood station"/>
<link wikidata="Q119352" start="1872" end="1890" title="Chevrolet Parkwood" label="Chevrolet Parkwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q7138835" start="1957" end="1979" title="Parkwood Entertainment" label="Parkwood Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q7138836" start="2041" end="2056" title="Parkwood Estate" label="Parkwood Estate"/>
<link wikidata="Q28407549" start="2096" end="2122" title="Parkwood Greyhound Stadium" label="Parkwood Greyhound Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q7138843" start="2206" end="2221" title="Parkwood Stable" label="Parkwood Stable"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2294" end="2315" title="Parkwood (bandy club)" label="Parkwood (bandy club)"/>
<link wikidata="Q15027409" start="2319" end="2347" title="List of United States bandy champions" label="United States bandy champion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7138842" start="2364" end="2373" title="Parkwoods" label="Parkwoods"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1329124" wikidata="Q9057151" url="?curid=1329124" title="Pawling">
<text>Pawling may refer to:

*Pawling (town), New York, in Dutchess County
**Pawling (village), New York, in the town of Pawling
***Pawling (Metro-North station), train station for the village
**Pawling Nature Reserve, in the northern section of the town of Pawling
*Pawling Hall, a historic meeting hall in Hagaman, Montgomery County, New York, United States
*Pawling &amp; Harnischfeger, a United States mining-equipment manufacturer in Wisconsin, 1880s–1930s

==See also==
*Pauling (surname)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q9057151" start="0" end="7" title="Pawling" label="Pawling"/>
<link wikidata="Q11698432" start="24" end="48" title="Pawling (town), New York" label="Pawling (town), New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020213" start="71" end="98" title="Pawling (village), New York" label="Pawling (village), New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q7156264" start="126" end="155" title="Pawling (Metro-North station)" label="Pawling (Metro-North station)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7156270" start="189" end="211" title="Pawling Nature Reserve" label="Pawling Nature Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q7156269" start="261" end="273" title="Pawling Hall" label="Pawling Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q121032" start="355" end="382" title="Pawling &amp;amp; Harnischfeger" label="Pawling &amp;amp; Harnischfeger"/>
<link wikidata="Q7155110" start="471" end="478" title="Pauling" label="Pauling"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1329127" wikidata="Q1171771" url="?curid=1329127" title="Pend Oreille">
<text>Pend Oreille may refer to:
* Lake Pend Oreille, the largest lake in the northern Idaho Panhandle
* Pend Oreille County, Washington, a county located in the northeastern section of the State of Washington
* Pend Oreille River, a tributary of the Columbia River
* Pend d&#x27;Oreilles tribe, an Indigenous peoples of the Northwest Plateau
* Pend Oreille Valley Railroad, a shortline railroad located in Usk, in northeast Washington

==See also==
* Oreille (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1171771" start="0" end="12" title="Pend Oreille" label="Pend Oreille"/>
<link wikidata="Q1632195" start="29" end="46" title="Lake Pend Oreille" label="Lake Pend Oreille"/>
<link wikidata="Q485301" start="99" end="130" title="Pend Oreille County, Washington" label="Pend Oreille County, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q270499" start="206" end="224" title="Pend Oreille River" label="Pend Oreille River"/>
<link wikidata="Q492901" start="262" end="288" title="Pend d&amp;#x27;Oreilles tribe" label="Pend d&amp;#x27;Oreilles tribe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7162357" start="339" end="367" title="Pend Oreille Valley Railroad" label="Pend Oreille Valley Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q3355817" start="446" end="470" title="Oreille (disambiguation)" label="Oreille (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1329130" wikidata="Q21492342" url="?curid=1329130" title="Bridgman">
<text>Bridgman is a surname. Notable people with the surname include:

* Elijah Coleman Bridgman (1801–1861), American missionary in China
* Frederick Arthur Bridgman (1847–1928), American artist
* George Bridgman (1865–1943), anatomist and artist
* Jon Bridgman (1930–2015), American historian
* Laura Bridgman (1829–1889), deaf-blind American
* Margaret Bridgman (1940–2009), former Canadian member of parliament
* Mel Bridgman (born 1955), Canadian ice hockey player
* Percy Williams Bridgman (1882–1961), American physicist and 1946 Nobel laureate

==See also==

* Bridgman, Michigan
* Bridgman (crater)
* Bridgeman</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q21492342" start="0" end="8" title="Bridgman" label="Bridgman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4570160" start="67" end="90" title="Elijah Coleman Bridgman" label="Elijah Coleman Bridgman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1452786" start="135" end="160" title="Frederick Arthur Bridgman" label="Frederick Arthur Bridgman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5537247" start="192" end="207" title="George Bridgman" label="George Bridgman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6270447" start="244" end="256" title="Jon Bridgman" label="Jon Bridgman"/>
<link wikidata="Q271758" start="291" end="305" title="Laura Bridgman" label="Laura Bridgman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6759208" start="341" end="358" title="Margaret Bridgman" label="Margaret Bridgman"/>
<link wikidata="Q357240" start="411" end="423" title="Mel Bridgman" label="Mel Bridgman"/>
<link wikidata="Q172118" start="466" end="489" title="Percy Williams Bridgman" label="Percy Williams Bridgman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2074992" start="563" end="581" title="Bridgman, Michigan" label="Bridgman, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2424301" start="584" end="601" title="Bridgman (crater)" label="Bridgman (crater)"/>
<link wikidata="Q21509094" start="604" end="613" title="Bridgeman" label="Bridgeman"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1329136" wikidata="Q2094781" url="?curid=1329136" title="Pike Township">
<text>Pike Township may refer to:
==Illinois==
* Pike Township, Livingston County, Illinois

==Indiana==
* Pike Township, Jay County, Indiana
* Pike Township, Marion County, Indiana
* Pike Township, Ohio County, Indiana
* Pike Township, Warren County, Indiana

==Iowa==
* Pike Township, Muscatine County, Iowa

==Kansas==
* Pike Township, Lyon County, Kansas

==Minnesota==
* Pike Township, St. Louis County, Minnesota

==Missouri==
* Pike Township, Carter County, Missouri
* Pike Township, Stoddard County, Missouri

==Ohio==
* Pike Township, Brown County, Ohio
* Pike Township, Clark County, Ohio
* Pike Township, Coshocton County, Ohio
* Pike Township, Fulton County, Ohio
* Pike Township, Knox County, Ohio
* Pike Township, Madison County, Ohio
* Pike Township, Perry County, Ohio
* Pike Township, Stark County, Ohio

==Pennsylvania==
* Pike Township, Berks County, Pennsylvania
* Pike Township, Bradford County, Pennsylvania
* Pike Township, Clearfield County, Pennsylvania
* Pike Township, Potter County, Pennsylvania</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2094781" start="0" end="13" title="Pike Township" label="Pike Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q7193614" start="43" end="85" title="Pike Township, Livingston County, Illinois" label="Pike Township, Livingston County, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q7193611" start="101" end="135" title="Pike Township, Jay County, Indiana" label="Pike Township, Jay County, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q7193618" start="138" end="175" title="Pike Township, Marion County, Indiana" label="Pike Township, Marion County, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q7193620" start="178" end="213" title="Pike Township, Ohio County, Indiana" label="Pike Township, Ohio County, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q7193624" start="216" end="253" title="Pike Township, Warren County, Indiana" label="Pike Township, Warren County, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q10807284" start="266" end="303" title="Pike Township, Muscatine County, Iowa" label="Pike Township, Muscatine County, Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2890078" start="318" end="352" title="Pike Township, Lyon County, Kansas" label="Pike Township, Lyon County, Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1911941" start="370" end="412" title="Pike Township, St. Louis County, Minnesota" label="Pike Township, St. Louis County, Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q9043408" start="429" end="467" title="Pike Township, Carter County, Missouri" label="Pike Township, Carter County, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q9043411" start="470" end="510" title="Pike Township, Stoddard County, Missouri" label="Pike Township, Stoddard County, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q925835" start="523" end="556" title="Pike Township, Brown County, Ohio" label="Pike Township, Brown County, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q925278" start="559" end="592" title="Pike Township, Clark County, Ohio" label="Pike Township, Clark County, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q933698" start="595" end="632" title="Pike Township, Coshocton County, Ohio" label="Pike Township, Coshocton County, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7193609" start="635" end="669" title="Pike Township, Fulton County, Ohio" label="Pike Township, Fulton County, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7193612" start="672" end="704" title="Pike Township, Knox County, Ohio" label="Pike Township, Knox County, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7193616" start="707" end="742" title="Pike Township, Madison County, Ohio" label="Pike Township, Madison County, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7193622" start="745" end="778" title="Pike Township, Perry County, Ohio" label="Pike Township, Perry County, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7193628" start="781" end="814" title="Pike Township, Stark County, Ohio" label="Pike Township, Stark County, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1894868" start="835" end="876" title="Pike Township, Berks County, Pennsylvania" label="Pike Township, Berks County, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1895026" start="879" end="923" title="Pike Township, Bradford County, Pennsylvania" label="Pike Township, Bradford County, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q7193608" start="926" end="972" title="Pike Township, Clearfield County, Pennsylvania" label="Pike Township, Clearfield County, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q630453" start="975" end="1017" title="Pike Township, Potter County, Pennsylvania" label="Pike Township, Potter County, Pennsylvania"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1329138" wikidata="Q5193572" url="?curid=1329138" title="Culture of Jersey">
<text>The culture of Jersey is the culture of the Bailiwick of Jersey. Jersey has a mixed Franco-British culture; however, modern Jersey culture is very dominated by British cultural influences and has also been influenced by immigrant communities such as the Bretons and the Portuguese (mainly from Madeira).

Jersey&#x27;s culture is strongly influenced by its distinct political culture, such as having its own currency and postal service, and its important industries such as agriculture and finance.

==Languages==

Jersey is predominantly English-speaking, with English forming the main cultural and official language of Jersey people and government. However, French remains a co-official language due to its use as the language of civil affairs in the island. Due to immigration, many islanders&#x27; first language is now Portuguese.

Jèrriais, the island&#x27;s Norman language, is spoken by a minority of the population, although it was the majority language in the 19th century. Among those who still speak the language one can identify the parish of origin of a speaker by differences in phonology and lexis. There has recently been a push, especially from the Government of Jersey, to keep Jèrriais as a living language. This includes Jèrriais lessons at all Government primary schools.

Most common place names in Jersey are in Jèrriais (such as La Ville-ès-Renauds), though some have been gallicised (e.g., Les Quennevais) and most pronunciations have been anglicised. The notable exception is all the parishes, which are usually in English (though French and Jèrriais forms exist). Road names are in French or Jèrriais, except in the town area and some other new developments around the island.

== Literature ==

Literature in Jersey may be divided into:

* Literature in Jèrriais, 
* Francophone literature, and 
* Jersey literature in English.

The literary tradition in Jersey is traced back to Wace, the 12th-century Jersey-born poet.

William Prynne wrote poetry while imprisoned in Jersey, but little indigenous literature survives from before the 18th century.

Printing only arrived in Jersey in the 1780s, but the island supported a multitude of regular publications in French (and Jèrriais) and English throughout the 19th century, in which poetry, most usually topical and satirical, flourished.

The first printed Jèrriais appears in the first newspapers at the end of the 18th century. The earliest identified dated example of printed poetry in Jèrriais is a fragment by Matchi L&#x27;Gé (Matthew Le Geyt, 1777–1849), dated 1795. The first printed anthology of Jèrriais poetry, &quot;Rimes Jersiaises&quot;, was published in 1865.

Influential writers include &#x27;Laelius&#x27; (Sir Robert Pipon Marett 1820–1884, Bailiff of Jersey 1880–1884), &#x27;A.A.L.G.&#x27; (Augustus Aspley Le Gros 1840–1877), and &#x27;St.-Luorenchais&#x27; (Philippe Langlois 1817–1884).

Philippe Le Sueur Mourant (1848–1918) wrote under several pseudonyms. His greatest success was the character &quot;Bram Bilo&quot;, but he later developed the Pain family, newly moved to Saint Helier, who commented on its Anglicized society and fashionable entertainments.

&#x27;Elie&#x27; (Edwin J. Luce 1881–1918) was editor of the French-language newspaper &quot;La Nouvelle Chronique de Jersey&quot; and a poet who wrote topical poems for the newspaper. He died in the influenza pandemic of 1918. His brother, Philip W. Luce (1882–1966), also a journalist and poet, emigrated to Canada, but sent occasional writings back to Jersey.

&#x27;Caouain&#x27; (George W. de Carteret 1869–1940) maintained a weekly newspaper column purporting to be the work of an owl (&quot;cahouain&quot;) reporting on the latest election news and local gossip.

During the Occupation, the German censors allowed little original writing to be published. However, many older pieces of literature were republished in the newspapers as an act of cultural self-assertion and morale-boosting.

Edward Le Brocq (1877–1964) revived the weekly column in 1946 with a letter from &quot;Ph&#x27;lip et Merrienne&quot;, supposedly a traditional old couple who would comment on the latest news or recall times past. The column continued until the author&#x27;s death in 1964.

The most influential writer of Jèrriais in the 20th century was a U.S. citizen, George Francis Le Feuvre (1891–1984), whose pen-name was &#x27;George d&#x27;la Forge&#x27;. He emigrated to North America after the First World War but for almost forty years maintained a flow of articles in Jèrriais back to Jersey for publication in newspapers.

Frank Le Maistre (1910–2002), compiler of the Jèrriais–French dictionary, maintained a literary output starting in the 1930s with newspaper articles under the pseudonym &quot;Marie la Pie&quot;, poems, magazine articles, and research into toponymy and etymology. He himself considered his masterpiece to be his translation of the Rubaiyat of Omar Khayyam into Jèrriais that he made during the German Occupation (1940–1945).

The French writer Victor Hugo lived in exile in Jersey from 1852 to 1855.

Elinor Glyn and John Lemprière were Jersey-born writers. Frederick Tennyson, Jack Higgins, and Gerald Durrell are among writers who have made Jersey their home.

==Art==
Some Neolithic carvings are the earliest works of artistic character to be found in Jersey. Only fragmentary wall-paintings remain from the rich mediaeval artistic heritage, after the wholesale iconoclasm of the Calvinist reformation of the 16th century - the most notable of these are the wall-paintings of the Fisherman&#x27;s Chapel (la Chapelle ès Pêcheurs) in St. Brelade.

The 1751 statue of George II by John Cheere in the Royal Square was Jersey&#x27;s first public sculpture since the Reformation. Subsequent works of public art to be seen include:
*Westaway monument (1875, Pierre-Alfred Robinet)
*Don monument (1885, Pierre-Alfred Robinet)
*Queen Victoria statue (1890, Georges Wallet)
*George V statue (1939, William Reid Dick)
*Liberation sculpture (1995, Philip Jackson)
*&quot;La Vaque dé Jèrri&quot; (2001, John McKenna)
*Jersey Girl (2010, Rowan Gillespie)

John Singleton Copley&#x27;s painting of the Battle of Jersey (6 January 1781), &quot;The Death of Major Pierson&quot;, became a national icon. The States of Jersey failed in an attempt to purchase it (it is now in the Tate Britain), but the image is reproduced on the reverse of a Jersey £10 note.

John Le Capelain (1812–1848) was born and lived all his life in St. Helier, setting up his studio in the attic of his parents&#x27; house in Hill Street. He is best known for his watercolours, although he had earlier followed his father in lithography but abandoned it after 1843. He travelled widely, taking advantage of St. Helier&#x27;s excellent maritime links, and went sketching in France, England and Scotland. He was commissioned to produce a series of watercolours which were presented to Queen Victoria by the States of Jersey to commemorate her visit of 1846. The series was subsequently lithographed and published in book form. The Queen commissioned Le Capelain to produce a series of watercolour views of the Isle of Wight and it was while working on this commission that Le Capelain contracted tuberculosis and died, barely a week after his 36th birthday. A collection of his works, presented by public subscription in his memory, is displayed in the Parish Hall of St. Helier.

Among artists attracted to Jersey in the 19th century was Sarah Louisa Kilpack (1839–1909), an English artist noted for seascapes and coastal scenes, often stormy, produced for exhibition in London.

John Everett Millais, a Jèrriais speaker from a Jersey family, was born in England, but is considered a Jersey artist. 
The Glass Church in St Lawrence is decorated with Art Deco glass by René Lalique, commissioned by Florence, Lady Trent, the Jersey-born wife of Lord Trent, founder of Boots Chemists. No similar Lalique commission survives elsewhere in the world.

Edmund Blampied (1886–1966), illustrator and artist, is the most popular Jersey artist of the 20th century.

John St. Helier Lander (1869–1944), born in St. Helier, later became a fashionable portrait painter in London. His portrait of George V hangs at Victoria College, and the Masonic Temple in St. Helier holds a number of masonic portraits by him.

Philip John Ouless (1817–1885), a successful workmanlike painter of marine subjects, was the father of Walter William Ouless RA (1848–1933), who developed a career as a portrait painter in London, becoming an Associate of the Royal Academy (ARA) in 1877 and RA in 1881.

Henry Bosdet (1857–1934), an artist in stained glass in a Pre-Raphaelite style, taught in the Royal Academy schools in London. Some of his work can be seen in his native Island.

Suzanne Malherbe and Claude Cahun, the &quot;Surrealist Sisters&quot; were among photographers attracted to Jersey.

Sir Francis Cook (1907–1978), English painter, moved to Jersey in 1948. In the 1960s he bought the former Methodist chapel at Augrès and converted it to a studio and gallery which was donated after his death to the Jersey Heritage Trust along with a collection of his works. The building, now named the &quot;Sir Francis Cook Gallery&quot;, serves as an exhibition space.

The &quot;Berni Gallery&quot; at the Jersey Arts Centre holds a programme of exhibitions by Jersey and visiting artists. The &quot;Barreau-Le Maistre Gallery&quot; in the Jersey Museum displays works from the permanent collection of the Jersey Heritage trust. Plans for a National Gallery to display the range of national holdings of visual art and provide suitable temporary exhibition space have been proposed from time to time. A National Gallery steering group chaired by Philip Bailhache, Bailiff of Jersey, is due to report by the end of 2007. A site for the National Gallery has been earmarked on the site of the former Weighbridge bus station in St Helier, funded by waterfront development.

==Performing arts==
The annual Jersey Eisteddfod provides a platform for competition in music, drama and speaking in English, French and Jèrriais.

The Opera House, opened by Lillie Langtry in 1900, and the Jersey Arts Centre are the main performance spaces, although many concerts and other cultural events take place in parish halls and other venues.

In 1995 the States of Jersey became the new owner of the Jersey Opera House at a cost of £1.3 million. In January 1997 the theatre closed for a major restoration project. A proposition was presented to the States of Jersey for a loan of £5.5 million to add to the £1.5 million that had been raised by the good will of the people and businesses of Jersey. This was successful and this major programme of work started in August 1998. After an extensive programme of rebuilding and renovation the new theatre opened its door on 9 July 2000 exactly 100 years to the day when the first Opera House had opened its doors to the public of Jersey.

Work on the Jersey Arts Centre started in 1981 when the Education Committee made available the redundant domestic science building in Saint Helier. The complex was opened by the Bailiff in January 1983 and various components of the building were subsequently completed: the Berni Gallery opened later in 1983, and the first performance took place in the shell of the auditorium in January 1985 although the performance space was not completed until August 1986. In 1992 the public acquired the former garrison church of St James and work started in 1998 to convert it into an arts venue. From 2000 the Jersey Arts Centre has undertaken artistic programming for St James.

Lillie Langtry, the &quot;Jersey Lily&quot;, is the island&#x27;s most widely recognised cultural icon. Other actors from Jersey have included Seymour Hicks, Ivy St Helier, and actor Henry Cavill (Showtime&#x27;s the Tudors and the DC Comics film version of the Justice League).

===Music and dance===

The traditional folk music of Jersey was common in country areas until the mid-20th century. It cannot be separated from the musical traditions of continental Europe, and the majority of songs and tunes that have been documented have close parallels or variants, particularly in France. Most of the surviving traditional songs are in French, with a minority in Jèrriais. The majority of Jèrriais-language songs are composed pieces dating from the 19th and 20th centuries, and not of folk origin. Research conducted in the 20th century also revealed the existence of folk songs in English (e.g. &quot;The Greenland Whale Fishery&quot;, &quot;Died for Love&quot;.) Only one folk song is believed to be of specifically Jersey provenance with no variants collected elsewhere: &quot;La Chanson de Peirson&quot;.

Very little survives of an indigenous musical or dance tradition. Written testimony from the 20th century (Frank Le Maistre; George F. Le Feuvre) points to the practice of archaic dance-forms such as the &quot;ronde&quot; or round dance, 18th-century dances such as the cotillon and 19-century forms such as the polka, the schottische and the quadrille. Dances such as the &quot;Gigoton&quot; and &quot;La Bébée&quot; are both forms of polka. The violin, the &quot;chifournie&quot; (hurdy-gurdy), and later the accordion were traditional instruments for &quot;sonneurs&quot; (country dances). The decline of these dances has often been ascribed to the influence of Nonconformist Christianity that discouraged such cultural frivolities, or at least placed such a low value on these activities that they were not thought worth recording. It is more likely that, as in many other parts of Europe, they were a victim of changing fashion and a cultural shift away from traditional regional society and toward English-speaking modernity.
There is also a lot of musical talent shown by the younger community of Jersey. The dominant genres are indie, punk and metal. The main event that these bands take part in is a Battle of the Bands each summer, the most recent winners being No Star Hotel. The bands often have trouble getting their music well known due to the isolation of the island. However, pop singer Nerina Pallot has enjoyed international success.

Music events include the Liberation Jersey Music Festival.

====Grassroots Festival====
Grassroots was a boutique summer music festival held in July, in front of Val de la Mare Reservoir sitting directly back from St Ouen&#x27;s Bay. The 2011 festival attracted over 4,200 visitors, but after the event the organisers left debts of £114,143.

====Jersey Live====
Jersey Live was a two-day indie/dance music festival that was held annually at The Royal Jersey Showground in Trinity from 2004 until 2016. The festival grew in popularity and size each year since its inception and drew interest from people outside the Channel Islands with foreign visitors making up approximately 27% of the 2006 crowd. Artists to have performed at Jersey Live Festival include Snow Patrol, Ed Sheeran, The Prodigy, Jake Bugg, Noel Gallagher, The Gaa Gaas, Fatboy Slim, Ben Howard, Ellie Goulding, Kasabian &amp; Calvin Harris to name a few.

==Television and radio==

In the Channel Islands, broadcasting laws are managed by the UK Government and Ofcom on behalf of the islands&#x27; governments. The islands have access to the same television channels as the United Kingdom and many of the same national radio stations, such as BBC Radio. The Channel Islands Competition and Regulatory Authorities manages the level of demand for spectrum in the islands and makes recommendations to Ofcom for their management; however, Ofcom is charged with issuing licenses.

Jersey has television licenses in line with the same system used in the United Kingdom. A license is required to use a television set video recorder, DVD player or computer, which is capable of receiving broadcast programmes in the Bailiwick or elsewhere in the British Islands. As of 2013, the license for a colour television or television-enabled computer is £145.50. The license fee is used to fund public broadcasting across the British Islands.

Although the Channel Islands have the same television channels as the United Kingdom, such as the BBC and Sky, the BBC and ITV plc operate regional channels in the islands, BBC One Channel Islands and ITV Channel Television respectively. Their main studios are based in St Helier. The question of balance of coverage between the two bailiwicks is a matter of long-running debate, especially as most of the content is broadcast from Jersey. ITV and the BBC both produce a daily news programme for the islands, as well as posting island news articles on their websites.

The introduction of an ITV franchise posed a problem to the Independent Television Authority, as, constitutionally, the Television Act 1954 did not apply to the islands, so the ITA&#x27;s ability to operate there had to be permitted by means of extending the Act to the islands by means of an Order in Council. Due to a technicality that prevented the Channel Islands from receiving colour television, Channel could only broadcast in black and white until 1976.

Due to the proximity to France, French television is fairly easily received as well, and British channels can be picked up on the neighbouring coast of the Norman mainland.

One of the best known portrayals of Jersey on the small screen was the BBC&#x27;s crime drama &quot;Bergerac&quot;, featuring John Nettles as Jim Bergerac as a policeman in &quot;Le Bureau des Étrangers&quot; (a fictional department, based on the real &quot;Bureau des Étrangers&quot;, for dealing with non-Jersey residents). This was filmed mainly in Jersey, but storylines increasingly moved further afield to England and France. Another series filmed in Jersey is the Real Housewives of Jersey, part of the Real Housewives series.

Jersey has two local radio stations, BBC Radio Jersey and Channel 103 - a private operator.

==Religion==

The island&#x27;s patron saint is Saint Helier.

The established church is the Church of England, but Methodism has been historically strong, especially in country areas, and remains influential. A large minority of the population is Roman Catholic. The historic toleration of religious minorities has led to many persecuted minorities seeking refuge in Jersey. This has left a rich legacy of churches, chapels and places of worship.

==Folklore and customs==
Jersey people are traditionally known as &quot;crapauds&quot; (toads) due to the particular fauna of Jersey that does not exist in the other Channel Islands, especially in Guernsey. According to a Guernsey legend, St Samson of Dol arrived in Jersey but encountered such a hostile reception on the then-pagan island that he proceeded on to Guernsey. The welcome being much warmer in Guernsey, he repaid the inhabitants of that island by sending all the snakes and toads from Guernsey to Jersey.

&quot;Vraic&quot; is the Jersey word for seaweed, and the collection of seaweed for fertiliser, &quot;vraicking&quot;, an important activity in the past, still continues on a small scale.

The Battle of Flowers is the major carnival, held annually in August. First held for the coronation of Edward VII in 1902, the carnival includes a parade of floral decorated floats. Originally, these floats were torn apart to provide floral ammunition for a battle of flowers between participants and spectators, but this aspect has long been abandoned.

Annual &quot;visites du branchage&quot; are carried out twice in summer by parish officials to inspect roadside verges and hedges and ensure property owners have trimmed back overhanging greenery. This custom is to prevent Jersey&#x27;s narrow lanes becoming hazardous or impassable through overgrown vegetation. The action of &quot;branchage&quot; (pronounced in the Jèrriais fashion, &quot;brancage&quot;, as opposed to the French pronunciation) is the trimming of verges prior to the annual inspections. A haircut may also be jocularly referred to as a &quot;branchage&quot;.

Belief in witchcraft was formerly strong in Jersey, and survived in country areas well into the 20th century. Witches were supposed to hold their &quot;sabbats&quot; on Fridays at Rocqueberg, the Witches&#x27; Rock, in St. Clement. Folklore preserves a belief that witches&#x27; stones on old houses were resting places for witches flying to their meetings.

Every third year, Jersey hosts &quot;La fête Nouormande&quot;, a folk festival centring on the Norman culture and heritage of the island, which attracts performers and visitors from Guernsey and the continent.

=== Past traditions ===
A past rural tradition was &quot;La Jouête&quot;, which took place on Shrove Tuesday, Easter Monday and other holidays. Islanders would be invited (for a fee) to throw stones at either cocks, ducks, hens, rabbits or similar. He who killed the animal would be able to take it as a prize. They were brought to end in 1896 by the Law to prevent the bad treatment of animals (though it is believed the tradition continued until 1906 nonetheless).

On Good Fridays of the past, it was tradition for Jerseymen to travel for a picnic. Limpets would be collected from the rocks and cooked on the spot with bread cake eaten hot with butter. Later on, eating hot cross buns became popular as well.

==National identity==
Jersey has often been patriotic about its connection with the British Crown, and by extension the UK itself. In 1833, a list of public houses in St Helier include two named the &#x27;Britannia&#x27;, the &#x27;Crown and Thistle&#x27;, &#x27;George III&#x27;, the King&#x27;s Arms&#x27;, the &#x27;King&#x27;s Head&#x27;, the Robin Hood&#x27;, three named the &#x27;Royal George&#x27;, &#x27;True Britain&#x27;, and &#x27;Waterloo&#x27;. On Mulcaster Street, a pub now named the Lamplighter features on its edifice a seated figure of Britannia holding a shield and trident, with a flagstaff displaying the Union Jack.

==Food and drink==
Seafood has traditionally been important to the cuisine of Jersey: mussels (called &quot;moules&quot; locally), scallops, oysters, lobster and crabs — especially spider crabs which are considered a particular delicacy. Razor-fishing, sand-eeling and limpeting used to be popular activities but have declined in importance. Ormers, being highly sought after, are conserved and fishing is restricted. Another seafood speciality is conger soup.

Bean crock (&quot;les pais au fou&quot;) can best be described as a sort of Norman cassoulet. It is a slow-cooked pork and bean stew, most authentically containing a pig&#x27;s trotter, water and onions. In the past the dish was so ubiquitous that English-speaking visitors, purporting to believe that the people of Jersey ate nothing else, dubbed the inhabitants &quot;Jersey beans&quot; (this epithet is sometimes considered derogatory, but a Jersey primary school French coursebook &quot;Salut Jersey&quot; featured two beans &quot;Haricot&quot; and &quot;Mangetout&quot;).

Nettle (&quot;ortchie&quot;) soup was once a popular dish and was considered a tonic for the heart.

Jersey wonders (&quot;les mèrvelles&quot;), a sort of rich twisted doughnut is made less in the home than formerly but is still a popular treat at fairs and festivals. A sort of wonder poached in milk is known as a fliotte (&quot;eune fliotte&quot;).

Cabbage loaf is the traditional Jersey bread baked between two cabbage leaves. Historically, Jersey produced sturdy walking sticks fashioned from the stalks of cabbages, known as &quot;Tall Jacks&quot;, which had been induced to grow tall stalks by removing leaves around the heart.

Vraic buns are very large sweet buns with raisins, and were traditionally eaten when men went out vraicing on the shore.

Hot cross buns, a popular food around Easter in England, were not introduced to the island until the nineteenth century, but are now readily available. 

Jersey milk being very rich, cream and butter have played a large part in insular cooking. Unlike other parts of the Duchy of Normandy, there is no historical tradition of cheese – Jersey people traditionally preferring rich yellow thickly spread butter.

Jersey Royal potatoes are the local variety of new potato, and the island is famous for its early crop of small, tasty potatoes from the south-facing côtils (steeply-sloping fields). They are eaten in any variety of ways, often simply boiled and served with butter.

Apples historically were an important crop. &quot;Bourdélots&quot; are apple dumplings, but the most typical speciality is black butter (&quot;lé nièr beurre&quot;), a dark spicy spread prepared from apples, cider and spices (especially liquorice). Although called butter, it does not contain any milk. It is traditional to hold black butter nights (&quot;séthées d&#x27;nièr beurre&quot;) in autumn. These are still an important traditional social occasion in country areas; the stirring must be maintained around the clock. The complete process of making black butter, including the peeling of the apples, the stirring of the mixture in a large cauldron throughout the night, the camaraderie and the jarring up was recorded by the filmmaker D. Rusowsky for a 48-minute documentary to capture the essence of this ancient recipe and reveal the spirit of one on Jersey&#x27;s best kept secrets: its people. Reviving the tradition benefits not only people and communities but creates a fertile social environment supporting the conservation of traditional orchards, which are highly endangered.

Cider used to be an important export. After decline and near-disappearance in the late 20th century, apple production is being increased and promoted. Calvados is also produced. Some wine is produced.

==Sport==
Jersey participates in its own right in the Commonwealth Games, in which shooting is a strong sport. Golf is also popular - Harry Vardon was a Jerseyman.

Jersey participates in the Island Games, which it has hosted. In sporting events in which Jersey does not have international representation, when the British Home Nations are competing separately, islanders that do have high athletic skill may choose to compete for any of the Home Nations - there are, however, restrictions on subsequent transfers to represent another Home Nation.

The Muratti football match against Guernsey is one of the sporting highlights of the year. There are several rugby clubs in the island, including a rugby academy for under 18s and Les Quennevais Rugby Club.

==Education==
*Highlands College provides post-16 vocational education, adult education and degree-level education.

==See also==
*Crown and Anchor
*Jersey cricket team
*Jersey Football Association
*Jersey national football team
*Liberation Day
*Media of Jersey
*National Trust for Jersey

==References==
==External links==

*Jersey Heritage Trust
*Jersey Arts Trust</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5193572" start="4" end="21" title="Culture of Jersey" label="culture of Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q11042" start="29" end="36" title="culture" label="culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q785" start="57" end="63" title="Jersey" label="Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1985804" start="84" end="90" title="Culture of France" label="Franco"/>
<link wikidata="Q32501" start="91" end="98" title="Culture of the United Kingdom" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q327" start="254" end="260" title="Brittany" label="Breton"/>
<link wikidata="Q45" start="270" end="280" title="Portugal" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q26253" start="294" end="301" title="Madeira" label="Madeira"/>
<link wikidata="Q303132" start="366" end="383" title="political culture" label="political culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q8142" start="408" end="416" title="currency" label="currency"/>
<link wikidata="Q49845" start="421" end="435" title="Postal Service" label="postal service"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="474" end="485" title="agriculture" label="agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q43015" start="490" end="497" title="finance" label="finance"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146" start="824" end="834" title="Portuguese language" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q56430" start="837" end="845" title="Jèrriais" label="Jèrriais"/>
<link wikidata="Q33850" start="865" end="880" title="Norman language" label="Norman language"/>
<link wikidata="Q102496" start="1046" end="1052" title="parish" label="parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q40998" start="1094" end="1103" title="phonology" label="phonology"/>
<link wikidata="Q3226977" start="1108" end="1113" title="Lexis (linguistics)" label="lexis"/>
<link wikidata="Q61747417" start="1167" end="1187" title="Government of Jersey" label="Government of Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2236213" start="1398" end="1408" title="Francization" label="gallicised"/>
<link wikidata="Q540885" start="1466" end="1476" title="Anglicisation" label="anglicised"/>
<link wikidata="Q147738" start="1644" end="1648" title="Saint Helier" label="town"/>
<link wikidata="Q8242" start="1724" end="1734" title="Literature" label="Literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q6320076" start="1769" end="1791" title="Jèrriais literature" label="Literature in Jèrriais"/>
<link wikidata="Q787221" start="1796" end="1818" title="Francophone literature" label="Francophone literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q5382" start="1909" end="1913" title="Wace" label="Wace"/>
<link wikidata="Q4020129" start="1951" end="1965" title="William Prynne" label="William Prynne"/>
<link wikidata="Q11034" start="2080" end="2088" title="Printing" label="Printing"/>
<link wikidata="Q482" start="2262" end="2268" title="poetry" label="poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091442" start="2709" end="2728" title="Robert Pipon Marett" label="Robert Pipon Marett"/>
<link wikidata="Q4848433" start="2740" end="2747" title="Bailiff (Channel Islands)" label="Bailiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q3380191" start="2892" end="2917" title="Philippe Le Sueur Mourant" label="Philippe Le Sueur Mourant"/>
<link wikidata="Q147738" start="3079" end="3091" title="Saint Helier" label="Saint Helier"/>
<link wikidata="Q178275" start="3366" end="3392" title="Spanish flu" label="influenza pandemic of 1918"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="3476" end="3482" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2238977" start="3748" end="3758" title="German occupation of the Channel Islands" label="Occupation"/>
<link wikidata="Q56430" start="4269" end="4277" title="Jèrriais" label="Jèrriais"/>
<link wikidata="" start="4318" end="4342" title=":fr:George F. Le Feuvre" label="George Francis Le Feuvre"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="4451" end="4466" title="World War I" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q23622" start="4645" end="4655" title="dictionary" label="dictionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059358" start="4913" end="4937" title="Rubaiyat of Omar Khayyam" label="Rubaiyat of Omar Khayyam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2238977" start="4976" end="4993" title="German occupation of the Channel Islands" label="German Occupation"/>
<link wikidata="Q535" start="5026" end="5037" title="Victor Hugo" label="Victor Hugo"/>
<link wikidata="Q447240" start="5083" end="5094" title="Elinor Glyn" label="Elinor Glyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1700819" start="5099" end="5113" title="John Lemprière" label="John Lemprière"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149915" start="5140" end="5158" title="Frederick Tennyson" label="Frederick Tennyson"/>
<link wikidata="Q433708" start="5160" end="5172" title="Jack Higgins" label="Jack Higgins"/>
<link wikidata="Q310400" start="5178" end="5192" title="Gerald Durrell" label="Gerald Durrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q36422" start="5258" end="5267" title="Neolithic" label="Neolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q181543" start="5447" end="5457" title="iconoclasm" label="iconoclasm"/>
<link wikidata="Q101849" start="5465" end="5474" title="Calvinism" label="Calvinist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1835699" start="5618" end="5629" title="Saint Brelade, Jersey" label="St. Brelade"/>
<link wikidata="Q131981" start="5651" end="5660" title="George II of Great Britain" label="George II"/>
<link wikidata="Q138605" start="5664" end="5675" title="John Cheere" label="John Cheere"/>
<link wikidata="Q472840" start="5974" end="5991" title="William Reid Dick" label="William Reid Dick"/>
<link wikidata="Q2310331" start="6110" end="6125" title="Rowan Gillespie" label="Rowan Gillespie"/>
<link wikidata="Q316016" start="6128" end="6149" title="John Singleton Copley" label="John Singleton Copley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5984957" start="6214" end="6240" title="The Death of Major Pierson" label="The Death of Major Pierson"/>
<link wikidata="Q195436" start="6347" end="6359" title="Tate Britain" label="Tate Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3173064" start="6428" end="6444" title="John Le Capelain" label="John Le Capelain"/>
<link wikidata="Q9439" start="6932" end="6940" title="Victoria of the United Kingdom" label="Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q9679" start="7151" end="7164" title="Isle of Wight" label="Isle of Wight"/>
<link wikidata="Q21456515" start="7480" end="7500" title="Sarah Louisa Kilpack" label="Sarah Louisa Kilpack"/>
<link wikidata="Q159606" start="7622" end="7642" title="John Everett Millais" label="John Everett Millais"/>
<link wikidata="Q7594698" start="7746" end="7758" title="St Matthew&amp;#x27;s Church, Jersey" label="Glass Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q509090" start="7762" end="7773" title="Saint Lawrence, Jersey" label="St Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q451400" start="7810" end="7822" title="René Lalique" label="René Lalique"/>
<link wikidata="Q18529058" start="7840" end="7860" title="Florence Boot" label="Florence, Lady Trent"/>
<link wikidata="Q4999130" start="7886" end="7896" title="Jesse Boot" label="Lord Trent"/>
<link wikidata="Q3047757" start="7989" end="8004" title="Edmund Blampied" label="Edmund Blampied"/>
<link wikidata="Q6258743" start="8098" end="8120" title="John St. Helier Lander" label="John St. Helier Lander"/>
<link wikidata="Q7966424" start="8446" end="8467" title="Walter William Ouless" label="Walter William Ouless"/>
<link wikidata="Q270920" start="8468" end="8470" title="Royal Academy" label="RA"/>
<link wikidata="Q270920" start="8552" end="8582" title="Associate of the Royal Academy" label="Associate of the Royal Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473346" start="8653" end="8666" title="stained glass" label="stained glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q184814" start="8672" end="8686" title="Pre-Raphaelite" label="Pre-Raphaelite"/>
<link wikidata="Q219636" start="8793" end="8809" title="Suzanne Malherbe" label="Suzanne Malherbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q219634" start="8814" end="8826" title="Claude Cahun" label="Claude Cahun"/>
<link wikidata="Q39427" start="8838" end="8848" title="Surrealist" label="Surrealist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7526690" start="8914" end="8926" title="Sir Francis Cook, 4th Baronet" label="Francis Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q3077317" start="9759" end="9775" title="Philip Bailhache" label="Philip Bailhache"/>
<link wikidata="Q130058" start="10014" end="10031" title="Jersey Eisteddfod" label="Jersey Eisteddfod"/>
<link wikidata="Q15229519" start="10135" end="10146" title="Jersey Opera House" label="Opera House"/>
<link wikidata="Q297743" start="11649" end="11663" title="Lillie Langtry" label="Lillie Langtry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3958616" start="11792" end="11805" title="Seymour Hicks" label="Seymour Hicks"/>
<link wikidata="Q15462454" start="11807" end="11820" title="Ivy St Helier" label="Ivy St Helier"/>
<link wikidata="Q295498" start="11832" end="11844" title="Henry Cavill" label="Henry Cavill"/>
<link wikidata="Q43343" start="11968" end="11978" title="folk music" label="folk music"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="12111" end="12117" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="12231" end="12237" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q5604234" start="12552" end="12579" title="Greenland Whale Fisheries" label="The Greenland Whale Fishery"/>
<link wikidata="Q55273250" start="12985" end="12996" title="Round dance (ballroom)" label="round dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q153071" start="13072" end="13077" title="polka" label="polka"/>
<link wikidata="Q329385" start="13083" end="13094" title="schottische" label="schottische"/>
<link wikidata="Q394084" start="13103" end="13112" title="quadrille" label="quadrille"/>
<link wikidata="Q8355" start="13207" end="13213" title="violin" label="violin"/>
<link wikidata="Q207821" start="13243" end="13254" title="hurdy-gurdy" label="hurdy-gurdy"/>
<link wikidata="Q79838" start="13271" end="13280" title="accordion" label="accordion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144064" start="13425" end="13438" title="Nonconformist (Protestantism)" label="Nonconformist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="13439" end="13451" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="13646" end="13652" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q297734" start="14163" end="14176" title="Nerina Pallot" label="Nerina Pallot"/>
<link wikidata="Q3069913" start="14576" end="14587" title="Jersey Live" label="Jersey Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q2187392" start="14602" end="14607" title="alternative dance" label="indie"/>
<link wikidata="Q316930" start="14608" end="14613" title="dance music" label="dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q868557" start="14614" end="14628" title="music festival" label="music festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q3488629" start="14655" end="14682" title="Royal Jersey Agricultural and Horticultural Society" label="The Royal Jersey Showground"/>
<link wikidata="Q2594704" start="14686" end="14693" title="Trinity, Jersey" label="Trinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q42314" start="14829" end="14844" title="Channel Islands" label="Channel Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q6063" start="15224" end="15237" title="Government of the United Kingdom" label="UK Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1529532" start="15242" end="15247" title="Ofcom" label="Ofcom"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15328" end="15347" title="Television Channels in the United Kingdom" label="television channels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191294" start="15424" end="15433" title="BBC Radio" label="BBC Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q25821" start="15668" end="15687" title="Television licence" label="television licenses"/>
<link wikidata="Q256091" start="15919" end="15934" title="British Islands" label="British Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q26398" start="16059" end="16078" title="public broadcasting" label="public broadcasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="16206" end="16209" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2033167" start="16214" end="16217" title="Sky UK" label="Sky"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="16223" end="16226" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q3140604" start="16231" end="16238" title="ITV plc" label="ITV plc"/>
<link wikidata="Q191472" start="16281" end="16288" title="BBC One" label="BBC One"/>
<link wikidata="Q3397234" start="16309" end="16331" title="ITV Channel Television" label="ITV Channel Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q6017286" start="16737" end="16769" title="Independent Television Authority" label="Independent Television Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696946" start="16797" end="16816" title="Television Act 1954" label="Television Act 1954"/>
<link wikidata="Q899485" start="16970" end="16986" title="Order in Council" label="Order in Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="17385" end="17388" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q960233" start="17414" end="17422" title="Bergerac (TV series)" label="Bergerac"/>
<link wikidata="Q47466" start="17440" end="17452" title="John Nettles" label="John Nettles"/>
<link wikidata="Q105063022" start="17781" end="17810" title="the Real Housewives of Jersey" label="the Real Housewives of Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2590440" start="17824" end="17839" title="The Real Housewives" label="Real Housewives"/>
<link wikidata="Q2378219" start="17886" end="17902" title="BBC Radio Jersey" label="BBC Radio Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q28914" start="17974" end="17986" title="patron saint" label="patron saint"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401089" start="17996" end="18002" title="Helier" label="Helier"/>
<link wikidata="Q188213" start="18009" end="18027" title="established church" label="established church"/>
<link wikidata="Q82708" start="18035" end="18052" title="Church of England" label="Church of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q33203" start="18058" end="18067" title="Methodism" label="Methodism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="18190" end="18204" title="Catholic Church" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q108325" start="18359" end="18365" title="chapel" label="chapel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5182286" start="18463" end="18470" title="crapaud" label="crapaud"/>
<link wikidata="Q42314" start="18557" end="18572" title="Channel Islands" label="Channel Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269091" start="18633" end="18646" title="Samson of Dol" label="Samson of Dol"/>
<link wikidata="Q237169" start="18952" end="18959" title="seaweed" label="seaweed"/>
<link wikidata="Q110127764" start="18983" end="19005" title="Seaweed fertiliser" label="seaweed for fertiliser"/>
<link wikidata="Q539642" start="19104" end="19121" title="Jersey Battle of Flowers" label="Battle of Flowers"/>
<link wikidata="Q20875" start="19203" end="19213" title="Edward VII of the United Kingdom" label="Edward VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q3561079" start="19468" end="19488" title="Visite du Branchage" label="visites du branchage"/>
<link wikidata="Q259745" start="20045" end="20055" title="witchcraft" label="witchcraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q831942" start="20187" end="20194" title="Sabbath (witchcraft)" label="sabbats"/>
<link wikidata="Q8027917" start="20300" end="20320" title="witches&amp;#x27; stones" label="witches&amp;#x27; stones"/>
<link wikidata="Q13042834" start="22044" end="22050" title="mussel" label="mussel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1311395" start="22089" end="22097" title="scallops" label="scallops"/>
<link wikidata="Q107411" start="22099" end="22105" title="oyster" label="oyster"/>
<link wikidata="Q27690" start="22108" end="22115" title="European lobster" label="lobster"/>
<link wikidata="Q40802" start="22120" end="22124" title="crab" label="crab"/>
<link wikidata="Q2233169" start="22139" end="22151" title="Maja squinado" label="spider crabs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2248806" start="22196" end="22209" title="Razor shell" label="Razor-fishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q15817131" start="22211" end="22219" title="sand-eel" label="sand-eel"/>
<link wikidata="Q17076044" start="22227" end="22233" title="limpet" label="limpet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4857439" start="22300" end="22306" title="Abalone" label="Ormers"/>
<link wikidata="Q137144" start="22406" end="22412" title="conger" label="conger"/>
<link wikidata="Q3039" start="22503" end="22512" title="cassoulet" label="cassoulet"/>
<link wikidata="Q17118905" start="22586" end="22604" title="pig&amp;#x27;s trotter" label="pig&amp;#x27;s trotter"/>
<link wikidata="Q155909" start="22998" end="23004" title="Urtica dioica" label="Nettle"/>
<link wikidata="Q192783" start="23166" end="23174" title="doughnut" label="doughnut"/>
<link wikidata="Q7802" start="23390" end="23395" title="bread" label="bread"/>
<link wikidata="Q35051" start="23414" end="23421" title="cabbage" label="cabbage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347864" start="23467" end="23480" title="walking stick" label="walking stick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1601611" start="23757" end="23771" title="Hot cross bun" label="Hot cross buns"/>
<link wikidata="Q8495" start="23918" end="23922" title="milk" label="milk"/>
<link wikidata="Q13228" start="23940" end="23945" title="cream" label="cream"/>
<link wikidata="Q34172" start="23950" end="23956" title="butter" label="butter"/>
<link wikidata="Q10943" start="24083" end="24089" title="cheese" label="cheese"/>
<link wikidata="Q3177530" start="24167" end="24188" title="Jersey Royal potatoes" label="Jersey Royal potatoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q10998" start="24214" end="24224" title="new potato" label="new potato"/>
<link wikidata="Q89" start="24434" end="24439" title="Apple" label="Apple"/>
<link wikidata="Q15647777" start="24577" end="24591" title="Nièr beurre" label="lé nièr beurre"/>
<link wikidata="Q257106" start="24671" end="24680" title="liquorice" label="liquorice"/>
<link wikidata="Q167296" start="25528" end="25533" title="Cider" label="Cider"/>
<link wikidata="Q178340" start="25784" end="25802" title="Commonwealth Games" label="Commonwealth Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q945877" start="25864" end="25876" title="Harry Vardon" label="Harry Vardon"/>
<link wikidata="Q845262" start="25922" end="25934" title="Island Games" label="Island Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040745" start="26053" end="26065" title="Home Nations" label="Home Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q3512678" start="26283" end="26290" title="Muratti" label="Muratti"/>
<link wikidata="Q16932544" start="26459" end="26484" title="Les Quennevais Rugby Club, Jersey" label="Les Quennevais Rugby Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q5016324" start="26502" end="26519" title="Highlands College, Jersey" label="Highlands College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5189478" start="26618" end="26634" title="Crown and Anchor" label="Crown and Anchor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3590252" start="26636" end="26655" title="Jersey cricket team" label="Jersey cricket team"/>
<link wikidata="Q4493678" start="26657" end="26684" title="Jersey Football Association" label="Jersey Football Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q635433" start="26686" end="26715" title="Jersey official football team" label="Jersey national football team"/>
<link wikidata="Q6540995" start="26717" end="26731" title="Liberation Day (Jersey)" label="Liberation Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q16151555" start="26733" end="26748" title="Media of Jersey" label="Media of Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3336952" start="26750" end="26775" title="National Trust for Jersey" label="National Trust for Jersey"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1329140" wikidata="Q114173" url="?curid=1329140" title="Pine River">
<text>Pine River may refer to:

==Places==
===United States===
* Pine River, Michigan, an unincorporated community in Arenac County
* Pine River Township, Michigan in Gratiot County
* Pine River, Minnesota, a small city
* Pine River Township, Cass County, Minnesota
* Pine River, Wisconsin, a town
* Pine River, Lincoln County, Wisconsin, an unincorporated community
* Pine River, Waushara County, Wisconsin, a census-designated place

===Canada===
* Pine River, Manitoba, a small community

==Rivers==
===Australia===
* Pine River (Queensland)
** North Pine River
** South Pine River

===Canada===
* Pine River (British Columbia)
** Pine River Breaks Provincial Park
* Pine River (Ontario)
* Pine River, Quebec

===Canada-United States===
* Pine River (Minnesota–Ontario)

===United States===
* Pine River (Michigan), any of eight rivers in Michigan
* In Minnesota:
** Pine River (Kettle River), a river in Pine County
** Pine River (Mississippi River), a river in Crow Wing County
** Pine River (Saint Louis River), a river in St. Louis County
* Pine River (New Hampshire)
* Los Pinos River (sometimes translated as &quot;Pine River&quot;) in Colorado and New Mexico
* Pine River (Rhode Island)
* In Wisconsin:
** Pine River (Florence County), a tributary of the Menominee River
** Pine River (Lincoln County), a tributary of the Wisconsin River in northern Wisconsin
** Pine River (Richland County), a tributary of the Wisconsin River in southwestern Wisconsin
** Pine River (Waushara County), a tributary of the Wolf River (Fox River)

==Companies==
* Pine River Capital Management

==See also==
* 
* Rivière des Pins (disambiguation) (Pine River)
* Rivière aux Pins (disambiguation) (River of Pines)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q114173" start="0" end="10" title="Pine River" label="Pine River"/>
<link wikidata="Q7598654" start="59" end="79" title="Pine River, Michigan" label="Pine River, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7195352" start="128" end="157" title="Pine River Township, Michigan" label="Pine River Township, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2228130" start="178" end="199" title="Pine River, Minnesota" label="Pine River, Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1912178" start="216" end="259" title="Pine River Township, Cass County, Minnesota" label="Pine River Township, Cass County, Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1887769" start="262" end="283" title="Pine River, Wisconsin" label="Pine River, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1887769" start="294" end="331" title="Pine River, Lincoln County, Wisconsin" label="Pine River, Lincoln County, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7195341" start="363" end="401" title="Pine River, Waushara County, Wisconsin" label="Pine River, Waushara County, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1660850" start="445" end="465" title="Pine River, Manitoba" label="Pine River, Manitoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q7195342" start="515" end="538" title="Pine River (Queensland)" label="Pine River (Queensland)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7056335" start="542" end="558" title="North Pine River" label="North Pine River"/>
<link wikidata="Q7568224" start="562" end="578" title="South Pine River" label="South Pine River"/>
<link wikidata="Q22370488" start="595" end="624" title="Pine River (British Columbia)" label="Pine River (British Columbia)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7195346" start="628" end="661" title="Pine River Breaks Provincial Park" label="Pine River Breaks Provincial Park"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="664" end="684" title="Pine River (Ontario)" label="Pine River (Ontario)"/>
<link wikidata="Q96478418" start="687" end="705" title="Pine River, Quebec" label="Pine River, Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q7195338" start="736" end="766" title="Pine River (Minnesota–Ontario)" label="Pine River (Minnesota–Ontario)"/>
<link wikidata="Q14716261" start="790" end="811" title="Pine River (Michigan)" label="Pine River (Michigan)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7195336" start="864" end="889" title="Pine River (Kettle River)" label="Pine River (Kettle River)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7195339" start="917" end="947" title="Pine River (Mississippi River)" label="Pine River (Mississippi River)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7195344" start="980" end="1010" title="Pine River (Saint Louis River)" label="Pine River (Saint Louis River)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7195340" start="1042" end="1068" title="Pine River (New Hampshire)" label="Pine River (New Hampshire)"/>
<link wikidata="Q14706054" start="1071" end="1086" title="Los Pinos River" label="Los Pinos River"/>
<link wikidata="Q7195343" start="1165" end="1190" title="Pine River (Rhode Island)" label="Pine River (Rhode Island)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7195335" start="1210" end="1238" title="Pine River (Florence County)" label="Pine River (Florence County)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1278" end="1305" title="Pine River (Lincoln County)" label="Pine River (Lincoln County)"/>
<link wikidata="Q978496" start="1326" end="1341" title="Wisconsin River" label="Wisconsin River"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1367" end="1395" title="Pine River (Richland County)" label="Pine River (Richland County)"/>
<link wikidata="Q978496" start="1416" end="1431" title="Wisconsin River" label="Wisconsin River"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1461" end="1489" title="Pine River (Waushara County)" label="Pine River (Waushara County)"/>
<link wikidata="Q941928" start="1510" end="1532" title="Wolf River (Fox River)" label="Wolf River (Fox River)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16967095" start="1550" end="1579" title="Pine River Capital Management" label="Pine River Capital Management"/>
<link wikidata="Q22948170" start="1599" end="1632" title="Rivière des Pins (disambiguation)" label="Rivière des Pins (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q22948118" start="1648" end="1681" title="Rivière aux Pins (disambiguation)" label="Rivière aux Pins (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1329145" wikidata="Q44417" url="?curid=1329145" title="Żurrieq">
<text>Żurrieq ( ) is a town in the Southern Region of Malta. It is one of the oldest towns in the country, and has a population of 11,823 inhabitants as of March 2014. Żurrieq is one of the 10 parishes to be documented in 1436 and is dedicated to Saint Catherine. The island of Filfla is administratively a part of the town. The town stretches from Nigret to Ħal Far. In old times the town had a border with Żejtun. The village of Qrendi used to be part of the parish of Żurrieq until 1618 when it was made into its own parish.

Żurrieq is part of District 5 and votes for the local council every five years. The council is made up of nine members, one of them is the mayor. The present mayor of Żurrieq is Rita Grima. The parish archpriest being Rev. Daniel Cardona, helped by Rev. Raymond Cassar and Rev. Karm Camilleri.

== Main Landmarks ==
One of the most popular landmarks is the Blue Grotto. Locally it is known as &#x27;Il-Ħnejja&#x27; (the arch). It is known for the beautiful shades of blue under the arch. People can go into the arch by boarding a luzzu from Wied Iż-Żurrieq.

Another popular landmark is the Xarolla Windmill. It is found in the limits of Żurrieq near Ħal Safi. It is one of the few restored Maltese windmills around the islands. During restorations, catacombs were found underneath the windmill. In front of the windmill is a small chapel dating to the time of the Knights dedicated to Saint Andrew. The chapel has also been restored. In the house of the archpriest one can find a small Punic tower which was built when Malta was under the control of the Phoenicians. There are also remains of a Roman tower near the remains of a chapel in tal-Baqqari. There are a number of churches and chapels in Żurrieq, among them the Parish Church of Saint Catherine and a medieval chapel dedicated to the Annunciation.

Żurrieq is also known for its big feasts which are held in summer. The first one, which is dedicated to Our Lady of Mount Carmel, is celebrated on the third Sunday of July. The titular feast is held in the honour of Saint Catherine. The feast is held on the first Sunday of September. During both feasts the streets of the town is adorned with decorations. A week of masses and marches are held leading up to Sunday where the statue is carried around the town in a procession. Fireworks are also used throughout the week with a firework show on the eve of the feast. A feast of Saint Catherine is also held on the 25th of November as it is the liturgical feast of Saint Catherine.

==Churches and chapels==
===Parish Church dedicated to Saint Catherine of Alexandria===
The building of the current church started in 1632–1633 under the direction of Rev. Matteolo Saliba, who was also the architect of the new church. The church was completed in 1658.

The church includes a number of paintings by Mattia Preti. These include the Martyrdom of Saint Stephen, Martyrdom of Saint Andrew, Martyrdom of Saint Catherine of Alexandria, Eternal Father, Visitation of the Virgin to Saint Elizabeth, Saint Roch, Saint Blaise, Saint Dominic, Saint Nicholas of Tolentino and of Our Lady of Graces.

===Bubaqra Chapel dedicated to the Assumption of Mary===
The present church may have been built on the original site of two old chapels, one dedicated to Saint Roch and the other to Saint Sebastian. The chapel of Saint Mary was built after the plague of 1676. The chapel experienced major restructuring in 1961 when it was enlarged to accommodate the increasing population of the area. This was done on the initiative of Rev. Salv Farrugia. 

===Nigret Chapel dedicated to the Immaculate conception of Mary===
The present church was built on the site of a previous chapel dedicated to the Annunciation which was deconsecrated by Bishop Miguel Juan Balaguer Camarasa on 24 November 1658. The church was built by commander James Togores de Valemuola and was finally consecrated by the parish priest of the village Rev. Karm Delicata on 11 October 1739.

===Chapel of the Annunciation, Ħal-Millieri===
The now uninhabited village of Ħal-Millieri was first documented in 1419 though it originates from Roman or even pre-historic times. The present church was built around 1450 on the site of an earlier 13th century chapel. 

The chapel was consecrated in 1480. During Monsignor Pietro Dusina&#x27;s apostolic visit to Ħal-Millieri, in 1575, he found that there were a total of four churches in the area. Only two of these remain standing; the Annunciation and Saint John the Evangelist. During his visit, Dusina found that the church was in a state of good repair, had three altars and paved. However, he found that the church was not equipped with sacred vestments, income or even a rector. 

===Chapel of Saint John the Evangelist in Ħal-Millieri===
The original medieval chapel dedicated to Saint John was built sometime around 1481. It is recorded in inquisitor Pietro Dusina&#x27;s report of his apostolic visit to the chapel in 1575. The report states that the chapel was in a dilapidated state, there were no doors, there were stone benches and a floor of beaten earth. Consequently, the church was deconsecrated. However, some time later it was reconsecrated and equipped with religious objects.

===Chapel of St. Leo===

The chapel serves as the official cemetery chapel of Żurrieq. It is the only such chapel dedicated to Pope Leo I in Malta. This chapel was closed in 1658 and reopened twenty years later, after the necessary restoration had been carried out. In this chapel one could also find an old painting on wood that from 1343 to 1575 was in the chapel in Filfla. Today, this painting is found in the parish church of Żurrieq.

===Chapel of St. Agatha===

The original church which stood on the site of the present church was built sometime in the 16th century. However it was deconsecrated by the Bishop of Malta, Balaguer on 24 November 1658. The present church was built by Cikku Grixti as a fulfillment of a vow made by a woman. It was blessed by the vicar general Philip Amato on 27 February 1859. The church served as a spiritual base for British soldiers during World War II. In 1952, the church was enlarged and decorated with important items such as the Via Crucis and new vestments. The painting depicting Saint Agatha was restored by R. Bonnici Cali.

===Chapel of St. James===
This church is first recorded in the report dating from 1575 during the apostolic visit of inquisitor Pietro Dusina. Beside the original church was another church dedicated to Saint John the Baptist. Both churches were demolished in the early 18th century to make way for a new and bigger church dedicated to Saint James. Work commenced in 1725 and was completed by June 24, 1731.

===Chapel of St. Bartholomew===
The original chapel of Saint Bartholomew was built in the year 1482. It was one of the churches which the inquisitor Pietro Dusina visited during his apostolic visit in 1575. He reported that the chapel was in a good state and was equipped with all necessary objects to function, however it lacked a rector and an income.

===Chapel of St. Andrew===

Saint Andrew&#x27;s was first mentioned in the reports recounting the visit of inquisitor Pietro Dusina in 1575. However, the chapel was rebuilt in 1634 as mentioned in other pastoral visits. The chapel was deconsecrated in 1658 by Bishop Balaguer. The church remained unused until 1690 when the chapel became the property of the parish church of Saint Catherine.

===Chapel of St. Luke===

The origin of the chapel of Saint Luke dates back to the 15th century. It was donated by its benefactor Luqa Zammit in his will dated 1460 as revealed in the notary documents of Luqa Sillato. However, the present structure dates from 1814 when the church was rebuilt on the initiative of Rev. Ġwann Zammit.

===Peace Laboratory===
In 1971 Fr Dionysius Mintoff took over an air force hangar to use as a centre of peace activities, dedicating it to Pope John XXIII. The area was later developed as a peace laboratory.

==Feasts==
*Saint Catherine of Alexandria
*Our Lady of Mount Carmel
*Our Lady of the Rosary
*Our Lady of tal-Warda
*Saint Joseph
*Saint Rocco
*Saint Stephen
*Saint Andrew
*Saint Clementine
*Sacred Heart of Jesus, celebrated in the parish church and also in Nigret.
*Corpus Christi
*The Assumption of our Lady, Celebrated in Bubaqra

==Bands and clubs==
*Soċjeta Mużikali Santa Katarina V.M.
*Għaqda Karmelitana Banda Queen Victoria

==Streets showing Roman Catholic Faith==

*Misrah Santa Marija(Saint Mary Square)
*Misraħ San Ġorg (Saint Georges Square)
*Misraħ il-Karmelitani (Carmelites Square)
*Triq Santa Katarina (St. Catherine&#x27;s Street)
*Triq il-Benedittini (Benedictines Street)
*Triq il-Karmnu (Our Lady of Mount Carmel Street)
*Triq il-Kunċizzjoni (Immaculate Conception Street)
*Triq l-Isqof Alpheran (Bishop Alpheran Street)
*Triq San Bartilmew (St. Bartholomew Street)
*Triq Sant&#x27;Luqa ( St. Luke Street)
*Triq San Bastjan (St. Sebastian Street)
*Triq San Ċiru (St. Ciros Street)
*Triq San David (St. David Street)
*Triq San Ġorġ (St. George Street)
*Triq San Ġwann (St. John Street)
*Triq San Iljun (St. Lion Street)
*Triq San Pawl (St. Paul Street)
*Triq San Mark (St. Mark Street)
*Triq San Lazzru (St. Lazrus)
*Triq Sant&#x27;Antnin (St. Antony Street)
*Triq San Nikola (St. Nicholas Street)
*Triq San Pietru (St. Peter Street)
*Triq San Gwann (St. John Street)
*Triq San Mikiel (St. Michael Street)
*Triq San Martin (St. Martin Street)
*Triq Sant&#x27;Iljun (St. Lion Street)
*Triq San Bastjan (St. Sebastian Street)
*Triq Sant&#x27;Agata (St. Agatha Street)
*Triq Sant&#x27;Porfirju
*Triq Santa Fawstina
*Triq Sant&#x27;Andrija (St. Andrew Street)
*Triq Santa Katerina tal-Baqqari
*Triq Monsinjur Pietru Pawl Saydon
*Triq Monsinjur Pullicino
*Triq il-Kanonku Balzan
*Triq l-Immakulata ( Immaculate Conception Street)
*Trejqa l-Iben il-Ħali ( Prodigal Son Street)
*Sqaq il-Karmnu Nru.1 u Nru.2 (Our Lady of Mount Carmel Alley No.1 and No.2)
*Sqaq il-Kunċizzjoni (Immaculate Conception Alley)
*Sqaq San Anard (St. Leonard Alley)
*Sqaq San Bartolimew (St. Bartholomew Alley)
*Sqaq San Ċiru (St. Ciros Alley)
*Sqaq San Edwardu (St. Edward Alley)
*Sqaq San Ġakmu (St. James Alley)
*Sqaq San Ġużepp (St. Joseph Alley)
*Sqaq San Ġwann (St. John Alley)
*Sqaq San Martin (St. Martin Alley)
*Sqaq San Patrizju (St. Patrick&#x27;s Alley)
*Żona Tal-Bambina (The Nativity of Our Lady Area)
*Triq Santa Katerina tal-Baqqari
==Language==
The primary language spoken in Żurrieq is the Żurrieq dialect of the Maltese language.

==Education==
==Zones==

*Bubaqra
*Nigret
*Xarolla
*Tal-Bebbux
*Tal-Gawhar
*Ta&#x27; Xaqqa
*Taz-Zutli
*Tal-Għerien
*Taċ-Ċantar
*Tax-Xewki
*Tal-Ġibjun
*Tal-Baqqari
*Ta&#x27; Taħt iċ-Ċint
*Ħal-Millieri
*Ħal-Lew
*Ħal-Far
*Ħal-Manin
*Wied Ganu
*Wied Żurrieq
*Wied Babu
*Wied Ħallelin
*Wied Basasa
*Wied Żnuber
*Wied Fulija
*Għar Ħasan
== Twin towns – sister cities ==
Żurrieq is twinned with:
* Angermünde, Germany
* Borgo Maggiore, San Marino
* Morphou, Cyprus
* Taverna, Italy
* Pedara, Italy

==References==
==External links==

*Żurrieq Local Council
*Żurrieq Parish</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q44417" start="0" end="7" title="Żurrieq" label="Żurrieq"/>
<link wikidata="Q20199405" start="29" end="44" title="Southern Region, Malta" label="Southern Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q233" start="48" end="53" title="Malta" label="Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q179718" start="241" end="256" title="Catherine of Alexandria" label="Saint Catherine"/>
<link wikidata="Q743970" start="272" end="278" title="Filfla" label="Filfla"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="343" end="349" title="Nigret" label="Nigret"/>
<link wikidata="Q342947" start="353" end="360" title="Ħal Far" label="Ħal Far"/>
<link wikidata="Q38232633" start="542" end="552" title="District 5, Malta" label="District 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q882491" start="880" end="891" title="Blue Grotto (Malta)" label="Blue Grotto"/>
<link wikidata="Q637920" start="1053" end="1058" title="luzzu" label="luzzu"/>
<link wikidata="Q8043158" start="1114" end="1130" title="Xarolla Windmill" label="Xarolla Windmill"/>
<link wikidata="Q658903" start="1174" end="1182" title="Safi, Malta" label="Ħal Safi"/>
<link wikidata="Q172896" start="1273" end="1282" title="catacombs" label="catacombs"/>
<link wikidata="Q187549" start="1388" end="1395" title="Knights Hospitaller" label="Knights"/>
<link wikidata="Q43399" start="1409" end="1421" title="Andrew the Apostle" label="Saint Andrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q106433172" start="1510" end="1521" title="Punic building, Żurrieq" label="Punic tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q41642" start="1578" end="1589" title="Phoenicia" label="Phoenicians"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="1619" end="1624" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q179718" start="1763" end="1778" title="Catherine of Alexandria" label="Saint Catherine"/>
<link wikidata="Q154326" start="1818" end="1830" title="Annunciation" label="Annunciation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065053" start="1937" end="1961" title="Our Lady of Mount Carmel" label="Our Lady of Mount Carmel"/>
<link wikidata="Q179718" start="2049" end="2064" title="Catherine of Alexandria" label="Saint Catherine"/>
<link wikidata="Q179718" start="2411" end="2426" title="Catherine of Alexandria" label="Saint Catherine"/>
<link wikidata="Q179718" start="2497" end="2512" title="Catherine of Alexandria" label="Saint Catherine"/>
<link wikidata="Q468632" start="2830" end="2842" title="Mattia Preti" label="Mattia Preti"/>
<link wikidata="Q161775" start="2875" end="2888" title="Saint Stephen" label="Saint Stephen"/>
<link wikidata="Q43399" start="2890" end="2915" title="Andrew the Apostle" label="Martyrdom of Saint Andrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q179718" start="2930" end="2959" title="Catherine of Alexandria" label="Saint Catherine of Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q691810" start="2977" end="3020" title="Visitation (Christianity)" label="Visitation of the Virgin to Saint Elizabeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q152457" start="3022" end="3032" title="Saint Roch" label="Saint Roch"/>
<link wikidata="Q151967" start="3034" end="3046" title="Saint Blaise" label="Saint Blaise"/>
<link wikidata="Q44091" start="3048" end="3061" title="Saint Dominic" label="Saint Dominic"/>
<link wikidata="Q470855" start="3063" end="3090" title="Nicholas of Tolentino" label="Saint Nicholas of Tolentino"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636804" start="3098" end="3116" title="Our Lady of Graces" label="Our Lady of Graces"/>
<link wikidata="Q152457" start="3273" end="3283" title="Saint Roch" label="Saint Roch"/>
<link wikidata="Q183332" start="3301" end="3316" title="Saint Sebastian" label="Saint Sebastian"/>
<link wikidata="Q345" start="3332" end="3342" title="Mary, mother of Jesus" label="Saint Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q20723261" start="3363" end="3377" title="1675–76 Malta plague epidemic" label="plague of 1676"/>
<link wikidata="Q20735509" start="3755" end="3784" title="Miguel Juan Balaguer Camarasa" label="Miguel Juan Balaguer Camarasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q84091489" start="4294" end="4307" title="Pietro Dusina" label="Pietro Dusina"/>
<link wikidata="Q328804" start="4476" end="4501" title="John the Evangelist" label="Saint John the Evangelist"/>
<link wikidata="Q328804" start="4810" end="4820" title="John the Evangelist" label="Saint John"/>
<link wikidata="Q84091489" start="4882" end="4895" title="Pietro Dusina" label="Pietro Dusina"/>
<link wikidata="Q43954" start="5353" end="5358" title="Pope Leo I" label="Leo I"/>
<link wikidata="Q743970" start="5590" end="5596" title="Filfla" label="Filfla"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="6103" end="6115" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q200895" start="6250" end="6262" title="Agatha of Sicily" label="Saint Agatha"/>
<link wikidata="Q84091489" start="6425" end="6438" title="Pietro Dusina" label="Pietro Dusina"/>
<link wikidata="Q40662" start="6499" end="6521" title="John the Baptist" label="Saint John the Baptist"/>
<link wikidata="Q43999" start="6632" end="6643" title="James the Great" label="Saint James"/>
<link wikidata="Q43982" start="6760" end="6777" title="Bartholomew the Apostle" label="Saint Bartholomew"/>
<link wikidata="Q84091489" start="6854" end="6867" title="Pietro Dusina" label="Pietro Dusina"/>
<link wikidata="Q43399" start="7088" end="7100" title="Andrew the Apostle" label="Saint Andrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q84091489" start="7178" end="7191" title="Pietro Dusina" label="Pietro Dusina"/>
<link wikidata="Q128538" start="7507" end="7517" title="Luke the Evangelist" label="Saint Luke"/>
<link wikidata="Q23873" start="7926" end="7941" title="Pope John XXIII" label="Pope John XXIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q179718" start="8008" end="8037" title="Catherine of Alexandria" label="Saint Catherine of Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065053" start="8039" end="8063" title="Our Lady of Mount Carmel" label="Our Lady of Mount Carmel"/>
<link wikidata="Q54875" start="8065" end="8087" title="Our Lady of the Rosary" label="Our Lady of the Rosary"/>
<link wikidata="Q128267" start="8112" end="8124" title="Saint Joseph" label="Saint Joseph"/>
<link wikidata="Q152457" start="8126" end="8137" title="Saint Roch" label="Saint Rocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q161775" start="8139" end="8152" title="Saint Stephen" label="Saint Stephen"/>
<link wikidata="Q43399" start="8154" end="8166" title="Andrew the Apostle" label="Saint Andrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q152395" start="8262" end="8276" title="Corpus Christi (feast)" label="Corpus Christi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2927369" start="8320" end="8327" title="Bubaqra" label="Bubaqra"/>
<link wikidata="Q7587447" start="8350" end="8386" title="St. Catherine Band Club" label="Soċjeta Mużikali Santa Katarina V.M."/>
<link wikidata="Q127427511" start="10493" end="10508" title="Żurrieq dialect" label="Żurrieq dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q9166" start="10516" end="10532" title="Maltese language" label="Maltese language"/>
<link wikidata="Q2927369" start="10561" end="10568" title="Bubaqra" label="Bubaqra"/>
<link wikidata="Q184711" start="10910" end="10917" title="Twin towns and sister cities" label="twinned"/>
<link wikidata="Q490066" start="10926" end="10936" title="Angermünde" label="Angermünde"/>
<link wikidata="Q201368" start="10948" end="10962" title="Borgo Maggiore" label="Borgo Maggiore"/>
<link wikidata="Q830638" start="10977" end="10984" title="Morphou" label="Morphou"/>
<link wikidata="Q53730" start="10995" end="11002" title="Taverna, Calabria" label="Taverna"/>
<link wikidata="Q478747" start="11012" end="11018" title="Pedara" label="Pedara"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1329152" wikidata="Q765749" url="?curid=1329152" title="Campeonato Carioca">
<text>The Campeonato Carioca (Carioca Championship), officially known as Campeonato Estadual do Rio de Janeiro (Rio de Janeiro State Championship), also commonly known as the Cariocão, is the top-flight professional state football league in the Brazilian state of Rio de Janeiro. It is run by the Rio de Janeiro State Football Federation (FERJ).

The first season of the &quot;Campeonato Carioca&quot; was played in 1906. It was predated by the Campeonato Paulista of São Paulo and the Campeonato Baiano of Bahia. Flamengo leads the title count with 38 championships, followed by Fluminense (33), Vasco da Gama (24), Botafogo (21), America (7), Bangu (2), São Cristóvão, and Paysandu (1 each).

Rivalries amongst four of the most prestigious Brazilian teams (Botafogo, Flamengo, Fluminense and Vasco da Gama) have marked the history of the competition.

The oldest clubs from Rio de Janeiro (America, Botafogo, Flamengo, Fluminense, São Cristóvão, Vasco da Gama) had inspired the creation of many clubs from other states.

==History==
===The early years===
The 20th century saw in Rio de Janeiro and Niterói a significant popularity in football with the establishment of clubs such as Rio Cricket and Athletic Association in Niterói, Fluminense Football Club in 1902, and Bangu Atlético Club, América Football Club, and Botafogo Football Club in 1904 being founded. Organizing leagues for competition amongst clubs followed by Rio Cricket and Athletic Association, Fluminense Football Club, Football and Athletic Club, America Football Club, Bangu Atlético Club, Sport Club Petrópolis and Payssandu Cricket Club. On June 8, 1905, the Liga Metropolitana de Football (abbreviated &quot;LMF&quot;, &quot;Metropolitan Football League&quot; in English) was founded. LMF&#x27;s first president was Bangu&#x27;s José Villas Boas, who was replaced by Francis Walter in December of the same year.

In 1906, the first Campeonato Carioca was contested by six clubs: Fluminense, Botafogo, Bangu, Football and Athletic, Payssandu and Rio Cricket. America, despite being one of the league founders, did not contest the league&#x27;s first edition. Fluminense became the first Rio de Janeiro state champion.

In 1907, the championship ended with a tie between Botafogo and Fluminense. The league rules did not address ties. Botafogo claimed an extra-match advantage; Fluminense claimed that the league should adopt the goal-average criteria. It went unresolved until 1996 when both clubs were declared champions.

On February 29, 1908, Fluminense, Botafogo, America, Paysandu, Rio Cricket, and Riachuelo founded &quot;Liga Metropolitana de Sports Athleticos&quot; (&quot;LMSA&quot;, meaning &quot;Metropolitan Athletic Sports League&quot;), the organizer of the 1908 Campeonato Carioca. Fluminense won.

===The splits of the league===
The first league split was in 1911 when Botafogo left LMSA and founded &quot;Associação de Football do Rio de Janeiro&quot; (AFRJ - &quot;Rio de Janeiro Football Association&quot;). The league was nicknamed &quot;Liga Barbante&quot; (&quot;String League&quot;), because Botafogo was the only significant club to question the full realisation of the sport under LMSA. AFRJ was incorporated by LMSA in 1913.

In 1917, several accusations of bribery caused LMSA to rebrand as &quot;Liga Metropolitana de Desportos Terrestres&quot; (&quot;Terrestrial Sports Metropolitan League&quot;) (LMDT). Fluminense won the competition of that year.

On March 1, 1924, a second league split occurred, and &quot;Associação Metropolitana de Esportes Athleticos&quot; (&quot;Athletic Sports Metropolitan Association&quot;) was founded. AMEA, founded by the &quot;aristocratic&quot; clubs Flamengo, Fluminense, Botafogo and America, with restrictions on its blacks and lower class citizens to their members. The Confederação Brasileira de Desportos (CBD - &quot;Brazilian Sports Confederation&quot;) remained with AMEA recognizing it as the official league of Rio de Janeiro from 1924 on, and disassociating with LMDT. AMEA&#x27;s competition was won by Fluminense. LMDT&#x27;s (The league was nicknamed Liga Barbante) (String League) competition was won by Vasco da Gama, the only significant club that remained on the old league. In 1925, AMEA rescinded its racial conditions and Vasco left LMDT, while LMDT continued with its minor clubs. Years later, the LMDT championship of 1924 was considered official - but not the following LMDT championships.

===Professional era===
On January 23, 1933, Bangu, Fluminense, Vasco and America founded the first professional league of Rio de Janeiro, &quot;Liga Carioca de Futebol&quot; (LCF) (&quot;Carioca Football League&quot;). The Confederação Brasileira de Desportos was an amateur-only league supported AMEA. For this reason, LCF was nicknamed &quot;pirate league&quot;. In 1934 CBD finally accepted professionalism, but LCF and AMEA did not merge for political reasons. On December 11, 1934, Botafogo, Vasco, Bangu, São Cristóvão, Andaraí, Olaria, Carioca and Madureira founded the professional &quot;Federação Metropolitana de Desportos&quot; (FMD) (&quot;Sports Metropolitan Federation&quot;), replacing AMEA as the official Rio de Janeiro league affiliated to CBD.

In 1937, the Brazilian football clubs were professionalized. On July 29, 1937, FMD and LCF merged, creating &quot;Liga de Football do Rio de Janeiro&quot; (&quot;Rio de Janeiro Football League&quot;), also called LFRJ. In 1941, LFRJ rebranded as Federação Metropolitana de Futebol (FMF) (&quot;Metropolitan Football Federation&quot;). The occasion was celebrated by a friendly match between Vasco da Gama and America that would come to be nicknamed &quot;Clássico da Paz&quot; (&quot;Peace Derby&quot;) for any game played between the two teams.

On April 21, 1960, the Brazilian capital city became Brasília, so, &quot;Federação Metropolitana de Futebol&quot; rebranded as &quot;Federação Carioca de Futebol&quot; (FCF) (&quot;Carioca Football Federation&quot;). América won the state championship of that year.

On March 15, 1975, Rio de Janeiro and Guanabara states merged under the name of Rio de Janeiro.

On September 29, 1978, &quot;Federação de Futebol do Estado do Rio de Janeiro&quot; (&quot;Rio de Janeiro State Football Federation&quot;) (FERJ), was founded, after Guanabara state&#x27;s FCF and Rio de Janeiro state&#x27;s FFD (&quot;Federação Fluminense de Desportos&quot;, or &quot;Fluminense Sports Federation&quot;) fused.

In 1979, there was an extra Campeonato Carioca which also included the countryside state teams, which, until that year, contested the Campeonato Fluminense. This extra competition, known as Primeiro Campeonato Estadual de Profissionais (&quot;First Professionals State Championship&quot;) was won by Flamengo, which was also the champion of the regular competition, but did not count in the overall titles.

In 1996, Taça Cidade Maravilhosa was contested only by clubs from Rio de Janeiro city. This competition was contested by eight teams (America, Bangu, Botafogo, Flamengo, Fluminense, Madureira, Olaria and Vasco da Gama), which played against each other once. Botafogo was the champion, Flamengo being the runner up. In the same year, a state championship was played, won by Flamengo.

==Format==
The competition is usually divided in three stages: the traditional Taça Guanabara, Taça Rio and the Finals.

Taça Guanabara is the first stage of the competition, with the teams divided into two groups. The traditional &quot;big four&quot;, namely, Botafogo, Flamengo, Fluminense and Vasco da Gama are seeded—two teams of the &quot;big four&quot; put into each group. It is possible other teams also be seeded in some ways, but the seeding criteria are not codified in the regulation and has never been publicly available. The teams play one match with each team in their group. The top team in each group plays the second team in the semi-finals; the winners qualify for the final match.

Taça Rio is the second stage of the competition. Teams are divided into the two same groups of Taça Guanabara, but each team plays once against every team from the other group. The top team from each group compete in the semi-finals with the second team from the opposite group, and winners of the semi-finals compete for the Taça Rio.

The winners of Taça Guanabara and Taça Rio compete in the two-legged finals of Campeonato Carioca, with the winner champion.

==Clubs==

2025 First Division

==Champions and top scorers==

Source: RSSSF Brasil

===Amateur era===

===Professional era===
== Titles by team ==
==Participation==

===Most appearances===

Below is the list of clubs that have more appearances in the Campeonato Carioca.

==All-time topscorers==

The 25 top score for team of the history of the Campeonato Carioca, all Brazilian, except the English Henry Welfare:

* 284 goals: Roberto Dinamite (Vasco da Gama)
* 239 goals: Zico (Flamengo)
* 233 goals: Romário (Vasco, Flamengo e Fluminense)
* 197 goals: Ademir de Menezes (Vasco e Fluminense)
* 196 goals: Nilo (Botafogo, Brasil e Fluminense)
* 172 goals: Ladislau (Bangu e Canto do Rio)
* 166 goals: Carvalho Leite (Botafogo)
* 164 goals: Russinho (Andarahy, Vasco e Botafogo)
* 156 goals: Luisinho Lemos (America, Flamengo, Botafogo e Americano)
* 153 goals: Zizinho (Flamengo e Bangu)
* 151 goals: Sylvio Pirillo (Flamengo e Botafogo)
* 149 goals: Quarentinha (Botafogo e Bonsucesso)
* 133 goals: Heleno de Freitas (Botafogo e Vasco)
* 125 goals: Leônidas da Silva (Syrio e Libanez, Bonsucesso, Flamengo e Botafogo)
* 123 goals: Henry Welfare (Fluminense)
* 118 goals: Didi (Madureira, Fluminense e Botafogo)
* 114 goals: Pinga (Vasco)
* 112 goals: Cláudio Adão (Flamengo, Fluminense, Vasco, Bangu, Campo Grande e Volta Redonda)
* 105 goals: Perácio (Botafogo, Flamengo e Canto do Rio)
* 105 goals: Plácido (Bangu e America)
* 102 goals: Orlando Pingo de Ouro (Fluminense e Botafogo)
* 102 goals: Waldo (Fluminense)
* 100 goals: Preguinho (Fluminense)
* 99 goals: Chico (Vasco da Gama) 
* 98 goals: Bebeto (Flamengo, Vasco e Botafogo)
* 96 goals: Hércules (Fluminense)
* Paysandu Cricket Club abandoned football activities in 1914. Nowadays it is called Paissandu Atlético Clube, and it is a social club only.

===Winning managers and captains===

;Professional era

==Annual awards==
The awards are given by the FERJ.

==Best XI of the 21st Century==
On 18 April 2020 distinguished Brazilian newspaper O Globo announced the best XI of the 21st Century via a poll. Romario received most of the votes.
*Goalkeeper: Júlio César
*Defenders: Thiago Silva, Juan, Dedé
*Midfielders: Marcelo, Juninho Pernambucano, Rafinha, Dejan Petković
*Forwards: Romario, Adriano, Edmundo

==See also==
*Campeonato Carioca Série A2
*Taça Guanabara
*Taça Rio
*Copa Rio

==Notes==
==References==

*MÉRCIO, Roberto. &quot;A História dos Campeonatos Cariocas de Futebol&quot;. Rio de Janeiro: Ed. FERJ.

==External links==

*FFERJ Official Website
*League at soccerway.com
*Campeonato Carioca in RSSSF
*Ranking Carioca
*Best Attendances in Campeonato Carioca
*Vital Statistics of the Rio de Janeiro State Main Football Clubs
*Fla-Flu and the Carioca Cup</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q765749" start="4" end="22" title="Campeonato Carioca" label="Campeonato Carioca"/>
<link wikidata="Q765749" start="67" end="104" title="Campeonato Carioca" label="Campeonato Estadual do Rio de Janeiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q765749" start="169" end="177" title="Campeonato Carioca" label="Cariocão"/>
<link wikidata="Q82899" start="210" end="231" title="State football leagues in Brazil" label="state football league"/>
<link wikidata="Q485258" start="249" end="254" title="States of Brazil" label="state"/>
<link wikidata="Q41428" start="258" end="272" title="Rio de Janeiro (state)" label="Rio de Janeiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q614735" start="291" end="331" title="Federação de Futebol do Estado do Rio de Janeiro" label="Rio de Janeiro State Football Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348155" start="439" end="458" title="Campeonato Paulista" label="Campeonato Paulista"/>
<link wikidata="Q175" start="462" end="471" title="São Paulo State" label="São Paulo"/>
<link wikidata="Q604925" start="480" end="497" title="Campeonato Baiano" label="Campeonato Baiano"/>
<link wikidata="Q40430" start="501" end="506" title="Bahia" label="Bahia"/>
<link wikidata="Q80958" start="753" end="761" title="Botafogo de Futebol e Regatas" label="Botafogo"/>
<link wikidata="Q17479" start="763" end="771" title="Clube de Regatas do Flamengo" label="Flamengo"/>
<link wikidata="Q80987" start="773" end="783" title="Fluminense Football Club" label="Fluminense"/>
<link wikidata="Q5014111" start="788" end="801" title="Club de Regatas Vasco da Gama" label="Vasco da Gama"/>
<link wikidata="Q463147" start="886" end="893" title="America Football Club (RJ)" label="America"/>
<link wikidata="Q2708265" start="927" end="940" title="São Cristóvão de Futebol e Regatas" label="São Cristóvão"/>
<link wikidata="Q178725" start="1094" end="1101" title="Niterói" label="Niterói"/>
<link wikidata="Q80987" start="1228" end="1252" title="Fluminense Football Club" label="Fluminense Football Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q788363" start="1266" end="1285" title="Bangu Atlético Clube" label="Bangu Atlético Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q463147" start="1287" end="1308" title="America Football Club (RJ)" label="América Football Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q80958" start="1314" end="1336" title="Botafogo de Futebol e Regatas" label="Botafogo Football Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q3360648" start="1583" end="1605" title="Paissandu Atlético Clube" label="Payssandu Cricket Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="1733" end="1740" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q388315" start="3752" end="3757" title="Afro-Brazilian" label="black"/>
<link wikidata="Q2844" start="5812" end="5820" title="Brasília" label="Brasília"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155409" start="6064" end="6073" title="Guanabara (state)" label="Guanabara"/>
<link wikidata="Q5028282" start="6587" end="6608" title="Campeonato Fluminense" label="Campeonato Fluminense"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6870" end="6893" title="1996 Campeonato Carioca#Taça Cidade Maravilhosa" label="Taça Cidade Maravilhosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2298603" start="7366" end="7380" title="Taça Guanabara" label="Taça Guanabara"/>
<link wikidata="Q80958" start="7506" end="7514" title="Botafogo de Futebol e Regatas" label="Botafogo"/>
<link wikidata="Q17479" start="7516" end="7524" title="Clube de Regatas do Flamengo" label="Flamengo"/>
<link wikidata="Q80987" start="7526" end="7536" title="Fluminense Football Club" label="Fluminense"/>
<link wikidata="Q5014111" start="7541" end="7554" title="Club de Regatas Vasco da Gama" label="Vasco da Gama"/>
<link wikidata="Q2525574" start="7947" end="7955" title="Taça Rio" label="Taça Rio"/>
<link wikidata="Q204960" start="8810" end="8823" title="Henry Welfare" label="Henry Welfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q550019" start="8839" end="8855" title="Roberto Dinamite" label="Roberto Dinamite"/>
<link wikidata="Q47526" start="8885" end="8889" title="Zico (footballer)" label="Zico"/>
<link wikidata="Q178649" start="8914" end="8921" title="Romário" label="Romário"/>
<link wikidata="Q332012" start="8966" end="8983" title="Ademir de Menezes" label="Ademir de Menezes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2538934" start="9018" end="9022" title="Nilo (footballer)" label="Nilo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4139072" start="9068" end="9076" title="Ladislau da Guia" label="Ladislau"/>
<link wikidata="Q261000" start="9113" end="9127" title="Carvalho Leite" label="Carvalho Leite"/>
<link wikidata="Q2538974" start="9152" end="9160" title="Russinho (footballer, born 1902)" label="Russinho"/>
<link wikidata="Q2349358" start="9203" end="9217" title="Luisinho Lemos" label="Luisinho Lemos"/>
<link wikidata="Q207085" start="9273" end="9280" title="Zizinho" label="Zizinho"/>
<link wikidata="Q2629446" start="9313" end="9327" title="Sylvio Pirillo" label="Sylvio Pirillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2604130" start="9363" end="9374" title="Quarentinha" label="Quarentinha"/>
<link wikidata="Q735449" start="9412" end="9429" title="Heleno de Freitas" label="Heleno de Freitas"/>
<link wikidata="Q311739" start="9462" end="9479" title="Leônidas da Silva" label="Leônidas da Silva"/>
<link wikidata="Q204960" start="9544" end="9557" title="Henry Welfare" label="Henry Welfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q312486" start="9584" end="9588" title="Didi (footballer, born 1928)" label="Didi"/>
<link wikidata="Q254747" start="9637" end="9642" title="Pinga (footballer, born 1924)" label="Pinga"/>
<link wikidata="Q2348982" start="9664" end="9676" title="Cláudio Adão" label="Cláudio Adão"/>
<link wikidata="Q660125" start="9757" end="9764" title="José Perácio" label="Perácio"/>
<link wikidata="Q10350586" start="9814" end="9821" title="Plácido Monsores" label="Plácido"/>
<link wikidata="Q4336518" start="9853" end="9874" title="Orlando Pingo de Ouro" label="Orlando Pingo de Ouro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333472" start="9912" end="9917" title="Waldo Machado" label="Waldo"/>
<link wikidata="Q456600" start="9944" end="9953" title="Preguinho" label="Preguinho"/>
<link wikidata="Q927470" start="9979" end="9984" title="Francisco Aramburu" label="Chico"/>
<link wikidata="Q204825" start="10014" end="10020" title="Bebeto" label="Bebeto"/>
<link wikidata="Q2714449" start="10062" end="10070" title="Hércules de Miranda" label="Hércules"/>
<link wikidata="Q614735" start="10328" end="10332" title="Federação de Futebol do Estado do Rio de Janeiro" label="FERJ"/>
<link wikidata="Q970729" start="10418" end="10425" title="O Globo" label="O Globo"/>
<link wikidata="Q178649" start="10480" end="10487" title="Romario" label="Romario"/>
<link wikidata="Q182459" start="10529" end="10540" title="Júlio César (football goalkeeper, born 1979)" label="Júlio César"/>
<link wikidata="Q210453" start="10553" end="10565" title="Thiago Silva" label="Thiago Silva"/>
<link wikidata="Q202429" start="10567" end="10571" title="Juan (footballer, born 1979)" label="Juan"/>
<link wikidata="Q58762" start="10573" end="10577" title="Dedé (footballer, born 1978)" label="Dedé"/>
<link wikidata="Q38136" start="10592" end="10599" title="Marcelo (footballer, born 1988)" label="Marcelo"/>
<link wikidata="Q203451" start="10601" end="10621" title="Juninho Pernambucano" label="Juninho Pernambucano"/>
<link wikidata="Q174926" start="10623" end="10630" title="Rafinha (footballer, born 1985)" label="Rafinha"/>
<link wikidata="Q2015351" start="10632" end="10646" title="Dejan Petković" label="Dejan Petković"/>
<link wikidata="Q178649" start="10658" end="10665" title="Romario" label="Romario"/>
<link wikidata="Q170452" start="10667" end="10674" title="Adriano (footballer, born February 1982)" label="Adriano"/>
<link wikidata="Q445541" start="10676" end="10683" title="Edmundo (footballer)" label="Edmundo"/>
<link wikidata="Q20052961" start="10699" end="10726" title="Campeonato Carioca Série A2" label="Campeonato Carioca Série A2"/>
<link wikidata="Q2298603" start="10728" end="10742" title="Taça Guanabara" label="Taça Guanabara"/>
<link wikidata="Q2525574" start="10744" end="10752" title="Taça Rio" label="Taça Rio"/>
<link wikidata="Q5168218" start="10754" end="10762" title="Copa Rio (state cup)" label="Copa Rio"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1329154" wikidata="Q2919810" url="?curid=1329154" title="Tel Shikmona">
<text>Tel Shikmona (), or Tell es-Samak () also spelt Sycamine, is an ancient Phoenician tell (mound) situated near the sea coast in the modern city of Haifa, Israel, just south of the Israeli National Institute of Oceanography. It has been called a &quot;forgotten Phoenician site&quot;. Nowadays researchers identify Tell es-Samak with Porphyreon (south).

==History==
In the Periplus of Pseudo-Scylax it is mentioned the Sykaminon (Συκάμινον) as a city of the Tyrians, and also that there was a river of the same name. Stephanus of Byzantium called it Sykaminon (Συκαμίνων) and called it a city of the Phoenicians.
Josephus in his &quot;Antiquities&quot; mentions &quot;Sycamine&quot; as being a place where ships could be brought to harbor, and where Ptolemy Lathyrus, during an incursion in the country, had brought his army ashore. Strabo mentions the site (Sycaminopolis, Συκαμίνων πόλις) as being no more than a ruin in his own day. The Mishnah (&quot;Demai&quot; 1:1), compiled in 189 CE, mentions the region of Tell es-Samak as being renowned for its cultivated variety of jujubes. The Bordeaux pilgrim in 333 CE passed through &quot;Sycaminon&quot; while traveling through the Holy Land.

===Archaeology===
====Excavation history====

The main archaeological excavations conducted at the site and in the Byzantine city south of it were carried out by the archaeologist J. Elgavish in the 1960s–70s on behalf of the Department of Museums, Municipality of Haifa.

Salvage excavations were conducted in the 1990s by the Israel Antiquities Authority (IAA) and concentrated in the eastern part of the Byzantine city, west of the Carmel Mountain slopes, where the city&#x27;s necropolis is. In 2010–2011, a new series of excavation seasons was conducted by a team from the Zinman Institute of Archaeology at the University of Haifa, headed by Dr. Michael Eisenberg with Dr. Shay Bar directing the excavations on the tell itself. The goals of the project were to re-expose excavated archaeological complexes south and east of the tell previously excavated by Elgavish, expand those areas and undertake extensive conservation work in order to preserve the antiquities and present them to the public as part of Shikmona Public Park. The work also aimed to study the stratification of the tell and create a precise chronological framework.

====Findings====

The remains on the tell date from the Late Bronze Age to the Late Byzantine period. The lower city, east and mainly south of the tell, is dated to the Late Roman period-Byzantine period. No remains have been found dating to the Early Arab period, leading the archaeologists to conclude that Tell es-Samak was abandoned before the 7th century CE.

Tell es-Samak has yielded various types of sherds, the most common of which belonging to the red-slipped plates and bowls (Eastern &quot;sigillata&quot; A) made on the Phoenician coast during the 1st century CE. In addition, archaeologists discovered evidence for dyeing industry based on the Murex sea snail, also known as Tyrian purple, dating back to the Iron Age. The purple dye extracted from the mollusk was used by the potters of Tell es-Samak to paint pottery. After the discovery, the entire collection of painted pottery underwent a chemical analysis to determine the make-up of the paint, during which time it was confirmed that the color was an authentic purple dye extracted from the Murex sea snail.

Identification

It is agreed among scholars that the site, Tell es-Samak, has no identification so far during the Biblical periods. Latest historical and archaeological research points towards the identification of the site during Hellenistic-Byzantine periods as Porphyreon (south). This new identification fits with the clear Christian remains at the site and the absence of Jewish ones as should be expected from Tell es-Samak.

==Nature reserve and national park==
Tell es-Samak was declared a 1677-dunam nature reserve in 2008. A small area (73 dunams) was declared a national park, as well.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2919810" start="0" end="12" title="Tel Shikmona" label="Tel Shikmona"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919810" start="20" end="33" title="Tel Shikmona" label="Tell es-Samak"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919810" start="48" end="56" title="Tel Shikmona" label="Sycamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q755017" start="83" end="87" title="Tell (archaeology)" label="tell"/>
<link wikidata="Q93352" start="114" end="123" title="coast" label="sea coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q41621" start="146" end="151" title="Haifa" label="Haifa"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="153" end="159" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="179" end="221" title="Israeli National Institute of Oceanography" label="Israeli National Institute of Oceanography"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780915" start="372" end="397" title="Periplus of Pseudo-Scylax" label="Periplus of Pseudo-Scylax"/>
<link wikidata="Q82070" start="457" end="464" title="Tyrians" label="Tyrians"/>
<link wikidata="Q380881" start="516" end="538" title="Stephanus of Byzantium" label="Stephanus of Byzantium"/>
<link wikidata="Q41642" start="599" end="610" title="Phoenicians" label="Phoenicians"/>
<link wikidata="Q134461" start="612" end="620" title="Josephus" label="Josephus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1232616" start="634" end="645" title="Antiquities of the Jews" label="Antiquities"/>
<link wikidata="Q3340" start="749" end="765" title="Ptolemy Lathyrus" label="Ptolemy Lathyrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q45936" start="832" end="838" title="Strabo" label="Strabo"/>
<link wikidata="Q191825" start="939" end="946" title="Mishnah" label="Mishnah"/>
<link wikidata="Q208141" start="988" end="990" title="Common Era" label="CE"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920458" start="1077" end="1084" title="Ziziphus spina-christi" label="jujubes"/>
<link wikidata="Q776772" start="1090" end="1106" title="Bordeaux itinerary" label="Bordeaux pilgrim"/>
<link wikidata="Q2744135" start="1522" end="1550" title="Israel Antiquities Authority" label="Israel Antiquities Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q591115" start="1811" end="1830" title="University of Haifa" label="University of Haifa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2207" end="2227" title="Shikmona Public Park" label="Shikmona Public Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="2397" end="2407" title="Bronze Age" label="Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2415" end="2436" title="History of Israel#Byzantine period (390–634)" label="Late Byzantine period"/>
<link wikidata="Q3109175" start="2744" end="2750" title="sherds" label="sherds"/>
<link wikidata="Q5330618" start="2824" end="2855" title="Eastern sigillata A" label="Eastern &amp;quot;sigillata&amp;quot; A"/>
<link wikidata="Q41642" start="2869" end="2878" title="Phoenicia" label="Phoenicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q311512" start="2994" end="2999" title="Murex" label="Murex"/>
<link wikidata="Q381180" start="3000" end="3009" title="sea snail" label="sea snail"/>
<link wikidata="Q5180360" start="3025" end="3038" title="Tyrian purple" label="Tyrian purple"/>
<link wikidata="Q11764" start="3059" end="3067" title="Iron Age" label="Iron Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q25326" start="3103" end="3110" title="Mollusca" label="mollusk"/>
<link wikidata="Q216795" start="3919" end="3924" title="dunam" label="dunam"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1329157" wikidata="Q3110641" url="?curid=1329157" title="Gonzalo de Céspedes y Meneses">
<text>Gonzalo de Céspedes y Meneses (c. 1585January 27, 1638) was a Spanish novelist.

==Biography==
He was born at Madrid about 1585. Nothing positive is known of him before the publication of his celebrated romance, the &quot;Poema trágico del español Gerardo, y desengaño del amor lascivo&quot; (1615-1617). There is evidence that he had been sentenced to eight years at the galleys previous to January 1, 1620, and that the penalty had been remitted; but the nature of his offense is not stated. His treatment of political questions in the &quot;Historia apologética en los sucesos del reyno de Aragon, y su ciudad de Zaragoza, años de 91 y 92&quot; (1622), has led to the confiscation of the book, Céspedes took up his residence at Zaragoza and Lisbon.

While in exile he issued a collection of six short stories entitled &quot;Historias peregrinas y exemplares&quot; (1623), the unfinished romance &quot;Varia fortuna del soldado Píndaro&quot; (1626), and the first part of his &quot;Historia de Felipe IV.&quot; (1631), a fulsome eulogy which was rewarded by the author&#x27;s appointment as official historiographer to the Spanish king.

His novels, though written in a ponderous, affected style, display considerable imagination and insight into character. The &quot;Poema trágico&quot; has been utilized by John Fletcher in &quot;The Spanish Curate&quot; and in &quot;The Maid of the Mill&quot;.

The &quot;Historias peregrinas&quot; has been reprinted (1906) with a valuable introduction by Emilio Cotarelo y Mori.

==Notes==
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3110641" start="0" end="29" title="Gonzalo de Céspedes y Meneses" label="Gonzalo de Céspedes y Meneses"/>
<link wikidata="Q6625963" start="70" end="78" title="novelist" label="novelist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2807" start="110" end="116" title="Madrid" label="Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q10305" start="731" end="739" title="Zaragoza" label="Zaragoza"/>
<link wikidata="Q597" start="744" end="750" title="Lisbon" label="Lisbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q312444" start="1311" end="1324" title="John Fletcher (playwright)" label="John Fletcher"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1329159" wikidata="Q3259055" url="?curid=1329159" title="Long drive">
<text>Long drive is a sport where players compete to hit or drive a golf ball the farthest. Top long drivers compete professionally in events and exhibitions.

==Distance==
Professional long drivers can average over in competition, compared with averages from the top PGA Tour drivers and for an average amateur. Some shots in competitions surpass .

The world record recognized by Guinness World Records as the longest drive in a competition is by 64-year-old Mike Austin in 1974 at the US Senior National Open Qualifier with a 43.5&quot; steel shafted persimmon wood driver. The record distance achieved in the European Long Drive Championship is by Allen Doyle in September 2005. The record distance achieved in the South African Long Drive Championship is by Nico Grobbelaar in September 2012.

Fast swingers can swing their club heads at over , well beyond the average for an amateur. Competitors train for strength, flexibility, and speed and often perform corporate exhibitions for money, exhibiting a variety of trick shots. Ball speeds are nearly double that of an average golfer (220 mph).

Jason Zuback is perhaps the best known competitor in long drive. He is one of six people to win multiple World Long Drive Championships, with four consecutive wins from 1996 to 1999 and a fifth win in 2006; the other multiple champions are Sean Fister (1995, 2001, and 2005), Jamie Sadlowski (2008 and 2009), Joe Miller (2010 and 2016), Tim Burke (2013 and 2015) and Kyle Berkshire (2019 and 2021).

==Equipment==
Long drive clubs, which are always drivers, differ in several ways from consumer clubs. Until the recent club length limitation rules, the shafts were much longer than a normal shaft, sometimes exceeding . In 2005, a limitation was introduced (measured vertically). Long drive shafts differ from standard shafts. The main difference is greater stiffness, as a flexible shaft will lag in an inconsistent manner, causing a loss of control. These shafts are almost always made of graphite, which is lighter than steel. In order to be stiff, a shaft is usually heavier and stronger than consumer clubs. The &#x27;kick point&#x27; or &#x27;bend point&#x27; is also higher for a lower trajectory relative to the swing, while shaft have a lower torque, meaning that long drive clubs will not twist as much, allowing the club-head to stay straighter. In November 2016, to align them with the standard rules of golf, the World Long Drive Association further-reduced the length limitation to —the maximum length allowed by the USGA.

Club-heads usually approach the 460 cubic centimeter limit, rarely below 400 cc. They must stay within the coefficient of restitution (COR) limit of 0.83, which measures how a ball hits off the surface. Most club-heads only approach the COR in the center of the club, so technology has allowed more area of the club to possess a COR of above 0.80. Thus, mishits are less affected by the newer clubheads. The loft of a long drive club is also much lower than a consumer club, sometimes around 4 or 5 degrees, as opposed to 10.5 degrees for an amateur&#x27;s driver. The reason for lower lofted driver heads is to greatly reduce back spin. Too much back spin causes the ball to balloon or climb, creating a steep landing angle which does not allow the ball roll out. A flatter landing angle is desired to get the most out of the ball&#x27;s forward velocity and energy.

Many competitions require golfers to use a specification ball for the tournament. The specific design characteristics of this ball include a dimple design that helps to maintain lower spin rates and a ball compression of 110. The average ball compression in golf varies from the mid-70s to the upper 80s.

==Notable long drivers==
*Martin Borgmeier, WLD World Champion 2022
*Kyle Berkshire, World Long Drive Champion - 2019 &amp; 2021
* Maurice Allen, World Long Drive Champion - 2018
*Justin James, World Long Drive Champion - 2017 - Ranking #1 in the World was maintained until June 2019
*Joe Miller, World Long Drive Champion 2010 &amp; 2016
*Tim Burke, World Long Drive Champion - 2013 &amp; 2015
*David Mobley, World Long Drive Champion – 2004 – Ranked #1 in the World by Long Drivers of America in 2003, 2004, and 2005
* Mike Austin, He was credited by Guinness World Records with hitting the longest drive in tournament play (471m/515 yards) in 1974
* Sean Fister (&quot;The Beast&quot;), World Long Drive Champion 1995, 2001, 2005.
* Monte Scheinblum, 1992 U.S. National and World Long Drive Champion.
* Jason Zuback (&quot;Golfzilla&quot;), World Long Drive Champion 1996, 1997, 1998, 1999, 2006. Seniors World Long Drive Champion 2015.
* Sandra Carlborg, Ladies Division WR holder 391, Yards World Long Drive Champion 2011, 2012, 2014, 2015,2017
*Phillis Meti 2006, 2016 2018 2022 &amp; 2024 Women&#x27;s World Long Drive Champion. WR for women&#x27;s longest drive 413 yards and being the youngest female World Champion 19 years, 2 months. Hit 349 yards on the WLD grid in 2008 Mesquite NV and 382 yards on WLD grid 2023 in Atlanta GA.

==References==

https://www.golfdigest.com/story/can-kyle-berkshire-world-long-drive-champ-make-it-to-pga-tour</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3259055" start="0" end="10" title="Long drive" label="Long drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q5307897" start="54" end="59" title="Drive (golf)" label="drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q919777" start="62" end="71" title="golf ball" label="golf ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q910409" start="262" end="270" title="PGA Tour" label="PGA Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q41675" start="376" end="398" title="Guinness World Records" label="Guinness World Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q686668" start="455" end="466" title="Mike Austin (golfer)" label="Mike Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q110327443" start="1095" end="1107" title="Jason Zuback" label="Jason Zuback"/>
<link wikidata="Q7276263" start="1200" end="1229" title="World Long Drive Championship" label="World Long Drive Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q24049037" start="1335" end="1346" title="Sean Fister" label="Sean Fister"/>
<link wikidata="Q6147419" start="1371" end="1386" title="Jamie Sadlowski" label="Jamie Sadlowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q6211366" start="1404" end="1414" title="Joe Miller (golfer)" label="Joe Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q62072786" start="1432" end="1441" title="Tim Burke (golfer)" label="Tim Burke"/>
<link wikidata="Q61995772" start="1462" end="1476" title="Kyle Berkshire" label="Kyle Berkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q193139" start="2188" end="2198" title="trajectory" label="trajectory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2468638" start="2402" end="2415" title="rules of golf" label="rules of golf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187243" start="2526" end="2530" title="USGA" label="USGA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143011" start="2640" end="2666" title="coefficient of restitution" label="coefficient of restitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q61995772" start="3777" end="3791" title="Kyle Berkshire" label="Kyle Berkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q62127568" start="3839" end="3852" title="Maurice Allen (golfer)" label="Maurice Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q62267916" start="3888" end="3900" title="Justin James (golfer)" label="Justin James"/>
<link wikidata="Q6211366" start="3993" end="4003" title="Joe Miller (golfer)" label="Joe Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q62072786" start="4048" end="4057" title="Tim Burke (golfer)" label="Tim Burke"/>
<link wikidata="Q20707031" start="4104" end="4116" title="David Mobley (golfer)" label="David Mobley"/>
<link wikidata="Q686668" start="4229" end="4240" title="Mike Austin (golfer)" label="Mike Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q24049037" start="4361" end="4372" title="Sean Fister" label="Sean Fister"/>
<link wikidata="Q16197217" start="4444" end="4460" title="Monte Scheinblum" label="Monte Scheinblum"/>
<link wikidata="Q61987069" start="4650" end="4665" title="Sandra Carlborg" label="Sandra Carlborg"/>
<link wikidata="Q35953207" start="4759" end="4771" title="Phillis Meti" label="Phillis Meti"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1329163" wikidata="Q2629760" url="?curid=1329163" title="Analog stick">
<text>An analog stick (analogue stick in British English), also known as control stick, thumbstick or joystick, is an input device for a controller (often a game controller) that is used for two-dimensional input. An analog stick is a variation of a joystick, consisting of a protrusion from the controller; input is based on the position of this protrusion in relation to the default &quot;center&quot; position. While digital sticks rely on single electrical connections for movement (using internal digital electrical contacts for up, down, left and right), analog sticks use continuous electrical activity running through potentiometers to measure the exact position of the stick within its full range of motion. The analog stick has greatly overtaken the D-pad in both prominence and usage in console video games.

==Usage in video games==
The initial prevalence of analog sticks was as peripherals for flight simulator games, to better reflect the subtleties of control required for such titles. It was during the fifth console generation that Nintendo announced it would integrate an analog stick into its iconic Nintendo 64 controller, a step which would pave the way for subsequent leading console manufacturers to follow suit.

An analog stick is often used to move some game object, usually the playable character. It may also be used to rotate the camera, usually around the character. The analog stick can serve a great variety of other functions, depending on the game. Today many analog sticks can also be pushed in like conventional face buttons of a controller, to allow for more functions. With the prevalence of analog sticks, the aforementioned limitations of the D-pad ceased to be an issue.

===Dual analog sticks===
Two analog sticks offer greater functionality than a single stick. On some modern game controllers, the analog sticks are &quot;staggered&quot;, such that the left stick is positioned to the upper left of the D-pad while the right stick is positioned to the lower left of the face buttons. The controllers of all of Microsoft&#x27;s Xbox consoles (Xbox controller, Xbox 360 controller and Xbox Wireless Controller), as well as controllers for Nintendo&#x27;s GameCube and Switch (GameCube controller, the dual Joy-Con Comfort Grip and the Nintendo Switch Pro Controller), utilize a staggered analog stick layout. 

Other controllers instead have the two analog sticks in a symmetrical configuration with a D-pad on the left thumb position and face buttons at the right thumb position, with analog sticks below and closer to the center on both sides. Sony&#x27;s PlayStation-series analog controllers—the Dual Analog Controller, DualShock, DualShock 2, Sixaxis, DualShock 3, DualShock 4 and DualSense—all use this configuration, with the remainder of the controller layout closely resembling the original digital PlayStation controller. The Classic Controller for the Wii also uses this configuration. The original configuration of the Wii U GamePad controller had twin analog &quot;Circle Pads&quot; positioned symmetrically above the D-pad and face buttons, but was reconfigured to have twin clickable analog sticks several months ahead of the system&#x27;s planned launch. This setup also carried over to the Wii U Pro Controller.

With genres such as action, adventure games, platforming, and shooting, the left stick normally controls the character&#x27;s movement while the second stick controls the camera. The use of a second analog stick alleviated problems in many earlier platform games, in which the camera was notorious for bad positioning. The right stick not only allows for camera control in third-person games, but is almost essential for most modern first-person shooters such as &quot;Halo&quot;, where it controls the player&#x27;s gaze and aim, as opposed to the left stick, which controls where the player moves. In Namco&#x27;s &quot;Katamari Damacy&quot; and its sequels, both analog sticks are used at once to control the player&#x27;s character.

In spite of widespread adoption of dual analog sticks, a few modern video game systems are designed without a second analog stick, namely the Wii&#x27;s standard controller (whose lone analog stick is implemented in the Wii Remote&#x27;s Nunchuk attachment), Sony&#x27;s PSP and Nintendo&#x27;s 3DS. While the Wii&#x27;s abovementioned supplemental Classic Controller accessory and its initial backwards compatibility support of the GameCube controller allow for dual-stick control schemes in certain games, the PSP&#x27;s complete lack of a second analog stick and later the 3DS&#x27; initial lack of such feature have been criticized. Nintendo has since released an add-on for the 3DS that adds, among other things, a second analog &quot;circle pad&quot;. The follow-up to the PSP, the PlayStation Vita, features dual analog sticks. It is the first handheld game console to do so. The New Nintendo 3DS line of systems added a second analog controller, known as the &quot;C-Stick&quot; to the right side of the device.

===Neutral position and drifting===
To operate properly, an analog stick must establish a neutral position, a special, unique position which the stick must maintain that the controller would interpret as an intentional cessation or absence of in-game movement. Ideally, this would be the stick&#x27;s very center when it is not touched or moved. Whenever the controller is activated or the system it is connected to is powered on, the current position of its analog stick(s) become the established neutral position. If the analog stick is moved away from its center during a time while it is established, the neutral position would shift to some place away from the center of the stick, causing the controller to interpret the center motionless position of the stick as in-game movement, since it is not the neutral position as it should be. This phenomenon, commonly called &quot;drifting&quot;, causes undesired gameplay effects, depending on the current game&#x27;s controls, such as constant movement of the player character in a single direction or the game camera being skewed towards one particular angle while the affected stick is unmoved, and can only be corrected by performing particular actions that would restore the affected analog stick&#x27;s neutral position back to the center of the analog stick. For Nintendo controllers with analog sticks, this would involve holding down a certain combination of buttons while the affected analog sticks are untouched.

==History==
===Analog joysticks===
Shortly after the introduction of the first microcomputers, Cromemco introduced a S-100 bus card containing an analog-to-digital converter, and shortly after, a card with two of these and an associated analog joystick, the JS-1. This is the first known example of such a device for personal use.

The first consumer games console which had analog joysticks was the Prinztronic/Acetronic/Interton series, launched in 1978. This system was widely cloned throughout Europe and available under several brand names. The 2 sticks each used a pair of potentiometers, they were not self-centering in most models but some, such as those of the Interton VC4000 models did self-center.

When the Apple II was released, it shipped with an analog paddle controller as a standard input, but these failed to meet FCC emissions guidelines and Apple Inc. was forced to stop selling them. This left hundreds of games unable to be used, and this problem was quickly rectified by 3rd party suppliers. Not long after, these same companies began producing analog joysticks for the system, but these took some time to become popular.

In 1982, Atari released a controller with a potentiometer-based analog joystick for their Atari 5200 home console. However, its non-centering joystick design proved to be ungainly and unreliable due to the filing, alienating many consumers at the time. During that same year, General Consumer Electronics introduced the Vectrex, a vector graphics based system which used a self-centering analog thumbstick.

In 1985, Sega&#x27;s third-person rail shooter game &quot;Space Harrier&quot;, released for the arcades, introduced an analog flight stick for movement. It could register movement in any direction as well as measure the degree of push, which could move the player character at different speeds depending on how far the joystick is pushed in a certain direction.

Sega&#x27;s analog Mission Stick was released for the Saturn console on September 29, 1995. On April 26, 1996, Sony released a potentiometer-based analog joystick for use in Flight-Simulation games. The Sony Dual Analog FlightStick featured twin analog sticks and was used in games such as &quot;Descent&quot; to provide a much greater degree of freedom than the typical digital joysticks of the day.

===Analog thumbsticks===
The NES Max, released in 1988, is the first instance of a thumb pad-based joystick controller. The Quickshot Chimera 2 is another example of an early thumbstick controller available to the NES.

In 1989, the Japanese company Dempa released an analog thumbstick controller called the XE-1 AP for the Sega Genesis console and several Japanese computers. It was intended to replicate the HOTAS controls found in Sega’s arcade games at the time, such as After Burner II. This controller included a thumb-operated control stick which allowed for varying levels of movement and near-360-degree control, translating into far more precise movements than what is possible with a D-pad. It was released twice, with a price drop upon its re-release in 1994. A few games on the Genesis (as well as the Sega CD and 32X add-ons) supported the controller’s analog stick functions, including some of Sega’s first-party games for the system.
Initially announced in late 1995, Nintendo released their Nintendo 64 controller on June 23, 1996, in Japan. The new controller included a thumb-operated control stick which, while a digital stick (the analog stick operated on the same principles as a mechanical ball-type computer mouse), still allowed for varying levels of movement and near-360-degree control, translating into far more precise movements than were possible with a D-pad. For three generations, Nintendo&#x27;s control stick was distinguished from analog sticks used in other major consoles by its surrounding octagonal area of freedom that assisted players in perfectly aligning the stick with any of the eight directions achievable with a D-pad. Nintendo would eventually change this octagonal area to the circle widely used in other console controllers during the eighth generation starting with the Nintendo 3DS and Wii U.

On July 5, 1996, Sega released &quot;Nights into Dreams&quot; for their Saturn console in Japan; bundled with it was the Saturn 3D control pad which featured an analog pad intended to give the player more fluid control over that game&#x27;s flight-based gameplay. The analog pad used magnet-based Hall effect sensors, which was a unique implementation of the technology that was carried forward into the design of the Dreamcast controller as well. The Saturn&#x27;s analog controller was previously mentioned in the June 1996 issue of &quot;Computer and Video Games&quot; magazine.

On April 25, 1997, Sony introduced the world&#x27;s first dual stick controller for its game console, PlayStation. Based on the same potentiometer technology that was used in the larger Dual Analog Flightstick, the Sony Dual Analog Controller featured rumble (removed in overseas versions), three modes of analog (Flightstick, Full Analog and Analog-Off), and dual plastic concave thumbsticks. It also added two new buttons, L3 and R3, under the thumbsticks, which could be used by pressing down on the sticks.

On November 20, 1997, Sony released their third analog controller to the market: the DualShock. The controller featured similar twin analog sticks to the Dual Analog, although they featured convex rubber tips rather than concave plastic ones. It also removed the third analog (Flightstick) mode and added two rumble motors.

In 1999, Sony&#x27;s &quot;Ape Escape&quot; became the first video game in history to require the use of two analog sticks.

In the console generations that followed, many video game console controllers have included two analog sticks, with the exception of the Sega Dreamcast controller and Nintendo&#x27;s Wii Remote controller. Other exceptions to this dual-stick rule are Sony&#x27;s PlayStation Portable and Nintendo&#x27;s 3DS handheld game consoles aside from the New 3DS (although the former may be upgraded to dual-stick functionality through the use of an accessory), which both feature only a single small, flat sliding analog &quot;nub&quot;.

==See also==
*D-pad
*Wired glove

==References==
== External links ==
&quot;How Stuff Works&quot; articles on:
* Nintendo 64 control pad
* Dreamcast control pad
* PlayStation 2 control pad (Dual Shock 2)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2629760" start="3" end="15" title="Analog stick" label="analog stick"/>
<link wikidata="Q2629760" start="17" end="31" title="Analog stick" label="analogue stick"/>
<link wikidata="Q2629760" start="67" end="80" title="Analog stick" label="control stick"/>
<link wikidata="Q2629760" start="82" end="92" title="Analog stick" label="thumbstick"/>
<link wikidata="Q2629760" start="96" end="104" title="Analog stick" label="joystick"/>
<link wikidata="Q865422" start="151" end="166" title="game controller" label="game controller"/>
<link wikidata="Q178805" start="244" end="252" title="joystick" label="joystick"/>
<link wikidata="Q187868" start="620" end="633" title="potentiometer" label="potentiometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2445850" start="754" end="759" title="D-pad" label="D-pad"/>
<link wikidata="Q6561427" start="792" end="810" title="console video game" label="console video game"/>
<link wikidata="Q214932" start="902" end="918" title="flight simulator" label="flight simulator"/>
<link wikidata="Q8093" start="1044" end="1052" title="Nintendo" label="Nintendo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7039136" start="1114" end="1136" title="Nintendo 64 controller" label="Nintendo 64 controller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062345" start="1300" end="1318" title="Player character" label="playable character"/>
<link wikidata="Q3561045" start="1354" end="1360" title="Virtual camera system" label="camera"/>
<link wikidata="Q865422" start="1815" end="1831" title="game controllers" label="game controllers"/>
<link wikidata="Q73801" start="2049" end="2058" title="Xbox Game Studios" label="Microsoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q15281614" start="2066" end="2070" title="Xbox" label="Xbox"/>
<link wikidata="Q8043359" start="2081" end="2096" title="Xbox controller" label="Xbox controller"/>
<link wikidata="Q4817881" start="2098" end="2117" title="Xbox 360 controller" label="Xbox 360 controller"/>
<link wikidata="Q17048760" start="2122" end="2146" title="Xbox Wireless Controller" label="Xbox Wireless Controller"/>
<link wikidata="Q8093" start="2176" end="2184" title="Nintendo" label="Nintendo"/>
<link wikidata="Q182172" start="2192" end="2200" title="GameCube" label="GameCube"/>
<link wikidata="Q19610114" start="2205" end="2211" title="Nintendo Switch" label="Switch"/>
<link wikidata="Q4231718" start="2213" end="2232" title="GameCube controller" label="GameCube controller"/>
<link wikidata="Q28677656" start="2243" end="2250" title="Joy-Con" label="Joy-Con"/>
<link wikidata="Q30917688" start="2272" end="2302" title="Nintendo Switch Pro Controller" label="Nintendo Switch Pro Controller"/>
<link wikidata="Q18594" start="2583" end="2587" title="Sony Interactive Entertainment" label="Sony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323662" start="2595" end="2606" title="PlayStation" label="PlayStation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132745" start="2637" end="2659" title="Dual Analog Controller" label="Dual Analog Controller"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2661" end="2670" title="DualShock#DualShock" label="DualShock"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2672" end="2683" title="DualShock#DualShock 2" label="DualShock 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q3485682" start="2685" end="2692" title="Sixaxis" label="Sixaxis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2694" end="2705" title="DualShock#DualShock 3" label="DualShock 3"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2707" end="2718" title="DualShock#DualShock 4" label="DualShock 4"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2723" end="2732" title="DualShock#DualSense" label="DualSense"/>
<link wikidata="Q3689266" start="2845" end="2867" title="PlayStation controller" label="PlayStation controller"/>
<link wikidata="Q2573628" start="2873" end="2891" title="Classic Controller" label="Classic Controller"/>
<link wikidata="Q8079" start="2900" end="2903" title="Wii" label="Wii"/>
<link wikidata="Q611619" start="2968" end="2981" title="Wii U GamePad" label="Wii U GamePad"/>
<link wikidata="Q4019736" start="3244" end="3264" title="Wii U Pro Controller" label="Wii U Pro Controller"/>
<link wikidata="Q270948" start="3287" end="3293" title="action game" label="action"/>
<link wikidata="Q23916" start="3295" end="3309" title="adventure game" label="adventure game"/>
<link wikidata="Q828322" start="3312" end="3323" title="platform game" label="platforming"/>
<link wikidata="Q4282636" start="3329" end="3337" title="shooter game" label="shooting"/>
<link wikidata="Q185029" start="3700" end="3721" title="first-person shooters" label="first-person shooters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747150" start="3736" end="3740" title="Halo (video game series)" label="Halo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206519" start="3889" end="3904" title="Katamari Damacy" label="Katamari Damacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q56898" start="4225" end="4235" title="Wii Remote" label="Wii Remote"/>
<link wikidata="Q56898" start="4243" end="4250" title="Wii Nunchuk" label="Nunchuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q170325" start="4276" end="4279" title="PlayStation Portable" label="PSP"/>
<link wikidata="Q203597" start="4300" end="4303" title="Nintendo 3DS" label="3DS"/>
<link wikidata="Q844605" start="4399" end="4422" title="backwards compatibility" label="backwards compatibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q6604113" start="4458" end="4511" title="List of Wii games with traditional control schemes" label="allow for dual-stick control schemes in certain games"/>
<link wikidata="Q188808" start="4793" end="4809" title="PlayStation Vita" label="PlayStation Vita"/>
<link wikidata="Q17679679" start="4892" end="4908" title="New Nintendo 3DS" label="New Nintendo 3DS"/>
<link wikidata="Q32738" start="6581" end="6594" title="microcomputer" label="microcomputer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140841" start="6597" end="6605" title="Cromemco" label="Cromemco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546156" start="6619" end="6628" title="S-100 bus" label="S-100 bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q190169" start="6648" end="6675" title="analog-to-digital converter" label="analog-to-digital converter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2037599" start="6902" end="6939" title="1292 Advanced Programmable Video System" label="Prinztronic/Acetronic/Interton series"/>
<link wikidata="Q201652" start="7222" end="7230" title="Apple II" label="Apple II"/>
<link wikidata="Q449573" start="7271" end="7288" title="Paddle (game controller)" label="paddle controller"/>
<link wikidata="Q128831" start="7335" end="7338" title="Federal Communications Commission" label="FCC"/>
<link wikidata="Q312" start="7364" end="7374" title="Apple Inc." label="Apple Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q207922" start="7658" end="7663" title="Atari" label="Atari"/>
<link wikidata="Q743222" start="7739" end="7749" title="Atari 5200" label="Atari 5200"/>
<link wikidata="Q767631" start="7969" end="7976" title="Vectrex" label="Vectrex"/>
<link wikidata="Q170130" start="7980" end="7995" title="vector graphics" label="vector graphics"/>
<link wikidata="Q122741" start="8066" end="8070" title="Sega" label="Sega"/>
<link wikidata="Q380266" start="8078" end="8090" title="Third-person shooter" label="third-person"/>
<link wikidata="Q2127647" start="8091" end="8103" title="rail shooter" label="rail shooter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1707792" start="8115" end="8128" title="Space Harrier" label="Space Harrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q113726751" start="8153" end="8160" title="Arcade game" label="arcades"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062345" start="8314" end="8330" title="player character" label="player character"/>
<link wikidata="Q200912" start="8474" end="8480" title="Sega Saturn" label="Saturn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7202963" start="8640" end="8651" title="Sony Flightstick" label="FlightStick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200546" start="8716" end="8723" title="Descent (video game)" label="Descent"/>
<link wikidata="Q3245625" start="8851" end="8858" title="List of Nintendo Entertainment System accessories" label="NES Max"/>
<link wikidata="Q10676" start="9146" end="9158" title="Sega Genesis" label="Sega Genesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q633320" start="9232" end="9237" title="HOTAS" label="HOTAS"/>
<link wikidata="Q388929" start="9297" end="9312" title="After Burner II" label="After Burner II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047516" start="9637" end="9644" title="Sega CD" label="Sega CD"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063978" start="9649" end="9652" title="32X" label="32X"/>
<link wikidata="Q8093" start="9806" end="9814" title="Nintendo" label="Nintendo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7039136" start="9830" end="9852" title="Nintendo 64 controller" label="Nintendo 64 controller"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10024" end="10059" title="Computer mouse#Mechanical mice" label="mechanical ball-type computer mouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q166080" start="10351" end="10360" title="octagonal" label="octagonal"/>
<link wikidata="Q129459" start="10608" end="10625" title="eighth generation of video game consoles" label="eighth generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q56942" start="10661" end="10666" title="Wii U" label="Wii U"/>
<link wikidata="Q122741" start="10686" end="10690" title="Sega" label="Sega"/>
<link wikidata="Q1855957" start="10706" end="10724" title="Nights into Dreams" label="Nights into Dreams"/>
<link wikidata="Q200912" start="10741" end="10747" title="Sega Saturn" label="Saturn"/>
<link wikidata="Q206021" start="10910" end="10916" title="flight" label="flight"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431247" start="10966" end="10984" title="Hall effect sensor" label="Hall effect sensor"/>
<link wikidata="Q184198" start="11087" end="11096" title="Dreamcast" label="Dreamcast"/>
<link wikidata="Q277666" start="11210" end="11234" title="Computer and Video Games" label="Computer and Video Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q41187" start="11271" end="11275" title="Sony" label="Sony"/>
<link wikidata="Q10677" start="11354" end="11365" title="PlayStation (console)" label="PlayStation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132745" start="11472" end="11494" title="Dual Analog Controller" label="Dual Analog Controller"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11849" end="11858" title="DualShock#DualShock" label="DualShock"/>
<link wikidata="Q960773" start="12116" end="12126" title="Ape Escape (video game)" label="Ape Escape"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12246" end="12254" title="History of video games#Sixth generation consoles (since 1998)" label="followed"/>
<link wikidata="Q8076" start="12261" end="12279" title="video game console" label="video game console"/>
<link wikidata="Q865422" start="12280" end="12291" title="game controllers" label="controllers"/>
<link wikidata="Q184198" start="12356" end="12365" title="Dreamcast" label="Dreamcast"/>
<link wikidata="Q8093" start="12381" end="12389" title="Nintendo" label="Nintendo"/>
<link wikidata="Q56898" start="12397" end="12407" title="Wii Remote" label="Wii Remote"/>
<link wikidata="Q170325" start="12477" end="12497" title="PlayStation Portable" label="PlayStation Portable"/>
<link wikidata="Q8093" start="12502" end="12510" title="Nintendo" label="Nintendo"/>
<link wikidata="Q203597" start="12518" end="12521" title="Nintendo 3DS" label="3DS"/>
<link wikidata="Q941818" start="12522" end="12544" title="handheld game consoles" label="handheld game consoles"/>
<link wikidata="Q17679679" start="12560" end="12567" title="New Nintendo 3DS" label="New 3DS"/>
<link wikidata="Q2445850" start="12759" end="12764" title="D-pad" label="D-pad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172433" start="12766" end="12777" title="Wired glove" label="Wired glove"/>
<link wikidata="Q2720134" start="12821" end="12836" title="How Stuff Works" label="How Stuff Works"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1329166" wikidata="Q1037072" url="?curid=1329166" title="Crusade (disambiguation)">
<text>The [[Crusades]] were a series of religious wars sanctioned by the Latin Church in the medieval period.

Crusade or Crusades may also refer to:

== Arts and entertainment==

=== Comics ===
* &quot;Crusade&quot;, a Franco-Belgian comics series published by Le Lombard
* &quot;The Crusades&quot; (comics), a series of American comic books
* Crusade Comics, publisher founded by Billy Tucci

=== Films ===
* &quot;The Crusaders&quot; (1918 film), an Italian film
* &quot;The Crusades&quot; (1935 film), a 1935 film directed by Cecil B. DeMille
* &quot;The Crusaders&quot; (2001 film), an Italian television mini-series
* &quot;The Crusade&quot; (2021 film), a French drama film
* &quot;The Crusades&quot; (2023 film), an American comedy drama film

=== Games ===
* &quot;Darkness Falls: The Crusade&quot;, a 1999 internet MUD
* &quot;Great Crusade&quot;, an episode in &quot;Warhammer 40,000&quot; fictional history
* &quot;Knights of the Temple: Infernal Crusade&quot;, a 2004 videogame
* &quot;Space Crusade&quot;, a boardgame set in the Warhammer 40,000 universe
* &quot;Warhammer 40,000: Dawn of War – Dark Crusade&quot;, a computer game expansion pack
* &quot;Wing Commander: The Secret Missions 2: Crusade&quot;, a computer game expansion pack
* &quot;World of Warcraft: The Burning Crusade&quot;, a 2007 computer game expansion pack

===Literature===
* &quot;Crusade&quot; (Anderson novel), the second book of the Destroyermen series by Taylor Anderson
* &quot;Crusade&quot; (Lowder novel), a novel by James Lowder
* &quot;Crusade&quot; (Laird novel), a 2007 historical novel by Elizabeth Laird
* &quot;Crusade&quot; (short story), a 1968 Arthur C. Clarke short story
* &quot;Crusade&quot; (Young novel), a 2007 novel by Robyn Young
* &quot;Crusade&quot;, a 2003 novel from the Aquasilva Trilogy, by Anselm Audley
* &quot;Crusade&quot;, a young-adult series by Nancy Holder and Debbie Viguié
* &quot;Crusade&quot;, a 1992 Starfire novel by David Weber and Steve White
* &quot;Crusade, The Untold Story of the Persian Gulf War&quot; (1993), a book by Rick Atkinson 
* &quot;The Crusade&quot;, novelization of the TV serial &quot;Doctor Who&quot;

=== Music ===
* Crusade Records, an independent record label based in Sydney, Australia
* &quot;Crusades&quot;, a song by August Burns Red from their 2009 album &quot;Constellations&quot;
* &quot;The Crusade&quot;, a song by Lovebites from their 2018 EP &quot;Battle Against Damnation&quot;
* &quot;The Crusaders&quot;, a jazz fusion group

====Albums====
* &quot;Crusade&quot; (album), a 1967 album by John Mayall and the Bluesbreakers
* &quot;Crusades&quot; (album), an album by The Plastic Constellations
* &quot;The Crusade&quot; (album), a 2006 album by Trivium

=== Television ===
* &quot;Crusade&quot; (Stargate SG-1), an episode from the science fiction TV series
* &quot;Crusade&quot; (TV series), a short-lived 1999 American science fiction spinoff from &quot;Babylon 5&quot;
* &quot;Crusades&quot; (TV series), a British television series hosted by Terry Jones
* &quot;The Crusade&quot; (&quot;Doctor Who&quot;), four episode serial from &quot;Doctor Who&quot;
* WHAS Crusade for Children, an annual telethon broadcast in Louisville, Kentucky

==Organizations==
* Campus Crusade for Christ, the former name of Cru, an American interdenominational Christian mission organization
* Crusade of Romanianism, a Romanian fascist party

==Other uses==
* Crusade (horse), an American-bred, Irish-trained Thoroughbred racehorse

== See also ==
* 
* Crusader (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1037072" start="0" end="16" title="Crusade (disambiguation)" label="The [[Crusades]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q1037072" start="105" end="112" title="Crusade (disambiguation)" label="Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1037072" start="116" end="124" title="Crusade (disambiguation)" label="Crusades"/>
<link wikidata="Q2379416" start="256" end="266" title="Le Lombard" label="Le Lombard"/>
<link wikidata="Q5190169" start="269" end="302" title="Crusades (comics)" label="&amp;quot;The Crusades&amp;quot; (comics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q8019547" start="376" end="387" title="Billy Tucci" label="Billy Tucci"/>
<link wikidata="Q3820875" start="405" end="442" title="The Crusaders (1918 film)" label="&amp;quot;The Crusaders&amp;quot; (1918 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q340187" start="462" end="498" title="The Crusades (1935 film)" label="&amp;quot;The Crusades&amp;quot; (1935 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1214064" start="543" end="580" title="The Crusaders (2001 film)" label="&amp;quot;The Crusaders&amp;quot; (2001 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q107439394" start="618" end="653" title="The Crusade (2021 film)" label="&amp;quot;The Crusade&amp;quot; (2021 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q119625123" start="677" end="713" title="The Crusades (2023 film)" label="&amp;quot;The Crusades&amp;quot; (2023 film)"/>
<link wikidata="" start="768" end="795" title="Darkness Falls: The Crusade" label="Darkness Falls: The Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q209026" start="872" end="888" title="Warhammer 40,000" label="Warhammer 40,000"/>
<link wikidata="" start="921" end="960" title="Knights of the Temple: Infernal Crusade" label="Knights of the Temple: Infernal Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1970025" start="993" end="1006" title="Space Crusade" label="Space Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1071" end="1115" title="Warhammer 40,000: Dawn of War – Dark Crusade" label="Warhammer 40,000: Dawn of War – Dark Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1162" end="1208" title="Wing Commander: The Secret Missions 2: Crusade" label="Wing Commander: The Secret Missions 2: Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1255" end="1293" title="World of Warcraft: The Burning Crusade" label="World of Warcraft: The Burning Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q5190133" start="1357" end="1393" title="Crusade (Anderson novel)" label="&amp;quot;Crusade&amp;quot; (Anderson novel)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3005595" start="1459" end="1493" title="Crusade (Lowder novel)" label="&amp;quot;Crusade&amp;quot; (Lowder novel)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5190134" start="1521" end="1554" title="Crusade (Laird novel)" label="&amp;quot;Crusade&amp;quot; (Laird novel)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5190141" start="1601" end="1634" title="Crusade (short story)" label="&amp;quot;Crusade&amp;quot; (short story)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5190135" start="1674" end="1707" title="Crusade (Young novel)" label="&amp;quot;Crusade&amp;quot; (Young novel)"/>
<link wikidata="Q569511" start="1782" end="1799" title="Aquasilva Trilogy" label="Aquasilva Trilogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6962746" start="1865" end="1877" title="Nancy Holder" label="Nancy Holder"/>
<link wikidata="Q588653" start="1944" end="1955" title="David Weber" label="David Weber"/>
<link wikidata="Q7331205" start="2054" end="2067" title="Rick Atkinson" label="Rick Atkinson"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2077" end="2088" title="The Crusade (Doctor Who)#Commercial Releases" label="The Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q5190140" start="2166" end="2181" title="Crusade Records" label="Crusade Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q2777813" start="2317" end="2331" title="Constellations (August Burns Red album)" label="Constellations"/>
<link wikidata="Q66360555" start="2410" end="2434" title="Battle Against Damnation" label="Battle Against Damnation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2118052" start="2443" end="2468" title="The Crusaders (jazz fusion group)" label="&amp;quot;The Crusaders&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3005602" start="2508" end="2535" title="Crusade (album)" label="&amp;quot;Crusade&amp;quot; (album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7757400" start="2589" end="2617" title="Crusades (album)" label="&amp;quot;Crusades&amp;quot; (album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q385638" start="2660" end="2691" title="The Crusade (album)" label="&amp;quot;The Crusade&amp;quot; (album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2569558" start="2739" end="2774" title="Crusade (Stargate SG-1)" label="&amp;quot;Crusade&amp;quot; (Stargate SG-1)"/>
<link wikidata="Q737343" start="2824" end="2855" title="Crusade (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Crusade&amp;quot; (TV series)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2913202" start="2938" end="2970" title="Crusades (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Crusades&amp;quot; (TV series)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2415039" start="3024" end="3072" title="The Crusade (Doctor Who)" label="&amp;quot;The Crusade&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;Doctor Who&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7950054" start="3124" end="3149" title="WHAS Crusade for Children" label="WHAS Crusade for Children"/>
<link wikidata="Q578100" start="3271" end="3274" title="Cru (Christian organization)" label="Cru"/>
<link wikidata="Q5190145" start="3341" end="3363" title="Crusade of Romanianism" label="Crusade of Romanianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q28453142" start="3408" end="3423" title="Crusade (horse)" label="Crusade (horse)"/>
<link wikidata="Q417327" start="3501" end="3526" title="Crusader (disambiguation)" label="Crusader (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1329167" wikidata="Q661604" url="?curid=1329167" title="Richard de Clare, 6th Earl of Gloucester">
<text>Richard de Clare, 5th Earl of Hertford, 6th Earl of Gloucester, 2nd Lord of Glamorgan, 8th Lord of Clare (4 August 1222 – 14 July 1262) was the son of Gilbert de Clare, 4th Earl of Hertford, and Isabel Marshal. He was also a powerful Marcher Lord in Wales and inherited the Lordship of Glamorgan upon the death of his father. He played a prominent role in the constitutional crisis of 1258–1263.

==Early life==
On his father&#x27;s death, when he became Earl of Gloucester (October 1230), Richard was entrusted first to the guardianship of Hubert de Burgh. On Hubert&#x27;s fall, his guardianship was given to Peter des Roches (c. October 1232); and in 1235 to Gilbert, Earl Marshall.

==Marriage==
Richard&#x27;s first marriage to Margaret or Megotta, as she was also called, ended with either an annulment or her death in November 1237. They were both about 14 or 15. The marriage of Hubert de Burgh&#x27;s daughter Margaret to Richard de Clare, the young Earl of Gloucester, brought de Burgh into some trouble in 1236, for the earl was as yet a minor and in the wardship of King Henry III, and the marriage had been celebrated without the royal licence. Hubert, however, protested that the match was not of his making, and promised to pay the king some money, so the matter passed by for the time. Even before Margaret died, the Earl of Lincoln offered 5,000 marks to King Henry to secure Richard for his own daughter. This offer was accepted, and Richard&#x27;s second marriage, on 2 February 1238, was to Maud de Lacy, daughter of John de Lacy, 1st Earl of Lincoln.

==Military career==
Richard joined in the Barons&#x27; letter to the Pope in 1246 against the exactions of the Curia in England. He was among those in opposition to the King&#x27;s half-brothers, who in 1247 visited England, where they were very unpopular, but afterwards, he was reconciled to them.

In August 1252/3 the King crossed over to Gascony with his army, and to his great indignation, Richard refused to accompany him and went to Ireland instead. In August 1255 the king sent him and John Maunsel to Edinburgh to find out the truth about reports which had reached the King that his son-in-law, Alexander III, King of Scotland, was being coerced by Robert de Roos and John Balliol. They were to try to bring the young King and Queen to him. The Earl and his companion, pretending to be the two of Roos&#x27;s knights, obtained entry to Edinburgh Castle, and gradually introduced their attendants, so that they had a force sufficient for their defence. They gained access to the Scottish Queen, who complained to them that she and her husband had been kept apart. They threatened Roos with dire punishments, so that he promised to go to the King.

Meanwhile, the Scottish magnates, indignant that their castle of Edinburgh was in English hands, proposed to besiege it, but they desisted when they found they would be besieging their King and Queen. The King of Scotland apparently travelled south with Richard, for on 24 September they were with King Henry III at Newminster, Northumberland. In July 1258 he fell ill, supposedly poisoned together with his brother William by his steward, Walter de Scotenay. He recovered, but his brother died.

==Death and legacy==
Richard died at John de Criol&#x27;s Manor of Asbenfield in Waltham, near Canterbury, on 14 July 1262 at the age of 39. On the following Monday, he was carried to Canterbury where a requiem mass was sung; his body was then transported about to the canons&#x27; church at Tonbridge and interred in the choir. From there it was taken to Tewkesbury Abbey and buried on 28 July 1262, with great solemnity in the presence of two bishops and eight abbots in the presbytery at his father&#x27;s right hand. Richard&#x27;s own arms were: Or, three chevronels gules.

Richard left extensive property, distributed across numerous counties. Details of these holdings were reported in a series of inquisitions post-mortem that took place after his death.

==Family==
Richard had no children by his first wife, Margaret de Burgh. By his second wife, Maud de Lacy, daughter of the Surety John de Lacy and Margaret de Quincy. They had:

*Isabel de Clare (c. 1240–1270); m. William VII, Marquess of Montferrat
*Gilbert de Clare, 6th Earl of Hertford, 7th Earl of Gloucester (2 September 1243 – 7 December 1295)
*Thomas de Clare (c. 1245–1287); seized control of Thomond in 1277; m. Juliana FitzGerald
*Bogo de Clare (c. 1248–1294)
*Margaret de Clare (c. 1250–1312); m. Edmund, 2nd Earl of Cornwall
*Rohese de Clare (c. 1252); m. Roger de Mowbray, 1st Baron Mowbray
*Eglentina de Clare (d. 1257); died in infancy.

Richard&#x27;s widow Maud, who had the Manor of Clare and the Manor and Castle of Usk and other lands for her dower, erected a splendid tomb for her late husband at Tewkesbury. She arranged for the marriages of her children. She died before 10 March 1288/9.

==Ancestry==
==See also==
*Holy Jesus Hospital

==References==
==Sources==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q661604" start="0" end="104" title="Richard de Clare, 6th Earl of Gloucester" label="Richard de Clare, 5th Earl of Hertford, 6th Earl of Gloucester, 2nd Lord of Glamorgan, 8th Lord of Clare"/>
<link wikidata="Q463491" start="151" end="189" title="Gilbert de Clare, 4th Earl of Hertford" label="Gilbert de Clare, 4th Earl of Hertford"/>
<link wikidata="Q449884" start="195" end="209" title="Isabel Marshal" label="Isabel Marshal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6756973" start="234" end="246" title="Marcher Lord" label="Marcher Lord"/>
<link wikidata="Q6680071" start="274" end="295" title="Lordship of Glamorgan" label="Lordship of Glamorgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277294" start="455" end="473" title="Earl of Gloucester" label="Earl of Gloucester"/>
<link wikidata="Q1381324" start="541" end="556" title="Hubert de Burgh, 1st Earl of Kent" label="Hubert de Burgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q701040" start="799" end="808" title="annulment" label="annulment"/>
<link wikidata="Q831704" start="1066" end="1074" title="wardship" label="wardship"/>
<link wikidata="Q160311" start="1078" end="1092" title="Henry III of England" label="King Henry III"/>
<link wikidata="Q4281830" start="1363" end="1368" title="mark (currency)" label="marks"/>
<link wikidata="Q3851876" start="1511" end="1523" title="Maud de Lacy" label="Maud de Lacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6265561" start="1537" end="1570" title="John de Lacy, 1st Earl of Lincoln" label="John de Lacy, 1st Earl of Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q19546" start="1642" end="1646" title="Pope" label="Pope"/>
<link wikidata="Q108169" start="1684" end="1689" title="Roman Curia" label="Curia"/>
<link wikidata="Q191085" start="1916" end="1923" title="Gascony" label="Gascony"/>
<link wikidata="Q23436" start="2084" end="2093" title="Edinburgh" label="Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q211109" start="2178" end="2191" title="Alexander III of Scotland" label="Alexander III"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="2201" end="2209" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q323643" start="2251" end="2263" title="John, 5th Baron Balliol" label="John Balliol"/>
<link wikidata="Q212065" start="2419" end="2435" title="Edinburgh Castle" label="Edinburgh Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q903810" start="2754" end="2762" title="magnates" label="magnates"/>
<link wikidata="Q160311" start="3028" end="3042" title="Henry III of England" label="King Henry III"/>
<link wikidata="Q23079" start="3058" end="3072" title="Northumberland" label="Northumberland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166079" start="3308" end="3315" title="Waltham, Kent" label="Waltham"/>
<link wikidata="Q29303" start="3322" end="3332" title="Canterbury" label="Canterbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q51616" start="3430" end="3442" title="requiem mass" label="requiem mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q936183" start="3519" end="3528" title="Tonbridge" label="Tonbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3405514" start="3583" end="3599" title="Tewkesbury Abbey" label="Tewkesbury Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q26935196" start="3788" end="3797" title="chevronel" label="chevronel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3851876" start="4085" end="4097" title="Maud de Lacy" label="Maud de Lacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1180082" start="4122" end="4134" title="de Lacy" label="John de Lacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1237643" start="4139" end="4157" title="Margaret de Quincy" label="Margaret de Quincy"/>
<link wikidata="Q579846" start="4206" end="4241" title="William VII, Marquess of Montferrat" label="William VII, Marquess of Montferrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360375" start="4243" end="4259" title="Gilbert de Clare, 6th Earl of Hertford" label="Gilbert de Clare"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647030" start="4265" end="4281" title="Earl of Hertford" label="Earl of Hertford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277294" start="4287" end="4305" title="Earl of Gloucester" label="Earl of Gloucester"/>
<link wikidata="Q2428399" start="4344" end="4359" title="Thomas de Clare, Lord of Thomond" label="Thomas de Clare"/>
<link wikidata="Q1688151" start="4394" end="4401" title="Thomond" label="Thomond"/>
<link wikidata="Q3811097" start="4414" end="4432" title="Juliana FitzGerald" label="Juliana FitzGerald"/>
<link wikidata="Q4937683" start="4434" end="4447" title="Bogo de Clare" label="Bogo de Clare"/>
<link wikidata="Q283151" start="4501" end="4529" title="Edmund, 2nd Earl of Cornwall" label="Edmund, 2nd Earl of Cornwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7359206" start="4561" end="4596" title="Roger de Mowbray, 1st Baron Mowbray" label="Roger de Mowbray, 1st Baron Mowbray"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000717" start="4811" end="4821" title="Tewkesbury" label="Tewkesbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q15224681" start="4932" end="4951" title="Holy Jesus Hospital" label="Holy Jesus Hospital"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1329168" wikidata="Q1171872" url="?curid=1329168" title="Dashboard (macOS)">
<text>Dashboard is a discontinued feature of Apple Inc.&#x27;s macOS operating systems, used as a secondary desktop for hosting mini-applications known as widgets. These are intended to be simple applications that do not take time to launch. Dashboard applications supplied with macOS included a stock ticker, weather report, calculator, and notepad; while users could create or download their own.

Before Mac OS X 10.7 Lion, when Dashboard is activated, the user&#x27;s desktop is dimmed and widgets appear in the foreground. Like application windows, they can be moved around, rearranged, deleted, and recreated (so that more than one of the same Widget is open at the same time, possibly with different settings). New widgets can be opened, via an icon bar on the bottom of the layer, loading a list of available apps similar to the iOS home screen or the macOS Launchpad. After loading, the widget is ready for use. 

Dashboard was first introduced in Mac OS X 10.4 Tiger. It can be activated as an application, from the Dock, Launchpad, or Spotlight. It can also be accessed by a dashboard key. Alternatively, the user can choose to make Dashboard open on moving the cursor into a preassigned hot corner or keyboard shortcut. Starting with Mac OS X 10.7 Lion, the Dashboard can be configured as a space, accessed by swiping four fingers to the right from the Desktops either side of it.

From OS X 10.10 Yosemite onward, the Dashboard was disabled by default, with the Notification Center becoming the primary method of displaying widgets. As of macOS 10.15 Catalina, Dashboard has been removed from macOS.

Widget support is reintroduced in macOS Sonoma, released in 2023. In macOS Sonoma, Apple has integrated the Dashboard with the Desktop. Users are still able to keep widgets in the Notification Center.

==Widget functions and capabilities==
Dashboard widgets, like web pages, are capable of many different things, including of performing tasks that would be complicated for the user to access manually. One example is the Google Search widget, which simply opens up the user&#x27;s web browser and performs a Google search. Other widgets, like Wikipedia, grab the contents of web pages and display them within Dashboard. Some widgets can also serve as games, using Adobe Flash (or another multimedia authoring program) to create games just as if they were in a web browser. It is also possible for Mac users to create their own widgets using built-in software.

==Graphics==

Dashboard uses a variety of graphical effects for displaying, opening, and using widgets. For instance, a 3-D flip effect is used to simulate the widget flipping around; by clicking on a small &quot;i&quot; icon in the right bottom corner, the user can change the preferences on the reverse side; other effects include crossfading and scaling from icon to body (when opening widgets), a &quot;spin-cycle effect&quot; when a widget is focused and the user presses Command-R or a suck-in effect when they are closed. On sufficiently powered Macs, widgets will produce a ripple effect when they are opened, like a leaf falling onto water. These effects consume considerable processing power but with the help of macOS’s Quartz Extreme and Core Image graphics architectures, sufficient computing power to render them in real time is available. As with Exposé, Front Row and the minimize effect, holding shift down while calling the Dashboard or opening the Dashboard menu bar will display the effect in slow motion.

==Creation of widgets==
Dashboard widgets are created using Hypertext Markup Language (HTML), Cascading Style Sheets (CSS), and JavaScript. Because the same languages are used for creating websites, many web developers can already build them. Widgets themselves are, at the core, simply HTML files that are displayed within the Dashboard layer; they use the WebKit application framework that is also used in Apple&#x27;s Safari web browser, meaning even users running earlier versions of macOS — where Dashboard is unavailable — can build them. There is widget API allows the widgets to use Mac-specific interface elements such as the Apple Slider.

When a Dashboard widget is built, it usually consists of six files:

* The widget&#x27;s HTML file, which is the actual file that will be displayed in the Dashboard layer
* The widget&#x27;s CSS file, which is used for styling the widget (but is called on from the HTML file)
* The widget&#x27;s JavaScript file, although it may be implemented directly within the HTML file if the developer desires
* The widget&#x27;s Property List (called “Info.plist”), which is what Dashboard uses to load the widget’s properties (i.e.: name, version, HTML file, etc.)
* The background image of the widget, in PNG format
* The icon that is displayed in the menu bar

Once all of these files are in the root of a directory, it is given a name and the extension &quot;.wdgt&quot;, and then it can be opened up in Dashboard as a widget. More complex widgets may also include a Cocoa widget plugin (for platform-specific functionality), one or more JavaScript files (for text scrolling, preferences, etc.) or multiple images (for personalized select menus or buttons).

Mac OS X 10.5 Leopard includes an application called Dashcode, which is a more user-friendly way of creating widgets. Another new feature of Leopard is called &quot;Web Clip&quot; which lets users easily create widgets from parts of a webpage. For example, during the WWDC 2007 keynote, Steve Jobs made widgets out of the following: the featured news headlines on Yahoo.com, the top ten most searched terms on Google, the Photo of the Day on National Geographic, the &quot;Dilbert&quot; comic strip, and the box office information from Rotten Tomatoes. The user can also customize the border to further personalize the widgets.

==Comparison with Konfabulator==
Many people have made comparisons between Konfabulator and Apple&#x27;s Dashboard, especially after Apple announced the feature while Mac OS X 10.4 Tiger was in development. It was a subject of debate in the online community following the few months before Tiger&#x27;s official release.

One school of thought came to the conclusion that Dashboard was a &quot;rip-off&quot; of Konfabulator. It points out the visual and functional similarities between Dashboard has been widely compared to Konfabulator (later Yahoo! Widget Engine) and sometimes called a copy of it, due to the similarities between their graphical aspects and the fact that they both use the term “widgets” to describe the objects in their environments. Konfabulator may, in turn, have been based on Apple’s Desk Accessories, first released in 1984 with the original Macintosh. Desk Accessories, similar to widgets, were small mini-applications that operated on a user’s desktop. After the introduction of System 7 and cooperative multitasking, the necessity of creating Desk Accessories was removed and developers were encouraged to create applications instead. The OS continued to support them, for backward compatibility, until the switch to Mac OS X (In fact, the Calculator desk accessory remained in the Mac OS through version 9, seventeen years without a significant update).

The codebases for Konfabulator and Dashboard are also different: Konfabulator uses XML and JavaScript to generate Widgets, whereas Dashboard uses HTML, CSS, JavaScript, and Objective-C.

==Included widgets==
In the first version of Dashboard released with Mac OS X 10.4 Tiger update 10.4.3. Apple included 14 widgets. They consisted of:

* Address Book (now known as Contacts)
* Business
* Calculator
* Calendar
* Dictionary
* Flight Tracker
* iTunes Controller—no longer included in latest macOS releases.
* Phone Book—no longer included in latest macOS releases.
* Stickies
* Stocks
* Tile Game
* Translation
* Unit Converter
* Weather
* World Clock

After the Macworld 2006 keynote, Steve Jobs also announced four new widgets (Ski Report, People Finder, Google Search, and ESPN), as well as significant updates to the Phone Book and Calendar widgets. All of these are available through the Mac OS X 10.4.4 Tiger update.

In addition, Mac OS X 10.5 Leopard, released in late 2007, includes new widgets. One of these is Web Clip, which allows any user to turn a rectangular section of any webpage into a widget (This, however, only works with the Safari web browser). The widget updates as the website does, and all links and other interactive material in the widget&#x27;s selection of the webpage works as if the website is being accessed from Safari. Another new widget is Movies, which allows users to find currently playing movies at local theaters, view trailers, and purchase tickets directly from Dashboard. In Mac OS X 10.7 Lion the Phone Book and iTunes Controller widgets were removed

==Widgets on iOS==
Apple has never announced support for the installation of Dashboard widgets on iOS. Even though, in June 2008, an unannounced update of Dashcode that was packaged with the iPhone SDK allowed for the creation of iPhone-oriented web widgets, it is unknown if this version of Dashcode would support the creation of AJAX-driven mobile widgets that could be installed natively on iOS.

It has been demonstrated that installing Dashboard widgets on a jailbroken iOS device is possible in theory, but most desktop-oriented widgets are not oriented to usage or interaction on iOS&#x27;s multi-touch screen-oriented interface; they may also rely on DashboardClient&#x27;s &quot;widget&quot; JavaScript object, which is not part of iOS.

On June 2, 2014, as part of their announcement of iOS 8, Apple announced that in the &quot;Today&quot; view (which is accessible by swiping down from the status bar) will be able to have downloadable widgets from the App Store. While not the same desktop-oriented widgets that are found in Dashboard, this represented the first time that widgets became available officially (i.e., without jailbreaking) on iOS.

There is an unrelated CarPlay feature with the same name introduced with iOS 13.

On June 22, 2020, during the WWDC Keynote Address, Apple introduced widgets for iOS 14. These widgets can be placed on the homescreen, and can be resized. Users can stack up to 10 widgets, or choose a &quot;Smart Stack&quot; widget which will change depending the user&#x27;s activity.

==See also==
*Add-on (Mozilla)
*Dashboard (business)
*Google Chrome Extensions

==References==
;Notes
*&quot;Desk Ornaments&quot; by Andy Hertzfeld, &quot;folklore.org&quot;, October 1981, retrieved July 11, 2006
*Apple.com

==External links==
*Apple&#x27;s Dashboard page
*Dashcode Developer Tips 
*Dashboard User Tips 
*Dashboard Games</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1171872" start="0" end="9" title="Dashboard (macOS)" label="Dashboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q312" start="39" end="49" title="Apple Inc." label="Apple Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q14116" start="57" end="62" title="macOS" label="macOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068192" start="149" end="156" title="Widget engine" label="widgets"/>
<link wikidata="Q476915" start="401" end="419" title="Mac OS X 10.7 Lion" label="Mac OS X 10.7 Lion"/>
<link wikidata="Q6592648" start="860" end="869" title="Launchpad (macOS)" label="Launchpad"/>
<link wikidata="Q693478" start="951" end="970" title="Mac OS X 10.4 Tiger" label="Mac OS X 10.4 Tiger"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1080" end="1093" title="Apple Keyboard#Usage of function keys" label="dashboard key"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423430" start="1297" end="1302" title="Spaces (software)" label="space"/>
<link wikidata="Q17107792" start="1393" end="1412" title="OS X 10.10 Yosemite" label="OS X 10.10 Yosemite"/>
<link wikidata="Q2917187" start="1469" end="1488" title="Notification Center" label="Notification Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q64351129" start="1546" end="1566" title="macOS 10.15 Catalina" label="macOS 10.15 Catalina"/>
<link wikidata="Q119104560" start="1642" end="1654" title="macOS Sonoma" label="macOS Sonoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q95" start="2029" end="2035" title="Google" label="Google"/>
<link wikidata="Q6368" start="2089" end="2100" title="web browser" label="web browser"/>
<link wikidata="Q165658" start="2272" end="2283" title="Adobe Flash" label="Adobe Flash"/>
<link wikidata="Q1591372" start="3200" end="3214" title="Quartz Extreme" label="Quartz Extreme"/>
<link wikidata="Q370467" start="3219" end="3229" title="Core Image" label="Core Image"/>
<link wikidata="Q3988" start="3299" end="3308" title="Real-time computing" label="real time"/>
<link wikidata="Q4044360" start="3331" end="3337" title="Exposé (macOS)" label="Exposé"/>
<link wikidata="Q421105" start="3339" end="3348" title="Front Row (software)" label="Front Row"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3357" end="3365" title="Aqua (user interface)#Animation" label="minimize"/>
<link wikidata="Q1899749" start="3482" end="3493" title="slow motion" label="slow motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q8811" start="3556" end="3581" title="Hypertext Markup Language" label="Hypertext Markup Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q46441" start="3590" end="3612" title="Cascading Style Sheets" label="Cascading Style Sheets"/>
<link wikidata="Q2005" start="3624" end="3634" title="JavaScript" label="JavaScript"/>
<link wikidata="Q35127" start="3685" end="3693" title="websites" label="websites"/>
<link wikidata="Q638608" start="3704" end="3714" title="Software developer" label="developers"/>
<link wikidata="Q654034" start="3854" end="3860" title="WebKit" label="WebKit"/>
<link wikidata="Q35773" start="3917" end="3923" title="Safari (web browser)" label="Safari"/>
<link wikidata="Q165194" start="4057" end="4060" title="API" label="API"/>
<link wikidata="Q138754" start="4760" end="4764" title="icon (computing)" label="icon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051988" start="5007" end="5012" title="Cocoa (software)" label="Cocoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q222996" start="5199" end="5220" title="Mac OS X 10.5 Leopard" label="Mac OS X 10.5 Leopard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1171875" start="5252" end="5260" title="Dashcode" label="Dashcode"/>
<link wikidata="Q37093" start="5563" end="5572" title="Yahoo!" label="Yahoo.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q95" start="5609" end="5615" title="Google" label="Google"/>
<link wikidata="Q167186" start="5641" end="5660" title="National Geographic Society" label="National Geographic"/>
<link wikidata="Q726431" start="5672" end="5679" title="Dilbert" label="Dilbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q105584" start="5735" end="5750" title="Rotten Tomatoes" label="Rotten Tomatoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779772" start="5903" end="5915" title="Konfabulator" label="Konfabulator"/>
<link wikidata="Q693478" start="5995" end="6014" title="Mac OS X 10.4 Tiger" label="Mac OS X 10.4 Tiger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779772" start="6372" end="6392" title="Yahoo! Widget Engine" label="Yahoo! Widget Engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3604107" start="6637" end="6653" title="Desk Accessory" label="Desk Accessories"/>
<link wikidata="Q75687" start="6696" end="6705" title="Apple Macintosh" label="Macintosh"/>
<link wikidata="Q420384" start="6835" end="6843" title="System 7 (Macintosh)" label="System 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q14116" start="7074" end="7082" title="Mac OS X" label="Mac OS X"/>
<link wikidata="Q2115" start="7296" end="7299" title="XML" label="XML"/>
<link wikidata="Q2005" start="7304" end="7314" title="JavaScript" label="JavaScript"/>
<link wikidata="Q8811" start="7359" end="7363" title="HTML" label="HTML"/>
<link wikidata="Q46441" start="7365" end="7368" title="CSS" label="CSS"/>
<link wikidata="Q188531" start="7386" end="7397" title="Objective-C" label="Objective-C"/>
<link wikidata="Q693478" start="7469" end="7488" title="Mac OS X 10.4 Tiger" label="Mac OS X 10.4 Tiger"/>
<link wikidata="Q621217" start="7553" end="7565" title="Address Book (application)" label="Address Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q4830453" start="7592" end="7600" title="Business" label="Business"/>
<link wikidata="Q2595736" start="7603" end="7613" title="Calculator (Apple)" label="Calculator"/>
<link wikidata="Q306184" start="7616" end="7624" title="Calendar (Apple)" label="Calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2706736" start="7627" end="7637" title="Dictionary (software)" label="Dictionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q9589" start="7657" end="7663" title="iTunes" label="iTunes"/>
<link wikidata="Q14116" start="7704" end="7709" title="macOS" label="macOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q14116" start="7762" end="7767" title="macOS" label="macOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q2704403" start="7780" end="7788" title="Stickies (Apple)" label="Stickies"/>
<link wikidata="Q65128560" start="7791" end="7797" title="Stocks (software)" label="Stocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q7553" start="7812" end="7823" title="Translation" label="Translation"/>
<link wikidata="Q29207021" start="7843" end="7850" title="Weather (Apple)" label="Weather"/>
<link wikidata="Q19837" start="7899" end="7909" title="Steve Jobs" label="Steve Jobs"/>
<link wikidata="Q222996" start="8150" end="8171" title="Mac OS X 10.5 Leopard" label="Mac OS X 10.5 Leopard"/>
<link wikidata="Q35773" start="8361" end="8367" title="Safari (web browser)" label="Safari"/>
<link wikidata="Q476915" start="8733" end="8751" title="Mac OS X 10.7 Lion" label="Mac OS X 10.7 Lion"/>
<link wikidata="Q48493" start="9002" end="9012" title="IOS (Apple)" label="iPhone SDK"/>
<link wikidata="Q901543" start="9057" end="9067" title="web widget" label="web widget"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068192" start="9154" end="9167" title="mobile widget" label="mobile widget"/>
<link wikidata="Q305918" start="9275" end="9285" title="IOS jailbreaking" label="jailbroken"/>
<link wikidata="Q390557" start="9409" end="9420" title="multi-touch" label="multi-touch"/>
<link wikidata="Q165970" start="9421" end="9427" title="touchscreen" label="screen"/>
<link wikidata="Q16973176" start="9608" end="9613" title="iOS 8" label="iOS 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q15940106" start="9992" end="9999" title="CarPlay" label="CarPlay"/>
<link wikidata="Q61497975" start="10043" end="10049" title="iOS 13" label="iOS 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q7593080" start="10353" end="10369" title="Add-on (Mozilla)" label="Add-on (Mozilla)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4343952" start="10371" end="10391" title="Dashboard (business)" label="Dashboard (business)"/>
<link wikidata="Q777" start="10393" end="10417" title="Google Chrome Extensions" label="Google Chrome Extensions"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1329174" wikidata="Q2632107" url="?curid=1329174" title="Little Octobrists">
<text>Little Octobrists ( ; singular, ) was a youth organization for elementary school children in grades 1 through 3 in the Soviet Union. After the age of nine, in the 3rd grade, Little Octobrists would typically join the Young Pioneer organization.

Little Octobrists were organized in groups each representing one school grade level. The group was divided into subgroups called &quot;little stars&quot; (), of five children each. Each group of Little Octobrists was under the leadership of one Young Pioneer from the Young Pioneer detachment. Every Little Octobrist wore a ruby-coloured five-pointed star badge with the portrait of Vladimir Lenin in his childhood. The symbol of the group was the little red flag.

== Description ==
On July 18, 1924, the VI Congress of the RLKSM wrote in its resolution &quot;On the organizational development of children&#x27;s groups&quot;: &quot;... it is possible for the communist movement to cover younger children, 8-11 years old, by creating a junior branch of the children&#x27;s communist movement.&quot;

The term &quot;Octobrists&quot; appeared in 1923–1924, when the first groups of children began to appear in Moscow, into which children of the same age as the Great October Socialist Revolution were admitted.

The same resolution of the VI Congress of the RLKSM established the structure of the October organization: a group of Octobrists of 25 children organized under the pioneer detachment was divided into links of 5 people (later the links began to be called asterisks and could reach 7-10 children; according to the regulations on the All-Union Pioneer Organization (1957) .) - up to 8 people; Regulations on the All-Union Pioneer Organization (1967) - 5-6 schoolchildren). The group is led by a Komsomol member allocated by the RLKSM cell and who is an assistant to the leader of the pioneer detachment. The pioneers are in charge of the squads, and October assistants are selected to help the pioneers. There was a group council, which consisted of its leader, link leaders and their assistants, that is, an Octobrist could only be an assistant linkman and an ordinary member of the group board. In 1957, the Octobrists gained the right to lead the stars.

Groups of Octobrists were created in the first grades of schools and operated until the Octobrists entered the pioneers and the formation of pioneer detachments. Initially, after joining the ranks of the Octobrists, children wore a red star sewn on their shirt, on their left chest. issue a badge - a five-pointed ruby star with a portrait of Lenin as a child. The group&#x27;s symbol was the red October flag.

The group (in some schools - a detachment) of the Octobrists consisted of several units, called &quot;stars&quot;, each of which usually included 5 children - the symbol of a five-pointed star. The principle of creating a detachment of Octobrists was simple: a detachment is a school class. As a rule, in the &quot;star&quot; every October, he held one of the &quot;positions&quot; - the commander of the &quot;star&quot;, florist, orderly, librarian, political informer, or sportsman. In some schools, the commander of the &quot;star&quot;, at the request of the teachers, sewed a stripe on the sleeve of his tunic (squad leader - 2 stripes).

The activities of the Octobrists took place mainly in a playful way and were organized by teachers and counselors. The All-Union October Week was held annually on April 16–22. At the school for the Octobrists, “Lenin&#x27;s readings” could be organized, when on the 22nd of each month the appointed senior pupil came to the class and read stories about V.I. Lenin (his birthday was April 22, 1870).

== Printed editions ==
All-Union magazines (Vesyolye Kartinki and Murzilka for preschool age and elementary grades, Koster, Young Technician and Young Naturalist for pre-pioneer and pioneer age) and republican magazines were published for the Octobrists. For example, in the Moldavian SSR the magazine &quot;Steluza&quot; (&quot;Star&quot;) was published in the Moldavian and Russian languages, in the Estonian SSR the magazines &quot;Täheke&quot; (&quot;Star&quot;) and &quot;Pioneer&quot; were published in Estonian. The magazine &quot;Barvinok&quot; was published in Kiev in Russian and Ukrainian. Various pioneer newspapers also published materials intended for the Octobrists.

Annually for the Octobrists, the Malysh publishing house issued the Zvezdochka desk calendar. Methodological materials on work with October were regularly published in the journals &quot;Vozhaty&quot;, &quot;Elementary School&quot;, &quot;Education of Schoolchildren&quot;.

== Age hierarchy of communist youth organizations in the Soviet Union ==

Little Octobrists - primary school students - children aged 7 to 9; (Octobrists were admitted as pioneers in the third grade, excellent students - in the fall, around October 29 or November 7, the rest - in the spring, around April 22.

Pioneers - middle school students (grades 3–4 to 8) - adolescents aged 8 to 15; (Pioneers were accepted into the Komsomol from the age of 14, those who were not accepted into the Komsomol, upon reaching the age of 15, automatically ceased to be pioneers)

Komsomol members - youth aged 14 to 28; with top leadership permitted to stay in Komsomol beyond 28 years.

== See also ==
* Cub Scoutequivalent in mainstream Scouting
* Komsomol 
* Murzilka
* Union of Communist Youth

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2632107" start="0" end="17" title="Little Octobrists" label="Little Octobrists"/>
<link wikidata="Q66809493" start="40" end="58" title="youth organization" label="youth organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="119" end="131" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1897721" start="217" end="230" title="Young Pioneer (Soviet)" label="Young Pioneer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394" start="629" end="643" title="Vladimir Lenin" label="Vladimir Lenin"/>
<link wikidata="Q42976" start="1206" end="1240" title="October Revolution" label="Great October Socialist Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q799000" start="2503" end="2508" title="badge" label="badge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394" start="3627" end="3632" title="Vladimir Lenin" label="Lenin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4109862" start="3713" end="3730" title="Vesyolye Kartinki" label="Vesyolye Kartinki"/>
<link wikidata="Q2382250" start="3735" end="3743" title="Murzilka" label="Murzilka"/>
<link wikidata="Q12372509" start="4146" end="4153" title="Pioneer (Estonian magazine)" label="Pioneer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4078076" start="4207" end="4215" title="Barvinok (magazine)" label="Barvinok"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470891" start="4339" end="4349" title="Octobrists" label="Octobrists"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4539" end="4546" title="Vozhaty" label="Vozhaty"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4591" end="4618" title="Education of Schoolchildren" label="Education of Schoolchildren"/>
<link wikidata="Q581754" start="4938" end="4946" title="Pioneer movement" label="Pioneers"/>
<link wikidata="Q166073" start="5194" end="5202" title="Komsomol" label="Komsomol"/>
<link wikidata="Q587357" start="5319" end="5328" title="Cub Scout" label="Cub Scout"/>
<link wikidata="Q166073" start="5364" end="5372" title="Komsomol" label="Komsomol"/>
<link wikidata="Q2382250" start="5376" end="5384" title="Murzilka" label="Murzilka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772362" start="5387" end="5411" title="Union of Communist Youth" label="Union of Communist Youth"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1329175" wikidata="Q603616" url="?curid=1329175" title="Maybole">
<text>Maybole is a town and former burgh of barony and police burgh in South Ayrshire, Scotland. It had an estimated population of in . It is situated south of Ayr and southwest of Glasgow by the Glasgow and South Western Railway. The town is bypassed by the A77.


== History ==

Maybole has Middle Ages roots, receiving a charter from Donnchadh, Earl of Carrick in 1193. In 1516 it was made a burgh of regality, although for generations it remained under the suzerainty of the Clan Kennedy, afterwards Earls of Cassillis and (later) Marquesses of Ailsa, the most powerful family in Ayrshire. The Marquess of Ailsa lived at Cassillis House, just outside Maybole until its sale in 2007. In the late seventeenth century, a census recorded Maybole was home to 28 &quot;lords and landowners with estates in Carrick and beyond.&quot;

In former times, Maybole was the capital of the district of Carrick, Scotland, and for long its characteristic feature was the family mansions of the barons of Carrick. Maybole Castle, a former seat of the Earls of Cassillis, dates to 1560 and still remains, although aspects of the castle are viewed as &quot;of concern&quot;. The public buildings include the town-hall, the Ashgrove and the Lumsden fresh-air fortnightly homes, and the Maybole combination poorhouse.

Maybole is a short distance from the birthplace of Robert Burns, the Scots national poet. Burns&#x27;s mother was a Maybole resident, Agnes Brown.

In the nineteenth century, Maybole became a centre of boot and shoe manufacturing.

Margaret McMurray (??-1760), one of the last native speakers of a Lowland dialect of Scottish Gaelic, is recorded to have lived at Cultezron (not to be confused with nearby Culzean), a farm on the outskirts of Maybole.

== Notable landmarks ==
* The ancestral seat of the Marquesses of Ailsa is Culzean Castle, now run by The National Trust for Scotland and located west from Maybole. This dates from 1777; it stands on a basaltic cliff, beneath which are the Coves of Culzean, once the retreat of outlaws and a resort of the fairies.
* Maybole Town Hall incorporates a tower which dates back to the 16th century.
* Cassillis Castle, near Maybole, is a category A 14th century castle with 17th century and 19th century baronial extensions.
* A primary rail service is at Maybole railway station. Set up in 1860.
* to the south-west are the ruins of Crossraguel (from &quot;Crois Riaghail&quot; meaning &#x27;Cross of St Regulus&#x27; ) Abbey, founded about 1240.
* &quot;Our Lady and St Cuthbert Catholic Church&quot; in Maybole was opened in 1878 and it was largely funded by Catholic convert Margaret Radclyffe Livingstone Eyre (born Kennedy). A Scottish Episcopal congregation was established in 1847 to serve the English and Irish weavers in the area, and the present St. Oswald&#x27;s Church was completed in 1883.
* In the early 20th century, Maybole added a Baptist church. This was admitted to the Baptist Union in 1901 and appointed its first full minister in 1919, a year after the Great War finished.
* Kirkoswald, where Robert Burns spent his seventeenth year, learning land-surveying, lies a little farther west. In the parish churchyard lie the real people who inspired two of Burns&#x27;s fictitious characters Douglas Graham (Tam o&#x27; Shanter) and John Davidson.
* Farther south are the ruins of Turnberry Castle, where Robert the Bruce is said to have been born. A few miles to the north of Culzean are the ruins of Dunure Castle, an ancient stronghold of the Kennedys.


== Education ==

The town has three primary schools: Cairn Primary, Gardenrose Primary and St Cuthberts Primary.

The secondary school for Maybole is Carrick Academy (a school of Rugby).

== Sports ==
The local football club, Maybole Juniors F.C., play at Ladywell Stadium. They are members of the West of Scotland Football League.

== Notable cultural references ==
The lyrics of The Waterboys&#x27; &quot;Glastonbury Song&quot; include: &quot;I dreamed myself from the sultry plains, To the old green square back in old Maybole ...&quot;

==Notable residents==
* Sir Gilbert Blane (1749–1834), 18th–century physician and Royal Navy reformer.
* Bernard Fergusson, Baron Ballantrae (1911–1980), part of the Fergusson family, and Governor-General of New Zealand, 1962–67.
* Robert MacBryde (1913–1966), a well-known painter of the &#x27;Modern&#x27; school of art and theatre designer.
* John Loudon McAdam (1756–1836), Scottish engineer and roadbuilder of the eighteenth century.
* Norris McWhirter (1925–2004), founder of the &quot;Guinness Book of World Records&quot;, is descended from the McWhirters of Maybole.
* Sir William Montgomery-Cuninghame (1834–1897), recipient of the Victoria Cross in 1854 during the Crimean War 
* Rev R Guy Ramsay (1895–1976), Scottish Baptist minister and President of the Baptist Union of Scotland, 1948–49.
* Thomas Ramsay (1857–1934), first pastor of Maybole Baptist Church, 1901–19, and President of the Baptist Union of Scotland, 1921–22.
* Rev Dr William King Tweedie (1803–1863), Scottish historian, biographer and minister of the Free Church of Scotland.

==Twin towns==
* Belœil, Belgium
* Crosne, France
* Schotten, Germany
* Arco, Trentino, Italy

==See also==
*Minishant

==References==
===Sources===
 
==External links==

* Maybole Home Page 
* About Maybole
* Its page in the Gazetteer for Scotland</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q603616" start="0" end="7" title="Maybole" label="Maybole"/>
<link wikidata="Q4998629" start="29" end="44" title="burgh of barony" label="burgh of barony"/>
<link wikidata="Q209131" start="65" end="79" title="South Ayrshire" label="South Ayrshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q4093" start="175" end="182" title="Glasgow" label="Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q2646029" start="190" end="223" title="Glasgow and South Western Railway" label="Glasgow and South Western Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q4649612" start="253" end="256" title="A77 road" label="A77"/>
<link wikidata="Q1241816" start="331" end="357" title="Donnchadh, Earl of Carrick" label="Donnchadh, Earl of Carrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q4998630" start="389" end="406" title="burgh of regality" label="burgh of regality"/>
<link wikidata="Q4222906" start="473" end="485" title="Clan Kennedy" label="Clan Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6772530" start="498" end="516" title="Earl of Cassillis" label="Earls of Cassillis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6772530" start="529" end="548" title="Marquess of Ailsa" label="Marquesses of Ailsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4786391" start="592" end="609" title="Archibald Angus Charles Kennedy, 8th Marquess of Ailsa" label="Marquess of Ailsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4216038" start="885" end="902" title="Carrick, Scotland" label="Carrick, Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q9705446" start="994" end="1008" title="Maybole Castle" label="Maybole Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q81960" start="1346" end="1358" title="Robert Burns" label="Robert Burns"/>
<link wikidata="Q13646795" start="1527" end="1544" title="Margaret McMurray" label="Margaret McMurray"/>
<link wikidata="Q654252" start="1593" end="1600" title="Scottish Lowlands" label="Lowland"/>
<link wikidata="Q9314" start="1612" end="1627" title="Scottish Gaelic" label="Scottish Gaelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q899545" start="1822" end="1836" title="Culzean Castle" label="Culzean Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q599997" start="1849" end="1880" title="National Trust for Scotland" label="The National Trust for Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q17843506" start="2064" end="2081" title="Maybole Town Hall" label="Maybole Town Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1926869" start="2298" end="2321" title="Maybole railway station" label="Maybole railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164332" start="2376" end="2387" title="Crossraguel" label="Crossraguel"/>
<link wikidata="Q18534233" start="2621" end="2671" title="Margaret Radclyffe Livingstone Eyre" label="Margaret Radclyffe Livingstone Eyre (born Kennedy)"/>
<link wikidata="Q81960" start="3059" end="3071" title="Robert Burns" label="Robert Burns"/>
<link wikidata="Q3980542" start="3269" end="3288" title="Tam o&amp;#x27; Shanter (Burns poem)" label="Tam o&amp;#x27; Shanter"/>
<link wikidata="Q4171981" start="3294" end="3307" title="John Davidson (poet)" label="John Davidson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4590136" start="3342" end="3358" title="Turnberry Castle" label="Turnberry Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q187312" start="3366" end="3382" title="Robert the Bruce" label="Robert the Bruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q5315780" start="3463" end="3476" title="Dunure Castle" label="Dunure Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5046136" start="3669" end="3684" title="Carrick Academy" label="Carrick Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6796988" start="3745" end="3765" title="Maybole Juniors F.C." label="Maybole Juniors F.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q96414504" start="3817" end="3849" title="West of Scotland Football League" label="West of Scotland Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422720" start="3900" end="3913" title="The Waterboys" label="The Waterboys"/>
<link wikidata="Q60738821" start="3926" end="3942" title="Glastonbury Song" label="Glastonbury Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q5560810" start="4088" end="4101" title="Gilbert Blane" label="Gilbert Blane"/>
<link wikidata="Q2897911" start="4165" end="4200" title="Bernard Fergusson, Baron Ballantrae" label="Bernard Fergusson, Baron Ballantrae"/>
<link wikidata="Q3938350" start="4292" end="4307" title="Robert MacBryde" label="Robert MacBryde"/>
<link wikidata="Q437708" start="4406" end="4424" title="John Loudon McAdam" label="John Loudon McAdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q320560" start="4501" end="4517" title="Norris McWhirter" label="Norris McWhirter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7529697" start="4637" end="4670" title="Sir William Montgomery-Cuninghame, 9th Baronet" label="Sir William Montgomery-Cuninghame"/>
<link wikidata="Q219578" start="4701" end="4715" title="Victoria Cross" label="Victoria Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q41751871" start="4750" end="4766" title="R Guy Ramsay" label="Rev R Guy Ramsay"/>
<link wikidata="Q4857696" start="4827" end="4852" title="Baptist Union of Scotland" label="Baptist Union of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q24845797" start="4865" end="4878" title="Thomas Ramsay (Scottish Baptist)" label="Thomas Ramsay"/>
<link wikidata="Q24197243" start="4908" end="4930" title="Maybole Baptist Church" label="Maybole Baptist Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q4857696" start="4962" end="4987" title="Baptist Union of Scotland" label="Baptist Union of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q18954685" start="5007" end="5027" title="William King Tweedie" label="William King Tweedie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3046878" start="5092" end="5115" title="Free Church of Scotland (1843–1900)" label="Free Church of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q95105" start="5135" end="5141" title="Beloeil, Belgium" label="Belœil"/>
<link wikidata="Q276484" start="5153" end="5159" title="Crosne, Essonne" label="Crosne"/>
<link wikidata="Q26368" start="5170" end="5178" title="Schotten" label="Schotten"/>
<link wikidata="Q138473" start="5190" end="5204" title="Arco, Trentino" label="Arco, Trentino"/>
<link wikidata="Q59260628" start="5227" end="5236" title="Minishant" label="Minishant"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1329178" wikidata="Q706474" url="?curid=1329178" title="Artek (camp)">
<text>Artek () is an international children&#x27;s center (a former Young Pioneer camp) on the Black Sea in the town of Gurzuf located on the Crimean Peninsula, near Ayu-Dag. It was established on 16 June 1925.

Artek was considered to be a privilege for Soviet children during its existence, as well as for children from other communist countries. During its heyday, 27,000 children a year vacationed at Artek. Between 1925 and 1969 the camp hosted 300,000 children including more than 13,000 children from 70 foreign countries. After the breaking up of the Young Pioneers in 1991 its prestige declined, though it remained a popular vacation destination.

==History==
===Soviet era===

The camp first hosted only 80 children but then grew rapidly. In 1969 it had an area of 3.2 km2 (790 acres). The camp consisted of 150 buildings, including three medical facilities, a school, the film studio Artekfilm, three swimming pools, a stadium with a seating capacity of 7,000 and playgrounds for various other activities. Unlike most of the young pioneer camps, Artek was an all-year camp, due to the warm climate.

Artek consisted of a total of ten smaller camps. Each of them had its own name: &quot;Morskoi&quot;, &quot;Lazurny&quot;, &quot;Kiparisny&quot;, etc. Four of these camps (&quot;Rechnoi&quot;, &quot;Ozyorny&quot;, &quot;Lesnoi&quot; and &quot;Polevoi&quot;) made up the notable &quot;Pribrezhny&quot; complex of Artek built between 1960 and 1964. The group of architects, led by Anatoly Polyansky, that designed &quot;Pribrezhny&quot; was awarded the USSR State Prize in architecture in 1967.

Similar distinguished pioneer camps were maintained by several Soviet republics, e.g., Orlyonok in Russian SFSR and on Byelorussian SSR.
In East Germany the Ernst Thälmann Pioneer Organisation built a pioneer camp similar to Artek in 1952 at Werbellinsee north-east of Berlin. 
===2000s===

The center was part of the Ukraine&#x27;s State Management of Affairs. 60% of visitors arrive on a state subsidized or free basis. The beneficiaries are children from low income and large families, as well as orphans, handicapped and gifted children. In 2005 full prices were in the range of ₴3,000–5,000, depending on the season and location. 2007 prices were from US$770 to about $2,000.

In 2004 it was officially recognized by UNESCO as a site for the implementation of international projects and in particular during the UN Decade of Education (2005–2014).

2005 was the year of Artek&#x27;s 80th anniversary and the camp hosted about 13,000 children in educational camps under the supervision of about 2,000 of volunteer squad leaders managed by permanent pedagogical staff of over 200 under the command of general director Olga Guzar (Ольга Владимировна Гузар).

Traditionally Artek provided a base (known as a School of Pedagogues-Organizers) for hands-on training of students of pedagogical schools. This tradition has been continued today and the camp is known as the &quot;Humanitarian Institute &#x27;Artek″&quot;. In 2005 students from Ukraine, Russia, Belarus, Moldova and Kazakhstan were trained there.

As of late 2008 Artek was in financial trouble, which was solved when the Ukrainian Parliament passed laws early February 2009 writing off more than $2 million in debt (and more in unpaid taxes), barred privatization of the camp&#x27;s land and obliged government agencies to pay the expenses of 15,000 children each year.

===Artek since the 2014 Russian annexation of Crimea===
Early in 2014 season, following the 2014 Russian annexation of Crimea, the staff of the camp officially moved from Crimea to Bukovel in the Carpathian Mountains. The new center there was named International Children Center &quot;Artek-Carpathians&quot; and consisted of three camps &quot;Lake&quot;, &quot;Forest&quot; and &quot;Mountain.&quot;

Meanwhile, the original site in Crimea remained open. In October 2014, the Russian government allocated 21 billion rubles (US$568 million) for reconstruction and development. On 16 June 2014, by the decree of the Government of the Russian Federation, the federal state budgetary educational institution &quot;International Children&#x27;s Center &quot;Artek&quot; was established. 
The functions of the founder were transferred to the Ministry of Education and Science of the Russian Federation, and a draft program for the development of the center was prepared. During the open discussion of the draft Concept, 894 expert opinions were received. In accordance with the final document which was presented on 8 October 2014 in Moscow, in addition to recreation the innovative educational activities were identified as a priority area of the center&#x27;s work. In the autumn of 2014, Artek started work on the improvement of the territory, reconstruction and major buildings repairs. About 5 billion rubles were allocated from the Russian budget for the reconstruction of Artek. In 2014–2015, a large-scale reconstruction of the camp was implemented. It is included completion of unfinished buildings, construction of new buildings and other infrastructure facilities. Inside the buildings service lines were changed, new furniture was delivered, the dining room was restored, and a sports ground was equipped with wide range of sports equipment. The swimming pools were also renovated, and the camp was equipped with modern computers. On 27 February 2015, 4 buildings of the camp &quot;Lazurny&quot; were put into operation.
There are three ways to get to Artek: for special achievements in science, culture, sports; winning a competition of a partner organization; or for an amount exceeding 80,000 rubles.

In 2014, Artek hosted 5,854 children, in 2015 – 18,858, in 2016 – 31,200, in 2017 – 39,000, in 2018 – 40,000 children, in 2019 – 44,025 children, in 2020 – 17,287 children (reduced capacity due to the COVID-19 pandemic) from different regions of the Russian Federation and abroad. These numbers include more than 6,300 children from 87 foreign countries who visited Artek from 2014 to 2020.

==Controversies==
In 1952, Turkish poet Nâzım Hikmet visited the Cypress camp in Artek, where he was appalled to realize he stepped on a former gravestone with a verse of the Quran facing up; years earlier, numerous Muslim cemeteries in Crimea were dismantled after the ethnic cleansing of Crimean Tatars by the Soviet regime, with the gravestones and pieces of them used as bricks. Only when Hikmet complained was that particular gravestone brick facing up removed, but for many years it was not considered objectionable by the many Soviet visitors of the camp who saw nothing wrong with stepping on the tombstone or simply ignored it.

In 2009, a criminal case was opened after several children stated they were raped in the camp. Three deputies of the Verkhovna Rada (Ukrainian parliament) and a priest are involved in this case according to BYuT Rada deputy Hryhoriy Omelchenko. On 21 May 2010, a Verkhovna Rada commission investigating these allegations was disbanded after it failed to find enough evidence to proceed.

===Russian invasion of Ukraine===
During the Russian invasion of Ukraine, Ukrainian children between the age of 6 and 16 from occupied parts of Ukraine were being held at the Artek camp against the will of their parents. Parents can collect the children in person, but it is either dangerous if crossing the frontline or expensive to go around via third countries. The children were being taught the Russian narrative about the war, including the claim that the Kherson and Zaporizhzhia oblasts had been annexed and were therefore parts of Russia, and that the Ukrainian-controlled parts of these oblasts were being &quot;occupied&quot; by Ukraine.

In October 2022, the Russian news agency TASS stated that there were around 4,500 children from the Kherson and Zaporizhzhia oblasts on Crimean summer camps during the Russian invasion of Ukraine. Russian authorities claimed that the children were being protected from the ongoing fighting. According to Ukraine&#x27;s human rights ombudsman, Dmytro Lubinets, this was a part of a Russian effort to erase Ukrainian identity.

The camp was added to the sanctions list of the United Kingdom in July 2023 which accused it of being involved in the deportation of Ukrainian children during the invasion. The United States also sanctioned the camp and included its director, Konstantin Fedorenko, in the Specially Designated Nationals and Blocked Persons List, which results in his assets being frozen and U.S. persons being prohibited from dealing with him.

==In film==

Quite a few Soviet films were shot in the camp. Some of them were about happenings in the camp, while other used its scenery for other purposes. In 1965 a special film studio, Артекфильм, Artekfilm was established.

===Films with action in Artek===
*1928: The children&#x27;s film &quot;The Three&quot; (&quot;Трое&quot;) based on a screenplay by Vladimir Mayakovsky. 
*1935: &quot;The New Gulliver&quot; (a Communist retelling of Jonathan Swift&#x27;s classic novel), the framing story takes place at the Artek, and the main character, Petya Konstantinov is an exemplary Pioneer boy.
*1958: :ru:Военная тайна (фильм)
*1959: :ru:Потерянная фотография
*1962: &quot;Hello, Children!&quot;
*1965: :ru:Пущик едет в Прагу
*1970: &quot;Passenger from the &quot;Equator&quot;&quot;
*2008-2012, 2021: &quot;Svaty&quot; TV series
*2022&quot; &quot;Summer Time: Travel Back&quot;

===Other films shot in Artek===
Some scenes of the following films were shot in Artek.
*1956: &quot;The White Poodle&quot;
*1963: :ru:Мечте навстречу
*1967: &quot;The Andromeda Nebula&quot;
*1957: &quot;The New Adventures of Captain Wrongel&quot;
*1981: &quot;Per Aspera Ad Astra&quot;
*1985: &quot;In Search for Captain Grant&quot;
*1987: &quot;Desyat Negrityat&quot;
*1990: &quot;The Battle of the Three Kings (film)&quot;
*1991: :ru:Одиссея капитана Блада (фильм, 1991)
*1992: :ru:Сердца трёх (фильм)
*1994: :ru:Империя пиратов
*2005: , Cypress camp (Кипарисный лагерь) beach
==See also==
*Orlyonok
*Samantha Smith, the young American peace activist who visited Artek

==References==
==External links==

*The International Children Center Artek, official homepage.
*Four weeks in Artek
*Representative office of the International Children Center Artek in Kiev.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q706474" start="0" end="5" title="Artek (camp)" label="Artek"/>
<link wikidata="Q316870" start="62" end="80" title="Young Pioneer camp" label="Young Pioneer camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q166" start="89" end="98" title="Black Sea" label="Black Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026062" start="114" end="120" title="Gurzuf" label="Gurzuf"/>
<link wikidata="Q7835" start="136" end="153" title="Crimean Peninsula" label="Crimean Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q2470386" start="160" end="167" title="Ayu-Dag" label="Ayu-Dag"/>
<link wikidata="Q1897721" start="553" end="567" title="Young Pioneer organization of the Soviet Union" label="Young Pioneers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2845633" start="1483" end="1500" title="Anatoly Polyansky" label="Anatoly Polyansky"/>
<link wikidata="Q758861" start="1555" end="1571" title="USSR State Prize" label="USSR State Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338251" start="1685" end="1693" title="Orlyonok" label="Orlyonok"/>
<link wikidata="Q2184" start="1697" end="1709" title="Russian SFSR" label="Russian SFSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q2895" start="1717" end="1733" title="Byelorussian SSR" label="Byelorussian SSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q16957" start="1738" end="1750" title="East Germany" label="East Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q333403" start="1755" end="1790" title="Ernst Thälmann Pioneer Organisation" label="Ernst Thälmann Pioneer Organisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="1867" end="1873" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603431" start="1916" end="1958" title="State Management of Affairs (Ukraine)" label="Ukraine&amp;#x27;s State Management of Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="2320" end="2326" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="3047" end="3053" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q184" start="3055" end="3062" title="Belarus" label="Belarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q217" start="3064" end="3071" title="Moldova" label="Moldova"/>
<link wikidata="Q232" start="3076" end="3086" title="Kazakhstan" label="Kazakhstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q176296" start="3182" end="3202" title="Ukrainian Parliament" label="Ukrainian Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q15920546" start="3524" end="3557" title="2014 Russian annexation of Crimea" label="2014 Russian annexation of Crimea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003394" start="3613" end="3620" title="Bukovel" label="Bukovel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1288" start="3628" end="3648" title="Carpathian Mountains" label="Carpathian Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q649" start="4561" end="4567" title="Moscow" label="Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q184906" start="6076" end="6088" title="Nâzım Hikmet" label="Nâzım Hikmet"/>
<link wikidata="Q428" start="6211" end="6216" title="Quran" label="Quran"/>
<link wikidata="Q1775286" start="6306" end="6361" title="Deportation of the Crimean Tatars" label="ethnic cleansing of Crimean Tatars by the Soviet regime"/>
<link wikidata="Q176296" start="6791" end="6805" title="Verkhovna Rada" label="Verkhovna Rada"/>
<link wikidata="Q383371" start="6881" end="6885" title="BYuT" label="BYuT"/>
<link wikidata="Q110999040" start="7107" end="7134" title="Russian invasion of Ukraine" label="Russian invasion of Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q112222097" start="8256" end="8289" title="Child abductions in the Russo-Ukrainian War" label="deportation of Ukrainian children"/>
<link wikidata="Q15848109" start="8410" end="8465" title="Specially Designated Nationals and Blocked Persons List" label="Specially Designated Nationals and Blocked Persons List"/>
<link wikidata="Q132964" start="8926" end="8945" title="Vladimir Mayakovsky" label="Vladimir Mayakovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q3225036" start="8961" end="8977" title="The New Gulliver" label="The New Gulliver"/>
<link wikidata="Q41166" start="9010" end="9024" title="Jonathan Swift" label="Jonathan Swift"/>
<link wikidata="Q181488" start="9032" end="9045" title="Gulliver&amp;#x27;s Travels" label="classic novel"/>
<link wikidata="" start="9171" end="9196" title=":ru:Военная тайна (фильм)" label=":ru:Военная тайна (фильм)"/>
<link wikidata="" start="9204" end="9229" title=":ru:Потерянная фотография" label=":ru:Потерянная фотография"/>
<link wikidata="Q4190049" start="9243" end="9259" title="Hello, Children!" label="Hello, Children!"/>
<link wikidata="" start="9273" end="9295" title=":ru:Пущик едет в Прагу" label=":ru:Пущик едет в Прагу"/>
<link wikidata="Q15270903" start="9309" end="9347" title="Passenger from the &amp;quot;Equator&amp;quot;" label="Passenger from the &amp;quot;Equator&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q4410005" start="9378" end="9383" title="Svaty" label="Svaty"/>
<link wikidata="" start="9418" end="9442" title="Summer Time: Travel Back" label="Summer Time: Travel Back"/>
<link wikidata="Q1963908" start="9550" end="9566" title="The White Poodle" label="The White Poodle"/>
<link wikidata="" start="9580" end="9599" title=":ru:Мечте навстречу" label=":ru:Мечте навстречу"/>
<link wikidata="Q1971187" start="9613" end="9633" title="The Andromeda Nebula" label="The Andromeda Nebula"/>
<link wikidata="Q4326518" start="9653" end="9690" title="The New Adventures of Captain Wrongel" label="The New Adventures of Captain Wrongel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2313918" start="9710" end="9729" title="Per Aspera Ad Astra (film)" label="Per Aspera Ad Astra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2359642" start="9749" end="9776" title="In Search for Captain Grant" label="In Search for Captain Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1775194" start="9796" end="9812" title="Desyat Negrityat" label="Desyat Negrityat"/>
<link wikidata="Q3231323" start="9832" end="9868" title="The Battle of the Three Kings (film)" label="The Battle of the Three Kings (film)"/>
<link wikidata="" start="9882" end="9922" title=":ru:Одиссея капитана Блада (фильм, 1991)" label=":ru:Одиссея капитана Блада (фильм, 1991)"/>
<link wikidata="" start="9930" end="9953" title=":ru:Сердца трёх (фильм)" label=":ru:Сердца трёх (фильм)"/>
<link wikidata="" start="9961" end="9980" title=":ru:Империя пиратов" label=":ru:Империя пиратов"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338251" start="10043" end="10051" title="Orlyonok" label="Orlyonok"/>
<link wikidata="Q228579" start="10053" end="10067" title="Samantha Smith" label="Samantha Smith"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1329179" wikidata="Q6415795" url="?curid=1329179" title="Kirkoswald">
<text>Kirkoswald may refer to:

* Kirkoswald, Cumbria, a civil parish and village in the District of Eden, England
* Kirkoswald, South Ayrshire, a village in South Ayrshire council area, Scotland</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2566509" start="28" end="47" title="Kirkoswald, Cumbria" label="Kirkoswald, Cumbria"/>
<link wikidata="Q6415798" start="111" end="137" title="Kirkoswald, South Ayrshire" label="Kirkoswald, South Ayrshire"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1329185" wikidata="Q5402969" url="?curid=1329185" title="Tepito metro station">
<text>Tepito is a station of the Metro B line located north of the center of México City in the barrio Tepito in the Colonia Morelos district of the Cuauhtémoc delegation. The station&#x27;s logo represents a boxing glove. Many Mexican boxers were born and raised in Tepito, like Rubén Olivares &quot;El Púas&quot; (&quot;spikes&quot;).

The station was opened on 15 December 1999.

From 23 April to 28 June 2020, the station was temporarily closed due to the COVID-19 pandemic in Mexico.

==Ridership==
== References ==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5402969" start="0" end="6" title="Tepito metro station" label="Tepito"/>
<link wikidata="Q3239062" start="27" end="39" title="Mexico City Metro Line B" label="Metro B line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1489" start="71" end="82" title="México City" label="México City"/>
<link wikidata="Q932570" start="97" end="103" title="Tepito" label="Tepito"/>
<link wikidata="Q5148245" start="111" end="126" title="Colonia Morelos" label="Colonia Morelos"/>
<link wikidata="Q645293" start="143" end="153" title="Cuauhtémoc, D.F." label="Cuauhtémoc"/>
<link wikidata="Q1970483" start="274" end="288" title="Rubén Olivares" label="Rubén Olivares"/>
<link wikidata="Q86628344" start="454" end="481" title="COVID-19 pandemic in Mexico" label="COVID-19 pandemic in Mexico"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1329192" wikidata="Q516611" url="?curid=1329192" title="Mayen">
<text>Mayen is a town in the Mayen-Koblenz District of the Rhineland-Palatinate Federal State of Germany, in the eastern part of the Volcanic Eifel Region. As well as the main town, additional settlements include Alzheim, Kürrenberg, Hausen-Betzing, Hausen and Nitztal. Mayen is the administrative centre of the Vordereifel ‘Collective Municipality’, although it is not part of the municipality.

==Geography==
To the west, as well as to the north and south-west of Mayen, is the country landscape of the Eifel. To the east, the landscape flattens out, running towards the Koblenz-Neuwied Basin, which is divided into the northern section of the Pellenz and the southern section of the Maifeld. This area is geographically considered to be part of the Eifel. Mayen is often called ‘The Gateway to the Eifel’.

The small river Nette runs through the town, flowing from the Eifel towards Weißenthurm on the Rhine.

==History==

Even in Roman times, Mayen (Lat. &quot;Megina&quot;) was an important economic centre. From the end of the 3rd century up until the Middle Ages, potteries operated here, and their products were traded and sold across Central Europe. During prehistoric times, nearby quarries were the sources of basalt to make millstones and tuff used to make sarcophagi. These sarcophagi were found buried with significant glass artifacts as grave goods (both classes of items are displayed in the Genovevaburg Museum in Mayen).

The name Mayen probably comes from the name Megina. Records from as far back as 847 show this as a designation of the town; it was adapted by the Romans from the Celtic word &quot;magos,&quot; meaning field. In the 8th century the legend of Genoveva of Brabant, names Mayen as the seat of government of Duke Siegfried of the Pfalz.

Mayen received its first official recognition in 1041, and was granted Town Status in 1291 by Rudolf I von Habsburg, at the same time as Bernkastel, Welschbillig, Montabaur and Saarburg. Mayen is possibly linked to the town of Maifeld, which lies a short distant to the south-east, since Mayen was called the capital of the Meiengau in the Middle Ages.

During the Second World War, in particular during the allied forces air attacks of 12 December 1944 and 2 January 1945, approximately 90% of the town was destroyed. After the war and following a special referendum which addressed costs of rebuilding, the people voted to rebuild the town.

Up until 1973, Mayen was the District Centre of the Mayen District (with number-plate code MY). After 1973, the district administration was moved to Koblenz and the District was renamed Mayen-Koblenz District with the new number-plate code of MYK; Koblenz kept its own code of KO.

==Boroughs==
Because of the Kommunalreform in 1970, four villages next to Mayen were incorporated. The four villages now belong officially to the town and became Boroughs of Mayen. The Boroughs are still village-like and hold most of the Agriculture of Mayen. The Boroughs are

* Alzheim (Population approx. 1300), to the south
* Hausen (Population approx. 1500), to the east, towards Koblenz
* Kürrenberg (Population approx. 1200), to the west, towards Nürburgring
* Nitztal (Population approx. 180), to the north, towards Schloss Bürresheim

The population of Alzheim and Hausen is increasing in the last years, due to the development of new residential areas.

==Infrastructure==
*Favourable location between A 61 (Cologne, Ludwigshafen) and A 48 (Trier, Koblenz).
*Train connection: the Trans Regio branch line goes from Andernach, which is on the Koblenz to Cologne route, to Kaisersesch in the Eifel, through Mayen Ost and, less frequently, through Mayen West.
*Regular (hourly) bus routes to/from Andernach, Neuwied and Koblenz, as well as westwards into the Eifel. The town is part of the Verkehrsverbund Rhein-Mosel (Rhine-Mosel Transport Network).
*Various shopping and business areas; several supermarkets from national chains; many clothes, sports, stationary and other shops; a cinema; various petrol stations; a large furniture store; a DIY store as well as building-supply stores. Most of these are located in a shopping area on the outskirts of the town, towards Koblenz.
*The town centre is very attractive and has a large pedestrian precinct.
*The town has its own hospital, the St Elisabeth Krankenhaus, and emergency services.

==Industry==
Basalt mining, slate mining, cardboard industry, machine-production, aluminium- and artificial material processing.

==Sights==

*Genovevaburg from the 13th century, with the Eifel Museum and the Slate Mining Museum housed inside.
*St Clemens Parish Church with its twisted spire (symbol of the town, rebuilt in 1945)
*Herz-Jesu Church (built in 1911/12)
*Volcanic Information Station in the Vulkanpark (Volcanic Park).
*Nearby in the Nette Valley: Schloss Bürresheim, which was filmed as Castle Grunewald in the United States adventure film, &quot;Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade&quot;.
*Swimming and leisure pool, with one of the longest hanging water slides in the world.

==Events==
*Lukasmarkt: yearly fair in October with rides and amusements for a week, as well as a two-day livestock market (the founding event of the fair).
*Burgfestspiele (Castle Festival Show): for several weeks in late spring, the courtyard of the castle is transformed into an open-air theatre and used for various productions.
*Stein- und Burgfest (Stone and Castle Festival); local craftsmen and guilds showcase their trade. Usually for two days towards in September.

==Education==
Mayen is the location of 
*Fachhochschule für öffentliche Verwaltung (Training College for Public Administration), 
*two Gymnasien (top-level secondary schools): the Megina Gymnasium and the Wirtschaftsgymnasium (Economics Grammar School); 
*a Realschule (middle-level secondary school): the Albert-Schweizer-Realschule; 
*two Hauptschulen (lower-level secondary school): Hinter Burg, St Veit; a Berufschule (vocational school); 
*various Grundschulen (primary schools); 
*two Förderschulen (schools for children with disabilities); and 
*vocational schools: one for beekeeping school, and one for stonemasonry.

The Bundeswehr (German Armed Forces) has a forces school at the Mayen Barracks, where troops are trained for psychological aspects of leadership of operations, as well as dealing with the media. This school is unique in Germany. Michigan State University, based in Michigan (USA), has a summer program in Mayen.

==Notable people==
*Henry Alken (1753–1827), sculptor and painter
*Balthasar Krems (1760–1813), inventor of the sewing machine
*Friedrich Wilhelm Raiffeisen (1818–1888), social reformer and founder of the cooperative movement, was District Secretary in Mayen and church hosts the Evangelical Church of Mayen
*Jacques Loeb (1859–1924), physiologist and biologist
*Fritz Seitz (1905–1949), Catholic Priest in Diocese of Speyer, longtime prisoner in Dachau concentration camp
*Werner Lamberz (1929–1978), politician
*Mario Adorf (born 1930), actor and author
*Winfried Schäfer (born 1950), football player and coach
*Reinhard Saftig (born 1952), football player and trainer
*Rabeya Müller (1957–2024), Islamic scholar
*Stephan Ackermann (born 1963), bishop
*Dominik Meffert (born 1981), tennis player
*Marc Hennerici (born 1982), racing driver
*Jan Siewert (born 1982), football coach
*Tim Kruse (born 1983), football player
==Twin towns – sister cities==

Mayen is twinned with:
* Godalming, England, United Kingdom
* Joigny, France
* Uherské Hradiště, Czech Republic

==References==
==External links==

*http://www.mayen.de
*http://www.deutsches-schieferbergwerk.de</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q516611" start="0" end="5" title="Mayen" label="Mayen"/>
<link wikidata="Q8593" start="23" end="45" title="Mayen-Koblenz" label="Mayen-Koblenz District"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200" start="53" end="73" title="Rhineland-Palatinate" label="Rhineland-Palatinate"/>
<link wikidata="Q43702" start="74" end="87" title="Federal State" label="Federal State"/>
<link wikidata="Q481543" start="306" end="343" title="Vordereifel" label="Vordereifel ‘Collective Municipality’"/>
<link wikidata="Q152356" start="499" end="504" title="Eifel" label="Eifel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1463803" start="640" end="647" title="Pellenz" label="Pellenz"/>
<link wikidata="Q897120" start="680" end="687" title="Maifeld" label="Maifeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q648282" start="820" end="825" title="Nette (Rhine)" label="Nette"/>
<link wikidata="Q541616" start="880" end="891" title="Weißenthurm" label="Weißenthurm"/>
<link wikidata="Q584" start="899" end="904" title="Rhine" label="Rhine"/>
<link wikidata="Q269052" start="1675" end="1694" title="Genevieve of Brabant" label="Genoveva of Brabant"/>
<link wikidata="Q76956" start="1861" end="1882" title="Rudolf I of Germany" label="Rudolf I von Habsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q155622" start="1904" end="1914" title="Bernkastel-Kues" label="Bernkastel"/>
<link wikidata="Q553409" start="1916" end="1928" title="Welschbillig" label="Welschbillig"/>
<link wikidata="Q632991" start="1930" end="1939" title="Montabaur" label="Montabaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q543639" start="1944" end="1952" title="Saarburg" label="Saarburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="2175" end="2188" title="Allied forces (World War II)" label="allied forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q3104" start="2560" end="2567" title="Koblenz" label="Koblenz"/>
<link wikidata="Q452440" start="2721" end="2735" title="Amalgamation (politics)" label="Kommunalreform"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="2931" end="2942" title="Agriculture" label="Agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q3104" start="3078" end="3085" title="Koblenz" label="Koblenz"/>
<link wikidata="Q152207" start="3147" end="3158" title="Nürburgring" label="Nürburgring"/>
<link wikidata="Q322433" start="3217" end="3235" title="Schloss Bürresheim" label="Schloss Bürresheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q10827" start="3405" end="3409" title="Bundesautobahn 61" label="A 61"/>
<link wikidata="Q365" start="3411" end="3418" title="Cologne" label="Cologne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2910" start="3420" end="3432" title="Ludwigshafen" label="Ludwigshafen"/>
<link wikidata="Q10817" start="3438" end="3442" title="Bundesautobahn 48" label="A 48"/>
<link wikidata="Q3138" start="3444" end="3449" title="Trier" label="Trier"/>
<link wikidata="Q3104" start="3451" end="3458" title="Koblenz" label="Koblenz"/>
<link wikidata="Q490058" start="3518" end="3527" title="Andernach" label="Andernach"/>
<link wikidata="Q490058" start="3697" end="3706" title="Andernach" label="Andernach"/>
<link wikidata="Q3967" start="3708" end="3715" title="Neuwied" label="Neuwied"/>
<link wikidata="Q3104" start="3720" end="3727" title="Koblenz" label="Koblenz"/>
<link wikidata="Q43338" start="4354" end="4360" title="Basalt" label="Basalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q44497" start="4361" end="4367" title="mining" label="mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q207079" start="4369" end="4374" title="slate" label="slate"/>
<link wikidata="Q44497" start="4375" end="4381" title="mining" label="mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q389782" start="4383" end="4392" title="cardboard" label="cardboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q268592" start="4393" end="4401" title="Industry (economics)" label="industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q11019" start="4403" end="4410" title="machine" label="machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q187939" start="4411" end="4421" title="Manufacturing" label="production"/>
<link wikidata="Q663" start="4423" end="4432" title="aluminium" label="aluminium"/>
<link wikidata="Q79529" start="4438" end="4457" title="artificial material" label="artificial material"/>
<link wikidata="Q2114240" start="4458" end="4468" title="Process manufacturing" label="processing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502536" start="4484" end="4496" title="Genovevaburg" label="Genovevaburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q322433" start="4803" end="4821" title="Schloss Bürresheim" label="Schloss Bürresheim"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5045" end="5055" title="Lukasmarkt" label="Lukasmarkt"/>
<link wikidata="Q270222" start="6365" end="6390" title="Michigan State University" label="Michigan State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2591521" start="6469" end="6480" title="Henry Alken" label="Henry Alken"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6516" end="6531" title="Balthasar Krems" label="Balthasar Krems"/>
<link wikidata="Q49013" start="6561" end="6575" title="sewing machine" label="sewing machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q45141" start="6577" end="6605" title="Friedrich Wilhelm Raiffeisen" label="Friedrich Wilhelm Raiffeisen"/>
<link wikidata="Q62982" start="6758" end="6770" title="Jacques Loeb" label="Jacques Loeb"/>
<link wikidata="Q42603" start="6846" end="6852" title="Priest (Christianity)" label="Priest"/>
<link wikidata="Q251276" start="6856" end="6873" title="Diocese of Speyer" label="Diocese of Speyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q151198" start="6896" end="6921" title="Dachau concentration camp" label="Dachau concentration camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q2561874" start="6923" end="6937" title="Werner Lamberz" label="Werner Lamberz"/>
<link wikidata="Q61322" start="6963" end="6974" title="Mario Adorf" label="Mario Adorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q551381" start="7006" end="7022" title="Winfried Schäfer" label="Winfried Schäfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q544634" start="7063" end="7078" title="Reinhard Saftig" label="Reinhard Saftig"/>
<link wikidata="Q2125018" start="7121" end="7134" title="Rabeya Müller" label="Rabeya Müller"/>
<link wikidata="Q67799" start="7165" end="7182" title="Stephan Ackermann" label="Stephan Ackermann"/>
<link wikidata="Q84816" start="7204" end="7219" title="Dominik Meffert" label="Dominik Meffert"/>
<link wikidata="Q91355" start="7248" end="7262" title="Marc Hennerici" label="Marc Hennerici"/>
<link wikidata="Q60738841" start="7291" end="7302" title="Jan Siewert" label="Jan Siewert"/>
<link wikidata="Q2434121" start="7332" end="7341" title="Tim Kruse" label="Tim Kruse"/>
<link wikidata="Q184711" start="7412" end="7419" title="Sister city" label="twinned"/>
<link wikidata="Q909146" start="7428" end="7437" title="Godalming" label="Godalming"/>
<link wikidata="Q476584" start="7465" end="7471" title="Joigny" label="Joigny"/>
<link wikidata="Q502993" start="7482" end="7498" title="Uherské Hradiště" label="Uherské Hradiště"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1329194" wikidata="Q5465369" url="?curid=1329194" title="Food Records">
<text>Food Records was a British rock record label set up in 1984 by David Balfe (formerly of Zoo Records), who later took on Andy Ross as his partner. Originally formed as an independent record label with distribution going through Rough Trade Distribution, Food also licensed acts through WEA Records, before becoming closely associated with the EMI group&#x27;s Parlophone label. EMI invested in the label and then in 1994 EMI gained complete control and folded it into Parlophone in 2000. Ross died in 2022 aged 65.

==Artists==
Food was sold to EMI by David Balfe in 1994. Andy Ross continued running Food as a sub-label of EMI, where it was the record label of Blur, Strangelove, Idlewild, Jesus Jones, Dubstar, The Supernaturals, Octopus and Grass Show and Fungus from Sweden.

==&quot;The Food Christmas EP&quot;==

In December 1989, Food Records released The Food Christmas EP (FOOD 23) that featured Food artists covering each other&#x27;s songs. Crazyhead covered Diesel Park West&#x27;s &quot;Like Princes Do&quot;, Jesus Jones covered Crazyhead&#x27;s &quot;I Don&#x27;t Want That Kind Of Love&quot; and Diesel Park West covered Jesus Jones&#x27; &quot;Info-Freako&quot;. The EP was released on CD, 7&quot; vinyl, 12&quot; and a limited gatefold sleeve 12&quot; vinyl.

The EP charted at #63 on the UK Singles Chart.

;Track listing (7&quot; and 12&quot;)
#&quot;I Don&#x27;t Want That Kind Of Love&quot; (Reverb) – 4:10 performed by Jesus Jones
#&quot;Like Princes Do&quot; (John Butler) – 3:25 performed by Crazyhead
#&quot;Info Freako&quot; (Mike Edwards) – 3:52 performed by Diesel Park West
#*CD versions reverse the track order to begin with &quot;Info Freako&quot;.

;Credits
*Mike Edwards - producer (&quot;I Don&#x27;t Want That Kind Of Love&quot;)
*Rick Wilson - producer (&quot;Like Princes Do&quot; and &quot;Info Freako&quot;)
*John Butler - producer (&quot;Info Freako&quot;)

==See also==
* List of record labels

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5465369" start="0" end="12" title="Food Records" label="Food Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q11399" start="27" end="31" title="Rock music" label="rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q18127" start="32" end="44" title="record label" label="record label"/>
<link wikidata="Q5231074" start="63" end="74" title="David Balfe" label="David Balfe"/>
<link wikidata="Q8074062" start="88" end="99" title="Zoo Records" label="Zoo Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q104178016" start="120" end="129" title="Andy Ross (music executive)" label="Andy Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542343" start="170" end="194" title="independent record label" label="independent record label"/>
<link wikidata="Q385558" start="227" end="251" title="Rough Trade Distribution" label="Rough Trade Distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q21077" start="285" end="296" title="Warner Music Group" label="WEA Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q183412" start="342" end="345" title="EMI" label="EMI"/>
<link wikidata="Q208909" start="359" end="369" title="Parlophone" label="Parlophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q183412" start="377" end="380" title="EMI" label="EMI"/>
<link wikidata="Q485820" start="661" end="665" title="Blur (band)" label="Blur"/>
<link wikidata="Q7621507" start="667" end="678" title="Strangelove (band)" label="Strangelove"/>
<link wikidata="Q784088" start="680" end="688" title="Idlewild (band)" label="Idlewild"/>
<link wikidata="Q4387765" start="690" end="701" title="Jesus Jones" label="Jesus Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q372843" start="703" end="710" title="Dubstar" label="Dubstar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2414509" start="712" end="729" title="The Supernaturals" label="The Supernaturals"/>
<link wikidata="Q7077080" start="731" end="738" title="Octopus (Scottish band)" label="Octopus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5597464" start="743" end="753" title="Grass Show (band)" label="Grass Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q950290" start="951" end="960" title="Crazyhead" label="Crazyhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q4387765" start="1022" end="1033" title="Jesus Jones" label="Jesus Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q5275015" start="1111" end="1127" title="Diesel Park West" label="Diesel Park West"/>
<link wikidata="Q193259" start="1306" end="1322" title="UK Singles Chart" label="UK Singles Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q4387765" start="1441" end="1452" title="Jesus Jones" label="Jesus Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q950290" start="1516" end="1525" title="Crazyhead" label="Crazyhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q5275015" start="1586" end="1602" title="Diesel Park West" label="Diesel Park West"/>
<link wikidata="Q120801938" start="1913" end="1934" title="List of record labels" label="List of record labels"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1329198" wikidata="Q316870" url="?curid=1329198" title="Young Pioneer camp">
<text>Young Pioneer camp () was the name for the vacation or summer camp of Young Pioneers. In the 20th century these camps existed in many socialist countries, particularly in the Soviet Union.

The Young Pioneer camps of the Soviet Union were the place of vacation for children from the Young Pioneer organization of the Soviet Union during summer and winter holidays.

== History ==

The first All-Union Young Pioneer camp, Artek was formed on June 16, 1925. The Young Pioneer camp phenomenon grew in popularity and in 1973 approximately forty thousand Young Pioneer camps existed in the USSR. In that year, approximately 9,300,000 children had vacations in these camps. There were different types of camps: sanitation camps, sports camps, tourist camps, thematic camps (for young technicians, young naturalists, young geologists and children of other potential careers). Generally speaking if parents wanted their child or children to go to one of these Young Pioneer camps, they had to pay a fee to apply for accommodation in the camp. However, typically the state organization where the parent worked &quot;sponsored&quot; the child by allotting the worker&#x27;s child a place in the camp free of charge to the parent or parents as an incident to the parent&#x27;s employment.

The main Young Pioneer camps of the Soviet Union were All-Union Young Pioneer camp &quot;Artek&quot; (near Gurzuf), republican camps: &quot;Orlyonok&quot; (near Tuapse, Russian SFSR, opened in 1960), &quot;Okean&quot; (near Vladivostok, Russian SFSR, opened in 1983), &#x27; (near Odessa, Ukrainian SSR) and &#x27; (in Minsk Oblast, Byelorussian SSR). It was very difficult to apply for accommodation to the main camps, especially to Artek, as they were very popular.

Western children also sometimes attended Soviet Young Pioneer camps, including children from Canada in the 1970s.

In East Germany the Ernst Thälmann Pioneer Organisation built a pioneer camp (known as a &quot;pioneer republic&quot;) in 1952 at Werbellinsee north-east of Berlin. It was based on the Artek camp. It was considered a privilege to be chosen to go to this camp.

== See also ==

* Young Pioneer organization of the Soviet Union
* Ernst Thälmann Pioneer Organisation
* Pioneers Palace

==References==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q316870" start="0" end="18" title="Young Pioneer camp" label="Young Pioneer camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q5338673" start="43" end="51" title="Annual leave" label="vacation"/>
<link wikidata="Q876852" start="55" end="66" title="summer camp" label="summer camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q581754" start="70" end="84" title="Pioneer movement" label="Young Pioneers"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="175" end="187" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1897721" start="283" end="329" title="Young Pioneer organization of the Soviet Union" label="Young Pioneer organization of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q706474" start="421" end="426" title="Artek (camp)" label="Artek"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="585" end="589" title="Soviet Union" label="USSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q484591" start="797" end="807" title="natural history" label="naturalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q520549" start="816" end="825" title="geologist" label="geologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q706474" start="1333" end="1379" title="Artek (camp)" label="All-Union Young Pioneer camp &amp;quot;Artek&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026062" start="1386" end="1392" title="Gurzuf" label="Gurzuf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338251" start="1419" end="1427" title="Orlyonok" label="Orlyonok"/>
<link wikidata="Q196702" start="1440" end="1446" title="Tuapse" label="Tuapse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2184" start="1448" end="1460" title="Russian SFSR" label="Russian SFSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q4127484" start="1485" end="1490" title="Ocean (youth camp)" label="Okean"/>
<link wikidata="Q959" start="1503" end="1514" title="Vladivostok" label="Vladivostok"/>
<link wikidata="Q1874" start="1560" end="1566" title="Odessa" label="Odessa"/>
<link wikidata="Q133356" start="1568" end="1581" title="Ukrainian SSR" label="Ukrainian SSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q192959" start="1598" end="1610" title="Minsk Province (Belarus)" label="Minsk Oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q2895" start="1612" end="1628" title="Byelorussian SSR" label="Byelorussian SSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q16957" start="1866" end="1878" title="East Germany" label="East Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q333403" start="1883" end="1918" title="Ernst Thälmann Pioneer Organisation" label="Ernst Thälmann Pioneer Organisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q315446" start="1993" end="2005" title="Werbellinsee" label="Werbellinsee"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="2020" end="2026" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1897721" start="2142" end="2188" title="Young Pioneer organization of the Soviet Union" label="Young Pioneer organization of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q333403" start="2191" end="2226" title="Ernst Thälmann Pioneer Organisation" label="Ernst Thälmann Pioneer Organisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q819590" start="2229" end="2244" title="Pioneers Palace" label="Pioneers Palace"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1329206" wikidata="Q5267188" url="?curid=1329206" title="Devil's Night Out">
<text>Devil&#x27;s Night Out is the debut studio album by the Mighty Mighty Bosstones. It was released in 1989 by Taang! Records. It was one of the first albums to mix ska and hardcore punk.

==Production==
The album was produced by Paul Kolderie. Jimmy Gestapo, of Murphy&#x27;s Law, duets on &quot;A Little Bit Ugly&quot;.

==Critical reception==

AllMusic called the album &quot;an energetic, skankin&#x27; party album fusing ska with punk and hard rock, with more of an emphasis on ska than the band would show on later records.&quot; &quot;The New Rolling Stone Album Guide&quot; wrote that the album &quot;doesn&#x27;t blend ska and hardcore so much as it bashes them together.&quot; &quot;Trouser Press&quot; called it &quot;a strong and confident debut.&quot;

==Track listing==
#&quot;Devil&#x27;s Night Out&quot; – 2:35
#&quot;Howwhywuz, Howwhyam&quot; – 2:32
#&quot;Drunks And Children&quot; – 2:36
#&quot;Hope I Never Lose My Wallet&quot; – 2:06
#&quot;Haji&quot; – 2:03
#&quot;The Bartender&#x27;s Song&quot; – 2:16
#&quot;Patricia&quot; – 2:48
#&quot;The Cave (Cognito Fiesta Version)&quot; – 2:12
#&quot;Do Somethin&#x27; Crazy&quot; – 2:27
#&quot;A Little Bit Ugly&quot; – 3:47

===Japan CD bonus tracks===
#&lt;li value=11&gt;&quot;Ain&#x27;t Talkin&#x27; &#x27;bout Love&quot; – 2:26
#&quot;Enter Sandman&quot; – 2:57
*Previously available on &quot;Where&#x27;d You Go?&quot; EP.

==Personnel==
*Dicky Barrett – lead vocals, artwork
*Nate Albert – guitar, backing vocals
*Joe Gittleman – bass, backing vocals
*Tim &quot;Johnny Vegas&quot; Burton – saxophone, backing vocals
*Tim Bridewell – trombone
*Josh Dalsimer – drums
*Ben Carr – Bosstone, backing vocals
*Davey Holmes – keyboards, backing vocals 
*Bill Conway – trombone, percussion, backing vocals
*Vinny Nobile of the Bim Skala Bim – horns 
*Mike Costello – harmonica
*Jimmy Gestapo – guest vocals on track 10
*Paul Q. Kolderie – producer, engineer
*Sean Slade – producer, engineer
*Rob Dimit – engineer
*R. Spencer – graphic design, layout design
*Jane Gulick – design

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1327973" start="52" end="79" title="the Mighty Mighty Bosstones" label="the Mighty Mighty Bosstones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758003" start="108" end="122" title="Taang! Records" label="Taang! Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645322" start="227" end="240" title="Paul Kolderie" label="Paul Kolderie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1953822" start="260" end="277" title="Murphy&amp;#x27;s Law (band)" label="Murphy&amp;#x27;s Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q31181" start="344" end="352" title="AllMusic" label="AllMusic"/>
<link wikidata="Q751678" start="539" end="572" title="The New Rolling Stone Album Guide" label="The New Rolling Stone Album Guide"/>
<link wikidata="Q976486" start="690" end="703" title="Trouser Press" label="Trouser Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q3302552" start="1243" end="1282" title="Ain&amp;#x27;t Talkin&amp;#x27; &amp;#x27;bout Love" label="Ain&amp;#x27;t Talkin&amp;#x27; &amp;#x27;bout Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q66057605" start="1303" end="1316" title="Enter Sandman" label="Enter Sandman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7993093" start="1361" end="1381" title="Where&amp;#x27;d You Go? (EP)" label="Where&amp;#x27;d You Go?"/>
<link wikidata="Q5273833" start="1408" end="1421" title="Dicky Barrett" label="Dicky Barrett"/>
<link wikidata="Q6968588" start="1446" end="1457" title="Nate Albert" label="Nate Albert"/>
<link wikidata="Q6210047" start="1484" end="1497" title="Joe Gittleman" label="Joe Gittleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7803257" start="1522" end="1557" title="Tim &amp;quot;Johnny Vegas&amp;quot; Burton" label="Tim &amp;quot;Johnny Vegas&amp;quot; Burton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5230330" start="1673" end="1685" title="Davey Holmes" label="Davey Holmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4913669" start="1788" end="1801" title="Bim Skala Bim" label="Bim Skala Bim"/>
<link wikidata="Q126077217" start="1839" end="1852" title="Jimmy Gestapo" label="Jimmy Gestapo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645322" start="1881" end="1897" title="Paul Q. Kolderie" label="Paul Q. Kolderie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7441436" start="1920" end="1930" title="Sean Slade" label="Sean Slade"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1329211" wikidata="Q433211" url="?curid=1329211" title="American Political Science Association">
<text>The American Political Science Association (APSA) is a professional association of political scientists in the United States. Founded in 1903 in the Tilton Memorial Library (now Tilton Hall) of Tulane University in New Orleans, it publishes four academic journals: &quot;American Political Science Review&quot;, &quot;Perspectives on Politics&quot;, &quot;Journal of Political Science Education,&quot; and &quot;PS – Political Science &amp; Politics&quot;. APSA Organized Sections publish or are associated with 15 additional journals.

APSA presidents serve one-year terms. The current president is Mark E. Warren of the University of British Columbia. Woodrow Wilson, who later became President of the United States, was APSA president in 1909. APSA&#x27;s headquarters are at 1527 New Hampshire Avenue NW in Washington, D.C., in a historic building that was owned by Admiral George Remy, labor leader Samuel Gompers, the American War Mothers, and Harry Garfield, son of President James A. Garfield and president of the association from 1921 to 1922.

APSA administers the Centennial Center for Political Science and Public Affairs, which offers fellowships, conference, research space and grants for scholars, and administers Pi Sigma Alpha, the honor society for political science students. It also periodically sponsors seminars and other events for political scientists, policymakers, the media, and the general public.

== Conferences and meetings ==
The association broadly aims to encourage scholarly understanding of political ideas, norms, behaviors, and institutions, and to inform public choices about government, governance, and public policy. APSA&#x27;s mission is to &quot;support excellence in scholarship and teaching and informed discourse about politics, policy and civic participation.&quot; APSA conducts several annual conferences, which provide an environment for scholars and other professionals to network and present their work, along with other pertinent and useful resources. The APSA Annual Meeting is among the world&#x27;s largest gatherings of political scientists. It occurs on Labor Day weekend each summer.

The APSA Teaching and Learning Conference is a smaller working group conference hosting cutting-edge approaches, techniques, and methodologies for the political science classroom. The conference provides a forum for scholars to share effective and innovative teaching and learning models and to discuss broad themes and values of political science education—especially the scholarship of teaching and learning.

With funding from the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation, APSA has organized political science workshops in various locations in Africa, APSA Africa Workshops. The first workshop was convened in Dakar, Senegal in partnership with the West African Research Center from July 6–27, 2008. The annual residential workshops are led by a joint U.S. and African organizing team and aimed at mid-and junior-level scholars residing in Africa. They will enhance the capacities of political scientists and their resources in East and West Africa while also providing a forum for supporting their ongoing research. Each three week workshop brings together up to 30 scholars and cover substantive issues, methodologies, and reviews of research. See also, APSA International Programs.

== Centennial Center for Political Science and Public Affairs ==
Through its facilities and endowed funding programs, APSA&#x27;S Centennial Center for Political Science and Public Affairs supports political science teaching, research, and public engagement. Opened in 2003, the centenary of APSA&#x27;s establishment, the Centennial Center encourages individual research and writing in all fields of political science, facilitates collaboration among scholars working within the discipline and across the social and behavioral sciences and humanities, and promotes communication between scholars and the public.

The Centennial Center, its facilities, and research support programs continue to be made possible in part through the donations of APSA members. It assists APSA members with the costs of research, including travel, interviews, access to archives, or costs for a research assistant. Funds can also be used to assist scholars in publishing their research. Grants can range in size from $500 to $10,000, depending upon the research fund.

== Congressional Fellowship Program ==
The APSA Congressional Fellowship Program is a highly selective, nonpartisan program devoted to expanding knowledge and awareness of Congress. Since 1953, it has brought select political scientists, journalists, federal employees, health specialists, and other professionals to Capitol Hill to experience Congress at work through fellowship placements on congressional staffs.

The nine-month program begins each November with an intensive one-month introduction to Congress taught by leading experts in the field. After orientation, fellows work in placements of their choosing and also participate in ongoing seminars and enrichment programs.

Through this unique opportunity, the American Political Science Association enhances public understanding of policymaking and improves the quality of scholarship, teaching and reporting on American national politics.

== Publications ==
One key component of APSA&#x27;s mission is to support political science education and the professional development of its practitioners. The APSA publications program attempts to fill the diverse needs of political scientists in academic settings as well as practitioners working outside of academia, and students at various stages of their education.

===Journals===
*&quot;American Political Science Review&quot; (APSR)
*&quot;Journal of Political Science Education&quot;
*&quot;Perspectives on Politics&quot;
*&quot;PS: Political Science &amp; Politics&quot;
*&quot;Organized Section Journals&quot;

== List of APSA presidents ==

* Frank J. Goodnow, 1904–1905
* Albert Shaw, 1905–1906
* Frederick N. Judson, 1906–1907
* James Bryce, 1907–1908
* Abbott Lawrence Lowell, 1908–1909
* Woodrow Wilson, 1909–1910
* Simeon E. Baldwin, 1910–1911
* Albert Bushnell Hart, 1911–1912
* Westel W. Willoughby, 1912–1913
* John Bassett Moore, 1913–1914
* Ernst Freund, 1914–1915
* Jesse Macy, 1915–1916
* Munroe Smith, 1916–1917
* Henry Jones Ford, 1917–1918
* Paul Samuel Reinsch, 1918–1919
* Leo S. Rowe, 1919–1920
* William A. Dunning, 1920–1921
* Harry A. Garfield, 1921–1922
* James Wilford Garner, 1923–1924
* Charles E. Merriam, 1924–1925
* Charles A. Beard, 1925–1926
* William Bennett Munro, 1926–1927
* Jesse S. Reeves, 1927–1928
* John A. Fairlie, 1928–1929
* Benjamin F. Shambaugh, 1929–1930
* Edward S. Corwin, 1930–1931
* William F. Willoughby, 1931–1932
* Isidor Loeb, 1932–1933
* Walter J. Shepard, 1933–1934
* Francis W. Coker, 1934–1935
* Arthur N. Holcombe, 1935–1936
* Thomas Reed Powell, 1936–1937
* Clarence A. Dykstra, 1937–1938
* , 1938–1939
* Robert C. Brooks, 1939–1940
* Frederic A. Ogg, 1940–1941
* William Anderson, 1941–1942
* Robert E. Cushman, 1942–1943
* Leonard D. White, 1943–1944
* John Gaus, 1944–1945
* Walter F. Dodd, 1945–1946
* Arthur W. MacMahon, 1946–1947
* Henry R. Spencer, 1947–1948
* Quincy Wright, 1948–1949
* James K. Pollock, 1949–1950
* Peter H. Odegard, 1950–1951
* Luther Gulick, 1951–1952
* E. Pendleton Herring, 1952–1953
* Ralph J. Bunche, 1953–1954
* Charles McKinley, 1954–1955
* Harold D. Lasswell, 1955–1956
* E.E. Schattschneider, 1956–1957
* V.O. Key, Jr., 1957–1958
* R. Taylor Cole, 1958–1959
* Carl B. Swisher, 1959–1960
* Emmette Redford, 1960–1961
* Charles S. Hyneman, 1961–1962
* Carl J. Friedrich, 1962–1963
* C. Herman Pritchett, 1963–1964
* David B. Truman, 1964–1965
* Gabriel A. Almond, 1965–1966
* Robert A. Dahl, 1966–1967
* Merle Fainsod, 1967–1968
* David Easton, 1968–1969
* Karl W. Deutsch, 1969–1970
* Robert E. Lane, 1970–1971
* Heinz Eulau, 1971–1972
* Robert E. Ward, 1972–1973
* Avery Leiserson, 1973–1974
* Austin Ranney, 1974–1975
* James MacGregor Burns, 1975–1976
* Samuel H. Beer, 1976–1977
* John C. Wahlke, 1977–1978
* Leon D. Epstein, 1978–1979
* Warren E. Miller, 1979–1980
* Charles E. Lindblom, 1980–1981
* Seymour Martin Lipset, 1981–1982
* William H. Riker, 1982–1983
* Philip E. Converse, 1983–1984
* Richard F. Fenno, Jr., 1984–1985
* Aaron B. Wildavsky, 1985–1986
* Samuel P. Huntington, 1986–1987
* Kenneth N. Waltz, 1987–1988
* Lucian W. Pye, 1988–1989
* Judith N. Shklar, 1989–1990
* Theodore J. Lowi, 1990–1991
* James Q. Wilson, 1991–1992
* Lucius J. Barker, 1992–1993
* Charles O. Jones, 1993–1994
* Sidney Verba, 1994–1995
* Arend Lijphart, 1995–1996
* Elinor Ostrom, 1996–1997
* M. Kent Jennings, 1997–1998
* Matthew Holden Jr., 1998–1999
* Robert O. Keohane, 1999–2000
* Robert Jervis, 2000–2001
* Robert Putnam, 2001–2002
* Theda Skocpol, 2002–2003
* Susanne Hoeber Rudolph, 2003–2004
* Margaret Levi, 2004–2005
* Ira Katznelson, 2005–2006
* Robert Axelrod, 2006–2007
* Dianne Pinderhughes, 2007–2008
* Peter Katzenstein, 2008–2009
* Henry E. Brady, 2009–2010
* Carole Pateman, 2010–2011
* G. Bingham Powell, 2011–2012
* Jane Mansbridge, 2012–2013
* John Aldrich, 2013–2014
* Rodney E. Hero, 2014–2015
* Jennifer Hochschild, 2015–2016
* David A. Lake, 2016–2017
* Kathleen Thelen, 2017–2018
* Rogers Smith, 2018–2019
* Paula D. McClain 2019–2020
* Janet Box-Steffensmeier, 2020–2021
* John Ishiyama, 2021–2022
* Lisa Martin, 2022–2023
* Mark E. Warren, 2023–2024
* Taeku Lee, 2024–2025
* Susan Stokes, President-Elect
== APSA organized sections ==
APSA members may also join the 41 membership organized sections focused around research themes in political science.
* 1. Federalism and Intergovernmental Relations
* 2. Law and Courts
* 3. Legislative Studies
* 4. Public Policy
* 5. Political Organizations and Parties
* 6. Public Administration
* 7. Conflict Processes
* 8. Representation and Electoral Systems
* 9. Presidents and Executive Politics
* 10. Political Methodology
* 11. Religion and Politics
* 13. Urban Politics
* 15. Science, Technology and Environmental Politics
* 16. Women and Politics Research
* 17. Foundations of Political Theory
* 18. Information Technology and Politics
* 19. International Security
* 20. Comparative Politics
* 21. European Politics and Society
* 22. State Politics and Policy
* 23. Political Communication
* 24. Politics and History
* 25. Political Economy
* 27. New Political Science
* 28. Political Psychology
* 29. Political Science Education
* 30. Politics, Literature, and Film
* 31. Foreign Policy
* 32. Elections, Public Opinion, and Voting Behavior
* 33. Race, Ethnicity and Politics
* 34. International History and Politics
* 35. Comparative Democratization
* 36. Human Rights
* 37. Qualitative and Multi-method Research
* 38. Sexuality and Politics
* 39. Health Politics and Policy
* 40. Canadian Politics
* 41. Political Networks
* 42. Experimental Research
* 43. Migration and Citizenship
* 44. African Politics
* 45. Class and Inequality
* 46. Ideas, Knowledge and Politics
* 47. American Political Thought
*48. International Collaboration
*49. Middle East and North Africa Politics
==Presidential rankings==
Since 2015, they have conducted three rankings of American Presidents.

===2015===
In 2015, Republican President Abraham Lincoln was rated the greatest President, while Democratic President James Buchanan was considered the worst. Barack Obama, president at the time of the survey, was ranked 18th.

===2018===
In 2018, Republican Abraham Lincoln was ranked the greatest American President, while Donald Trump, president at the time of the survey, was ranked last.

===2024===
In 2024, Republican Abraham Lincoln was ranked the greatest American President for the third time, while Republican Donald Trump was ranked last for the second time. Democrat Joe Biden, president at the time of this survey, was ranked 13th, tied with Federalist John Adams.

== Awards ==
To recognize excellence in the profession, the Association offers the following awards:
* Dissertation Awards
* Paper and Article Awards
* Book Awards
* Career Awards
* Goodnow Award
* Teaching Award and Campus Teaching Award Recognition

In addition to the APSA awards, the APSA organized sections also present over 100 awards at every Annual Meeting to recognize important research and contributions to the profession. These awards are presented at the Association&#x27;s Annual Meeting.

===The Herbert Simon Award===
The Herbert Simon Award is given to &quot;significant contributions to public administration scholarship.&quot; The recipients are:
* 2018 Rachel VanSickle-Ward, Pitzer College: The Deveil is in the Details. SUNY Press, 2014.
* 2018 Daniel Sabet, Social Impact: Police Reform in Mexico: Infromal Politics and the Challenge of Institutional Change. Stanford University Press. 2012.
* 2017 Sean Gailmard, University of California, Berkeley: Learning While Governing: Expertise and Accountability in the Executive Branch. University of Chicago Press, 2013.
* 2017 John W. Patty, Washington University: Learning While Governing: Expertise and Accountability in the Executive Branch. University of Chicago Press, 2013.
* 2016 Manuel P. Teodoro, Texas A&amp;M University: Bureaucratic Ambition: Careers, Motives, and the Innovative Administrator. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press. 
* 2014 Jonathan Koppell, Arizona State University: World Rule: Accountability, Legitimacy, and the Design of Global Governance. University of Chicago Press, 2010
* 2013 Barry Bozeman, Arizona State University: Public Values and Public Interest: Counterbalancing Economic Individualism (Georgetown University Press, 2007)
* 2012 Donald Moynihan, University of Wisconsin, Madison: The Dynamics of Performance Management (Georgetown University Press, 2008)
* 2010 Paul C. Light, New York University: A Government III Executed: The Decline of the Federal Service and How to Reverse It
* 2007 Arjen Boin, Leiden University: The Politics of Crisis Management: Public Leadership Under Pressure
* 2007 Eric K. Stern, Uppsala Universistet: The Politics of Crisis Management: Public Leadership Under Pressure
* 2007 Bengt Sundelius, Uppsala Universitet: The Politics of Crisis Management: Public Leadership Under Pressure
* 2007 Dvora Yanow, Cal State University, East Bay: Constructing “Race” and “Ethnicity” in America: Category-Making in Public Policy and Administration
* 2007 Paul &#x27;t Hart, The Politics of Crisis Management: Public Leadership Under Pressure
* 2006 Henry S. Richardson, Georgetown University: Democratic Autonomy: Public Reasoning about the Ends of Policy (Oxford University Press, 2003)
* 2005 John Rohr: Civil Servants and Their Constitutions (University of Kansas Press)
* 2005 Steven Maynard-Moody, University of Kansas: Cops, Teachers, Counselors: Stories from the Front-Lines of Public Service (University of Michigan Press)
* 2005 Michael Musheno, Arizona State University: Cops, Teachers, Counselors: Stories from the Front-Lines of Public Service (University of Michigan Press)

== Notes ==
== References ==
==External links==
* American Political Science Association
* Political Science Now</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q433211" start="4" end="42" title="American Political Science Association" label="American Political Science Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q433211" start="44" end="48" title="American Political Science Association" label="APSA"/>
<link wikidata="Q829080" start="55" end="79" title="professional association" label="professional association"/>
<link wikidata="Q36442" start="83" end="103" title="Political science" label="political scientists"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="111" end="124" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193547" start="194" end="211" title="Tulane University" label="Tulane University"/>
<link wikidata="Q34404" start="215" end="226" title="New Orleans" label="New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q737498" start="246" end="262" title="academic journal" label="academic journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4744701" start="271" end="304" title="American Political Science Review" label="American Political Science Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q7170763" start="318" end="342" title="Perspectives on Politics" label="Perspectives on Politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q15708820" start="412" end="449" title="PS – Political Science &amp;amp; Politics" label="PS – Political Science &amp;amp; Politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q121862755" start="600" end="614" title="Mark E. Warren" label="Mark E. Warren"/>
<link wikidata="Q391028" start="622" end="652" title="University of British Columbia" label="University of British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q34296" start="654" end="668" title="Woodrow Wilson" label="Woodrow Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="687" end="717" title="President of the United States" label="President of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q8210331" start="784" end="804" title="New Hampshire Avenue" label="New Hampshire Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="811" end="827" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q282657" start="904" end="918" title="Samuel Gompers" label="Samuel Gompers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4745354" start="924" end="944" title="American War Mothers" label="American War Mothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q591629" start="950" end="964" title="Harry Garfield" label="Harry Garfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q34597" start="983" end="1000" title="James A. Garfield" label="James A. Garfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q7189976" start="1229" end="1243" title="Pi Sigma Alpha" label="Pi Sigma Alpha"/>
<link wikidata="Q9078534" start="1249" end="1262" title="honor society" label="honor society"/>
<link wikidata="Q504703" start="1325" end="1332" title="seminar" label="seminar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156854" start="1377" end="1388" title="policymaker" label="policymaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q848352" start="2113" end="2122" title="Labor Day" label="Labor Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q4758812" start="2579" end="2606" title="Andrew W. Mellon Foundation" label="Andrew W. Mellon Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="4543" end="4551" title="United States Congress" label="Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479463" start="4587" end="4607" title="political scientists" label="political scientists"/>
<link wikidata="Q2305815" start="4688" end="4700" title="Capitol Hill" label="Capitol Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q4744701" start="5669" end="5702" title="American Political Science Review" label="American Political Science Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q1443506" start="5930" end="5946" title="Frank J. Goodnow" label="Frank J. Goodnow"/>
<link wikidata="Q4711210" start="5960" end="5971" title="Albert Shaw (journalist)" label="Albert Shaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q336497" start="6018" end="6029" title="James Bryce, 1st Viscount Bryce" label="James Bryce"/>
<link wikidata="Q306766" start="6043" end="6065" title="Abbott Lawrence Lowell" label="Abbott Lawrence Lowell"/>
<link wikidata="Q34296" start="6079" end="6093" title="Woodrow Wilson" label="Woodrow Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q886146" start="6107" end="6124" title="Simeon E. Baldwin" label="Simeon E. Baldwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4709846" start="6138" end="6158" title="Albert Bushnell Hart" label="Albert Bushnell Hart"/>
<link wikidata="Q6340487" start="6172" end="6192" title="Westel W. Willoughby" label="Westel W. Willoughby"/>
<link wikidata="Q173897" start="6206" end="6224" title="John Bassett Moore" label="John Bassett Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q5394992" start="6238" end="6250" title="Ernst Freund" label="Ernst Freund"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186630" start="6264" end="6274" title="Jesse Macy" label="Jesse Macy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6936847" start="6288" end="6300" title="Munroe Smith" label="Munroe Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q5724067" start="6314" end="6330" title="Henry Jones Ford" label="Henry Jones Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q5946855" start="6344" end="6363" title="Paul Samuel Reinsch" label="Paul Samuel Reinsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q21073089" start="6377" end="6388" title="Leo S. Rowe" label="Leo S. Rowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q8004524" start="6402" end="6420" title="William A. Dunning" label="William A. Dunning"/>
<link wikidata="Q591629" start="6434" end="6451" title="Harry A. Garfield" label="Harry A. Garfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q6145511" start="6465" end="6485" title="James Wilford Garner" label="James Wilford Garner"/>
<link wikidata="Q716312" start="6499" end="6517" title="Charles E. Merriam" label="Charles E. Merriam"/>
<link wikidata="Q719860" start="6531" end="6547" title="Charles A. Beard" label="Charles A. Beard"/>
<link wikidata="Q15504618" start="6561" end="6582" title="William Bennett Munro" label="William Bennett Munro"/>
<link wikidata="Q5345210" start="6689" end="6705" title="Edward S. Corwin" label="Edward S. Corwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q8008896" start="6719" end="6740" title="William F. Willoughby" label="William F. Willoughby"/>
<link wikidata="Q4799804" start="6840" end="6858" title="Arthur N. Holcombe" label="Arthur N. Holcombe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5126373" start="6904" end="6923" title="Clarence A. Dykstra" label="Clarence A. Dykstra"/>
<link wikidata="Q8004417" start="7010" end="7026" title="William Anderson (political scientist)" label="William Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q960619" start="7071" end="7087" title="Leonard D. White" label="Leonard D. White"/>
<link wikidata="Q7964799" start="7124" end="7138" title="Walter F. Dodd" label="Walter F. Dodd"/>
<link wikidata="Q4799619" start="7152" end="7170" title="Arthur W. MacMahon" label="Arthur W. MacMahon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4349539" start="7214" end="7227" title="Quincy Wright" label="Quincy Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q1680653" start="7241" end="7257" title="James K. Pollock" label="James K. Pollock"/>
<link wikidata="Q23618751" start="7271" end="7287" title="Peter H. Odegard" label="Peter H. Odegard"/>
<link wikidata="Q764062" start="7301" end="7314" title="Luther Gulick (social scientist)" label="Luther Gulick"/>
<link wikidata="Q5322092" start="7328" end="7348" title="E. Pendleton Herring" label="E. Pendleton Herring"/>
<link wikidata="Q213500" start="7362" end="7377" title="Ralph J. Bunche" label="Ralph J. Bunche"/>
<link wikidata="Q314462" start="7421" end="7439" title="Harold D. Lasswell" label="Harold D. Lasswell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5366537" start="7453" end="7473" title="E.E. Schattschneider" label="E.E. Schattschneider"/>
<link wikidata="Q7906154" start="7487" end="7500" title="V.O. Key, Jr." label="V.O. Key, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q52156901" start="7542" end="7557" title="Carl B. Swisher" label="Carl B. Swisher"/>
<link wikidata="Q5373575" start="7571" end="7586" title="Emmette Redford" label="Emmette Redford"/>
<link wikidata="Q77442" start="7632" end="7649" title="Carl J. Friedrich" label="Carl J. Friedrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q5240515" start="7696" end="7711" title="David B. Truman" label="David B. Truman"/>
<link wikidata="Q729543" start="7725" end="7742" title="Gabriel A. Almond" label="Gabriel A. Almond"/>
<link wikidata="Q83907" start="7756" end="7770" title="Robert A. Dahl" label="Robert A. Dahl"/>
<link wikidata="Q6819677" start="7784" end="7797" title="Merle Fainsod" label="Merle Fainsod"/>
<link wikidata="Q471431" start="7811" end="7823" title="David Easton" label="David Easton"/>
<link wikidata="Q77454" start="7837" end="7852" title="Karl W. Deutsch" label="Karl W. Deutsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7343823" start="7866" end="7880" title="Robert E. Lane" label="Robert E. Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q6104642" start="7976" end="7989" title="Austin Ranney" label="Austin Ranney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1529607" start="8003" end="8024" title="James MacGregor Burns" label="James MacGregor Burns"/>
<link wikidata="Q7410894" start="8038" end="8052" title="Samuel H. Beer" label="Samuel H. Beer"/>
<link wikidata="Q60729619" start="8066" end="8080" title="John C. Wahlke" label="John C. Wahlke"/>
<link wikidata="Q44196142" start="8094" end="8109" title="Leon D. Epstein" label="Leon D. Epstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q2549694" start="8123" end="8139" title="Warren E. Miller (Political Scientist)" label="Warren E. Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q462573" start="8153" end="8172" title="Charles E. Lindblom" label="Charles E. Lindblom"/>
<link wikidata="Q352959" start="8186" end="8207" title="Seymour Martin Lipset" label="Seymour Martin Lipset"/>
<link wikidata="Q326238" start="8221" end="8237" title="William H. Riker" label="William H. Riker"/>
<link wikidata="Q2086156" start="8251" end="8269" title="Philip E. Converse" label="Philip E. Converse"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325646" start="8283" end="8304" title="Richard Fenno" label="Richard F. Fenno, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q1918516" start="8318" end="8336" title="Aaron B. Wildavsky" label="Aaron B. Wildavsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q19074" start="8350" end="8370" title="Samuel P. Huntington" label="Samuel P. Huntington"/>
<link wikidata="Q356069" start="8384" end="8400" title="Kenneth N. Waltz" label="Kenneth N. Waltz"/>
<link wikidata="Q6696725" start="8414" end="8427" title="Lucian W. Pye" label="Lucian W. Pye"/>
<link wikidata="Q455736" start="8441" end="8457" title="Judith N. Shklar" label="Judith N. Shklar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7781847" start="8471" end="8487" title="Theodore J. Lowi" label="Theodore J. Lowi"/>
<link wikidata="Q636710" start="8501" end="8516" title="James Q. Wilson" label="James Q. Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q60728444" start="8530" end="8546" title="Lucius J. Barker" label="Lucius J. Barker"/>
<link wikidata="Q5081332" start="8560" end="8576" title="Charles O. Jones" label="Charles O. Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355609" start="8590" end="8602" title="Sidney Verba" label="Sidney Verba"/>
<link wikidata="Q641796" start="8616" end="8630" title="Arend Lijphart" label="Arend Lijphart"/>
<link wikidata="Q153761" start="8644" end="8657" title="Elinor Ostrom" label="Elinor Ostrom"/>
<link wikidata="Q26884766" start="8671" end="8687" title="M. Kent Jennings" label="M. Kent Jennings"/>
<link wikidata="Q6790687" start="8701" end="8719" title="Matthew Holden Jr." label="Matthew Holden Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q544500" start="8733" end="8750" title="Robert Keohane" label="Robert O. Keohane"/>
<link wikidata="Q3435538" start="8764" end="8777" title="Robert Jervis" label="Robert Jervis"/>
<link wikidata="Q351815" start="8791" end="8804" title="Robert Putnam" label="Robert Putnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q130064" start="8818" end="8831" title="Theda Skocpol" label="Theda Skocpol"/>
<link wikidata="Q17466129" start="8845" end="8867" title="Susanne Hoeber Rudolph" label="Susanne Hoeber Rudolph"/>
<link wikidata="Q6759639" start="8881" end="8894" title="Margaret Levi" label="Margaret Levi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420350" start="8908" end="8922" title="Ira Katznelson" label="Ira Katznelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q583438" start="8936" end="8950" title="Robert Axelrod (political scientist)" label="Robert Axelrod"/>
<link wikidata="Q5271698" start="8964" end="8983" title="Dianne Pinderhughes" label="Dianne Pinderhughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q84931" start="8997" end="9014" title="Peter Katzenstein" label="Peter Katzenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q20768714" start="9028" end="9042" title="Henry E. Brady" label="Henry E. Brady"/>
<link wikidata="Q299627" start="9056" end="9070" title="Carole Pateman" label="Carole Pateman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1682612" start="9115" end="9130" title="Jane Mansbridge" label="Jane Mansbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q6218515" start="9144" end="9156" title="John Aldrich (political scientist)" label="John Aldrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q29134700" start="9198" end="9217" title="Jennifer Hochschild" label="Jennifer Hochschild"/>
<link wikidata="Q30069795" start="9258" end="9273" title="Kathleen Thelen" label="Kathleen Thelen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7359338" start="9287" end="9299" title="Rogers Smith" label="Rogers Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q7154664" start="9313" end="9329" title="Paula D. McClain" label="Paula D. McClain"/>
<link wikidata="Q49361498" start="9342" end="9365" title="Janet Box-Steffensmeier" label="Janet Box-Steffensmeier"/>
<link wikidata="Q88805229" start="9379" end="9392" title="John Ishiyama" label="John Ishiyama"/>
<link wikidata="Q11347969" start="9406" end="9417" title="Lisa Martin (political scientist)" label="Lisa Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q121862755" start="9431" end="9445" title="Mark E. Warren" label="Mark E. Warren"/>
<link wikidata="Q29024078" start="9950" end="9971" title="Society for Political Methodology" label="Political Methodology"/>
<link wikidata="Q5054351" start="10399" end="10420" title="Caucus for a New Political Science" label="New Political Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243931" start="11196" end="11227" title="Historical rankings of presidents of the United States" label="rankings of American Presidents"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="11250" end="11260" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q91" start="11271" end="11286" title="Abraham Lincoln" label="Abraham Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="11327" end="11337" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q12325" start="11348" end="11362" title="James Buchanan" label="James Buchanan"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="11555" end="11567" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="11751" end="11763" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q6279" start="11810" end="11819" title="Joe Biden" label="Joe Biden"/>
<link wikidata="Q42189" start="11886" end="11896" title="Federalist Party" label="Federalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q11806" start="11897" end="11907" title="John Adams" label="John Adams"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12583" end="12604" title="Rachel VanSickle-Ward" label="Rachel VanSickle-Ward"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12677" end="12689" title="Daniel Sabet" label="Daniel Sabet"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12832" end="12845" title="Sean Gailmard" label="Sean Gailmard"/>
<link wikidata="Q112467616" start="13005" end="13018" title="John W. Patty" label="John W. Patty"/>
<link wikidata="Q131525634" start="13165" end="13182" title="Manuel P. Teodoro" label="Manuel P. Teodoro"/>
<link wikidata="Q16211749" start="13336" end="13352" title="Jonathan Koppell" label="Jonathan Koppell"/>
<link wikidata="Q20985286" start="13498" end="13511" title="Barry Bozeman" label="Barry Bozeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q98831951" start="13657" end="13672" title="Donald Moynihan" label="Donald Moynihan"/>
<link wikidata="Q105946005" start="13790" end="13803" title="Paul C. Light" label="Paul C. Light"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13917" end="13927" title="Arjen Boin" label="Arjen Boin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14023" end="14036" title="Eric K. Stern" label="Eric K. Stern"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14135" end="14150" title="Bengt Sundelius" label="Bengt Sundelius"/>
<link wikidata="Q112515901" start="14248" end="14259" title="Dvora Yanow" label="Dvora Yanow"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14400" end="14417" title="Paul &amp;#x27;t Hart" label="Paul &amp;#x27;t Hart"/>
<link wikidata="Q16499826" start="14494" end="14513" title="Henry S. Richardson" label="Henry S. Richardson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6255463" start="14640" end="14649" title="John Rohr" label="John Rohr"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14726" end="14746" title="Steven Maynard-Moody" label="Steven Maynard-Moody"/>
<link wikidata="Q131543350" start="14883" end="14898" title="Michael Musheno" label="Michael Musheno"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1329212" wikidata="Q6765258" url="?curid=1329212" title="Marion Junction (New Jersey)">
<text>Marion Junction is a railroad junction in western Jersey City, New Jersey. Currently, it connects CSX&#x27;s River Line (via Conrail&#x27;s Northern Branch) to Conrail&#x27;s Passaic and Harsimus Line. The two lines merge towards the west, allowing through trains from upstate New York to continue towards the rest of the country. The track actually making the connection is known as the Marion Running Track.

==History==
The New Jersey Railroad (NJRR; later part of the Pennsylvania Railroad, PRR) and Paterson and Hudson River Railroad (later part of the Erie Railroad) both built their lines to this point in 1834 and November 28, 1833, respectively. It took four more years for the NJRR to cut through Bergen Hill, or the lower New Jersey Palisades; prior to that, passengers and freight transferred to horse-drawn carriages over the hill. The junction was a simple one, with both lines merging towards the east, allowing both railroads to access the east side of the Palisades and the Hudson River.

In 1861, due to congestion on the PRR cut, the Erie built the Long Dock Tunnel through Bergen Hill and Marion Junction became a minor transfer point. In 1873 the newly opened New York, Susquehanna and Western Railway (NYS&amp;W) and Montclair Railway (later New York and Greenwood Lake Railway, NY&amp;GL) began using trackage rights over the Erie route to Marion Junction in order to reach the PRR cut. NY&amp;GL rerouted passenger trains to the Erie&#x27;s Pavonia Terminal about 1890, and NYS&amp;W did the same in 1911. NYS&amp;W continued to maintain a freight house at Marion Junction.

With the decline of the passenger railroads in the mid-20th century, Marion Junction lost much traffic. Facing east, it was not in the best alignment for freight traffic between upstate New York and points south.

Around 1994, New Jersey Transit paid to modify the junction to point west, as part of moving the River Line to the west side of the Palisades, clearing the east side for the Hudson-Bergen Light Rail. This made the junction the preferred (and in some cases the only) route for freight traffic.

== See also ==
*Hudson Connecting Railway
* Croxton, Jersey City
* Long Dock Tunnel
* List of New Jersey railroad junctions

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6765258" start="0" end="15" title="Marion Junction (New Jersey)" label="Marion Junction"/>
<link wikidata="Q336764" start="21" end="38" title="railroad junction" label="railroad junction"/>
<link wikidata="Q26339" start="50" end="73" title="Jersey City, New Jersey" label="Jersey City, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q856783" start="98" end="101" title="CSX Transportation" label="CSX"/>
<link wikidata="Q7337587" start="109" end="119" title="River Line (Conrail)" label="River Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q633760" start="125" end="132" title="Conrail" label="Conrail"/>
<link wikidata="Q7058168" start="140" end="155" title="Northern Branch (Conrail)" label="Northern Branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q633760" start="160" end="167" title="Conrail" label="Conrail"/>
<link wikidata="Q7142521" start="175" end="200" title="Passaic and Harsimus Line" label="Passaic and Harsimus Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q7058168" start="388" end="408" title="Marion Running Track" label="Marion Running Track"/>
<link wikidata="Q116837164" start="427" end="446" title="New Jersey Railroad" label="New Jersey Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197895" start="472" end="493" title="Pennsylvania Railroad" label="Pennsylvania Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q16983405" start="504" end="538" title="Paterson and Hudson River Railroad" label="Paterson and Hudson River Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353770" start="558" end="571" title="Erie Railroad" label="Erie Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q4891517" start="707" end="718" title="Bergen Hill" label="Bergen Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q3338968" start="733" end="753" title="New Jersey Palisades" label="New Jersey Palisades"/>
<link wikidata="Q3140" start="991" end="1003" title="Hudson River" label="Hudson River"/>
<link wikidata="Q14705714" start="1068" end="1084" title="Long Dock Tunnel" label="Long Dock Tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4891517" start="1093" end="1104" title="Bergen Hill" label="Bergen Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1725537" start="1181" end="1222" title="New York, Susquehanna and Western Railway" label="New York, Susquehanna and Western Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7014891" start="1239" end="1256" title="New York and Greenwood Lake Railway (1878–1943)" label="Montclair Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2355239" start="1324" end="1339" title="trackage rights" label="trackage rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q6294677" start="1401" end="1408" title="Journal Square Transportation Center" label="PRR cut"/>
<link wikidata="Q7156043" start="1465" end="1481" title="Pavonia Terminal" label="Pavonia Terminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="1785" end="1793" title="New York (state)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q498553" start="1826" end="1844" title="New Jersey Transit" label="New Jersey Transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7337587" start="1910" end="1920" title="River Line (Conrail)" label="River Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357874" start="1987" end="2011" title="Hudson-Bergen Light Rail" label="Hudson-Bergen Light Rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q5928615" start="2123" end="2148" title="Hudson Connecting Railway" label="Hudson Connecting Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5189628" start="2151" end="2171" title="Croxton, Jersey City" label="Croxton, Jersey City"/>
<link wikidata="Q14705714" start="2174" end="2190" title="Long Dock Tunnel" label="Long Dock Tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6591830" start="2193" end="2230" title="List of New Jersey railroad junctions" label="List of New Jersey railroad junctions"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1329217" wikidata="Q7345252" url="?curid=1329217" title="Robert Harkness">
<text>Professor Robert Harkness FRS FRSE FGS (28 July 1816 – 4 October 1878), was a British geologist and mineralogist.

==Early life==
Robert Harkness was born in Ormskirk on 28 July 1816. His family moved to south-west Scotland when he was young and he was educated at the high school, Dumfries. From 1833 to 1834 he studied at the University of Edinburgh, where he acquired an interest in geology from the teachings of Robert Jameson and JD Forbes. Returning to Ormskirk, he worked zealously at the local geology, especially on the Coal-measures and New Red Sandstone, his first paper (read before the Manchester Geol. Soc. in 1843) being on &quot;The Climate of the Coal Epoch&quot;.

==Family and career==
In 1848, he returned to reside in Dumfries with his family. Here he commenced to work on the Silurian rocks of the SW of Scotland; in 1849 he carried his investigations into Cumberland. In these regions during the next few years, he discovered much information of the strata and their Fossils, especially graptolites, and elaborated in papers read before the Geological Society of London. He wrote also on the New Red rocks of the north of England and Scotland.

As the successor to William Nicol, in 1853, Harkness was appointed professor of geology in Queen&#x27;s College, Cork, and in 1856 he was elected fellow of the Royal Society. During this period, he wrote some articles on the geology of parts of Ireland, and exercised much influence as a teacher, but he returned to England during his vacations and devoted himself assiduously to the geology of the Lake district. He was also a constant attendant at the meetings of the British Association. In 1854 he was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh, his proposer being John Hutton Balfour.

In 1876, the syllabus for the Queen&#x27;s Colleges in Ireland was altered, and Professor Harkness was required to lecture not only on geology, palaeontology, mineralogy and physical geography, but also on zoology and botany. Due to the strain, he decided to relinquish his post and retired.

He died soon after, in Dublin, on 4 October 1878.

==Legacy==
There is a memoir of Harkness, by J. G. Goodchild, in the &quot;Transactions of the Cumberland Association&quot; No. viii. (with portrait). In memory of Harkness, his sister established two Harkness scholarships. One scholarship (of the value of about £35 a year, tenable for three years) for women, tenable at either Girton or Newnham College, Cambridge, is awarded triennially to the best candidate in an examination in geology and palaeontology, provided that proficiency be shown; the other, for men, is vested in the hands of the university of Cambridge, and is awarded annually, any member of the university being eligible who has graduated as a B.A., provided that not more than three years have elapsed since the 19th day of December next following his final examination for the degree of bachelor of arts.

==References==


==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7345252" start="10" end="25" title="Robert Harkness" label="Robert Harkness"/>
<link wikidata="Q123885" start="26" end="29" title="Royal Society of London" label="FRS"/>
<link wikidata="Q5438598" start="30" end="34" title="FRSE" label="FRSE"/>
<link wikidata="Q520549" start="86" end="95" title="geologist" label="geologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020958" start="158" end="166" title="Ormskirk" label="Ormskirk"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="215" end="223" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q652035" start="282" end="290" title="Dumfries" label="Dumfries"/>
<link wikidata="Q160302" start="328" end="351" title="University of Edinburgh" label="University of Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273078" start="416" end="430" title="Robert Jameson" label="Robert Jameson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356328" start="435" end="444" title="James David Forbes" label="JD Forbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q652035" start="739" end="747" title="Dumfries" label="Dumfries"/>
<link wikidata="Q62412" start="798" end="806" title="Silurian" label="Silurian"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="826" end="834" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q23360" start="879" end="889" title="Cumberland, England" label="Cumberland"/>
<link wikidata="Q12758989" start="973" end="979" title="stratum" label="strata"/>
<link wikidata="Q40614" start="990" end="996" title="Fossil" label="Fossil"/>
<link wikidata="Q332403" start="1010" end="1020" title="graptolite" label="graptolite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230936" start="1064" end="1092" title="Geological Society of London" label="Geological Society of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330440" start="1188" end="1201" title="William Nicol (geologist)" label="William Nicol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1574185" start="1259" end="1285" title="Queen&amp;#x27;s College, Cork" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s College, Cork"/>
<link wikidata="Q123885" start="1328" end="1341" title="Royal Society" label="Royal Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="1413" end="1420" title="Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="1484" end="1491" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q211778" start="1567" end="1580" title="Lake District" label="Lake district"/>
<link wikidata="Q918782" start="1638" end="1657" title="British Association" label="British Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q117467" start="1698" end="1724" title="Royal Society of Edinburgh" label="Royal Society of Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q510424" start="1745" end="1764" title="John Hutton Balfour" label="John Hutton Balfour"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205" start="1911" end="1924" title="palaeontology" label="palaeontology"/>
<link wikidata="Q83353" start="1926" end="1936" title="mineralogy" label="mineralogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q52107" start="1941" end="1959" title="physical geography" label="physical geography"/>
<link wikidata="Q431" start="1973" end="1980" title="zoology" label="zoology"/>
<link wikidata="Q441" start="1985" end="1991" title="botany" label="botany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761" start="2083" end="2089" title="Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q797846" start="2440" end="2446" title="Girton College, Cambridge" label="Girton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247589" start="2450" end="2476" title="Newnham College, Cambridge" label="Newnham College, Cambridge"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1329232" wikidata="Q213655" url="?curid=1329232" title="Friedrich Sertürner">
<text>Friedrich Wilhelm Adam Sertürner (19 June 1783 – 20 February 1841) was a German pharmacist and a pioneer of alkaloid chemistry. He is best known for his discovery of morphine, which he isolated from opium in 1804, and for conducting tests, including on himself, to evaluate its physiological effects.

==Biography==
Sertürner was born, the fourth of six children, to Joseph Simon Serdinier and Marie Therese Brockmann on 19 June 1783, in Neuhaus, Holy Roman Empire (now part of Paderborn). The family may have had origins in Sardinia. His father called himself an &quot;architectus&quot;, serving surveyor and engineer to the prince bishop. After his father died, he became a pharmacist&#x27;s apprentice at the Cramersche Hofapotheke in Paderborn. He completed the apprenticeship in four years and passed the qualifying examination on August 2, 1803.

Sertürner worked on the isolation of morphine from opium from 1804. He called the isolated alkaloid &quot;morphium&quot; after the Greek god of dreams, Morpheus. He published a comprehensive paper on its isolation, crystallization, crystal structure, and pharmacological properties, which he studied first in stray dogs and then in self-experiments. Morphine was not only the first alkaloid to be extracted from opium, but the first ever alkaloid to be isolated from any plant. Thus Sertürner became the first person to isolate the active ingredient associated with a medicinal plant or herb. The branch of science that he originated has since become known as alkaloid chemistry.

In 1806 Sertürner moved to Einbeck, working as a pharmacists&#x27; assistant to Ratsapotheker Daniel Wilhelm Hinck (1783 -1813). In 1809, Sertürner opened the first pharmacy he owned, in Einbeck. Between 1812 and 1814 he dabbled in work to improve guns and cannons for the army and navy. In 1813 his right to run the pharmacy had to be contested and he lost the case in 1817. He however got his brother-in-law Heinrich Karl Daniel Bolstorff to take over his pharmacy and move to Hamelin where he worked as Ratsapotheke succeeding Johann Friedrich Westrumb (1751-1819). He continued to investigate the effects of morphine. After the publication of his paper &quot;Ueber das Morphium als Hauptbestandteil des Opiums&quot; in 1817, his work on morphine became more widely known and morphine became more widely used. In 1821 he married Eleonore Dorette von Rettberg of Einbeck and would have six children. In 1822, Sertürner bought the main pharmacy in Hamelin (Rathaus Apotheke), where he worked until his death on 20 February 1841. Around 1831 he was involved in studying a cholera epidemic that affected Hamelin and recognized an organismic cause for the disease. He suffered from arthritis during his last years and it is said that he took morphine for relief. There have been suggestions that he may have become addicted. The autopsy noted that his entire body gave the appearance of dropsy. He was buried in Einbeck. His son Victor took up the position of Ratsapotheke after his death.

==Isolation of morphine==
During his efforts to isolate morphine from opium between 1804 and 1816, Sertürner relied on animal and human testing to evaluate the results of his work. In 1805 he published a paper 1805, in Johann Trommsdorff’s &quot;Journal der Pharmacie&quot; (volume 13) calling it meconic acid. In volume 14 he called it the &quot;Principium somniferum&quot; of opium. His 1806 paper describes a highly impure alcoholic extract of opium that was tested on a mouse and three dogs, one of which died as a result.

As described in his 1817 paper, he finally found success extracting colourless crystals of pure morphine by precipitation. He dissolved the crystals in alcohol and tested the effects of this solution by swallowing it together with 3 boys, “none older than seventeen years.” He administered it gradually, in three doses of half-grains. After the third dose, symptoms of intoxication increased to an almost fatal extent. Concerned by this result, Sertürner drank several ounces of vinegar along with the boys, inducing extreme vomiting. He was not fully conscious while responding to the situation:
Sertürner hypothesized that, because lower doses of the drug were needed, it would be less addictive. However, he became addicted to the drug, warning that &quot;I consider it my duty to attract attention to the terrible effects of this new substance I called morphium in order that calamity may be averted.&quot; It was renamed to morphine by Joseph Louis Gay-Lussac in 1817.

Heinrich Emanuel Merck began the sale of morphine a few years after Sertürner&#x27;s paper was published. Jean-Francois Derosne and Armand Séguin have both been claimed to have discovered morphine before Sertürner.

==Recognition==
In 1817 Sertürner was awarded an honorary doctorate from Jena University. The degree was initiated by Goethe who also had Sertürner inducted into the Jenaer Societät für die gesammte Mineralogie as an honorary member. Gay Lussac brought attention in France to the work of Sertürner. In 1831, Sertürner received the Montyon Prize from the Institut de France with the title ‘Benefactor of Humanity’. In 1924, a street in Münster was named after him as Sertürnerstraße.

==References==
==Further reading==
*
*
*
*
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q213655" start="0" end="32" title="Friedrich Sertürner" label="Friedrich Wilhelm Adam Sertürner"/>
<link wikidata="Q105186" start="80" end="90" title="pharmacist" label="pharmacist"/>
<link wikidata="Q70702" start="108" end="116" title="alkaloid" label="alkaloid"/>
<link wikidata="Q81225" start="166" end="174" title="morphine" label="morphine"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="447" end="464" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2971" start="478" end="487" title="Paderborn" label="Paderborn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2971" start="738" end="747" title="Paderborn" label="Paderborn"/>
<link wikidata="Q46452" start="904" end="909" title="opium" label="opium"/>
<link wikidata="Q70702" start="944" end="952" title="alkaloid" label="alkaloid"/>
<link wikidata="Q194012" start="1005" end="1013" title="Morpheus (mythology)" label="Morpheus"/>
<link wikidata="Q284256" start="1068" end="1083" title="crystallization" label="crystallization"/>
<link wikidata="Q895901" start="1085" end="1102" title="crystal structure" label="crystal structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q70702" start="1291" end="1299" title="alkaloid" label="alkaloid"/>
<link wikidata="Q188840" start="1421" end="1436" title="Medicinal plants" label="medicinal plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q207123" start="1440" end="1444" title="herb" label="herb"/>
<link wikidata="Q47244" start="1561" end="1568" title="Einbeck" label="Einbeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q47244" start="1721" end="1728" title="Einbeck" label="Einbeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q81225" start="2146" end="2154" title="morphine" label="morphine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4062" start="2483" end="2490" title="Hamelin" label="Hamelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q152234" start="2919" end="2925" title="dropsy" label="dropsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q38344" start="3142" end="3148" title="animal testing" label="animal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331083" start="3153" end="3166" title="human subject research" label="human testing"/>
<link wikidata="Q84669" start="3242" end="3260" title="Johann Trommsdorff" label="Johann Trommsdorff"/>
<link wikidata="Q113796" start="3659" end="3672" title="precipitation (chemistry)" label="precipitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q99910" start="4526" end="4548" title="Heinrich Emanuel Merck" label="Heinrich Emanuel Merck"/>
<link wikidata="Q23760557" start="4632" end="4653" title="Jean-Francois Derosne" label="Jean-Francois Derosne"/>
<link wikidata="Q442695" start="4658" end="4671" title="Armand Séguin" label="Armand Séguin"/>
<link wikidata="Q154561" start="4815" end="4830" title="Jena University" label="Jena University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5879" start="4860" end="4866" title="Johann Wolfgang von Goethe" label="Goethe"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4908" end="4952" title="Jenaer Societät für die gesammte Mineralogie" label="Jenaer Societät für die gesammte Mineralogie"/>
<link wikidata="Q153185" start="4976" end="4986" title="Joseph Louis Gay-Lussac" label="Gay Lussac"/>
<link wikidata="Q372160" start="5073" end="5086" title="Montyon Prize" label="Montyon Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q2742" start="5177" end="5184" title="Münster" label="Münster"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1329234" wikidata="Q6591830" url="?curid=1329234" title="List of New Jersey railroad junctions">
<text>This is a List of New Jersey railroad junctions, present and past.

Abbreviations used in the table:
*ACRR = Atlantic City Railroad
*B&amp;O = Baltimore and Ohio Railroad
*BRW = Blairstown Railway
*C&amp;A = Camden and Amboy Railroad
*CNJ = Central Railroad of New Jersey
*CSAO = Conrail Shared Assets Operations
*DLW = Delaware, Lackawanna and Western Railroad
*ERIE = Erie Railroad
*EL = Erie Lackawanna Railroad
*LHR = Lehigh and Hudson River Railway
*LV = Lehigh Valley Railroad
*NJT = New Jersey Transit
*LNE = Lehigh and New England Railroad
*M&amp;E = Morristown &amp; Erie Railway
*NS = Norfolk Southern
*NYC = New York Central Railroad
*NY&amp;GL = New York and Greenwood Lake Railway
*NYSW = New York, Susquehanna and Western Railway
*PRR = Pennsylvania Railroad
*P-RSL = Pennsylvania–Reading Seashore Lines
*RDG = Reading Railroad
*SIRT = Staten Island Rapid Transit Railroad
*WJ&amp;S = West Jersey and Seashore Railroad
*W&amp;DR = Williamstown and Delaware River Railroad
Line names may not be official, but serve to identify the line.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6591830" start="10" end="47" title="List of New Jersey railroad junctions" label="List of New Jersey railroad junctions"/>
<link wikidata="Q2869388" start="109" end="131" title="Atlantic City Railroad" label="Atlantic City Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q805757" start="143" end="170" title="Baltimore and Ohio Railroad" label="Baltimore and Ohio Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q4924233" start="178" end="196" title="Blairstown Railway" label="Blairstown Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q116837284" start="208" end="233" title="Camden and Amboy Railroad" label="Camden and Amboy Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053974" start="241" end="271" title="Central Railroad of New Jersey" label="Central Railroad of New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5162679" start="280" end="312" title="Conrail Shared Assets Operations" label="Conrail Shared Assets Operations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183933" start="320" end="361" title="Delaware, Lackawanna and Western Railroad" label="Delaware, Lackawanna and Western Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353770" start="370" end="383" title="Erie Railroad" label="Erie Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q444183" start="390" end="414" title="Erie Lackawanna Railroad" label="Erie Lackawanna Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q647518" start="422" end="453" title="Lehigh and Hudson River Railway" label="Lehigh and Hudson River Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q490228" start="460" end="482" title="Lehigh Valley Railroad" label="Lehigh Valley Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q498553" start="490" end="508" title="New Jersey Transit" label="New Jersey Transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3229121" start="516" end="547" title="Lehigh and New England Railroad" label="Lehigh and New England Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q6914113" start="559" end="588" title="Morristown &amp;amp; Erie Railway" label="Morristown &amp;amp; Erie Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321054" start="595" end="611" title="Norfolk Southern" label="Norfolk Southern"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371464" start="619" end="644" title="New York Central Railroad" label="New York Central Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q7014891" start="658" end="693" title="New York and Greenwood Lake Railway (1878-1943)" label="New York and Greenwood Lake Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1725537" start="702" end="743" title="New York, Susquehanna and Western Railway" label="New York, Susquehanna and Western Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197895" start="751" end="772" title="Pennsylvania Railroad" label="Pennsylvania Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2069121" start="782" end="817" title="Pennsylvania–Reading Seashore Lines" label="Pennsylvania–Reading Seashore Lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q837860" start="825" end="841" title="Reading Railroad" label="Reading Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273068" start="850" end="886" title="Staten Island Rapid Transit Railroad" label="Staten Island Rapid Transit Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q15091625" start="899" end="932" title="West Jersey and Seashore Railroad" label="West Jersey and Seashore Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q131740124" start="945" end="985" title="Williamstown and Delaware River Railroad" label="Williamstown and Delaware River Railroad"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1329240" wikidata="Q455616" url="?curid=1329240" title="Kiyosi Itô">
<text>was a Japanese mathematician who made fundamental contributions to probability theory, in particular, the theory of stochastic processes. He invented the concept of stochastic integral and stochastic differential equation, and is known as the founder of so-called Itô calculus. He also pioneered the world connections between stochastic calculus and differential geometry, known as stochastic differential geometry. He was invited for the International Congress of Mathematicians in Stockholm in 1962.
So much were Itô&#x27;s results useful to financial mathematics that he was sometimes called &quot;the most famous Japanese in Wall Street&quot;.

Itô was a member of the faculty at University of Kyoto for most of his career and eventually became the director of their Research Institute for Mathematical Sciences. But he also spent multi-year stints at several foreign institutions, the longest of which took place at Cornell University.

== Overview ==

Itô pioneered the theory of stochastic integration and stochastic differential equations, now known as Itô calculus. Its basic concept is the Itô integral, and among the most important results is a change of variable formula known as Itô&#x27;s lemma (also known as the Itô formula). 
Itô also made contributions to the study of diffusion processes on manifolds, known as stochastic differential geometry.

Itô calculus is a method used in the mathematical study of random events and is applied in various fields, and is perhaps best known for its use in mathematical finance. In particular, the Itô&#x27;s lemma&#x27;s best known application is in the derivation of the Black–Scholes equation for option values.

Itô&#x27;s methods are also used in other fields, including biology and physics. His results have been applied to population models, white noise, chemical reactions, and quantum physics, in addition to uses in various mathematical subjects such as differential geometry, partial differential equations, complex analysis, and harmonic analysis and potential theory.

Fellow mathematician Daniel W. Stroock noted that &quot;People all over realized that what Ito had done explained things that were unexplainable before.&quot; Economist Robert C. Merton stated that Itô&#x27;s work had provided him &quot;a very useful tool&quot; in his own prize-winning work.

Although the standard Hepburn romanization of his name is &quot;Kiyoshi Itō&quot;, he used the spelling Kiyosi Itô (Kunrei-shiki romanization). The alternative spellings Itoh and Ito are also sometimes seen in the Western world.

Itô was married with three daughters.

==Biography==

Itô was born on 7 September 1915 in a farming area located west of Nagoya, Japan, that being the town of Hokusei-cho in Mie Prefecture. He excelled in his studies as a youth. Admitted to the Imperial University of Tokyo, he studied mathematics and became interested in the underdeveloped field of probability theory, graduating from there in 1938, with his degree in mathematics being granted by the university&#x27;s Faculty of Science. 
From 1939 to 1943 he worked as a Statistical Officer with the Statistics Bureau of the Cabinet Secretariat, There he was given rein by management to continue his research. His breakthrough paper, &quot;On Stochastic Processes&quot;, appeared in 1942. 
In 1943, he was appointed an assistant professor at Nagoya Imperial University, where he benefited from discussions with the mathematicians Kōsaku Yosida and Shizuo Kakutani.
From investigations done during this period he published a series of articles in which he defined the stochastic integral and laid the foundations of the Itō calculus. 
Meanwhile, he received his Doctor of Science degree from the Imperial University of Tokyo in 1945.

These works were published despite the difficulties of life in Japan during World War II, including problems accessing libraries and especially the loss of contact with Western mathematicians and the lack of awareness of results from them. For instance, the only other Japanese mathematician actively interested in Itô&#x27;s work during the war, Gisiro Maruyama, read a mimeographed copy of a paper while in a military camp. Scholarly activity during the Occupation of Japan had its difficulties; in one case, paper shortages were such that a lengthy Itô article could not be published in a Japanese journal and he had to arrange for an American journal to publish it instead. Ito later referred to his time at Nagoya as having been during &quot;the dark age of World War II and its aftermath.&quot;
After this period he continued to develop his ideas on stochastic analysis with many important papers on the topic.
In 1952, he became a professor at the University of Kyoto. His most well-known text, &quot;Probability Theory&quot;, appeared in 1953. 
Itô remained affiliated with Kyoto until his retirement in 1979. 
However, beginning in the 1950s, Itô spent long periods of time away from Japan. He was at the Institute for Advanced Study from 1954 to 1956 while on a Fulbright fellowship; while there he worked closely with William Feller and Henry McKean who were at nearby Princeton University. He was a professor at Stanford University from 1961 to 1964 and a professor at Aarhus University from 1966 to 1969. 

Then in 1969 Itô arrived at Cornell University, where he was a professor of mathematics for six years until 1975. This was his longest stint outside Japan. Among the courses he taught at Cornell was one in Higher Calculus.

Itô wrote not only in Japanese but also in Chinese, German, French and English. However, his ability to converse in foreign languages was a different matter, and by his own admission his accent made him largely incomprehensible to Americans.

When Itô left Cornell and returned to the University of Kyoto, he served as director of their Research Institute for Mathematical Sciences. After his retirement, he became professor emeritus at Kyoto University. He also had a post-retirement position as a professor at the private Gakushuin University for several years, a common practice among higher-ranking Japanese academics. 

Itô was recipient of the Wolf Prize and the Kyoto Prize.
He was a member of the Japan Academy, and also a foreign member of the Académie des sciences in France and the National Academy of Sciences in the United States. 

In his later years, Itô struggled with poor health.
Itô was awarded the inaugural Gauss Prize in 2006 by the International Mathematical Union for his lifetime achievements. As he due to his health was unable to travel to Madrid, his youngest daughter, Junko Ito, received the Gauss Prize from King Juan Carlos I on his behalf. Later, IMU President Sir John Macleod Ball personally presented the medal to Itô at a special ceremony held in Kyoto.
In October 2008, Itô was honored with Japan&#x27;s Order of Culture, and an awards ceremony for the Order of Culture was held at the Imperial Palace. 

Itô died on November 10, 2008, in Kyoto, Japan, at age 93, of respiratory failure .

==Selected publications==








==References==
==See also==
*Itô calculus
*Itô diffusion
*Itô integral
*Itô–Nisio theorem
*Itô isometry
*Itô&#x27;s lemma
*Black–Scholes model

==Further reading==
*

==External links==
* Kiyosi Itô(1915-2008) / Eightieth Birthday Lecture RIMS, Kyoto University, September 1995 at the Research Institute for Mathematical Sciences, Kyoto University
* Bibliography of Kiyosi Itô at the Research Institute for Mathematical Sciences, Kyoto University</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q161652" start="6" end="14" title="Japanese people" label="Japanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q170790" start="15" end="28" title="mathematician" label="mathematician"/>
<link wikidata="Q5862903" start="67" end="85" title="probability theory" label="probability theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q176737" start="116" end="134" title="stochastic process" label="stochastic process"/>
<link wikidata="Q1308570" start="165" end="184" title="stochastic integral" label="stochastic integral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545585" start="189" end="221" title="stochastic differential equation" label="stochastic differential equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q947053" start="264" end="276" title="Itô calculus" label="Itô calculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q114347521" start="382" end="414" title="stochastic differential geometry" label="stochastic differential geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q860611" start="439" end="479" title="International Congress of Mathematicians" label="International Congress of Mathematicians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754" start="483" end="492" title="Stockholm" label="Stockholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q336264" start="684" end="703" title="University of Kyoto" label="University of Kyoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q840667" start="771" end="815" title="Research Institute for Mathematical Sciences" label="Research Institute for Mathematical Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q49115" start="921" end="939" title="Cornell University" label="Cornell University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1308570" start="986" end="1008" title="stochastic integration" label="stochastic integration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545585" start="1013" end="1045" title="stochastic differential equation" label="stochastic differential equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q947053" start="1061" end="1073" title="Itô calculus" label="Itô calculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q947053" start="1100" end="1112" title="Itô integral" label="Itô integral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151100" start="1192" end="1208" title="Itô&amp;#x27;s lemma" label="Itô&amp;#x27;s lemma"/>
<link wikidata="Q5275442" start="1287" end="1304" title="diffusion process" label="diffusion process"/>
<link wikidata="Q203920" start="1310" end="1318" title="manifold" label="manifold"/>
<link wikidata="Q114347521" start="1330" end="1362" title="stochastic differential geometry" label="stochastic differential geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q176737" start="1424" end="1437" title="Stochastic process" label="random events"/>
<link wikidata="Q335632" start="1513" end="1533" title="mathematical finance" label="mathematical finance"/>
<link wikidata="Q17005676" start="1629" end="1651" title="Black–Scholes equation" label="Black–Scholes equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7229808" start="1786" end="1802" title="population model" label="population model"/>
<link wikidata="Q381287" start="1805" end="1816" title="white noise" label="white noise"/>
<link wikidata="Q36534" start="1818" end="1835" title="chemical reaction" label="chemical reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q944" start="1842" end="1857" title="quantum physics" label="quantum physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q188444" start="1920" end="1941" title="differential geometry" label="differential geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q271977" start="1943" end="1972" title="partial differential equation" label="partial differential equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q193756" start="1975" end="1991" title="complex analysis" label="complex analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q876215" start="1997" end="2014" title="harmonic analysis" label="harmonic analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154848" start="2019" end="2035" title="potential theory" label="potential theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1162797" start="2059" end="2076" title="Daniel W. Stroock" label="Daniel W. Stroock"/>
<link wikidata="Q287542" start="2207" end="2223" title="Robert C. Merton" label="Robert C. Merton"/>
<link wikidata="Q667558" start="2354" end="2374" title="Hepburn romanization" label="Hepburn romanization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129626" start="2448" end="2473" title="Kunrei-shiki romanization" label="Kunrei-shiki romanization"/>
<link wikidata="Q160381" start="2546" end="2559" title="Western world" label="Western world"/>
<link wikidata="Q11751" start="2683" end="2696" title="Nagoya, Japan" label="Nagoya, Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5878364" start="2721" end="2732" title="Hokusei, Mie" label="Hokusei-cho"/>
<link wikidata="Q128196" start="2736" end="2750" title="Mie Prefecture" label="Mie Prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q7842" start="2807" end="2835" title="Imperial University of Tokyo" label="Imperial University of Tokyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5862903" start="2913" end="2931" title="probability theory" label="probability theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q11524678" start="3016" end="3052" title="Graduate School of Science and Faculty of Science, University of Tokyo" label="university&amp;#x27;s Faculty of Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q11606829" start="3117" end="3161" title="Statistics Bureau (Japan)" label="Statistics Bureau of the Cabinet Secretariat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191132" start="3359" end="3385" title="Nagoya Imperial University" label="Nagoya Imperial University"/>
<link wikidata="Q382402" start="3447" end="3460" title="Kōsaku Yosida" label="Kōsaku Yosida"/>
<link wikidata="Q945209" start="3465" end="3480" title="Shizuo Kakutani" label="Shizuo Kakutani"/>
<link wikidata="Q1308570" start="3584" end="3603" title="stochastic integral" label="stochastic integral"/>
<link wikidata="Q947053" start="3636" end="3648" title="Itō calculus" label="Itō calculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2248352" start="3678" end="3695" title="Doctor of Science" label="Doctor of Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q10539611" start="3814" end="3839" title="Japan during World War II" label="Japan during World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q5564964" start="4098" end="4113" title="Gisiro Maruyama" label="Gisiro Maruyama"/>
<link wikidata="Q696251" start="4207" end="4226" title="Occupation of Japan" label="Occupation of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q336264" start="4706" end="4725" title="University of Kyoto" label="University of Kyoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q635642" start="4965" end="4993" title="Institute for Advanced Study" label="Institute for Advanced Study"/>
<link wikidata="Q253936" start="5023" end="5043" title="Fulbright fellowship" label="Fulbright fellowship"/>
<link wikidata="Q201426" start="5080" end="5094" title="William Feller" label="William Feller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1607032" start="5099" end="5111" title="Henry McKean" label="Henry McKean"/>
<link wikidata="Q21578" start="5131" end="5151" title="Princeton University" label="Princeton University"/>
<link wikidata="Q41506" start="5175" end="5194" title="Stanford University" label="Stanford University"/>
<link wikidata="Q924265" start="5232" end="5249" title="Aarhus University" label="Aarhus University"/>
<link wikidata="Q49115" start="5299" end="5317" title="Cornell University" label="Cornell University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5287" start="5517" end="5525" title="Japanese language" label="Japanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q7850" start="5538" end="5545" title="Chinese language" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="5547" end="5553" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="5555" end="5561" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="5566" end="5573" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q840667" start="5832" end="5876" title="Research Institute for Mathematical Sciences" label="Research Institute for Mathematical Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q1372362" start="6019" end="6039" title="Gakushuin University" label="Gakushuin University"/>
<link wikidata="Q915604" start="6145" end="6155" title="Wolf Prize in Mathematics" label="Wolf Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q658444" start="6164" end="6175" title="Kyoto Prize" label="Kyoto Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q1683229" start="6200" end="6213" title="Japan Academy" label="Japan Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q188771" start="6248" end="6269" title="Académie des sciences" label="Académie des sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q270794" start="6288" end="6316" title="National Academy of Sciences" label="National Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036512" start="6423" end="6434" title="Gauss Prize" label="Gauss Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q828490" start="6450" end="6482" title="International Mathematical Union" label="International Mathematical Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q2807" start="6562" end="6568" title="Madrid" label="Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q6313947" start="6593" end="6602" title="Junko Ito" label="Junko Ito"/>
<link wikidata="Q19943" start="6634" end="6652" title="King Juan Carlos I" label="King Juan Carlos I"/>
<link wikidata="Q667583" start="6689" end="6710" title="Sir John Macleod Ball" label="Sir John Macleod Ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q530124" start="6837" end="6853" title="Order of Culture" label="Order of Culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q34600" start="6972" end="6984" title="Kyoto, Japan" label="Kyoto, Japan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7000" end="7020" title="respiratory failure " label="respiratory failure "/>
<link wikidata="Q947053" start="7086" end="7098" title="Itô calculus" label="Itô calculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6095358" start="7100" end="7113" title="Itô diffusion" label="Itô diffusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q947053" start="7115" end="7127" title="Itô integral" label="Itô integral"/>
<link wikidata="Q113623203" start="7129" end="7146" title="Itô–Nisio theorem" label="Itô–Nisio theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q6095356" start="7148" end="7160" title="Itô isometry" label="Itô isometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151100" start="7162" end="7178" title="Itô&amp;#x27;s lemma" label="Itô&amp;#x27;s lemma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338307" start="7180" end="7199" title="Black–Scholes model" label="Black–Scholes model"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1329245" wikidata="Q846929" url="?curid=1329245" title="Bridge (nautical)">
<text>A bridge (also known as a command deck), or wheelhouse (also known as a pilothouse), is a room or platform of a ship, submarine, airship, or spaceship from which the ship can be commanded. When a ship is under way, the bridge is manned by an officer of the watch aided usually by an able seaman acting as a lookout. During critical maneuvers the captain will be on the bridge, often supported by an officer of the watch, an able seaman on the wheel and sometimes a pilot, if required.

== History and etymology ==
There are many terms for parts of a ship with functions similar to a bridge. Depending upon the design and layout of a ship, some of these terms may be interchangeable.

Traditionally, sailing ships were commanded from the quarterdeck, aft of the mainmast, where the ship&#x27;s wheel was located (as it was close to the rudder). A &quot;wheelhouse&quot; was a small enclosure around the ship&#x27;s wheel on the quarterdeck of sailing ships. On modern ships the &quot;wheelhouse&quot; or &quot;pilothouse&quot; refers to the bridge of smaller motor vessels, such as tugs.

With the arrival of paddle steamers, engineers required a platform from which they could inspect the paddle wheels and where the captain&#x27;s view would not be obstructed by the paddle houses. A raised walkway, literally a bridge, connecting the paddle houses was therefore provided. When the screw propeller superseded the paddle wheel, the term &quot;bridge&quot; survived.

Traditionally, commands would be passed from the senior officer on the bridge to stations dispersed throughout the ship, where physical control of the ship was exercised, as technology did not exist for the remote control of steering or machinery. Helm orders would be passed to an enclosed wheel house, where the coxswain or helmsman operated the ship&#x27;s wheel. Engine commands would be relayed to the engine officer in the engine room by an engine order telegraph that displayed the captain&#x27;s orders on a dial. The engine officer would ensure that the correct combination of steam pressure and engine revolutions were applied. Weatherproof pilot houses supplanted open bridges so that the pilot, who was traditionally the ship&#x27;s navigating officer, could issue commands from shelter.

Iron, and later steel, ships also required a &quot;compass platform&quot;. This was usually a tower, where a magnetic compass could be sited far away as possible from the ferrous interference of the hulk of the ship.

Many ships still have a &quot;flying bridge&quot;, a platform atop the pilot house, open to weather, containing a binnacle and voice tubes to allow the conning officer to direct the ship from a higher position during fair weather conditions.

Larger warships may have a &quot;navigation bridge&quot;, which is used for the actual conning of the ship, and a separate &quot;admiral&#x27;s bridge&quot; can be provided in flagships, where the admiral can exercise control over the squadron of ships without interfering with the captain&#x27;s command of the vessel. In older warships, a heavily armored conning tower was often provided, where the vital command staff could be located under protection to ensure that the ship could be commanded under fire.

On a submarine, the bridge is the highest point on the conning tower, to provide for better visual navigation when on the surface. They became standard on United States Navy submarines after 1917, greatly improving the function of the vessels while at the surface.

== Configuration ==
Modern advances in remote control equipment have seen progressive transfer of the actual control of the ship to the bridge. The wheel and throttles can be operated directly from the bridge, controlling often-unmanned machinery spaces. Aboard modern warships, navigational command comes from the bridge, whereas electronically directed weapon systems are usually controlled from an interior compartment.

On a commercial vessel, the bridge will contain the equipment necessary to safely navigate a vessel on passage. Such equipment will vary with ship type, but generally includes a GPS navigation device, a Navtex receiver, an ECDIS or chart system, one or more radars, a communications system (including distress calling equipment), engine (telegraph) controls, a wheel/autopilot system, a magnetic compass (for redundancy and cross check capability) and light/sound signalling devices.

=== Navigation station ===
The navigation station of a ship may be located on the bridge or in a separate chart room, nearby. It includes a table sized for nautical charts where calculations of course and location are made. The navigator plots the course to be followed by the ship on these charts. Besides the desk and the navigation charts, the area contains navigational instruments that may include electronic equipment for a Global Positioning System receiver and chart display, fathometer, a compass, a marine chronometer, two-way radios, and radiotelephone, etc.

=== Flying bridge ===
A flying bridge, also known as &quot;monkey island&quot;, is an open area on top of a surface ship that provides unobstructed views of the fore, aft, and the sides of a vessel. It serves as an operating station for the ship&#x27;s officers, such as the captain or officer of the watch.

Prior to World War II, virtually every sailing ship, steamship, monitor, paddle steamer, or large pleasure ship had a flying bridge above the main bridge. Flying bridges were generally not enclosed at all (although sometimes they were partially enclosed), and often had little equipment—usually just a speaking tube or telephone to allow communication with the helmsman or wheelman on the main bridge. On military warships after 1914, the flying bridge was usually the station for the air defense officer and the gunnery officer. The amount of equipment on a flying bridge varies widely with the need of the captain. During World War II, for example, American submarine chaser surface ships had a well-outfitted flying bridge which usually contained a pelorus, signal lamps, telescope, and voice tube to permit the captain to command the ship. U.S. Navy attack transport ships could be outfitted with either 20mm or 40mm automatic cannons on their flying bridges.

Flying bridges were almost always the highest bridge on the ship. They were usually above the flag bridge.

Since the 1980s, large pleasure craft may have a flying bridge toward the stern that is used as additional outdoor seating space and a place to store a tender. On the smallest surface vessels, such as a sport fishing boat, the flying bridge may have controls permitting the ship to be piloted from the flying bridge, but will lack the full range of controls of the pilot house. On larger small vessels, the flying bridge may actually be enclosed, in which case it is more properly called an &quot;upper pilot house&quot; or &quot;upper bridge&quot;.

=== Flag bridge ===
Warships that were also flagships (had a flag officer onboard) sometimes contained a flag bridge. Also known as the &quot;admiral&#x27;s bridge&quot;, these were a bridge below the main bridge on a command warship where a high-ranking officer such as an admiral could conduct fleet operations, plan strategy, and conduct large battles.

=== Bridge wing ===
Some flying bridges have &quot;bridge wings&quot;, open areas which thrust outward from the flying bridge over the sides of the vessel by approximately to allow an officer to see the side of their ship while docking or working with smaller vessels. A bridge wing is a narrow walkway extending from both sides of a pilothouse to the full width of a ship or slightly beyond, to allow bridge personnel a full view to aid in the maneuvering of the ship. Officers use bridge wings when docking or maneuvering in locks and narrow waterways. Each bridge wing may be equipped with a console controlling the bow thruster, stern thruster, rudder and engines.

== See also ==

* Cab (locomotive)
* Cockpit (sailing)
* Command center
* Control room
* Deck department
* Engine department

== References ==
== External links ==

* Video clips of (nautical) bridges aboard various ships</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q846929" start="2" end="8" title="Bridge (nautical)" label="bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q846929" start="26" end="38" title="Bridge (nautical)" label="command deck"/>
<link wikidata="Q846929" start="44" end="54" title="Bridge (nautical)" label="wheelhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q846929" start="72" end="82" title="Bridge (nautical)" label="pilothouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q11446" start="112" end="116" title="ship" label="ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2811" start="118" end="127" title="submarine" label="submarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q133585" start="129" end="136" title="airship" label="airship"/>
<link wikidata="Q40218" start="141" end="150" title="spacecraft" label="spaceship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1694456" start="242" end="262" title="Watchstanding" label="officer of the watch"/>
<link wikidata="Q10989378" start="283" end="294" title="Able Seaman (occupation)" label="able seaman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2572947" start="307" end="314" title="lookout" label="lookout"/>
<link wikidata="Q163500" start="346" end="353" title="Captain (naval)" label="captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q475604" start="465" end="470" title="Maritime pilot" label="pilot"/>
<link wikidata="Q170483" start="699" end="711" title="sailing ship" label="sailing ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q10516659" start="737" end="748" title="quarterdeck" label="quarterdeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q331744" start="761" end="769" title="mainmast" label="mainmast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1980202" start="781" end="798" title="ship&amp;#x27;s wheel" label="ship&amp;#x27;s wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q209760" start="835" end="841" title="rudder" label="rudder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1980202" start="902" end="919" title="ship&amp;#x27;s wheel" label="ship&amp;#x27;s wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q170483" start="942" end="954" title="sailing ship" label="sailing ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q191826" start="1081" end="1085" title="Tugboat" label="tugs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121471" start="1108" end="1122" title="paddle steamer" label="paddle steamer"/>
<link wikidata="Q849424" start="1217" end="1224" title="Captain (nautical)" label="captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q205451" start="1383" end="1398" title="screw propeller" label="screw propeller"/>
<link wikidata="Q18891017" start="1715" end="1719" title="Steering" label="Helm"/>
<link wikidata="Q15647248" start="1781" end="1789" title="coxswain" label="coxswain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2309900" start="1793" end="1801" title="helmsman" label="helmsman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1980202" start="1815" end="1832" title="ship&amp;#x27;s wheel" label="ship&amp;#x27;s wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2177743" start="1874" end="1888" title="engine officer" label="engine officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415781" start="1896" end="1907" title="engine room" label="engine room"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262266" start="1914" end="1936" title="engine order telegraph" label="engine order telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q475604" start="2167" end="2172" title="harbour pilot" label="pilot"/>
<link wikidata="Q677" start="2268" end="2272" title="Iron" label="Iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q11427" start="2284" end="2289" title="steel" label="steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q34735" start="2377" end="2393" title="magnetic compass" label="magnetic compass"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285982" start="2439" end="2446" title="ferrous metal" label="ferrous"/>
<link wikidata="Q2452225" start="2600" end="2608" title="binnacle" label="binnacle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319005" start="2613" end="2624" title="Speaking tube" label="voice tubes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031121" start="2736" end="2743" title="warship" label="warship"/>
<link wikidata="Q5161261" start="2816" end="2823" title="Conn (nautical)" label="conning"/>
<link wikidata="Q212357" start="2905" end="2913" title="flagship" label="flagship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187402" start="3086" end="3099" title="conning tower" label="conning tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187402" start="3295" end="3308" title="conning tower" label="conning tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="3395" end="3413" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q961356" start="3664" end="3672" title="throttle" label="throttle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3475123" start="3982" end="3991" title="Navigation system" label="equipment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1486497" start="4108" end="4129" title="GPS navigation device" label="GPS navigation device"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756992" start="4133" end="4139" title="Navtex" label="Navtex"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035351" start="4153" end="4158" title="ECDIS" label="ECDIS"/>
<link wikidata="Q47528" start="4188" end="4193" title="radar" label="radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2355426" start="4231" end="4239" title="distress signal" label="distress"/>
<link wikidata="Q721587" start="4268" end="4277" title="telegraph" label="telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q728502" start="4571" end="4585" title="nautical chart" label="nautical chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1962728" start="4609" end="4615" title="course (navigation)" label="course"/>
<link wikidata="Q2221906" start="4620" end="4628" title="location (geography)" label="location"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064858" start="4726" end="4730" title="desk" label="desk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780422" start="4776" end="4799" title="navigational instrument" label="navigational instrument"/>
<link wikidata="Q11650" start="4818" end="4838" title="electronics" label="electronic equipment"/>
<link wikidata="Q18822" start="4845" end="4870" title="Global Positioning System" label="Global Positioning System"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164536" start="4899" end="4909" title="fathometer" label="fathometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q34735" start="4913" end="4920" title="compass" label="compass"/>
<link wikidata="Q2307829" start="4924" end="4942" title="marine chronometer" label="marine chronometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474418" start="4944" end="4957" title="two-way radio" label="two-way radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2313348" start="4964" end="4978" title="radiotelephone" label="radiotelephone"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5272" end="5292" title="Watchstanding#Navigational watches" label="officer of the watch"/>
<link wikidata="Q170483" start="5334" end="5346" title="sailing ship" label="sailing ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q12859788" start="5348" end="5357" title="steamship" label="steamship"/>
<link wikidata="Q137823" start="5359" end="5366" title="Monitor (warship)" label="monitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121471" start="5368" end="5382" title="paddle steamer" label="paddle steamer"/>
<link wikidata="Q744967" start="5955" end="5971" title="submarine chaser" label="submarine chaser"/>
<link wikidata="Q2067564" start="6047" end="6054" title="pelorus (instrument)" label="pelorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4213" start="6070" end="6079" title="telescope" label="telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q3679597" start="6149" end="6165" title="attack transport" label="attack transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q751705" start="6216" end="6232" title="automatic cannon" label="automatic cannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6706483" start="6520" end="6526" title="Luxury yacht tender" label="tender"/>
<link wikidata="Q7579401" start="6571" end="6589" title="sport fishing boat" label="sport fishing boat"/>
<link wikidata="Q212357" start="6963" end="6972" title="Flagship" label="flagships"/>
<link wikidata="Q977459" start="6980" end="6992" title="flag officer" label="flag officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q132851" start="7193" end="7200" title="admiral" label="admiral"/>
<link wikidata="Q5249273" start="7746" end="7754" title="Ship&amp;#x27;s officer" label="Officers"/>
<link wikidata="Q124282" start="7777" end="7781" title="Dock (maritime)" label="dock"/>
<link wikidata="Q105731" start="7803" end="7808" title="Canal lock" label="locks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1267889" start="7820" end="7828" title="waterway" label="waterway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1510756" start="7895" end="7907" title="bow thruster" label="bow thruster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1510756" start="7909" end="7923" title="stern thruster" label="stern thruster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418299" start="7964" end="7980" title="Cab (locomotive)" label="Cab (locomotive)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934227" start="7983" end="8000" title="Cockpit (sailing)" label="Cockpit (sailing)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772543" start="8003" end="8017" title="Command center" label="Command center"/>
<link wikidata="Q390516" start="8020" end="8032" title="Control room" label="Control room"/>
<link wikidata="Q5249273" start="8035" end="8050" title="Deck department" label="Deck department"/>
<link wikidata="Q15971765" start="8053" end="8070" title="Engine department" label="Engine department"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1329251" wikidata="Q2151007" url="?curid=1329251" title="Richard de Clare, 3rd Earl of Hertford">
<text>Richard de Clare, 3rd Earl of Hertford (–1217), feudal baron of Clare in Suffolk, and lord of Tonbridge in Kent and of Cardigan in Wales, was a powerful Anglo-Norman nobleman with vast landholdings in England and Wales.

==Career==
Richard was the son and heir of Roger de Clare, 2nd Earl of Hertford, 5th feudal baron of Clare, by his wife Maud de St Hillary, a daughter of James de St Hillary. More commonly known as the Earl of Clare, he had the majority of the Giffard estates from his ancestor, Rohese. He was present at the coronations of King Richard I at Westminster, 3 September 1189, and King John on 27 May 1199. He was also present at the homage of King William of Scotland as English Earl of Huntingdon at Lincoln. 

==Magna Carta==
He sided with the Barons against King John, even though he had previously sworn peace with the King at Northampton, and his castle of Tonbridge was taken. He played a leading part in the negotiations for Magna Carta, being one of the twenty five sureties. On 9 November 1215, he was one of the commissioners on the part of the Barons to negotiate the peace with the King. In 1215, his lands in counties Cambridge, Norfolk, Suffolk and Essex were granted to Robert de Betun. He and his son were among the Barons excommunicated by the Pope in 1215. 
His coat of arms was: &quot;Or, three chevronels gules&quot;, adopted at the start of the age of heraldry c.1200-1215, and certainly borne by his son the Earl of Gloucester.

==Marriage and issue==
In about 1172 he married Amice Fitzwilliam, 4th Countess of Gloucester (c. 1160–1220), the second daughter and co-heiress of William Fitz Robert, 2nd Earl of Gloucester by his wife Hawise de Beaumont. At some time before 1198, Earl Richard and his wife Amice were ordered to separate by the Pope on the grounds of consanguinity, but later apparently reconciled their marriage with the Pope&#x27;s agreement. By his wife he has issue as follows:
* Gilbert de Clare (ca. 1180 – 25 October 1230), 4th Earl of Hertford and 5th Earl of Gloucester, (or 1st Earl of Gloucester of new creation). Married in 1217 Isabel Marshal.
* Maud de Clare (ca. 1184–1213), married in 1206, Sir William de Braose, son of William de Braose and Maud de St. Valery.
* Richard de Clare (ca. 1184 – 4 Mar 1228, London) 
* Mathilde, married Rhys Gryg son of Rhys ap Gruffydd, ruler of the kingdom of Deheubarth.

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2151007" start="0" end="38" title="Richard de Clare, 3rd Earl of Hertford" label="Richard de Clare, 3rd Earl of Hertford"/>
<link wikidata="Q5378545" start="48" end="60" title="English feudal barony" label="feudal baron"/>
<link wikidata="Q2559341" start="64" end="69" title="Clare, Suffolk" label="Clare"/>
<link wikidata="Q4614620" start="264" end="300" title="Roger de Clare, 2nd Earl of Hertford" label="Roger de Clare, 2nd Earl of Hertford"/>
<link wikidata="Q24969941" start="500" end="506" title="Rohese Giffard" label="Rohese"/>
<link wikidata="Q42305" start="545" end="559" title="Richard I of England" label="King Richard I"/>
<link wikidata="Q5933" start="563" end="574" title="Westminster Abbey" label="Westminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q129308" start="598" end="607" title="John of England" label="King John"/>
<link wikidata="Q312594" start="661" end="685" title="William I of Scotland" label="King William of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q129308" start="779" end="788" title="John of England" label="King John"/>
<link wikidata="Q192240" start="849" end="860" title="Northampton" label="Northampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q936183" start="880" end="889" title="Tonbridge" label="Tonbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q12519" start="950" end="961" title="Magna Carta" label="Magna Carta"/>
<link wikidata="Q350" start="1149" end="1158" title="Cambridge" label="Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q23109" start="1160" end="1167" title="Norfolk" label="Norfolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q23111" start="1169" end="1176" title="Suffolk" label="Suffolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q23240" start="1181" end="1186" title="Essex" label="Essex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027587" start="1203" end="1218" title="Robert VII, Lord of Béthune" label="Robert de Betun"/>
<link wikidata="Q19546" start="1279" end="1283" title="Pope" label="Pope"/>
<link wikidata="Q330360" start="1617" end="1660" title="William Fitz Robert, 2nd Earl of Gloucester" label="William Fitz Robert, 2nd Earl of Gloucester"/>
<link wikidata="Q774347" start="1806" end="1819" title="consanguinity" label="consanguinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q463491" start="1939" end="1955" title="Gilbert de Clare, 4th Earl of Hertford" label="Gilbert de Clare"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647030" start="1990" end="2006" title="Earl of Hertford" label="Earl of Hertford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277294" start="2015" end="2033" title="Earl of Gloucester" label="Earl of Gloucester"/>
<link wikidata="Q449884" start="2096" end="2110" title="Isabel Marshal" label="Isabel Marshal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3779058" start="2192" end="2209" title="William de Braose, 4th Lord of Bramber" label="William de Braose"/>
<link wikidata="Q942269" start="2214" end="2232" title="Maud de Braose" label="Maud de St. Valery"/>
<link wikidata="Q3399280" start="2306" end="2315" title="Rhys Gryg" label="Rhys Gryg"/>
<link wikidata="Q741855" start="2323" end="2339" title="Rhys ap Gruffydd" label="Rhys ap Gruffydd"/>
<link wikidata="Q837136" start="2365" end="2375" title="Deheubarth" label="Deheubarth"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1329258" wikidata="Q2836696" url="?curid=1329258" title="The Secret at Shadow Ranch">
<text>The Secret at Shadow Ranch is the fifth volume in the Nancy Drew Mystery Stories series. It was first published in 1931 under the pseudonym Carolyn Keene, and was ghostwritten by Mildred Wirt Benson. This book, as of 2001, ranks 50 on the list of All-Time Bestselling Children&#x27;s Books, according to &quot;Publishers Weekly&quot;, with 2,347,750 sales since 1931.

==Plot summary - 1931 edition==
In this book, you are introduced to Nancy&#x27;s best friends, Elizabeth &quot;Bess&quot; Marvin and George Fayne, complete opposites. George is a brave, sporty tomboy, while Bess is a girly, shopping, scaredycat. One of Bess and George&#x27;s cousins, Alice Regor, traveled with Nancy to their Aunt and Uncle&#x27;s ranch in Arizona where the cousins&#x27; aunt attempts to keep up a ranch she received as payment of a debt. Nancy reunites Alice with her long-lost artist father, who is suffering from amnesia. She also uncovers the mystery behind why an old mountain woman is guardian of a beautiful young girl, all the while enjoying mountain life, including horseback riding, a flash flood, being lost in the mountains overnight, and a dangerous mountain lion.

==1965 revision==
Nancy travels with her friends Bess and George to Shadow Ranch, near Phoenix, Arizona. The ranch is in danger of being shut down, and is threatened by a phantom horse that seems to bring destruction with it each time it appears. The girls soon become friends with the young ranch hands who help them. The discovery of a pocket watch with a hidden message about a green bottle and a pastel painting are her clues to find the lost treasure of Dirk Valentine. These clues lead her to an ancient Indian dwelling, a prisoner, a chest of gold hearts, a gang of thieves, and a lot of danger. The revised book had the title changed to &quot;of&quot; instead of &quot;at,&quot; and doesn&#x27;t expand the biographies of the cousins significantly. Whereas the ranch is depicted as somewhat slow, and a young doctor is interested in Nancy, the revision sees them involved in resort-town activities with men near their age.

==Artwork==
Russell H. Tandy illustrated the original dust jacket and internal illustrations, and the frontispiece. In 1950, Bill Gillies revised the cover art, which featured Nancy on a rearing horse. The art was revised for the new story in 1965, this time by Rudy Nappi, and featuring the phantom horse.

== Continuity Error ==
Though Ned Nickerson is mentioned in passing in this book as being in Europe, Nancy doesn&#x27;t actually meet Ned until two books later, The Clue in the Diary, #7. The mistake was made when this title was revised. In the revised text, Nancy is said to be knitting a sweater for Ned, identified as her boyfriend, in the first chapter. George references the sweater and Ned again in the final chapter. Since Nancy has not yet met Ned in the series, this error was corrected in subsequent printings in the first chapter substituting Ned with her father, Carson Drew. The last chapter still mentioned Ned as the one who would receive the sweater. Many printings later, George&#x27;s remark in the last chapter was changed from &quot;Ned&quot; to &quot;your dad&quot; when she mentions the sweater Nancy is knitting. However, Ned is still mentioned in this book as being in Europe (page 111), but the reader isn&#x27;t given any explanation about who Ned actually is since the opening and closing chapters no longer mention his name.

== Adaptation ==
The tenth installment in the Nancy Drew point-and-click adventure game series by Her Interactive, named &quot;Nancy Drew: The Secret of Shadow Ranch&quot;, is based on the novel.

A mobile version for iPad, iPhone, and iPod Touch was also released under the &quot;Mobile Mysteries&quot; label. 

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q16155002" start="54" end="80" title="Nancy Drew Mystery Stories" label="Nancy Drew Mystery Stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044648" start="140" end="153" title="Carolyn Keene" label="Carolyn Keene"/>
<link wikidata="Q3814719" start="179" end="198" title="Mildred Wirt Benson" label="Mildred Wirt Benson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2096635" start="310" end="327" title="Publishers Weekly" label="Publishers Weekly"/>
<link wikidata="Q5539219" start="502" end="514" title="George Fayne" label="George Fayne"/>
<link wikidata="Q16556" start="1254" end="1270" title="Phoenix, Arizona" label="Phoenix, Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q7381538" start="2111" end="2127" title="Russell H. Tandy" label="Russell H. Tandy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2224" end="2236" title="Bill Gillies" label="Bill Gillies"/>
<link wikidata="Q6986060" start="2437" end="2450" title="Ned Nickerson" label="Ned Nickerson"/>
<link wikidata="Q8199988" start="2568" end="2589" title="The Clue in the Diary" label="The Clue in the Diary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076932" start="3507" end="3517" title="Nancy Drew" label="Nancy Drew"/>
<link wikidata="Q23916" start="3518" end="3548" title="point-and-click adventure game" label="point-and-click adventure game"/>
<link wikidata="Q3133362" start="3559" end="3574" title="Her Interactive" label="Her Interactive"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3588" end="3626" title="Nancy Drew: The Secret of Shadow Ranch" label="Nancy Drew: The Secret of Shadow Ranch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2796" start="3679" end="3683" title="iPad" label="iPad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2766" start="3685" end="3691" title="iPhone" label="iPhone"/>
<link wikidata="Q14094" start="3697" end="3707" title="iPod Touch" label="iPod Touch"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1329263" wikidata="Q3914710" url="?curid=1329263" title="Ali ibn Tahir al-Sulami">
<text>Ali ibn Tahir al-Sulami (died 1106) was a Damascene jurist and philologist who was the first to preach &quot;jihad&quot; against the crusaders in the aftermath of the First Crusade.

al-Sulami recognized the Crusaders as Franks whereas his most of his contemporaries thought the Christians were Eastern Romans trying to re-capture their lost territories since the Siege of Jerusalem (636–637).

In 1105 al-Sulami published his treatise, &quot;Kitab al-Jihad&quot; (&quot;Book of Struggle&quot; or &quot;Book of Jihad&quot;), and preached his ideas from the Great Mosque in Damascus. He recognized the dangers of the Christian invaders connected with the ongoing Christian reconquests of Sicily and Spain. He believed that Muslims had abandoned &quot;jihad&quot; and other religious duties, and argued that the caliphs were supposed to make war on the Christians once a year, something they had not done for many years. God, he claimed, was now punishing Muslims for their sins. In order to defeat the crusaders, al-Sulami argued that Muslims must practise the inner &quot;jihad&quot; so that they could successfully undertake the &quot;jihad&quot; against the enemy. His message was mostly ignored, as Muslim rulers would not merge the concept of &quot;jihad&quot; with military expeditions until later in the 12th century under Nur ad-Din Zangi and Saladin.

Only two manuscripts of the &quot;Kitab&quot; survive, both incomplete, and both in Damascus.

==External links==
*Extracts from the &quot;Kitab al-Jihad&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3914710" start="0" end="23" title="Ali ibn Tahir al-Sulami" label="Ali ibn Tahir al-Sulami"/>
<link wikidata="Q3766" start="42" end="51" title="Damascus" label="Damascene"/>
<link wikidata="Q185351" start="52" end="58" title="jurist" label="jurist"/>
<link wikidata="Q40634" start="63" end="74" title="philologist" label="philologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q44311" start="109" end="114" title="jihad" label="jihad"/>
<link wikidata="Q12546" start="133" end="140" title="crusade" label="crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q51649" start="167" end="180" title="First Crusade" label="First Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="295" end="309" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Eastern Romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q815154" start="364" end="392" title="Siege of Jerusalem (636–637)" label="Siege of Jerusalem (636–637)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="687" end="693" title="Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="698" end="703" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q190" start="919" end="922" title="God" label="God"/>
<link wikidata="Q312973" start="1329" end="1345" title="Nur ad-Din Zangi" label="Nur ad-Din Zangi"/>
<link wikidata="Q8581" start="1350" end="1357" title="Saladin" label="Saladin"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1329287" wikidata="Q6019339" url="?curid=1329287" title="India Inc.">
<text>India Inc. is a common term used by the Indian media to refer to the formal (comprising government and corporate) sector of the nation. It employed 7 percent of the workforce in 2000 and contributed 60 per cent of the nominal GDP of the nation. The informal sector consists of 44 million non-farm enterprises, as per a recent labour survey.
The &quot;Companies Act 2013&quot; allows a variety of formations in India&#x27;s mixed economy. The &quot;Ministry of Company Affairs&quot; estimates that as of 31 October 2005, there were
There were 17,49,359 companies as on 31.03.2018. Out of those 3,47,857 were headquartered in Maharashtra, 3,17,998 were headquartered in Delhi, 1,96,724 were headquartered in West Bengal, 1,34,615 were headquartered in Tamil Nadu and 1,04,847 were headquartered in Karnataka. The number of active companies out of those total of 17,49,359 companies was 11,67,858

According to Annual report as of 31.03.2018, a total of 11,67,858 active companies were on the Register (consisting of 10,88,657 private limited companies and 71,288 public limited companies). Out of the above, a large number of companies were engaged in Business Services(3.56 Lakh) followed by Manufacturing (2.33 Lakh), Trading (1.52 Lakh) and Construction Trading (1.05 Lakh) sectors.

==See also==
* Corporate America
* UK plc
* Brand India
* Make in India
* My Gov (India)
* Digital India

==References==
==External links==
* India Inc. and its moral discontents
* India Inc. The official RuneScape clan for India recognised by Jagex Ltd.
* India Inc.: Aiming Higher by Susan Kitchens (forbes.com)
* India Inc., Still Going Strong by Jaikumar Vijayan (computerworld.com) 
* India Inc. arrives overseas by Vipul Mudgal for HT Research (HindustanTimes.com)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6019339" start="0" end="10" title="India Inc." label="India Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q11033" start="47" end="52" title="Mass media" label="media"/>
<link wikidata="Q944235" start="249" end="264" title="informal sector" label="informal sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q16950654" start="341" end="375" title="The Companies Act, 2013" label="The &amp;quot;Companies Act 2013&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q191675" start="423" end="436" title="mixed economy" label="mixed economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q188540" start="1300" end="1317" title="Economy of the United States" label="Corporate America"/>
<link wikidata="Q323138" start="1320" end="1326" title="Economy of the United Kingdom" label="UK plc"/>
<link wikidata="Q4956493" start="1329" end="1340" title="Brand India" label="Brand India"/>
<link wikidata="Q18201621" start="1343" end="1356" title="Make in India" label="Make in India"/>
<link wikidata="Q18128352" start="1359" end="1373" title="My Gov (India)" label="My Gov (India)"/>
<link wikidata="Q18124504" start="1376" end="1389" title="Digital India" label="Digital India"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1329304" wikidata="Q2842206" url="?curid=1329304" title="Eastern Air Lines Flight 66">
<text>Eastern Air Lines Flight 66 was a regularly scheduled flight from New Orleans to New York City that crashed on June 24, 1975, while on approach to New York&#x27;s John F. Kennedy International Airport, killing 113 of the 124 people on board. The accident was determined to be caused by wind shear caused by a microburst, but the failure of the airport and the flight crew to recognize the severe weather hazard was also a contributing factor.

==Background==
Eastern Air Lines Flight 66 was a regularly scheduled passenger flight from New Orleans International Airport to John F. Kennedy International Airport in Jamaica, Queens, New York. On Tuesday June 24, 1975, Flight 66 was operated using a Boeing 727 trijet, registration number &quot;N8845E&quot;.

The flight departed from New Orleans at 13:19 EDT with 124 people on board, including 116 passengers and eight crew members. The flight operated from New Orleans to the New York City area without any reported difficulty.

The flight crew consisted of the following:

* The captain was 54-year-old John W. Kleven, who had been serving with Eastern Air Lines for nearly 25 years and had been a 727 captain since July 10, 1968. Kleven had a total of 17,381 flight hours, including 2,813 hours on the Boeing 727.
* The first officer was 34-year-old William Eberhart, who had been with Eastern Air Lines for nearly nine years. He had 5,063 flight hours, of which 4,327 were on the Boeing 727.
* The flight engineer was 31-year-old Gary M. Geurin, who had been with Eastern Air Lines since 1968 and had 3,910 flight hours, 3,123 of which were on the Boeing 727.
* The second flight engineer, 33-year-old Peter J. McCullough, had been with Eastern Air Lines for four years and had 3,602 military flying hours and 1,767 civil flying hours, including 676 hours on the Boeing 727. He was administering a required flight check on Geurin.

==Accident==
A severe thunderstorm arrived at JFK just as Flight 66 was approaching the New York City area. At 15:35, the crew was instructed to contact the JFK approach controller for instructions, and the approach controller sequenced it into the approach pattern for Runway 22L. At 15:52, the approach controller warned all incoming aircraft that the airport was experiencing &quot;very light rain showers and haze&quot; and zero visibility and that all approaching aircraft must land using instrument flight rules.

At 15:53, Flight 66 was switched to another frequency for final approach to Runway 22L. Controllers sent the crew radar vectors to operate around the approaching thunderstorms and sequence into the landing pattern with other traffic. Because of the deteriorating weather, one of the crew members checked the weather at LaGuardia Airport in Flushing, Queens, the flight&#x27;s alternate airport. At 15:59, the controller warned all aircraft of &quot;a severe wind shift&quot; on final approach and advised that more information would be reported shortly. Although communications on the frequency continued to report deteriorating weather, Flight 66 continued on its approach to Runway 22L. At 16:02, the crew was told to contact the JFK tower controller for landing clearance.

At 16:05, on final approach to Runway 22L, the aircraft entered a microburst or wind shear environment caused by the severe storms. The aircraft continued its descent until it struck the approach lights approximately from the threshold of the runway. After the initial impact, the plane banked to the left and continued to strike the approach lights until it burst into flames and scattered the wreckage along Rockaway Boulevard, which runs along the northeast perimeter of the airport. Of the 124 people on board, 107 passengers and six crew members (including all four cockpit crew members) were killed. The other 11 people on board, including nine passengers and two flight attendants, were injured but survived.

The accident was the deadliest single-aircraft accident in United States history to date, and would remain so until the 1979 crash of American Airlines Flight 191. The victims included American Basketball Association player Wendell Ladner, a member of the 1974 champion New York Nets, and Iveson B. Noland, bishop of the Episcopal Diocese of Louisiana.

==Investigation and results==
The accident was investigated by the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), which revealed that minutes before Flight 66&#x27;s crash, a Flying Tiger Line Douglas DC-8 cargo jet landing on Runway 22L reported tremendous wind shear on the ground. The pilot warned the tower of the wind-shear conditions, but other aircraft continued to land. After the DC-8 landed, an Eastern Air Lines Lockheed L-1011 landing on the same runway nearly crashed. Two more aircraft landed before Flight 66 attempted its landing. According to the conversation recorded by the cockpit voice recorder, the captain of Flight 66 was aware of reports of severe wind shear on the final-approach path (which he confirmed by radio to the final-vector controller), but decided to continue nonetheless.

The NTSB published its final report on March 12, 1976, determining the following probable cause of the accident:

The National Transportation Safety Board determines that the probable cause of this accident was the aircraft&#x27;s encounter with adverse winds associated with a very strong thunderstorm located astride the ILS localizer course, which resulted in high descent rate into the non-frangible approach light towers. The flight crew&#x27;s delayed recognition and correction of the high descent rate were probably associated with their reliance upon visual cues rather than on flight instrument reference. However, the adverse winds might have been too severe for a successful approach and landing even had they relied upon and responded rapidly to the indications of the flight instruments.

The NTSB also concluded that failure of either air traffic controllers or the flight crew to abort the landing, given the severe weather conditions, also contributed to the accident:

Contributing to the accident was the continued use of runway 22L when it should have become evident to both air traffic control personnel and the flight crew that a severe weather hazard existed along the approach path.

==Legacy==

The accident led to the development of the original low-level wind-shear alert system by the U.S. Federal Aviation Administration in 1976, which was installed at 110 FAA-staffed airports between 1977 and 1987. The accident also led to the discovery of downbursts, a weather phenomenon that creates vertical wind shear and poses dangers to landing aircraft, and it sparked decades of research into downburst and microburst phenomena and their effects on aircraft.

The concept of downbursts was not yet understood when Flight 66 crashed. During the investigation, meteorologist Ted Fujita worked with the NTSB and the Eastern Air Lines flight-safety department to study the weather phenomena encountered by Flight 66. Fujita identified &quot;cells of intense downdrafts&quot; during the storm that caused aircraft flying through them &quot;considerable difficulties in landing.&quot; Fujita named this phenomenon &quot;downburst cells&quot; and determined that a plane can be &quot;seriously affected&quot; by &quot;a downburst of air current.&quot; Fujita proposed new methods of detecting and identifying downbursts, including installation of additional weather monitoring equipment at the approach ends of active runways, and also proposed development of new procedures for immediately communicating downburst detection to incoming aircraft.

Fujita&#x27;s downburst theory was not immediately accepted by the aviation meteorology community. However, the crashes of Pan Am Flight 759 in 1982 and Delta Air Lines Flight 191 in 1985 prompted the aviation community to reevaluate and ultimately accept Fujita&#x27;s theory and to begin researching downburst/microburst detection-and-avoidance systems in earnest.

== See also ==

*Aviation safety
*List of accidents and incidents involving commercial aircraft
*1956 Kano Airport BOAC Argonaut crash
*Delta Air Lines Flight 191
*USAir Flight 1016
*Aeromexico Connect Flight 2431
*Pan Am Flight 759
*Martinair Flight 495
*United Nations Flight 834
*1950 Air France multiple Douglas DC-4 accidents

==Footnotes==
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2842206" start="0" end="27" title="Eastern Air Lines Flight 66" label="Eastern Air Lines Flight 66"/>
<link wikidata="Q34404" start="66" end="77" title="New Orleans" label="New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="81" end="94" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q8685" start="163" end="200" title="John F. Kennedy International Airport" label="John F. Kennedy International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027878" start="286" end="296" title="wind shear" label="wind shear"/>
<link wikidata="Q4847219" start="309" end="319" title="microburst" label="microburst"/>
<link wikidata="Q611742" start="459" end="476" title="Eastern Air Lines" label="Eastern Air Lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461076" start="535" end="568" title="Louis Armstrong New Orleans International Airport" label="New Orleans International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q8685" start="572" end="609" title="John F. Kennedy International Airport" label="John F. Kennedy International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320403" start="613" end="628" title="Jamaica, Queens" label="Jamaica, Queens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="630" end="638" title="New York (state)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q6409" start="697" end="707" title="Boeing 727" label="Boeing 727"/>
<link wikidata="Q849579" start="708" end="714" title="trijet" label="trijet"/>
<link wikidata="Q941023" start="803" end="806" title="Eastern Time Zone" label="EDT"/>
<link wikidata="Q2857578" start="1907" end="1919" title="thunderstorm" label="thunderstorm"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2046" end="2065" title="Air traffic control#Approach and terminal control" label="approach controller"/>
<link wikidata="Q847919" start="2379" end="2402" title="instrument flight rules" label="instrument flight rules"/>
<link wikidata="Q319654" start="2724" end="2741" title="LaGuardia Airport" label="LaGuardia Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058775" start="2745" end="2761" title="Flushing, Queens" label="Flushing, Queens"/>
<link wikidata="Q4847219" start="3248" end="3258" title="microburst" label="microburst"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027878" start="3262" end="3272" title="wind shear" label="wind shear"/>
<link wikidata="Q14707231" start="3592" end="3610" title="Rockaway Boulevard" label="Rockaway Boulevard"/>
<link wikidata="Q463197" start="4033" end="4061" title="American Airlines Flight 191" label="American Airlines Flight 191"/>
<link wikidata="Q463486" start="4084" end="4115" title="American Basketball Association" label="American Basketball Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1607769" start="4123" end="4137" title="Wendell Ladner" label="Wendell Ladner"/>
<link wikidata="Q572134" start="4169" end="4182" title="Brooklyn Nets" label="New York Nets"/>
<link wikidata="Q21605013" start="4188" end="4204" title="Iveson B. Noland" label="Iveson B. Noland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5383391" start="4220" end="4250" title="Episcopal Diocese of Louisiana" label="Episcopal Diocese of Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053145" start="4320" end="4356" title="National Transportation Safety Board" label="National Transportation Safety Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q248637" start="4426" end="4443" title="Flying Tiger Line" label="Flying Tiger Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q223315" start="4444" end="4456" title="Douglas DC-8" label="Douglas DC-8"/>
<link wikidata="Q611742" start="4656" end="4673" title="Eastern Air Lines" label="Eastern Air Lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q852" start="4674" end="4689" title="Lockheed L-1011" label="Lockheed L-1011"/>
<link wikidata="Q998319" start="4844" end="4866" title="Cockpit Voice Recorder" label="cockpit voice recorder"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5385" end="5398" title="Instrument landing system#Localizer" label="ILS localizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6693020" start="6334" end="6367" title="low level windshear alert system" label="low-level wind-shear alert system"/>
<link wikidata="Q335357" start="6380" end="6411" title="Federal Aviation Administration" label="Federal Aviation Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q4847219" start="6534" end="6543" title="downburst" label="downburst"/>
<link wikidata="Q4847219" start="6693" end="6703" title="microburst" label="microburst"/>
<link wikidata="Q2310145" start="6845" end="6858" title="meteorologist" label="meteorologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q967509" start="6859" end="6869" title="Ted Fujita" label="Ted Fujita"/>
<link wikidata="Q2254983" start="7750" end="7767" title="Pan Am Flight 759" label="Pan Am Flight 759"/>
<link wikidata="Q1184780" start="7780" end="7806" title="Delta Air Lines Flight 191" label="Delta Air Lines Flight 191"/>
<link wikidata="Q640853" start="8012" end="8027" title="Aviation safety" label="Aviation safety"/>
<link wikidata="Q354069" start="8029" end="8090" title="List of accidents and incidents involving commercial aircraft" label="List of accidents and incidents involving commercial aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q4568652" start="8092" end="8129" title="1956 Kano Airport BOAC Argonaut crash" label="1956 Kano Airport BOAC Argonaut crash"/>
<link wikidata="Q1184780" start="8131" end="8157" title="Delta Air Lines Flight 191" label="Delta Air Lines Flight 191"/>
<link wikidata="Q7875834" start="8159" end="8176" title="USAir Flight 1016" label="USAir Flight 1016"/>
<link wikidata="Q55859110" start="8178" end="8208" title="Aeromexico Connect Flight 2431" label="Aeromexico Connect Flight 2431"/>
<link wikidata="Q2254983" start="8210" end="8227" title="Pan Am Flight 759" label="Pan Am Flight 759"/>
<link wikidata="Q3153850" start="8229" end="8249" title="Martinair Flight 495" label="Martinair Flight 495"/>
<link wikidata="Q2976024" start="8251" end="8276" title="United Nations Flight 834" label="United Nations Flight 834"/>
<link wikidata="Q4566775" start="8278" end="8325" title="1950 Air France multiple Douglas DC-4 accidents" label="1950 Air France multiple Douglas DC-4 accidents"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1329305" wikidata="Q1355895" url="?curid=1329305" title="Robert M. T. Hunter">
<text>Robert Mercer Taliaferro Hunter (April 21, 1809 – July 18, 1887) was an American lawyer, politician and planter. He was a U.S. representative (1837–1843, 1845–1847), speaker of the House (1839–1841), and U.S. senator (1847–1861). During the American Civil War, Hunter became the Confederate States Secretary of State (1861–1862) and then a Confederate senator (1862–1865) and critic of President Jefferson Davis. After the war, Hunter failed to win re-election to the U.S. Senate, but did serve as the treasurer of Virginia (1874–1880) before retiring to his farm. After fellow Democrat Grover Cleveland was elected President of the United States in 1884, Hunter became the customs collector for the port of Tappahannock until his death.

==Early life and education==
Born at the &quot;Mount Pleasant&quot; plantation near Loretto, Essex County, Virginia, to James Hunter (1774–1826) and his wife Maria (Garnett) Hunter (1777–1811), R.M.T. Hunter was descended from the First Families of Virginia. His mother&#x27;s father, Henry Garnett was one of the county&#x27;s largest landowners, her brother James M. Garnett was the U.S. congressman representing the area (and her other brother Robert S. Garnett would be within a decade). However, Maria Hunter died shortly after giving birth to William Garnett Hunter (1811–1829), when Robert M. T. Hunter was two years old, and shortly after one of his slightly elder brothers, also William Hunter, died at age 5. Educated first by private tutors, R. M. T. Hunter entered the University of Virginia when he was 17, shortly after his father&#x27;s death, and became one of its first graduates. While a student, Hunter became a member of the Jefferson Literary and Debating Society, then studied law at the Winchester Law School.

==Planter==
Several generations of Hunter&#x27;s family owned a considerable number of slaves, most used to farm their plantations. In 1830, R.M.T. Hunter owned 72 slaves (44 males and 26 females), and his household consisted of two white males (presumably him and an overseer). A decade later, following his marriage, R. M. T. Hunter&#x27;s household included himself, two young white males (presumably one his eldest son) and five white females, as well as 83 slaves. In 1850, R. M. T. Hunter of Essex County, Virginia, owned at least 100 slaves. In the 1860 U.S. federal census for Essex County, Virginia, U.S. Senator Hunter owned real estate worth $80,890 and personal property (including slaves) worth $92,800. The federal lists of slaves owned by R. M. T. Hunter nearly fill the majority of two pages (more than 120 persons).

==Political career==
In 1830, Hunter was admitted to the Virginia bar. In 1834, he was elected to represent Essex County in the Virginia House of Delegates, succeeding Richard Baylor. R. M. T. Hunter won re-election in 1834 and 1836, but resigned upon winning election to the U.S. Congress as discussed next.
In 1836, Hunter was elected U.S. Representative as a States Rights Whig. He was re-elected in 1838, and became Speaker of the United States House of Representatives – the youngest person ever to hold that office. He was re-elected again in 1840, but was not chosen Speaker. In 1842 he was defeated for re-election, but returned in 1844. Hunter favored annexing Texas and compromise on the Oregon question (opposing the Wilmot Proviso), and led efforts to retrocede the City of Alexandria back to Virginia (removing it from the District of Columbia). After losing the 1842 election, Hunter changed parties, becoming a Democrat. In 1845, he again took the oath of office as an elected Congressman, and supported the Tariff of 1846.

In 1846, the Virginia General Assembly elected Hunter U.S. Senator. He assumed office in 1847 and won re-election in 1852 and 1858. Hunter continued to support slavery and its extension: favoring extending the Missouri Compromise line to the Pacific Ocean, opposing abolishing the slave trade in the District of Columbia as well as any interference with its operation in any state or territory, and supported the Fugitive Slave Act of 1850. Senator Hunter delivered an address in Richmond supporting states’ rights in 1852, and in the 1857–58 congressional session advocated admitting Kansas under the pro-slavery Lecompton constitution.

In the Senate, Hunter became chairman of the Committee on Finance in 1850. He is credited with bringing about a reduction of the quantity of silver in small silver denominations, helping push forward Senate Bill No. 271 which would eventually become the Coinage Act of 1853. Hunter also drafted and sponsored the Tariff of 1857 (which lowered duties) and creation of the bonded-warehouse system, although federal revenues were thereby reduced. He also advocated civil service reform.

In January 1860, Hunter delivered a speech in favor of slavery and the right of slaveholders to carry their slaves into the territories. At the first session of the 1860 Democratic National Convention in Charleston, South Carolina, Hunter was a contender for the presidential nomination, but received little support except from the Virginia delegation. On the first eight ballots, he was a very distant second to the leader, Stephen A. Douglas, and was third on the remaining 49 ballots. When the convention reconvened in Baltimore, most Southerners withdrew, including Hunter, and Douglas won the party&#x27;s nomination.

Hunter did not regard Lincoln&#x27;s election as being of itself sufficient cause for secession. On January 11, 1861, he proposed an elaborate but impracticable scheme to adjust differences between the North and the South. When this and several other similar efforts failed, Hunter quietly urged his own state to pass the ordinance of secession in April 1861. He was expelled from the Senate for supporting secession. One scheme proposed him as president of the new Confederate government, with fellow former U.S. Senator Jefferson Davis as commander of the Confederate States Army. Voters in parts of Virginia that had not seceded elected Unionist John S. Carlile to fill the rest of Hunter&#x27;s term.

==American Civil War==
In July 1861, Confederate President Jefferson Davis appointed Hunter the Confederate States secretary of state. He resigned on February 18, 1862, after his election as a Confederate senator. Hunter served in the Confederate Senate in Richmond, Virginia, until the war&#x27;s end, and was at times President &quot;pro tem&quot;. His portrait appeared on the Confederate $10 bill.

As a Confederate senator, Hunter became an often caustic critic of Confederate President Davis. Despite this friction, Davis appointed Hunter as one of three commissioners sent to attempt peace negotiations in February 1865. Hunter met with President Abraham Lincoln and Secretary of State William H. Seward at the Hampton Roads Conference. However, after Lincoln refused to acknowledge the Confederacy&#x27;s independence, Senator Hunter chaired a war meeting in Richmond where Confederates vowed they would never lay down their arms before achieving independence. Following Lee&#x27;s surrender, President Lincoln summoned Hunter to confer regarding Virginia&#x27;s restoration to the Union.

Many of Hunter&#x27;s Garnett relatives became Confederate military officers, and his cousin Judge Muscoe Garnett (1808–1880) commanded the Home Guard in Essex County. Hunter&#x27;s first cousins (through his mother) were career U.S. Army officers who became Confederate generals Robert S. Garnett and Richard B. Garnett, both of whom died in the conflict. His son James D. Hunter enlisted as a private in Company F, 9th Virginia Cavalry, which was organized in December 1861 with Lt. Garnett among its officers, and which was initially assigned to protect the Rappahannock River as well as the Rappahannock river port cities of Falmouth and Fredericksburg. James D. Hunter served only months before being furloughed on account of sickness in July 1862, but did participate in raids under Gen. J.E.B. Stuart and Capt. William Latane (who became a Confederate martyr as the only casualty of Stuart&#x27;s vaunted ride around Union troops) and in General Lee&#x27;s Seven Day offensive which ended the Union Peninsular Campaign. While his eldest son R.M.T. Hunter Jr. died early in the war of disease, his second son, Robert D. Hunter, served as a staff officer in the Army of Northern Virginia and as an engineer.

When some suggested late in the war that their slaves could be armed and serve in the Confederate Army to win their freedom, Senator R.M.T. Hunter vehemently opposed the proposal with a long speech against it, but after the Virginia legislature passed a resolution to the contrary, voted as instructed but with an emphatic protest.

==Later years==

In 1867, President Andrew Johnson pardoned Hunter for his activities supporting the Confederate States. He unsuccessfully ran to become U.S. Senator again in 1874, to succeed Unionist Republican John F. Lewis. However, Confederate veteran Robert E. Withers of the Conservative Party won. After that loss, Hunter accepted an appointment as the Treasurer of Virginia, serving from 1874 to 1880, when he returned to his farm. Hunter also published &quot;Origin of the Late War&quot;, about the causes of the Civil War. From 1885 until his death, he was customs collector of the Port of Tappahannock, Virginia, near his home.

He died near Lloyds, Virginia, in 1887, and was buried at the Garnett family burial ground in Loretto in Essex County.

==Personal life==
He married Mary Evelina Dandridge (1817–1893) on October 4, 1836, in Jefferson County (then in Virginia, but which became West Virginia during the American Civil War). They had sons Robert Mercer Taliaferro Hunter Jr. (1839–1861), James Dandridge Hunter (1844–1892), Philip Stephen Hunter (1848–1919) and Muscoe Russell Garnett Hunter (1850–1865). Their daughters (educated and unmarried) were Martha Taliaferro Hunter (1841–1909), Sarah Stephena Hunter (1846–1865), Annie Buchanan Hunter (1852–1853) and Mary Evelina Hunter 1854–1881). In 1860 and later censuses, R. M. T. Hunter&#x27;s unmarried sisters Martha Fenton Hunter (1800–1866) and Jane Swann Hunter (1804–1880) and half-sister Sara (Sully) Hunter (1822–1874) also lived on the family plantation.

==Legacy==

In 1942, a United States Liberty ship named the SS &quot;Robert M. T. Hunter&quot; was launched. She was scrapped in 1971.

As a former Speaker of the House, his portrait had been on display in the US Capitol. The portrait was removed from public display in the Speaker&#x27;s Lobby outside the House Chamber after an order issued by the Speaker of the House, Nancy Pelosi, on June 18, 2020.

==In popular culture==
Hunter appeared in the 2012 film &quot;Lincoln&quot;, which included the Hampton Roads Conference. He was portrayed by Mike Shiflett.

==See also==
*List of United States senators expelled or censured

Notelist

==Notes==
*

==References==
==Further reading==
*
*

==External links==
*Retrocession of Alexandria – A speech by R. M. T. Hunter before the U.S. House of Representatives, May 8, 1846</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1355895" start="0" end="31" title="Robert M. T. Hunter" label="Robert Mercer Taliaferro Hunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="122" end="141" title="United States House of Representatives" label="U.S. representative"/>
<link wikidata="Q912994" start="166" end="186" title="Speaker of the United States House of Representatives" label="speaker of the House"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="204" end="216" title="United States Senate" label="U.S. senator"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="241" end="259" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2523231" start="279" end="316" title="Confederate States Secretary of State" label="Confederate States Secretary of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q6627960" start="340" end="359" title="Confederate senator" label="Confederate senator"/>
<link wikidata="Q162269" start="396" end="411" title="Jefferson Davis" label="Jefferson Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q29093785" start="502" end="523" title="treasurer of Virginia" label="treasurer of Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="578" end="586" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q35171" start="587" end="603" title="Grover Cleveland" label="Grover Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373810" start="708" end="720" title="Tappahannock, Virginia" label="Tappahannock"/>
<link wikidata="Q182112" start="832" end="854" title="Essex County, Virginia" label="Essex County, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5452987" start="970" end="996" title="First Families of Virginia" label="First Families of Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430834" start="1099" end="1115" title="James M. Garnett" label="James M. Garnett"/>
<link wikidata="Q2158817" start="1186" end="1203" title="Robert S. Garnett" label="Robert S. Garnett"/>
<link wikidata="Q213439" start="1520" end="1542" title="University of Virginia" label="University of Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6175528" start="1684" end="1723" title="Jefferson Literary and Debating Society" label="Jefferson Literary and Debating Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q8023816" start="1749" end="1770" title="Winchester Law School" label="Winchester Law School"/>
<link wikidata="Q320275" start="2735" end="2762" title="Virginia House of Delegates" label="Virginia House of Delegates"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="2944" end="2963" title="United States House of Representatives" label="U.S. Representative"/>
<link wikidata="Q48527" start="2969" end="2982" title="States Rights" label="States Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q42183" start="2983" end="2987" title="Whig Party (United States)" label="Whig"/>
<link wikidata="Q912994" start="3027" end="3080" title="Speaker of the United States House of Representatives" label="Speaker of the United States House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661295" start="3335" end="3349" title="Wilmot Proviso" label="Wilmot Proviso"/>
<link wikidata="Q88" start="3385" end="3403" title="Alexandria, Virginia" label="City of Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="3533" end="3541" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q7962356" start="3630" end="3644" title="Tariff of 1846" label="Tariff of 1846"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="3701" end="3713" title="United States Senate" label="U.S. Senator"/>
<link wikidata="Q727854" start="3857" end="3876" title="Missouri Compromise" label="Missouri Compromise"/>
<link wikidata="Q535519" start="4060" end="4086" title="Fugitive Slave Act of 1850" label="Fugitive Slave Act of 1850"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995078" start="4261" end="4283" title="Lecompton constitution" label="Lecompton constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2985424" start="4331" end="4351" title="United States Senate Committee on Finance" label="Committee on Finance"/>
<link wikidata="Q39058068" start="4540" end="4559" title="Coinage Act of 1853" label="Coinage Act of 1853"/>
<link wikidata="Q7686038" start="4599" end="4613" title="Tariff of 1857" label="Tariff of 1857"/>
<link wikidata="Q4555039" start="4936" end="4971" title="1860 Democratic National Conventions" label="1860 Democratic National Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q47716" start="4975" end="5001" title="Charleston, South Carolina" label="Charleston, South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q433174" start="5196" end="5214" title="Stephen A. Douglas" label="Stephen A. Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092" start="5293" end="5302" title="Baltimore" label="Baltimore"/>
<link wikidata="Q91" start="5417" end="5424" title="Abraham Lincoln" label="Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q5421751" start="5762" end="5786" title="Expulsion from the United States Congress" label="expelled from the Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q162269" start="5917" end="5932" title="Jefferson Davis" label="Jefferson Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125021" start="5953" end="5976" title="Confederate States Army" label="Confederate States Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1701638" start="6044" end="6059" title="John S. Carlile" label="John S. Carlile"/>
<link wikidata="Q162269" start="6160" end="6175" title="Jefferson Davis" label="Jefferson Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2523231" start="6197" end="6234" title="Confederate States Secretary of State" label="Confederate States secretary of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q628728" start="6294" end="6313" title="Congress of the Confederate States" label="Confederate senator"/>
<link wikidata="Q91" start="6755" end="6770" title="Abraham Lincoln" label="Abraham Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q297308" start="6794" end="6811" title="William H. Seward" label="William H. Seward"/>
<link wikidata="Q5646292" start="6819" end="6843" title="Hampton Roads Conference" label="Hampton Roads Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q165557" start="7080" end="7083" title="Robert E. Lee" label="Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2158817" start="7479" end="7496" title="Robert S. Garnett" label="Robert S. Garnett"/>
<link wikidata="Q650188" start="7501" end="7519" title="Richard B. Garnett" label="Richard B. Garnett"/>
<link wikidata="Q4646697" start="7616" end="7636" title="9th Virginia Cavalry" label="9th Virginia Cavalry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375083" start="7828" end="7836" title="Falmouth, Virginia" label="Falmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q492342" start="7841" end="7855" title="Fredericksburg, Virginia" label="Fredericksburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154050" start="8205" end="8224" title="Peninsular Campaign" label="Peninsular Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q8612" start="8782" end="8796" title="Andrew Johnson" label="Andrew Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q117651" start="8958" end="8971" title="John F. Lewis" label="John F. Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1664315" start="9002" end="9019" title="Robert E. Withers" label="Robert E. Withers"/>
<link wikidata="Q29093785" start="9106" end="9127" title="Virginia State Treasurer" label="Treasurer of Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373810" start="9346" end="9368" title="Tappahannock, Virginia" label="Tappahannock, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q14712722" start="9399" end="9415" title="Lloyds, Virginia" label="Lloyds, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6681005" start="9480" end="9487" title="Loretto, Virginia" label="Loretto"/>
<link wikidata="Q490946" start="9593" end="9609" title="Jefferson County, West Virginia" label="Jefferson County"/>
<link wikidata="Q593485" start="10320" end="10332" title="Liberty ship" label="Liberty ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q7394297" start="10343" end="10377" title="SS Robert M. T. Hunter" label="SS &amp;quot;Robert M. T. Hunter&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q170581" start="10655" end="10667" title="Nancy Pelosi" label="Nancy Pelosi"/>
<link wikidata="Q32433" start="10750" end="10757" title="Lincoln (film)" label="Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10830" end="10843" title="Mike Shiflett" label="Mike Shiflett"/>
<link wikidata="Q6602918" start="10860" end="10911" title="List of United States senators expelled or censured" label="List of United States senators expelled or censured"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1329314" wikidata="Q60406" url="?curid=1329314" title="Tobias Mayer">
<text>Tobias Mayer (17 February 172320 February 1762) was a German astronomer famous for his studies of the Moon.

He was born at Marbach, in Württemberg, and brought up at Esslingen in poor circumstances. A self-taught mathematician, he earned a living by teaching mathematics while still a youth. He had already published two original geometrical works when, in 1746, he entered J. B. Homann&#x27;s cartographic establishment at Nuremberg. Here he introduced many improvements in mapmaking, and gained a scientific reputation which led (in 1751) to his election to the chair of economy and mathematics at the University of Göttingen. In 1754 he became superintendent of the observatory, where he worked until his death in 1762. He has been created with developing an early form of regression analysis in 1750, though 50 years earlier Isaac Newton had used similar methods.

==Career==
Mayer&#x27;s first important astronomical work was a careful investigation of the libration of the Moon (&quot;Kosmographische Nachrichten&quot;, Nuremberg, 1750), and his chart of the full moon (published in 1775) was unsurpassed for half a century. But his fame rests chiefly on his lunar tables, communicated in 1752, with new solar tables to the &quot;Königliche Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften zu Göttingen&quot; (Royal Society of Sciences at Göttingen), and published in their transactions. In 1755 he submitted to the British government an amended body of manuscript tables, which James Bradley compared with the Greenwich observations. He found these to be sufficiently accurate to determine the Moon&#x27;s position to 75&quot;, and consequently the longitude at sea to about half a degree. An improved set was later published in London (1770), as also the theory (&quot;Theoria lunae juxta systema Newtonianum&quot;, 1767) upon which the tables are based. His widow, with whom they were sent to England, received in consideration from the British government a grant of £3,000 (). Appended to the London edition of the solar and lunar tables are two short tracts, one on determining longitude by lunar distances, together with a description of the reflecting circle (invented by Mayer in 1752), the other on a formula for atmospheric refraction, which applies a remarkably accurate correction for temperature.

During his work on the Moon in 1750, Mayer also used an averaging method for a set of data, seen as an early form of regression analysis, if not its start. However, it has been discovered that Isaac Newton had used regression analysis 50 years prior, as he not only performed an averaging of a set of data, but also adjusted the results so that the total of the deviations (residuals) equaled zero, ensuring that the regression line went through the average point of the data, along with recognizing the differences between two uneven datasets and may have considered an ideal solution regarding bias, although not in terms of efficiency.

==Legacy==
Mayer left behind him a considerable quantity of manuscript material, part of which was collected by G. C. Lichtenberg and published in one volume (&quot;Opera inedita&quot;, Göttingen, 1775). It contains an easy and accurate method for calculating eclipses, an essay on colour, in which three primary colours are recognized, a catalogue of 998 zodiacal stars, and a memoir, the earliest of any real value, on the proper motion of eighty stars, originally communicated to the Göttingen Royal Society in 1760. The remaining manuscripts included papers on atmospheric refraction from 1755, on the motion of Mars as affected by the perturbations of Jupiter and the Earth (1756), and on terrestrial magnetism (1760 and 1762). In these last Mayer sought to explain the magnetic action of the Earth by a modification of Euler&#x27;s hypothesis, and made the first really definite attempt to establish a mathematical theory of magnetic action (C. Hansteen, &quot;Magnetismus der Erde&quot;, I, 283). In 1881 Ernst Klinkerfues published photo-lithographic reproductions of Mayer&#x27;s local charts and general map of the Moon. His star catalogue was re-edited by Francis Baily in 1830 (&quot;Memoirs of the Royal Astronomical Society&quot; IV, 391) and by Arthur Auwers in 1894.

Honors: Lunar crater T. Mayer (Southwest of crater Copernicus).

==Family==
His son Johann Tobias Mayer became a noted German physicist.

==Notes==
==References==
* A. G. Kästner, &quot;Elogium Tobiae Mayeri&quot; (Göttingen, 1762)
*Jérôme Lalande, &quot;Connaissance des Temps&quot;, 1767, p. 187
*&quot;Monatliche Correspondenz&quot;, VIII, 257; IX, 45, 415, 487; XI, 462
*&quot;Allgemeine Geographische Ephemeriden&quot; III, 116, 1799 (portrait)
*A. G. Kästner, &quot;Berliner Astronomisches Jahrbuch&quot;, Suppl. Bd. III, 209, 1797
*J. B. J. Delambre, &quot;Histoire de l&#x27;Astronomie au Dix-huitième Siecle&quot;, (Paris, 1827), p. 429
*Robert Grant, &quot;History of Physical Astronomy from the Earliest Ages to the Middle of the Nineteenth Century&quot; (London, 1852), pp. 46, 488, 555
*Arthur Berry, &quot;A Short History of Astronomy&quot; (London, 1898), p. 282
*J. S. Pütter, &quot;Versuch einer academischen Gelehrten-Geschichte von der Universität zu Gottingen&quot;, I, 68
*J. Gehler, &quot;Physikalisches Wörterbuch&quot; neu bearb. von H.W. Brandes [u.a.]. (Leipzig, 1825- ), VI, 746, 1039
*
Attribution:

==Further reading==
*Eric G. Forbes: &quot;Tobias Mayer (1723–1762), pioneer of enlightened science in Germany&quot;. Göttingen: Vandenhoeck &amp; Ruprecht, 1980 German edition as: &quot;Tobias Mayer (1723-62), Pionier der Naturwissenschaften der deutschen Aufklärungszeit&quot; übers. von Maria Forbes u. Hans-Heinrich Vogt. Marbach am Neckar: Tobias-Mayer-Museum-Verein, 1993 (Schriftenreihe des Tobias-Mayer-Museum-Vereins e.V.; Nr. 17)
*Sarah Lowengard, &quot;Tobias Mayer&#x27;s Trichromatic Graph,&quot; &quot;The Creation of Color in Eighteenth-Century Europe&quot; New York, Columbia University Press, 2006. http://www.gutenberg-e.org/lowengard/A_Chap03.html#31
*Tobias Mayer: &quot;Tobias Mayer&#x27;s Opera inedita: the first translation of the Lichtenberg edition of 1775&quot;, by Eric G. Forbes. London: Macmillan, 1971 (American ed.: New York: American Elsevier, 1971 )
*Tobias Mayer: &quot;The unpublished writings of Tobias Mayer&quot; by Eric G. Forbes. Göttingen: Vandenhoeck &amp; Ruprecht, 1972. 3v. (v. 1); (v. 2); (v. 3) (Arbeiten aus der Niedersächsischen Staats- und Universitätsbibliothek Göttingen; Bd. 9-11)
*&quot;The Euler-Mayer correspondence, 1751-1755: a new perspective on eighteenth-century advances in the lunar theory&quot;, [edited] by Eric G. Forbes. London: Macmillan, 1971 

==External links==
*
*Entry in the Mathematics Genealogy Project</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q60406" start="0" end="12" title="Tobias Mayer" label="Tobias Mayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q11063" start="61" end="71" title="astronomer" label="astronomer"/>
<link wikidata="Q405" start="102" end="106" title="Moon" label="Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q61890" start="124" end="131" title="Marbach am Neckar" label="Marbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q159626" start="136" end="147" title="Württemberg" label="Württemberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q3786" start="167" end="176" title="Esslingen am Neckar" label="Esslingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q170790" start="214" end="227" title="mathematician" label="mathematician"/>
<link wikidata="Q62706" start="375" end="387" title="Johann Homann" label="J. B. Homann"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090" start="425" end="434" title="Nuremberg" label="Nuremberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q42515" start="476" end="485" title="mapmaking" label="mapmaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q152838" start="605" end="628" title="University of Göttingen" label="University of Göttingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q208042" start="777" end="796" title="regression analysis" label="regression analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q935" start="830" end="842" title="Isaac Newton" label="Isaac Newton"/>
<link wikidata="Q218673" start="963" end="972" title="libration" label="libration"/>
<link wikidata="Q405" start="980" end="984" title="Moon" label="Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1443023" start="1166" end="1178" title="lunar theory" label="lunar tables"/>
<link wikidata="Q312278" start="1469" end="1482" title="James Bradley" label="James Bradley"/>
<link wikidata="Q179385" start="1501" end="1510" title="Greenwich" label="Greenwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q36477" start="1640" end="1649" title="longitude" label="longitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547342" start="2086" end="2100" title="Lunar distance (navigation)" label="lunar distance"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2138" end="2155" title="reflecting instrument#Reflecting circles" label="reflecting circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q254634" start="2212" end="2234" title="atmospheric refraction" label="atmospheric refraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q208042" start="2418" end="2437" title="regression analysis" label="regression analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q935" start="2494" end="2506" title="Isaac Newton" label="Isaac Newton"/>
<link wikidata="Q208042" start="2516" end="2535" title="regression analysis" label="regression analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q57554" start="3053" end="3070" title="Georg Christoph Lichtenberg" label="G. C. Lichtenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q141022" start="3201" end="3208" title="eclipse" label="eclipse"/>
<link wikidata="Q40540" start="3297" end="3303" title="zodiac" label="zodiac"/>
<link wikidata="Q193223" start="3366" end="3379" title="proper motion" label="proper motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q4130" start="3547" end="3553" title="Planetary orbit" label="motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q111" start="3557" end="3561" title="Mars" label="Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q803623" start="3581" end="3593" title="perturbation (astronomy)" label="perturbation"/>
<link wikidata="Q319" start="3598" end="3605" title="Jupiter" label="Jupiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2" start="3614" end="3619" title="Earth" label="Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500960" start="3635" end="3656" title="Earth&amp;#x27;s magnetic field" label="terrestrial magnetism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7604" start="3766" end="3771" title="Euler" label="Euler"/>
<link wikidata="Q68175" start="3953" end="3970" title="Ernst Friedrich Wilhelm Klinkerfues" label="Ernst Klinkerfues"/>
<link wikidata="Q358244" start="4108" end="4121" title="Francis Baily" label="Francis Baily"/>
<link wikidata="Q57349" start="4201" end="4214" title="Georg Friedrich Julius Arthur von Auwers" label="Arthur Auwers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2383384" start="4246" end="4254" title="T. Mayer (crater)" label="T. Mayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131154" start="4269" end="4286" title="Copernicus (lunar crater)" label="crater Copernicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q215965" start="4309" end="4328" title="Johann Tobias Mayer" label="Johann Tobias Mayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q18593033" start="5374" end="5388" title="Eric G. Forbes" label="Eric G. Forbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q829984" start="6703" end="6732" title="Mathematics Genealogy Project" label="Mathematics Genealogy Project"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1329315" wikidata="Q1705063" url="?curid=1329315" title="American Laser Games">
<text>American Laser Games was a company based in Albuquerque, New Mexico that created numerous light gun laserdisc video games featuring live action full motion video. The company was founded in the late 1980s by Robert Grebe, who had originally created a system to train police officers under the company name ICAT (Institute for Combat Arms and Tactics) and later adapted the technology for arcade games. Its first hit game was &quot;Mad Dog McCree&quot;, a light gun shooter set in the American Old West. By mid-1995 they were recognized as the leading company in the medium of laserdisc-based arcade games. Almost all arcade games released by the company were light gun shooters and a number of them also had an Old West theme.

American Laser arcade cabinets included a Sony Lasermax LaserDisc player to stream the video content, and an Amiga 500 computer to overlay on-screen graphics, and to control individual game logic. The computer was fitted with a bespoke interface to utilise the LaserDisc player, an auto-booting ROM board, and a Roctec Genlock. 

Later, the company turned toward compact disc technology to release its games. Ports of its arcade titles were released for the Sega CD, CD-i and DOS computers equipped with CD-ROM drives. The company was particularly supportive of the 3DO, not only releasing versions of its games for the console, but also offering a modified version of the 3DO platform as an upgrade kit for existing arcade video game cabinets, supporting compressed video versions of their games at a lower cost. In 1995, American Laser Games released &quot;Mazer&quot; for the 3DO home market and &quot;Orbatak&quot; (3DO-powered) for the arcade - their first and only in-house non-Full motion video based games. The company also released a series of light-gun controllers, including the 3DO Game Gun and the PC Gamegun, for home computer use. The latter proved unsuccessful due to its poor accuracy.

American Laser Games lasted until the mid-to-late 1990s, by which time it had begun making &quot;games for girls&quot; for the PC under the moniker HeR Interactive, beginning with &quot;McKenzie &amp; Co&quot;. In response to a major slump in the arcade industry, American Laser Games ended its direct manufacturing of coin-op machines in November 1995, and turned its focus to developing games for the Sega Saturn and Sony PlayStation. This failed to revive the company&#x27;s fortunes, and revenues in 1996 were roughly half of the $16 million it generated in 1995. At the end of 1996 ALG laid off a third of its staff, Jan Claesson replaced Grebe as president, and the company began focusing primarily on the HeR Interactive line, cancelling all the games in their mainstream line except for &quot;Shining Sword&quot;. The company eventually closed its doors and was bought out by HeR Interactive, which had been spun off before ALG closing and is still making games . In 2000, the development and publishing rights to all of the games that were produced by American Laser Games were purchased by Digital Leisure, Inc from HeR Interactive. Many of these games were then re-released for the PC and in DVD TV game format.

== Games ==

===Light gun arcade games===
*&quot;Mad Dog McCree&quot; (1990)
*&quot;Who Shot Johnny Rock?&quot; (1991)
*&quot;Space Pirates&quot; (1992)
*&quot;Mad Dog II: The Lost Gold&quot; (1992)
*&quot;Gallagher&#x27;s Gallery&quot; (1992)
*&quot;Crime Patrol&quot; (1993)
*&quot;Crime Patrol 2: Drug Wars&quot; (1993)
*&quot;The Last Bounty Hunter&quot; (1994)
*&quot;Fast Draw Showdown&quot; (1994)
*&quot;Shootout at Old Tucson&quot; (1994, limited arcade release. 3DO port was cancelled)

===Other games===
*&quot;Mazer&quot;
*&quot;Way of the Warrior&quot; (with Naughty Dog)
*&quot;Orbatak&quot;
*&quot;McKenzie &amp; Co.&quot;
*&quot;McKenzie &amp; Co. : More Friends&quot;
*&quot;The Vampire Diaries&quot;
*&quot;Battles in Time&quot; (with QQP)
*&quot;Shining Sword&quot; (cancelled)
*&quot;Blood Bath at Red Falls&quot;(1995)

== See also ==
*Digital Pictures

== Notes ==
== References ==
==External links==
* KLOV entry for American Laser Games
*The Dot Eaters Article covering ALG and the laser game craze</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1705063" start="0" end="20" title="American Laser Games" label="American Laser Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q34804" start="44" end="55" title="Albuquerque" label="Albuquerque"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522" start="57" end="67" title="New Mexico" label="New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055974" start="90" end="99" title="light gun" label="light gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635956" start="100" end="120" title="laserdisc video game" label="laserdisc video game"/>
<link wikidata="Q517386" start="132" end="143" title="live action" label="live action"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473699" start="144" end="161" title="full motion video" label="full motion video"/>
<link wikidata="Q113726751" start="388" end="399" title="arcade game" label="arcade game"/>
<link wikidata="Q2747251" start="431" end="445" title="Mad Dog McCree" label="Mad Dog McCree"/>
<link wikidata="Q3965952" start="455" end="472" title="light gun shooter" label="light gun shooter"/>
<link wikidata="Q14947899" start="484" end="501" title="American Old West" label="American Old West"/>
<link wikidata="Q41187" start="770" end="774" title="Sony" label="Sony"/>
<link wikidata="Q273309" start="784" end="793" title="LaserDisc" label="LaserDisc"/>
<link wikidata="Q100047" start="837" end="842" title="Amiga" label="Amiga"/>
<link wikidata="Q34467" start="1091" end="1103" title="compact disc" label="compact disc"/>
<link wikidata="Q851989" start="1137" end="1142" title="Porting" label="Ports"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047516" start="1186" end="1193" title="Sega CD" label="Sega CD"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023103" start="1195" end="1199" title="CD-i" label="CD-i"/>
<link wikidata="Q170434" start="1204" end="1207" title="DOS" label="DOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q7982" start="1232" end="1244" title="CD-ROM drive" label="CD-ROM drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q229429" start="1294" end="1297" title="3DO Interactive Multiplayer" label="3DO"/>
<link wikidata="Q2493" start="1484" end="1500" title="video compression" label="compressed video"/>
<link wikidata="Q56276350" start="1633" end="1640" title="Orbatak" label="Orbatak"/>
<link wikidata="Q5519996" start="1818" end="1830" title="Gamegun" label="3DO Game Gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q3133362" start="2080" end="2095" title="HeR Interactive" label="HeR Interactive"/>
<link wikidata="Q6801816" start="2118" end="2135" title="McKenzie &amp;amp; Co" label="McKenzie &amp;amp; Co"/>
<link wikidata="Q200912" start="2335" end="2346" title="Sega Saturn" label="Sega Saturn"/>
<link wikidata="Q10677" start="2351" end="2367" title="PlayStation (console)" label="Sony PlayStation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5275905" start="3032" end="3052" title="Digital Leisure, Inc" label="Digital Leisure, Inc"/>
<link wikidata="Q751046" start="3125" end="3127" title="IBM PC compatible" label="PC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635956" start="3135" end="3146" title="DVD TV game" label="DVD TV game"/>
<link wikidata="Q2747251" start="3205" end="3219" title="Mad Dog McCree" label="Mad Dog McCree"/>
<link wikidata="Q933680" start="3240" end="3261" title="Who Shot Johnny Rock?" label="Who Shot Johnny Rock?"/>
<link wikidata="Q15042134" start="3282" end="3295" title="Space Pirates (video game)" label="Space Pirates"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3316" end="3341" title="Mad Dog II: The Lost Gold" label="Mad Dog II: The Lost Gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q5518822" start="3362" end="3378" title="Gallagher (comedian)" label="Gallagher&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q3002601" start="3407" end="3419" title="Crime Patrol (video game)" label="Crime Patrol"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3440" end="3465" title="Crime Patrol 2: Drug Wars" label="Crime Patrol 2: Drug Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q7745602" start="3486" end="3508" title="The Last Bounty Hunter" label="The Last Bounty Hunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5436909" start="3529" end="3547" title="Fast Draw Showdown" label="Fast Draw Showdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q56276302" start="3678" end="3683" title="Mazer (video game)" label="Mazer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3067859" start="3697" end="3715" title="Way of the Warrior (video game)" label="Way of the Warrior"/>
<link wikidata="Q56276350" start="3748" end="3755" title="Orbatak" label="Orbatak"/>
<link wikidata="Q6801816" start="3769" end="3786" title="McKenzie &amp;amp; Co" label="McKenzie &amp;amp; Co"/>
<link wikidata="Q2891851" start="3881" end="3896" title="Battles in Time" label="Battles in Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q4037348" start="4013" end="4029" title="Digital Pictures" label="Digital Pictures"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1329317" wikidata="Q203675" url="?curid=1329317" title="Mažeikiai">
<text>Mažeikiai (; Samogitian: &quot;Mažeikē&quot;; ; ) is a city in northwestern Lithuania, on the Venta River. It has a population of around 32,000, making it the eighth largest city in Lithuania. The city is the administrative center of Mažeikiai District Municipality in Telšiai County. It is the largest city that does not have its own county.

==History==
Mažeikiai was first mentioned in written sources in 1335. A chronicler of the Livonian Order wrote about a campaign of the Order, during which the land of Duke Mažeika was devastated. It was located in the Duchy of Samogitia in the Grand Duchy of Lithuania within the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth.

The town started growing rapidly in 1869 when the Libau–Romny Railway connecting Vilnius and Liepāja was constructed. In 1893, the town had 13 shops and 5 alehouses. In 1894 an Eastern Orthodox church was built, and a synagogue had been founded several years earlier. In 1902 a Catholic church was established, followed by an Evangelical-Lutheran church in 1906. From 1899 to 1918 the town was called Muravyov.

In 1919, Mažeikiai became the county centre and received the rights of self-government. During the first years of independence, Mažeikiai was subject to a territorial dispute between Lithuania and Latvia because of its importance as a railway hub between the Latvian cities of Riga, Jelgava and Liepāja. In 1921 Latvian claims for the town were rejected by an international commission.

A hospital and a library were opened in 1922 and a museum in 1928. In 1939, the population of the town was recorded as 5,618. In 1940 26 industrial companies, 4 banks and a credit union operated in Mažeikiai.

During World War II, Mažeikiai was under occupation of Nazi Germany from 26 June 1941 until 31 October 1944. It was administered as a part of the &quot;Generalbezirk Litauen&quot; of &quot;Reichskommissariat Ostland&quot;. In August 1941, a mass killing occurred in which 4,000 Jews from the Mažeikiai district were killed.

In 1950, Mažeikiai became the district centre.

==Economy==
In 1980 an oil refinery plant Mažeikių Nafta was opened. Today it is one of the largest industrial plants in Lithuania. In 1999, it was privatized and sold to an American company Williams International. In 2001, facing financial problems, Williams sold the refinery to Yukos. However, Yukos ran afoul with the Russian government and, facing bankruptcy, sold the refinery to PKN Orlen in 2006. In 2004, Mažeikių Nafta financed the construction of the New Church of Saint Francis of Assisi.

==Culture==
In 1928 the Mažeikiai Museum was founded by teacher Stasys Ličkūnas. According to the official website of the Mažeikiai district municipality, the museum preserves and exhibits archaeological, historical, ethnographic, and folk art collections of the Samogitia region.

Mažeikiai has one of the largest cultural centres in Lithuania. It was established in 1946 as a &quot;culture house&quot;. In 2005 it moved to a new building which has three halls: the great hall contains 750 seats, the small hall has 250 seats, while the entertainment hall has up to 500 seats. The centre has 20 amateur art collectives.

In 1922 a public library was founded in the city. In 1975 it moved to a new three-story building. In 1976 it became a central library in the district with 21 rural and 2 urban branches.

==Twin towns – sister cities==
Mažeikiai is twinned with:

* Havířov, Czech Republic
* Lebedyn, Ukraine
* Liezen, Austria
* Paide, Estonia
* Płock, Poland
* Saldus, Latvia
* Stendal, Germany
==Notable residents==

*Rokas Jokubaitis (born 2000), Lithuanian basketball player for Maccabi Tel Aviv of the Israeli Basketball Premier League

== Gallery ==
== See also ==
* Asteroid 248839 Mazeikiai named in honor of the city

==References==
==External links==

* Official website
* Information about Mazeikiai city
* Memorial website to the Jewish Shtetl Mazheik (Mažeikiai)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q203675" start="0" end="9" title="Mažeikiai" label="Mažeikiai"/>
<link wikidata="Q213434" start="13" end="23" title="Samogitian language" label="Samogitian"/>
<link wikidata="Q37" start="76" end="85" title="Lithuania" label="Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q215397" start="94" end="105" title="Venta River" label="Venta River"/>
<link wikidata="Q313132" start="234" end="265" title="Mažeikiai District Municipality" label="Mažeikiai District Municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q188963" start="269" end="283" title="Telšiai County" label="Telšiai County"/>
<link wikidata="Q273789" start="335" end="341" title="Counties of Lithuania" label="county"/>
<link wikidata="Q29140" start="434" end="448" title="Livonian Order" label="Livonian Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q166886" start="511" end="515" title="Duke" label="Duke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473221" start="562" end="580" title="Duchy of Samogitia" label="Duchy of Samogitia"/>
<link wikidata="Q49683" start="588" end="612" title="Grand Duchy of Lithuania" label="Grand Duchy of Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q172107" start="624" end="654" title="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth" label="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2479029" start="707" end="726" title="Libau–Romny Railway" label="Libau–Romny Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q216" start="738" end="745" title="Vilnius" label="Vilnius"/>
<link wikidata="Q167668" start="750" end="757" title="Liepāja" label="Liepāja"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="834" end="857" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="Eastern Orthodox church"/>
<link wikidata="Q34627" start="875" end="884" title="synagogue" label="synagogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="935" end="950" title="Roman Catholic Church" label="Catholic church"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="983" end="1003" title="Lutheranism" label="Evangelical-Lutheran"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078001" start="1224" end="1243" title="territorial dispute" label="territorial dispute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773" start="1346" end="1350" title="Riga" label="Riga"/>
<link wikidata="Q179830" start="1352" end="1359" title="Jelgava" label="Jelgava"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1673" end="1685" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="1721" end="1733" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q9101280" start="1818" end="1839" title="Generalbezirk Litauen" label="Generalbezirk Litauen"/>
<link wikidata="Q156031" start="1855" end="1881" title="Reichskommissariat Ostland" label="Reichskommissariat Ostland"/>
<link wikidata="Q12353044" start="2062" end="2074" title="oil refinery" label="oil refinery"/>
<link wikidata="Q950584" start="2081" end="2095" title="Mažeikių Nafta" label="Mažeikių Nafta"/>
<link wikidata="Q161500" start="2187" end="2197" title="Privatization" label="privatized"/>
<link wikidata="Q930639" start="2230" end="2252" title="Williams Companies" label="Williams International"/>
<link wikidata="Q835692" start="2320" end="2325" title="Yukos" label="Yukos"/>
<link wikidata="Q971649" start="2425" end="2434" title="PKN Orlen" label="PKN Orlen"/>
<link wikidata="Q950584" start="2453" end="2467" title="Mažeikių Nafta" label="Mažeikių Nafta"/>
<link wikidata="Q111362" start="2804" end="2813" title="Samogitia" label="Samogitia"/>
<link wikidata="Q184711" start="3394" end="3401" title="Twin towns and sister cities" label="twinned"/>
<link wikidata="Q192904" start="3411" end="3418" title="Havířov" label="Havířov"/>
<link wikidata="Q476688" start="3437" end="3444" title="Lebedyn" label="Lebedyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q698520" start="3456" end="3462" title="Liezen" label="Liezen"/>
<link wikidata="Q45114" start="3474" end="3479" title="Paide" label="Paide"/>
<link wikidata="Q104725" start="3491" end="3496" title="Płock" label="Płock"/>
<link wikidata="Q744247" start="3507" end="3513" title="Saldus" label="Saldus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7082" start="3524" end="3531" title="Stendal" label="Stendal"/>
<link wikidata="Q47158953" start="3565" end="3581" title="Rokas Jokubaitis" label="Rokas Jokubaitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q819694" start="3628" end="3644" title="Maccabi Tel Aviv B.C." label="Maccabi Tel Aviv"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462454" start="3652" end="3685" title="Israeli Basketball Premier League" label="Israeli Basketball Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q608131" start="3727" end="3743" title="248839 Mazeikiai" label="248839 Mazeikiai"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1329320" wikidata="Q215965" url="?curid=1329320" title="Johann Tobias Mayer">
<text>Johann Tobias Mayer (5 May 1752 – 30 November 1830) was a German physicist.

== Personal and professional life ==

Mayer, born in Göttingen in the Electorate of Hanover, was the first child of the astronomer Tobias Mayer and his wife Maria. The elder Mayer, a well-known Göttingen professor of geography, physics, and astronomy, died in 1762, when Johann was only ten.

Johann Tobias Mayer studied theology and philosophy since 1769 at the Georg-August University of Göttingen (founded 1737) under Abraham Gotthelf Kästner and later also with Georg Christoph Lichtenberg. After graduating in 1773, Mayer worked as a lecturer in mathematics and as an astronomer. On 17 November 1779, he was called to the University of Altdorf, where he worked from 1780 to 1786. He later taught mathematics and physics at Friedrich-Alexander-University, Erlangen-Nuremberg, and in 1799, he succeeded Lichtenberg at Göttingen. The mathematician Enno Dirksen was one of his doctoral students.

Mayer was well known for his mathematics and natural science textbooks. The textbook &quot;Anfangsgründe der Naturlehre zum Behuf der Vorlesungen über die Experimental-Physik&quot; from 1801 was the most influential of its time in the German-speaking countries. Mayer&#x27;s research in experimental physics and astronomy was published in &quot;Annalen der Physik&quot;. 

Mayer and his wife Johanna had five children. Mayer died in Göttingen.

== The Leonardo da Vinci Proof of the Pythagorean Theorem ==

A proof of the Pythagorean theorem ascribed to Leonardo da Vinci is now claimed to have been authored by Mayer in 1772.

==See also==
*Lorentz force

== References ==
== External links ==
* Entry in the Mathematics Genealogy Project
* Astronomie in Nürnberg (in German) </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q215965" start="0" end="19" title="Johann Tobias Mayer" label="Johann Tobias Mayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q169470" start="65" end="74" title="physicist" label="physicist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3033" start="130" end="139" title="Göttingen" label="Göttingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q706018" start="147" end="168" title="Electorate of Hanover" label="Electorate of Hanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q60406" start="208" end="220" title="Tobias Mayer" label="Tobias Mayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q152838" start="440" end="476" title="Georg-August University of Göttingen" label="Georg-August University of Göttingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q61813" start="498" end="522" title="Abraham Gotthelf Kästner" label="Abraham Gotthelf Kästner"/>
<link wikidata="Q57554" start="543" end="570" title="Georg Christoph Lichtenberg" label="Georg Christoph Lichtenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q880228" start="704" end="725" title="University of Altdorf" label="University of Altdorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q40025" start="805" end="855" title="Friedrich-Alexander-University, Erlangen-Nuremberg" label="Friedrich-Alexander-University, Erlangen-Nuremberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q87940" start="927" end="939" title="Enno Dirksen" label="Enno Dirksen"/>
<link wikidata="Q83790" start="1036" end="1044" title="textbook" label="textbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q413" start="1275" end="1282" title="physics" label="physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q333" start="1287" end="1296" title="astronomy" label="astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q275655" start="1320" end="1338" title="Annalen der Physik" label="Annalen der Physik"/>
<link wikidata="Q11518" start="1497" end="1516" title="Pythagorean theorem" label="Pythagorean theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q762" start="1529" end="1546" title="Leonardo da Vinci" label="Leonardo da Vinci"/>
<link wikidata="Q172137" start="1617" end="1630" title="Lorentz force" label="Lorentz force"/>
<link wikidata="Q829984" start="1685" end="1714" title="Mathematics Genealogy Project" label="Mathematics Genealogy Project"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1329322" wikidata="Q205004" url="?curid=1329322" title="Tin(IV) chloride">
<text>Tin(IV) chloride, also known as tin tetrachloride or stannic chloride, is an inorganic compound of tin and chlorine with the formula SnCl4. It is a colorless hygroscopic liquid, which fumes on contact with air. It is used as a precursor to other tin compounds. It was first discovered by Andreas Libavius (1550–1616) and was known as &quot;spiritus fumans libavii&quot;.

==Preparation==
It is prepared from reaction of chlorine gas with tin at :

==Structure==
Anhydrous tin(IV) chloride solidifies at −33 °C to give monoclinic crystals with the P21/c space group. It is isostructural with SnBr4. The molecules adopt near-perfect tetrahedral symmetry with average Sn–Cl distances of 227.9(3) pm. 

==Reactions==
Tin(IV) chloride is well known as a Lewis acid. Thus it forms hydrates. The pentahydrate SnCl4·5H2O was formerly known as butter of tin. These hydrates consist of &quot;cis&quot;-[SnCl4(H2O)2] molecules together with varying amounts of water of crystallization. The additional water molecules link together the molecules of [SnCl4(H2O)2] through hydrogen bonds. A pentahydrate has also been crystallized. In &quot;cis&quot;-, the Sn-Cl bonds are 238.3 pm. Although the pentahydrate is the most common hydrate, lower hydrates have also been characterised.

Aside from water, other Lewis bases form adducts with SnCl4. These include ammonia and organophosphines. 

The ammonium salt of [SnCl6]2− is formed from ammonium chloride. It is called &quot;pink salt&quot;:
The analogous reaction with hydrochloric acid gives &quot;hexachlorostannic acid&quot;.

Reaction of the tetrachloride with hydrogen fluoride gives tin tetrafluoride:

Tin(IV) chloride undergoes redistribution with tin(IV) bromide as assessed by 119Sn NMR and Raman spectroscopy. Equilibrium is achieved in seconds at room temperature. By contrast, halide exchange for related germanium and especially silicon halides is slower.

==Applications==
===Precursor to organotin compounds===
Anhydrous tin(IV) chloride is a major precursor in organotin chemistry. Upon treatment with Grignard reagents, tin(IV) chloride gives tetraalkyltin compounds:
:SnCl4 + 4 RMgCl → SnR4 + 4 MgCl2
Anhydrous tin(IV) chloride reacts with tetraorganotin compounds in redistribution reactions:
:SnCl4 + SnR4 → 2 SnCl2R2
These organotin halides are useful precursors to catalysts (e.g., dibutyltin dilaurate) and polymer stabilizers.

===Organic synthesis===
SnCl4 is used in Friedel–Crafts reactions as a Lewis acid catalyst. For example, the acetylation of thiophene to give 2-acetylthiophene is promoted by tin(IV) chloride. Similarly, tin(IV) chloride is useful for nitrations.

==Safety==
Stannic chloride was used as a chemical weapon in World War I, as it formed an irritating (but non-deadly) dense smoke on contact with air. It was supplanted by a mixture of silicon tetrachloride and titanium tetrachloride near the end of the war due to shortages of tin.

==References==
==External links==

* International Chemical Safety Card 0953</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q205004" start="0" end="16" title="Tin(IV) chloride" label="Tin(IV) chloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q205004" start="32" end="49" title="Tin(IV) chloride" label="tin tetrachloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q205004" start="53" end="69" title="Tin(IV) chloride" label="stannic chloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q190065" start="77" end="95" title="inorganic compound" label="inorganic compound"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096" start="99" end="102" title="tin" label="tin"/>
<link wikidata="Q688" start="107" end="115" title="chlorine" label="chlorine"/>
<link wikidata="Q216678" start="158" end="169" title="Hygroscopy" label="hygroscopic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11435" start="170" end="176" title="liquid" label="liquid"/>
<link wikidata="Q31161" start="288" end="304" title="Andreas Libavius" label="Andreas Libavius"/>
<link wikidata="Q624543" start="518" end="528" title="monoclinic" label="monoclinic"/>
<link wikidata="Q899033" start="553" end="564" title="space group" label="space group"/>
<link wikidata="Q2926032" start="591" end="596" title="SnBr4" label="SnBr4"/>
<link wikidata="Q900337" start="749" end="759" title="Lewis acid" label="Lewis acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q504492" start="949" end="973" title="water of crystallization" label="water of crystallization"/>
<link wikidata="Q504492" start="979" end="1005" title="water of crystallization" label="additional water molecules"/>
<link wikidata="Q169324" start="1059" end="1072" title="hydrogen bond" label="hydrogen bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q4087" start="1344" end="1351" title="ammonia" label="ammonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q207877" start="1362" end="1371" title="phosphine" label="phosphine"/>
<link wikidata="Q188543" start="1422" end="1439" title="ammonium chloride" label="ammonium chloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q2468" start="1601" end="1618" title="hydrogen fluoride" label="hydrogen fluoride"/>
<link wikidata="Q204994" start="1625" end="1642" title="tin tetrafluoride" label="tin tetrafluoride"/>
<link wikidata="Q7305974" start="1672" end="1686" title="redistribution reaction" label="redistribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q862228" start="1737" end="1755" title="Raman spectroscopy" label="Raman spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q205118" start="2014" end="2033" title="organotin chemistry" label="organotin chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1238028" start="2055" end="2071" title="Grignard reagent" label="Grignard reagent"/>
<link wikidata="Q7305974" start="2223" end="2246" title="redistribution reaction" label="redistribution reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q15632742" start="2341" end="2361" title="dibutyltin dilaurate" label="dibutyltin dilaurate"/>
<link wikidata="Q649999" start="2430" end="2453" title="Friedel–Crafts reaction" label="Friedel–Crafts reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q82264" start="2471" end="2479" title="catalyst" label="catalyst"/>
<link wikidata="Q27261757" start="2531" end="2548" title="2-Acetylthiophene" label="2-acetylthiophene"/>
<link wikidata="Q3639228" start="2679" end="2694" title="chemical weapon" label="chemical weapon"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="2698" end="2709" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q413709" start="2822" end="2843" title="silicon tetrachloride" label="silicon tetrachloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q413471" start="2848" end="2870" title="titanium tetrachloride" label="titanium tetrachloride"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1329327" wikidata="Q1949069" url="?curid=1329327" title="Mohali">
<text>Mohali, officially Sahibzada Ajit Singh Nagar, is a planned city in the Mohali district in Punjab, India, which is an administrative and a commercial hub lying south-west of Chandigarh. It is the headquarters of the Mohali district and one of the six Municipal Corporations of the State. It is officially named after Sahibzada Ajit Singh, the eldest son of Guru Gobind Singh.

Mohali has developed rapidly as an IT hub of the state of Punjab, and has thus grown in importance. 
The Government of Punjab has initiated significant infrastructure and recreation projects in attempts to increase the standard of living in Mohali. Roads have been built to create networks between Mohali and Chandigarh International Airport to boost its international connectivity.

Mohali was earlier a part of the Rupnagar district and was carved out and made a part of a separate district in 2006.

==History==

===Early history===
Prehistoric evidence has been found in Mohali and its surrounding regions. Due to the presence of the lake, fossil remains with imprints of a large variety of aquatic plant, animal, and amphibian life have been found. As a part of the Punjab region, it has many rivers in the areas where it is speculated that ancient and primitive settlements by humans began. Some 8,000 years ago, the area was also known to be a home to the Harappans.

===Medieval history===
Mohali means &quot;settlement&quot;. The village of Mohali was a part of the Sikh Empire.

The village Lambian, located in the city, was visited by Guru Har Rai, the 7th Guru of the Sikhs. A battle took place here between the British and 500 Sikhs under the command of Akali Hanuman Singh, in which Akali Hanuman Singh attained martyrdom.

===Modern history===
After the partition of India in 1947, the former British province of Punjab was split between east Punjab in India and west Punjab in Pakistan. The Indian Punjab required a new capital city to replace Lahore, which became part of Pakistan during partition. Consequently, the government made Chandigarh from nearly 50 Puadhi speaking villages of the then state of East Punjab, India.

Mohali was conceived after the trifurcation of Punjab and its capital Chandigarh became a Union Territory in the late 1960s. In 1967, the area around Mohali Village was initially developed as an industrial estate; this was broadened with residential areas to meet housing demands. The township plan for Mohali was put forward by the All India Congress Committee during the annual session held in 1975 at Mohali. On 1 November 1975, Punjab Chief Minister Giani Zail Singh laid the foundation stone of Mohali township and named it Sahibzada Ajit Singh Nagar. It was rechristened to Ajitgarh by the union government in the year 2012, as it was felt at that time that the name, SAS Nagar, was too long.

==City design==
Mohali and Chandigarh are contiguous, with only the boundary between Punjab and Chandigarh dividing this area. The original plan of Mohali township is an extension of the road and an 800m x 1200m extension of the sector design system of Chandigarh, without any unique planning.

The first 11 sectors of the sector design system for Mohali are popularly known as &quot;Phases&quot;. Early development was only till Phase 7. The development of sectors and phases from Phase 8 onwards started in the late 1980s, the city received its bus stand during Phase 8 in the mid-1990s. Some sectors of Chandigarh are shared between Chandigarh and Sahibzada Ajit Singh Nagar, like the sectors 48, 51, 52, 54, 56, 61 and 63. 63 onwards sectors fall in the Sahibzada Ajit Singh Nagar region.
phase 1 = sector 55
phase 2 = sector 56
phase 3= Sector 57
phase 4 = sector 58
phase 5 = sector 59
phase 6 = sector 60
phase 7 = sector 61
phase 8 = sector 62
phase 9 = sector 63
phase 10 = sector 64
===Greater Mohali Area Development Authority master plan===
In the GMADA master plan, the city has up to 128 Sectors which include nearby villages. They are, among others,
Aerocity
Alipur,
Bairampur,
Bakarpur,
Ballo Majra,
Balongi,
Bari,
Bar Majra,
Bathlana,
Behlol,
Bhago Majra,
Chajju Majra,
Chaparchiri,
Daun,
Desumajra,
Dyalpur,
Harlalpur,
Jandpur,
Jhampur,
Jheureri,
Jhungian,
Kailon,
Kandala,
Khuni Majra,
Kishanpura,
Kurali,
Landiali,
Landran,
Manakmajra,
Manana,
Matran,
Naraingarh,
Pattlin,
Raipur Kalan,
Sambalki,
Saneta,
Santemajra,
Shafipur,
Siaun,
Sihanpur,
Sukhgarh,
Tapauli and
Thaska.
GMADA also includes the Aerocity which is a gateway to Mohali International Airport.
Also IT City Mohali has emerged as one of the best location for residences and corporate offices under GMADA. It is spread over 1,600 acres and includes sectors 82, 82A, and 83A. The IT city aims to produce at least 40,000 jobs. With allotment to top IT companies and state of the art infrastructure for residential projects. With futuristic planning and due the location advantage, IT City Mohali is understandably the distinguished locality in Tricity.

===Chandigarh Tricity===
Mohali and Panchkula are two satellite cities of Chandigarh. The trio of these three cities is collectively known as Chandigarh Tricity. Panchkula is a planned city adjoining Chandigarh in Panchkula District, Haryana, India.

==Climate==


Sahibzada Ajit Singh Nagar has a sub-tropical continental monsoon climate characterised by a seasonal rhythm: hot summers, slightly cold winters, unreliable rainfall and great variation in temperature (). In winter, frost sometimes occurs during December and January. The average annual rainfall is recorded at . The city also receives occasional winter rains from the west.

===Average temperature===
*Summer: The temperature in summer may rise to a maximum of . Temperatures generally remain between .
*Autumn: In autumn, the temperature may rise to a maximum of . Temperatures usually remain between in autumn. The minimum temperature is around .
*Winter: Average temperatures in winter (November to February) remain at (maximum) and (minimum) .
*Spring: spring temperatures vary between (min) (max).

==Demographics==
As per 2011 census, Mohali&#x27;s urban agglomeration (metropolitan area) had a population of 176,152, out of which males were 92,407 and females were 83,745. The effective literacy rate (7+ years) was 93.04% per cent. The sex ratio of Mohali is 906 females per 1,000 males.

Sikhism is the majority religion in Mohali which is followed by 51.53% of the people. Hinduism is the second most followed religion which is adhered to by 45.55% of the people. Minority religions like Islam and Christianity are followed by 1.68% and 0.79% of the population, with 0.45% are Buddhists, Jains and others.

==Politics and government==
The Deputy Commissioner, an officer belonging to the Indian Administrative Service, is the overall in charge of the General Administration in the Districts of India. Currently, Girish Dayalan is serving as Deputy Commissioner. The civic administration in Mohali under the Municipal Corporation (established 1984), a body of elected councillors and is headed by a Commissioner chosen from the elected members.


Sahibzada Ajit Singh Nagar is a Municipal Corporation, with Kulwant Singh as the first mayor, with the current being Amarjoit Singh since April 2021. The district administration is under the supervision of Current Administrator Gurpreet Kaur Sapra, Deputy Commissioner (IAS). Sahibzada Ajit Singh Nagar is part of Anandpur Sahib Parliamentary Constituency, represented by Manish Tewari since 2019, while in Punjab Legislative Assembly, Sahibzada Ajit Singh Nagar is represented since 2012 by MLA Balbir Singh Sidhu from Congress. Before 2012, Sahibzada Ajit Singh Nagar was part of the Kharar Assembly Constituency. In the 2012 Punjab Legislative Assembly election, a new Assembly Constituency was carved out in the name of Mohali (as Sahibzada Ajit Singh Nagar was known during Assembly Elections 2012). Sahibzada Ajit Singh Nagar is also represented in Shiromani Gurdwara Parbandhak Committee (SGPC) by Paramjit Kaur Landran and Hardeep Singh. The seat was reserved for women during the 2011 SGPC Elections.

==Transport==

=== Road ===

The main bus stand of this city is located in Sector 56, where many government and private bus operators provide services to different cities of the state. Chandigarh Transport Undertaking (CTU) provides bus connectivity with the rest of the tricity. Chandigarh Sector 43 Bus Stand is also close to Mohali.

Auto-rickshaws ply throughout the city.

=== Rail ===
Mohali Railway Station is situated in Industrial Area, Phase 11 and connects the city with several important locations in the region such as Delhi, Ludhiana and Amritsar, as well as other parts of the country.

=== Air ===
Shaheed Bhagat Singh International Airport is located near Aerocity in Mohali. It has both domestic and international flights.

==Economy==
Mohali&#x27;s economy is largely manufacturing-based, the major companies in the region include Punjab Tractor Limited (PTL), ICI Paints, and Punjab Communications Limited. Also small- and medium sized companies, such as Torque Pharmaceuticals, are based in Mohali.

Telecommunications service providers including Tata Communications, Vodafone and the Godrej Group operate within SAS Nagar. SAS Nagar&#x27;s role in facilitating multinational corporations is growing, with contributions from global tech giants such as Quark and Philips.

Denver-based Quark, Inc. has created a $500M, QuarkCity in SAS Nagar, complete with a residential complex comprising 30% of the area; the shopping, entertainment, medical and educational districts consume another 10%. It was designed to generate 25,000 direct and 100,000 indirect jobs. It also includes a Special Economic Zone (SEZ). It is located north of India&#x27;s capital city of New Delhi.

The region has been targeted by an increasing number of outsourcing IT companies.

==Sports==
Mohali contributes greatly to sports within the Punjab region (most notably Minerva Academy), with 8 multipurpose sports complexes equipped football, field hockey, cricket, swimming, table tennis, athletics, volleyball, badminton, tennis, etc. It has two international cricket stadiums, latest being Mullanpur International Cricket Stadium. It also home to the Mohali International Hockey Stadium.

===Cricket===
In 1990, the Punjab Cricket Association (PCA) unveiled a plan to build a state-of-the-art facility complete with a separate practice ground—to be built in a swampy area in the city. The PCA invested heavily in the ground, a swimming pool, health club, tennis court, library, restaurant, and bar and outdoor &amp; indoor cricket practice nets were incorporated into the plans.

The construction of the stadium took around ₹25 crores and 3 years to complete. The stadium has an official capacity of 30000 spectators. The stadium was designed by Arun Loomba and Associates, Panchkula and constructed by R.S. Construction Company, Chandigarh. The lights here are unconventional compared to other cricket stadiums, in that the light pillars are very low in height. This is to avoid aircraft from the nearby airport colliding with the light pillars. The stream passing through the central part of Chandigarh called N Choe, also passes alongside the stadium.

PCA Stadium is home of Punjab Kings (IPL Mohali franchisee). The current pitch curator for the PCA Stadium is Daljit Singh and the design consultant is Ar. Sufyan Ahmad.

===Hockey===
The city has the International Hockey Stadium which serves as the home ground for the hockey club, Punjab Warriors, of Hockey India League.

==Places of interest==

Places of tourist interest in and around this region include the following:
* Fateh Burj

===Religious places===
==== Gurudwara Amb Sahib ====
&quot;Gurudwara Amb Sahib&quot; is a historical shrine situated in Sector 62, Mohali commemorates the visit of the 7th Guru of Sikhs, Guru Har Rai. The place also commemorates the meeting of Guru Har Rai with his famous Sikh Bhai Kuram, a Labana trader. This shrine is managed by SGPC, Amritsar.

==== Shri Shiv Mandir ====

Shri Shiv Mandir is an old Hindu temple dedicated to Shiva, situated in Phase1.

==== Gurudwara Singh Shaheedan ====
This shrine is situated in the village Sohana, close to Sector 70 constructed in memory of the martyrdom of Jathedar Baba Hanuman Singh, a Nihang Jathedar. He, along with 500 Sikhs, attained martyrdom at this place in a battle against British forces during the Anglo-Sikh Wars.

==== Dera Dargah Sharif Bakarpur ====

This shrine is situated in the village Bakarpur, in Aerocity, near Mohali Airport. This shrine is home of Ali and five Pirs. Sai Surinder Singh is currently the chief dera head of this Dargah.

===Parks and gardens===
* Nature Park, Phase 8
* Rose Garden, Phase 3B1
* Bougainvillea Garden, Phase 4
* Silvy Park, Phase 10
* Valley Park, Phase 8
* Ekta Park, Phase 7 (Near Chawla Chowk) Mohali
* Kargil Park, Sector 71
* Fountain Park, Sector 70
* City park, sector 68

=== Markets and other places ===
* Main Market, Phase - 7, SAS Nagar
* Main Market, Phase - 4, SAS Nagar
* Main Market, Phase - 3, SAS Nagar
* Main Market, Phase - 1, SAS Nagar
* Main Market, Phase - 5, SAS Nagar
* Main Market, Phase - 10, SAS Nagar
* Punjab Cricket Association Stadium, SAS Nagar
* International Hockey Stadium, Phase-9
* Gurudwara Amb Sahib, Phase - 8
* Janta Market, Phase - 3B1

=== Chowks of Mohali ===
The famous chowks of Mohali, which replicate one of the best features of the city are:
* YPS Chowk
* Diplast Chowk
* Airport Chowk

==Upcoming developing areas==
* Aerocity, Mohali
* Aerotropolis, Mohali

=== Other Nearby Places ===
* Sikh Ajaibghar, Sector 119, Village Balongi, Village Bar Majra
* VR Punjab, Kharar 
* Gurudwara Nabha Sahib - Zirakpur

==Education==

; Schools
* Anee&#x27;s School, Sector-69, Mohali
* Doon International School, Sector-69, Mohali
* Gian Jyoti Public School, Phase 2, Mohali
* Gurukul World School, Sector-69, Mohali
* Learning Paths School, Sector 67, Mohali
* Shivalik Public School, Mohali
* The British School, Sector 70
* Yadavindra Public School, Sector 51, Mohali

; Universities

* Plaksha University Alpha, Sector 101, IT City Rd, Sahibzada Ajit Singh Nagar
*Chandigarh University NH-95, Chandigarh-Ludhiana Highway, Mohali

; Science and Medical Colleges
* Dr. B.R. Ambedkar State Institute of Medical Sciences (AIMS, Mohali)
* Indian Institute of Science Education and Research, Mohali (IISER Mohali)

; Engineering colleges
* GGS College of Modern Technology
* Indo Global Colleges
* Shaheed Udham Singh College of Engineering &amp; Technology
* Chandigarh Engineering College

; Business Schools
* Indian School of Business (ISB), Sector 81
* Amity University, Sector 82A, IT City, Mohali
* Plaksha University, Sector 83A, IT City, Mohali

; Law Schools
* Army Institute of Law
* Universal Law College

; Pharmacy
* National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education and Research, Mohali (NIPER)

==Healthcare==

The city has several speciality hospitals. Government dispensaries also are present in some sectors. Dr. B.R. Ambedkar State Institute of Medical Sciences Of phase 6 is the oldest government hospital in the city and the new hospital is in Sector 66.

The city has many multi-facility private hospitals like the Max Super Speciality Hospital, Fortis Hospital, Silver Oak Hospital, Ivy Hospital, Indus Super Speciality Hospital, Mayo Hospital, Cheema Medical Complex, Mukat Hospital and Heart Institute, Cosmo Hospital, Amar Hospital, Grecian Super Speciality Hospital, Sohana Hospital, Ace Heart and Vascular Institute, SGHS Hospitals, AM Hospital, ESI Hospital &amp; Regional Spinal Injury Center (Sector 70). Pharmacies such as City Medicos have also situated near Fortis and Silver Oaks hospital.

==See also==
* New Chandigarh

==References==
==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1949069" start="0" end="6" title="Mohali" label="Mohali"/>
<link wikidata="Q1949069" start="19" end="45" title="Mohali" label="Sahibzada Ajit Singh Nagar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074523" start="52" end="64" title="planned city" label="planned city"/>
<link wikidata="Q2037672" start="72" end="87" title="Mohali district" label="Mohali district"/>
<link wikidata="Q22424" start="91" end="97" title="Punjab, India" label="Punjab"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="99" end="104" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q43433" start="174" end="184" title="Chandigarh" label="Chandigarh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2097994" start="251" end="273" title="Municipal Corporations" label="Municipal Corporations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432076" start="317" end="337" title="Sahibzada Ajit Singh" label="Sahibzada Ajit Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q312967" start="357" end="374" title="Guru Gobind Singh" label="Guru Gobind Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589302" start="482" end="502" title="Government of Punjab, India" label="Government of Punjab"/>
<link wikidata="Q1835533" start="686" end="718" title="Chandigarh International Airport" label="Chandigarh International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q196508" start="794" end="811" title="Rupnagar district" label="Rupnagar district"/>
<link wikidata="Q10908" start="1099" end="1108" title="amphibian" label="amphibian"/>
<link wikidata="Q169132" start="1148" end="1161" title="Punjab" label="Punjab region"/>
<link wikidata="Q42534" start="1340" end="1349" title="Indus Valley civilisation" label="Harappans"/>
<link wikidata="Q83572" start="1452" end="1463" title="Sikh Empire" label="Sikh Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q630106" start="1523" end="1535" title="Guru Har Rai" label="Guru Har Rai"/>
<link wikidata="Q16858103" start="1644" end="1663" title="Akali Hanuman Singh" label="Akali Hanuman Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q16858103" start="1674" end="1693" title="Akali Hanuman Singh" label="Akali Hanuman Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q129053" start="1746" end="1764" title="partition of India" label="partition of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q2629708" start="1778" end="1811" title="Punjab Province (British India)" label="former British province of Punjab"/>
<link wikidata="Q2354639" start="1830" end="1841" title="east Punjab" label="east Punjab"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246245" start="1855" end="1866" title="west Punjab" label="west Punjab"/>
<link wikidata="Q11739" start="1937" end="1943" title="Lahore" label="Lahore"/>
<link wikidata="Q7257223" start="2053" end="2059" title="Puadhi language" label="Puadhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2354639" start="2099" end="2110" title="East Punjab" label="East Punjab"/>
<link wikidata="Q4728931" start="2453" end="2481" title="All India Congress Committee" label="All India Congress Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q334851" start="2580" end="2590" title="Zail Singh" label="Zail Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q24936090" start="3880" end="3885" title="GMADA" label="GMADA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2237445" start="4237" end="4243" title="Kurali" label="Kurali"/>
<link wikidata="Q882172" start="4991" end="5000" title="Panchkula" label="Panchkula"/>
<link wikidata="Q43433" start="5097" end="5115" title="Chandigarh Tricity" label="Chandigarh Tricity"/>
<link wikidata="Q16305538" start="5253" end="5265" title="sub-tropical" label="sub-tropical"/>
<link wikidata="Q42967" start="5278" end="5285" title="monsoon" label="monsoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7937" start="5286" end="5293" title="climate" label="climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7925" start="5377" end="5385" title="rainfall" label="rainfall"/>
<link wikidata="Q11466" start="5409" end="5420" title="temperature" label="temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q4590598" start="5436" end="5441" title="frost" label="frost"/>
<link wikidata="Q9316" start="6318" end="6325" title="Sikhism" label="Sikhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="6404" end="6412" title="Hinduism" label="Hinduism"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="6519" end="6524" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="6529" end="6541" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2722496" start="6670" end="6689" title="Deputy Commissioner (India)" label="Deputy Commissioner"/>
<link wikidata="Q3520703" start="6719" end="6748" title="Indian Administrative Service" label="Indian Administrative Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q21066594" start="7137" end="7150" title="Kulwant Singh (politician)" label="Kulwant Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q6749904" start="7449" end="7462" title="Manish Tewari" label="Manish Tewari"/>
<link wikidata="Q7260271" start="7484" end="7511" title="Punjab Legislative Assembly" label="Punjab Legislative Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q10225" start="7597" end="7605" title="Indian National Congress" label="Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q7260322" start="7700" end="7741" title="2012 Punjab Legislative Assembly election" label="2012 Punjab Legislative Assembly election"/>
<link wikidata="Q7498941" start="7932" end="7971" title="Shiromani Gurdwara Parbandhak Committee" label="Shiromani Gurdwara Parbandhak Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7135261" start="7982" end="8003" title="Paramjit Kaur Landran" label="Paramjit Kaur Landran"/>
<link wikidata="Q19894064" start="8126" end="8135" title="Mohali Bus Stand" label="bus stand"/>
<link wikidata="Q19896258" start="8163" end="8172" title="Sector 56, Mohali" label="Sector 56"/>
<link wikidata="Q18111003" start="8273" end="8305" title="Chandigarh Transport Undertaking" label="Chandigarh Transport Undertaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q19894068" start="8479" end="8501" title="Mohali Railway Station" label="Mohali Railway Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353" start="8620" end="8625" title="Delhi" label="Delhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q200123" start="8627" end="8635" title="Ludhiana" label="Ludhiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q48403" start="8640" end="8648" title="Amritsar" label="Amritsar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1835533" start="8702" end="8744" title="Shaheed Bhagat Singh International Airport" label="Shaheed Bhagat Singh International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q17152266" start="9063" end="9085" title="Torque Pharmaceuticals" label="Torque Pharmaceuticals"/>
<link wikidata="Q3764225" start="9194" end="9206" title="Godrej Group" label="Godrej Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471792" start="9361" end="9366" title="Quark, Inc." label="Quark"/>
<link wikidata="Q170416" start="9371" end="9378" title="Philips" label="Philips"/>
<link wikidata="Q16554" start="9381" end="9387" title="Denver" label="Denver"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9427" end="9436" title="QuarkCity" label="QuarkCity"/>
<link wikidata="Q494978" start="9687" end="9708" title="Special Economic Zone" label="Special Economic Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q5119" start="9752" end="9764" title="capital city" label="capital city"/>
<link wikidata="Q987" start="9768" end="9777" title="New Delhi" label="New Delhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q61515" start="9836" end="9847" title="outsourcing" label="outsourcing"/>
<link wikidata="Q11661" start="9848" end="9850" title="Information Technology" label="IT"/>
<link wikidata="Q118947244" start="9950" end="9965" title="Minerva Academy FC" label="Minerva Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="10014" end="10022" title="association football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455" start="10024" end="10036" title="field hockey" label="field hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375" start="10038" end="10045" title="cricket" label="cricket"/>
<link wikidata="Q6388" start="10047" end="10055" title="swimming" label="swimming"/>
<link wikidata="Q3930" start="10057" end="10069" title="table tennis" label="table tennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3312129" start="10071" end="10080" title="track and field" label="athletics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1734" start="10082" end="10092" title="volleyball" label="volleyball"/>
<link wikidata="Q7291" start="10094" end="10103" title="badminton" label="badminton"/>
<link wikidata="Q847" start="10105" end="10111" title="tennis" label="tennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q24747936" start="10174" end="10213" title="Mullanpur International Cricket Stadium" label="Mullanpur International Cricket Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q16632762" start="10235" end="10270" title="Mohali International Hockey Stadium" label="Mohali International Hockey Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q7260249" start="10300" end="10326" title="Punjab Cricket Association" label="Punjab Cricket Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q166735" start="10444" end="10449" title="swamp" label="swamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501" start="10511" end="10524" title="swimming pool" label="swimming pool"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065656" start="10526" end="10537" title="health club" label="health club"/>
<link wikidata="Q847" start="10539" end="10545" title="tennis" label="tennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7075" start="10553" end="10560" title="library" label="library"/>
<link wikidata="Q11707" start="10562" end="10572" title="restaurant" label="restaurant"/>
<link wikidata="Q187456" start="10578" end="10581" title="Bar (establishment)" label="bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q18128380" start="11196" end="11202" title="N Choe" label="N Choe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3522142" start="11240" end="11251" title="PCA Stadium" label="PCA Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q537658" start="11263" end="11275" title="Punjab Kings" label="Punjab Kings"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11350" end="11362" title="Daljit Singh (cricketer, born the 1940s)" label="Daljit Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q16632762" start="11441" end="11469" title="International Hockey Stadium" label="International Hockey Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q7260312" start="11523" end="11538" title="Punjab Warriors" label="Punjab Warriors"/>
<link wikidata="Q4380931" start="11543" end="11562" title="Hockey India League" label="Hockey India League"/>
<link wikidata="Q5437386" start="11667" end="11677" title="Fateh Burj" label="Fateh Burj"/>
<link wikidata="Q19896263" start="11799" end="11816" title="Sector 62, Mohali" label="Sector 62, Mohali"/>
<link wikidata="Q630106" start="11866" end="11878" title="Guru Har Rai" label="Guru Har Rai"/>
<link wikidata="Q4900751" start="11957" end="11967" title="Bhai Kuram" label="Bhai Kuram"/>
<link wikidata="Q6466750" start="11971" end="11977" title="Labana" label="Labana"/>
<link wikidata="Q7498941" start="12012" end="12016" title="SGPC" label="SGPC"/>
<link wikidata="Q11378" start="12110" end="12115" title="Shiva" label="Shiva"/>
<link wikidata="Q7554662" start="12213" end="12219" title="Sohana" label="Sohana"/>
<link wikidata="Q16858103" start="12282" end="12309" title="Jathedar Baba Hanuman Singh Nihang" label="Jathedar Baba Hanuman Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q4849019" start="12531" end="12539" title="Bakarpur" label="Bakarpur"/>
<link wikidata="Q268385" start="12611" end="12614" title="Pir (Sufism)" label="Pir"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12617" end="12635" title="Sai Surinder Singh" label="Sai Surinder Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q3522142" start="13212" end="13246" title="Punjab Cricket Association Stadium" label="Punjab Cricket Association Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q16632762" start="13260" end="13288" title="International Hockey Stadium" label="International Hockey Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q20707986" start="13333" end="13345" title="Janta Market" label="Janta Market"/>
<link wikidata="Q7513636" start="13620" end="13634" title="Sikh Ajaibghar" label="Sikh Ajaibghar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2317411" start="13730" end="13738" title="Zirakpur" label="Zirakpur"/>
<link wikidata="Q7720195" start="14016" end="14034" title="The British School, Panchkula" label="The British School"/>
<link wikidata="Q18356541" start="14036" end="14045" title="Sector 70, Mohali" label="Sector 70"/>
<link wikidata="Q104847937" start="14111" end="14129" title="Plaksha University" label="Plaksha University"/>
<link wikidata="Q16858934" start="14189" end="14210" title="Chandigarh University" label="Chandigarh University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6020706" start="14359" end="14417" title="Indian Institute of Science Education and Research, Mohali" label="Indian Institute of Science Education and Research, Mohali"/>
<link wikidata="Q5620357" start="14459" end="14491" title="GGS College of Modern Technology" label="GGS College of Modern Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q6025608" start="14494" end="14514" title="Indo Global Colleges" label="Indo Global Colleges"/>
<link wikidata="Q7461561" start="14517" end="14576" title="Shaheed Udham Singh College of Engineering &amp;amp; Technology" label="Shaheed Udham Singh College of Engineering &amp;amp; Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q5071065" start="14579" end="14609" title="Chandigarh Engineering College" label="Chandigarh Engineering College"/>
<link wikidata="Q3273896" start="14632" end="14657" title="Indian School of Business" label="Indian School of Business"/>
<link wikidata="Q104847937" start="14725" end="14743" title="Plaksha University" label="Plaksha University"/>
<link wikidata="Q18109792" start="14790" end="14811" title="Army Institute of Law" label="Army Institute of Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q85812243" start="14814" end="14835" title="Universal Law College" label="Universal Law College"/>
<link wikidata="Q3631392" start="14850" end="14917" title="National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education and Research, Mohali" label="National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education and Research, Mohali"/>
<link wikidata="Q7810035" start="15285" end="15300" title="Fortis Hospital" label="Fortis Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q18356541" start="15641" end="15650" title="Sector 70, Mohali" label="Sector 70"/>
<link wikidata="Q19894757" start="15758" end="15772" title="New Chandigarh" label="New Chandigarh"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1329331" wikidata="Q413270" url="?curid=1329331" title="Pleasant Ridge">
<text>Pleasant Ridge may refer to a place in the United States:

* Pleasant Ridge (Wilcox County, Alabama), a plantation near Camden, Alabama
* Pleasant Ridge, Indiana (disambiguation), several places
* Pleasant Ridge Plantation, Maine
* Pleasant Ridge, Michigan
* Pleasant Ridge, Barry County, Missouri
* Pleasant Ridge, Harrison County, Missouri
* Pleasant Ridge, Texas County, Missouri
* Pleasant Ridge, Cincinnati, Ohio
* Pleasant Ridge, Wisconsin
* Pleasant Ridge, Grant County, Wisconsin</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7844206" start="61" end="100" title="Pleasant Ridge (Wilcox County, Alabama)" label="Pleasant Ridge (Wilcox County, Alabama)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7203933" start="138" end="178" title="Pleasant Ridge, Indiana (disambiguation)" label="Pleasant Ridge, Indiana (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7203940" start="197" end="229" title="Pleasant Ridge Plantation, Maine" label="Pleasant Ridge Plantation, Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2604810" start="232" end="256" title="Pleasant Ridge, Michigan" label="Pleasant Ridge, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5269861" start="259" end="297" title="Pleasant Ridge, Barry County, Missouri" label="Pleasant Ridge, Barry County, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q27985243" start="300" end="341" title="Pleasant Ridge, Harrison County, Missouri" label="Pleasant Ridge, Harrison County, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q28089629" start="344" end="382" title="Pleasant Ridge, Texas County, Missouri" label="Pleasant Ridge, Texas County, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q7203932" start="385" end="411" title="Pleasant Ridge, Cincinnati" label="Pleasant Ridge, Cincinnati"/>
<link wikidata="Q7203935" start="420" end="445" title="Pleasant Ridge, Wisconsin" label="Pleasant Ridge, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q104851018" start="448" end="487" title="Pleasant Ridge, Grant County, Wisconsin" label="Pleasant Ridge, Grant County, Wisconsin"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1329333" wikidata="Q411655" url="?curid=1329333" title="Plevna">
<text>Plevna may refer to:

* Pleven, Bulgaria, an old name for the city

Canada
* Plevna, Ontario

Finland
* Plevna, Tampere, a former industrial building in Tampere, Finland

Romania
* Plevna, a village in Suharău Commune, Botoşani County
* Plevna, a village in Grebănu Commune, Buzău County
* Plevna, a village in Lupșanu Commune, Călăraşi County
* Plevna, a village in Rediu Commune, Galați County

United States
* Plevna, Alabama
* Plevna, Indiana
* Plevna, Kansas
* Plevna, Missouri
* Plevna, Montana

== See also ==
* Siege of Plevna, a major battle of the Russo-Turkish War (1877–1878)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q411655" start="0" end="6" title="Plevna" label="Plevna"/>
<link wikidata="Q165420" start="24" end="30" title="Pleven" label="Pleven"/>
<link wikidata="Q411655" start="68" end="74" title="Plevna" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204871" start="77" end="92" title="Plevna, Ontario" label="Plevna, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q411655" start="94" end="101" title="Plevna" label="Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q18661362" start="104" end="119" title="Plevna, Tampere" label="Plevna, Tampere"/>
<link wikidata="Q411655" start="171" end="178" title="Plevna" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q12725170" start="202" end="209" title="Suharău" label="Suharău"/>
<link wikidata="Q2537955" start="258" end="265" title="Grebănu" label="Grebănu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2717055" start="311" end="318" title="Lupșanu" label="Lupșanu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3725426" start="367" end="372" title="Rediu, Galați" label="Rediu"/>
<link wikidata="Q411655" start="397" end="410" title="Plevna" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204868" start="413" end="428" title="Plevna, Alabama" label="Plevna, Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204870" start="431" end="446" title="Plevna, Indiana" label="Plevna, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1982046" start="449" end="463" title="Plevna, Kansas" label="Plevna, Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3459753" start="466" end="482" title="Plevna, Missouri" label="Plevna, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q968903" start="485" end="500" title="Plevna, Montana" label="Plevna, Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q780367" start="519" end="534" title="Siege of Plevna" label="Siege of Plevna"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1329336" wikidata="Q440271" url="?curid=1329336" title="Pontotoc">
<text>Pontotoc may refer to:

* Fulton, Kentucky, formerly known as Pontotoc
* Pontotoc, Mississippi
* Pontotoc, Texas
* Pontotoc County, Mississippi
* Pontotoc County, Oklahoma
* Pontotoc, Oklahoma, an unincorporated community in Johnston County</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3067098" start="26" end="42" title="Fulton, Kentucky" label="Fulton, Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q985208" start="73" end="94" title="Pontotoc, Mississippi" label="Pontotoc, Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7228354" start="97" end="112" title="Pontotoc, Texas" label="Pontotoc, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q490259" start="115" end="143" title="Pontotoc County, Mississippi" label="Pontotoc County, Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q495856" start="146" end="171" title="Pontotoc County, Oklahoma" label="Pontotoc County, Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q22083098" start="174" end="192" title="Pontotoc, Oklahoma" label="Pontotoc, Oklahoma"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1329337" wikidata="Q744613" url="?curid=1329337" title="Lesli Kay">
<text>Lesli Kay (born Lesli Kay Pushkin on June 13, 1965 in Charleston, West Virginia) is an American actress, known for her roles on the CBS soap operas &quot;As the World Turns&quot; and &quot;The Bold and the Beautiful&quot;. For her role in &quot;As the World Turns&quot;, Kay received Daytime Emmy Award for Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Drama Series in 2001.

==Life and career==
Kay was born in Charleston, West Virginia. At age 12, she had the first individual girl&#x27;s bat mitzvah in the state of West Virginia. She moved to New York City at the age of 15 to pursue a modeling career before graduating from Colorado State University. Kay later worked at MTV and won $27,500 on &quot;Wheel of Fortune&quot;.

In 1997 she made her daytime debut as Molly Conlan on &quot;As the World Turns&quot;. For some time the character was not very popular due to Molly&#x27;s villainous behavior, but she eventually won a 2001 Daytime Emmy for Best Supporting Actress in addition to charming viewers during her romance with Jake McKinnon (Tom Eplin). When Jake was killed off in 2002, Molly again became adrift, and Kay left the show in early 2004 after a number of promised storylines never appeared. Kay popped up a few months later to recast the popular, brassy character of Lois Cerullo on &quot;General Hospital&quot;. Kay (and the resurrected character of Lois) exited &quot;GH&quot; in early 2005 after mutually agreeing to part ways with the show.

In November 2005, Kay assumed the role of Felicia Forrester on &quot;The Bold and the Beautiful&quot;, taking over for Colleen Dion after a year&#x27;s absence. &quot;Bold and the Beautiful&quot; Head Writer Bradley Bell had planned to kill her character off from cancer. However, a huge fan outpouring, including petitions and numerous letters, in addition to Kay&#x27;s job of making the role her own, convinced Bell to keep Kay on the cast. Her character, Felicia Forrester was resurrected from the dead. Lesli Kay invested herself into the cancer storyline so much that she shaved her head for the role. In 2007, Kay was nominated for Outstanding Supporting Actress at the &quot;34th Annual Daytime Emmy Awards&quot; but lost to Genie Francis.

In 2008, it was announced that Kay would crossover to &quot;The Young and the Restless&quot;, in what was considered to be a semi-permanent basis. Kay&#x27;s crossover to &quot;Y&amp;R&quot; was short-lived and she returned to her home series. In 2009, it was announced that Kay would make history in becoming the first actress to hold two roles on two separate coasts, when she was announced to be returning to the role of Molly on &quot;As the World Turns&quot;, while maintaining her role as Felicia on a recurring status. She stayed with &quot;As the World Turns&quot; until the show&#x27;s final episode on September 17, 2010. Kay continued making appearances on &quot;B&amp;B&quot; until 2014, and then reprised the role in 2016.

==Filmography==

===Film===

=== Television ===
==References==
==External links==
*SoapCentral profile</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q744613" start="0" end="9" title="Lesli Kay" label="Lesli Kay"/>
<link wikidata="Q744613" start="16" end="33" title="Lesli Kay" label="Lesli Kay Pushkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q44564" start="54" end="79" title="Charleston, West Virginia" label="Charleston, West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="132" end="135" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261578" start="154" end="172" title="As the World Turns" label="As the World Turns"/>
<link wikidata="Q82729" start="189" end="215" title="The Bold and the Beautiful" label="The Bold and the Beautiful"/>
<link wikidata="Q5243451" start="284" end="355" title="Daytime Emmy Award for Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Drama Series" label="Daytime Emmy Award for Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Drama Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q44564" start="402" end="427" title="Charleston, West Virginia" label="Charleston, West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q75673" start="481" end="492" title="bat mitzvah" label="bat mitzvah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371" start="509" end="522" title="West Virginia" label="West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1111640" start="619" end="644" title="Colorado State University" label="Colorado State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q43359" start="666" end="669" title="MTV" label="MTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q3567653" start="695" end="711" title="Wheel of Fortune (US game show)" label="Wheel of Fortune"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261578" start="780" end="798" title="As the World Turns" label="As the World Turns"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179189" start="926" end="938" title="Daytime Emmy" label="Daytime Emmy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7815727" start="1038" end="1047" title="Tom Eplin" label="Tom Eplin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6571681" start="1277" end="1289" title="Lois Cerullo" label="Lois Cerullo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136370" start="1299" end="1315" title="General Hospital" label="General Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q3742245" start="1498" end="1515" title="Felicia Forrester" label="Felicia Forrester"/>
<link wikidata="Q82729" start="1525" end="1551" title="The Bold and the Beautiful" label="The Bold and the Beautiful"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649517" start="1575" end="1587" title="Colleen Dion" label="Colleen Dion"/>
<link wikidata="Q4954882" start="1664" end="1676" title="Bradley Bell" label="Bradley Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q12078" start="1720" end="1726" title="cancer" label="cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q193432" start="1744" end="1747" title="Fan (person)" label="fan"/>
<link wikidata="Q697279" start="1770" end="1778" title="petition" label="petition"/>
<link wikidata="Q275244" start="2189" end="2202" title="Genie Francis" label="Genie Francis"/>
<link wikidata="Q849627" start="2265" end="2291" title="The Young and the Restless" label="The Young and the Restless"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1329339" wikidata="Q408462" url="?curid=1329339" title="Powers Lake">
<text>Powers Lake may refer to:
* Powers Lake (Georgia)
* Powers Lake (Meeker County, Minnesota)
* Powers Lake, North Dakota
* Powers Lake, Wisconsin
* Powers Lake, Connecticut</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q19987667" start="28" end="49" title="Powers Lake (Georgia)" label="Powers Lake (Georgia)"/>
<link wikidata="Q21197140" start="52" end="90" title="Powers Lake (Meeker County, Minnesota)" label="Powers Lake (Meeker County, Minnesota)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2362193" start="93" end="118" title="Powers Lake, North Dakota" label="Powers Lake, North Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570939" start="121" end="143" title="Powers Lake, Wisconsin" label="Powers Lake, Wisconsin"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1329341" wikidata="Q2072116" url="?curid=1329341" title="Jewel of the Seas">
<text>GTS &quot;Jewel of the Seas&quot; is a operated by Royal Caribbean. The ship was completed in the spring of 2004 with her maiden voyage in May of that year.

==History==
The ship was built at Meyer Werft, Papenburg, Germany. After her float out, she left the shipyard on 4 April 2004. The ship was delivered to RCI on 22 April 2004.

&quot;Jewel of the Seas&quot; initially operated cruises from Rome (Civitavecchia), Italy, to the Greek Isles in the Mediterranean Sea until November 2016, the ship re-positioned to cruising from San Juan, Puerto Rico to Caribbean destinations. In March 2019 the ship re-positioned from the Caribbean to the Mediterranean where it operated cruises in the Greek Isles and as of December 2019 it has been home ported in Dubai and operated cruises within the Persian Gulf.

In April 2016, &quot;Jewel of the Seas&quot; completed a £20 million renovation.
In May 2024, &quot;Jewel of the Seas&quot; completed a three week renovation in dry dock at Damen Shiprepair in Brest, France.

===Coronavirus pandemic===

On 11 March 2020, the ship was docked at the Dubai Cruise Terminal with two passengers that were experiencing respiratory illnesses. After the ship was placed in quarantine, test results for the two sick passengers returned negative, and the ship was given the all clear. However, because many ports had begun to close, &quot;Jewel of the Seas&quot; ended up staying at Dubai for the duration of the cruise, and Royal Caribbean gave the passengers full refunds and allowed them to use the ship as a hotel.

In May 2020 while moored outside Piraeus, a 27 year old crewmember went overboard and died. The crewmember, who worked as an electrician, reportedly was not missed for over 48 hours, before crew of the &quot;Jewel of the Seas&quot; began searching for him.

Up until late April 2021 &quot;Jewel of the Seas&quot; was at anchor in Poole Bay off the Dorset coast in the UK sitting out the COVID-19 pandemic. As with the other cruise ships in the area the ship made occasional visits to The Port of Southampton to collect supplies and fuel. As of 3 May 2021 she was heading for Cádiz in Spain. &quot;Jewel of the Seas&quot; was most recently spotted docking in the Firth of Forth in Scotland near Rosyth Dockyard and next to the Forth Bridge.

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==

* Official website
* Picture of the ship passing the </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2072116" start="0" end="27" title="Jewel of the Seas" label="GTS &amp;quot;Jewel of the Seas"/>
<link wikidata="Q929872" start="51" end="66" title="Royal Caribbean International" label="Royal Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q242533" start="402" end="415" title="Civitavecchia" label="Civitavecchia"/>
<link wikidata="Q213881" start="432" end="443" title="Greek Isles" label="Greek Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="451" end="468" title="Mediterranean Sea" label="Mediterranean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q41211" start="530" end="551" title="San Juan, Puerto Rico" label="San Juan, Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247" start="555" end="564" title="Caribbean Sea" label="Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q612" start="752" end="757" title="Dubai" label="Dubai"/>
<link wikidata="Q34675" start="790" end="802" title="Persian Gulf" label="Persian Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q12193" start="998" end="1011" title="Brest, France" label="Brest, France"/>
<link wikidata="Q3773278" start="1087" end="1108" title="Mina Rashid" label="Dubai Cruise Terminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q929872" start="1454" end="1469" title="Royal Caribbean International" label="Royal Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="1936" end="1953" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231265" start="2033" end="2056" title="Port of Southampton" label="The Port of Southampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q15682" start="2124" end="2129" title="Cádiz" label="Cádiz"/>
<link wikidata="Q202083" start="2211" end="2225" title="Firth of Forth" label="Firth of Forth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2956391" start="2243" end="2258" title="Rosyth Dockyard" label="Rosyth Dockyard"/>
<link wikidata="Q275" start="2275" end="2287" title="Forth Bridge" label="Forth Bridge"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1329352" wikidata="Q33038" url="?curid=1329352" title="Krzysztof Wiesiołowski">
<text>Krzysztof Wiesiołowski (died 1637) was a Polish nobleman, starost of Tykocin and Supraśl, Stolnik of Lithuania and Ciwun of Wilno before 1620, Court Marshal of Lithuania from 1619, Krajczy of Lithuania from 1620, and Grand Marshal of Lithuania from 1635.

He was Marshal of the Sejm from 15 January to 26 February 1609 and 13 February to 13 March 1618 in Warsaw.

==Coat of arms==
==Bibliography==
* http://edukacja.sejm.gov.pl/historia-sejmu/marszalkowie-sejmu/i-rzeczpospolita.html 
* Ks. A. Kochański, 526 lat dziejów miasta Tykocina na tle historii Polski, Białystok 2010</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q33038" start="0" end="22" title="Krzysztof Wiesiołowski" label="Krzysztof Wiesiołowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q311995" start="48" end="56" title="szlachcic" label="nobleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231714" start="58" end="65" title="starost" label="starost"/>
<link wikidata="Q941451" start="69" end="76" title="Tykocin" label="Tykocin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1906334" start="81" end="88" title="Supraśl" label="Supraśl"/>
<link wikidata="Q2278370" start="90" end="110" title="Stolnik of Lithuania" label="Stolnik of Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q2662430" start="115" end="120" title="Ciwun" label="Ciwun"/>
<link wikidata="Q216" start="124" end="129" title="Vilnius" label="Wilno"/>
<link wikidata="Q10992060" start="143" end="169" title="Court Marshal of Lithuania" label="Court Marshal of Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q2662430" start="181" end="201" title="Krajczy of Lithuania" label="Krajczy of Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q10992060" start="217" end="243" title="Grand Marshal of Lithuania" label="Grand Marshal of Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q100172" start="263" end="282" title="Marshal of the Sejm" label="Marshal of the Sejm"/>
<link wikidata="Q270" start="355" end="361" title="Warsaw" label="Warsaw"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1329357" wikidata="Q7615378" url="?curid=1329357" title="Steven Wayne Smith">
<text>Steven Wayne Smith (born October 26, 1961) is a Republican
former Texas Supreme Court justice, who was defeated for renomination in 2004 through the active opposition of then-Governor Rick Perry. He was unseated by Paul W. Green. Smith again lost – very narrowly – a bid for nomination to the court in the March 7, 2006, GOP primary, when Perry again opposed his candidacy.

Smith served on the Texas high court from November 2002 through January 2005.

== Education and career ==
A fifth-generation Texan, Smith graduated from Everman High School, which is located in south Tarrant County. He attended the University of Texas at Arlington, where he received a bachelor of business administration degree in finance, the first member of his extended family to have graduated from college. Smith attended the University of Texas Law School, where he concentrated on federal law. He graduated with honors in 1986.

After graduation, Smith worked as a bill analyst for the Texas Senate and as a staff attorney, first for the Office of the Texas Secretary of State and then for the Texas Legislative Council. He spent three years at the legislative council and worked on redistricting issues and judicial selection. There, he met his wife, the former Susan Hunter, who was also on the legal staff.

&quot;My judicial philosophy probably comes as much from working at the legislature as from anything. ... I developed a real appreciation for what goes into making public policy. The legislature is the policy-making branch. Courts should defer to the legislature, unless there&#x27;s a clear constitutional reason&quot; otherwise, said Smith.

While he was on the Supreme Court, Smith authored 16 published opinions, including the court&#x27;s landmark decision in &quot;Texas Department of Protective and Regulatory Services v. Mega Child Care&quot;. His work was lauded by then Chief Justice Wallace Jefferson.

==Election history==

===Primary election of 1998===
In 1998, Smith ran for the Republican nomination for Place 4 on the Texas Supreme Court. He opposed the then=incumbent Deborah Hankinson, who had been appointed to the body in 1997 by then-Governor George W. Bush. In the Republican primary, Smith lost to Hankinson by 59.41 to 40.58% of the vote.

===Election of 2002===
Smith was elected to the court in 2002 by first defeating Xavier Rodriguez, an appointee of Governor Rick Perry, in the Republican primary. Smith polled 306,730 votes (53.49%) to Rodriguez&#x27;s 266,648 ballots (46.50%). Rodriguez spent $558,000, called himself a &quot;moderate&quot;, and lost; Smith spent $9,500, called himself a &quot;conservative&quot;, and won in an upset.

Smith defeated Democrat Margaret Mirabal in the November general election. He polled 2,331,140 votes (54.09%), to Mirabal&#x27;s 1,978,081 ballots (45.90%).

The 2002 election was for the unexpired portion of a normal six-year term. The term began with the re-election of Greg Abbott to the seat in 1998. Under the Texas Constitution, after he resigned in 2001 to run for Texas attorney general, an election had to be scheduled for fall 2002 for the remaining two years of Abbott&#x27;s original term. Thus, Smith had to run for re-election in 2004.

===Primary election of 2004===
Perry and U.S. Senator John Cornyn opposed Smith&#x27;s candidacy and he eventually lost the primary to Green. Green was unopposed in the 2004 general election. Green still holds this seat on the Supreme Court.

A controversial email that Smith sent out responding to Green&#x27;s attack that Smith was short on credentials may have backfired and cost Smith some support. While touting his own academic achievements at the University of Texas School of Law, Smith disparaged Green&#x27;s academic achievements, namely that Green had graduated from St. Mary&#x27;s University School of Law in San Antonio, a smaller and less well-known law school. Senator John Cornyn is a St. Mary&#x27;s alumnus. Dean Bill Piatt of St. Mary&#x27;s blasted Smith, saying that it was inappropriate for a sitting Supreme Court justice to belittle one of the law schools in the State of Texas. Piatt widely distributed a letter that he had written to Smith to many alumni of St. Mary&#x27;s and others in the legal community. Smith wrote a conciliatory response letter to Piatt, but did not publicize that letter.

===Primary election of 2006===
On January 3, 2006, Smith announced that he would enter the March 7 Republican primary for Place 2 on the Texas Supreme Court. He opposed Justice Don Willett of Austin, a Baylor and Duke University Law School graduate who was appointed to the bench in fall 2005 by Governor Perry. Bush announced on January 19, 2006, that he was supporting Willett.

In 2004, Senator Kay Bailey Hutchison supported Smith&#x27;s re-election, but she endorsed Willett in the 2006 race. Cornyn and Texas Attorney General Greg Abbott, himself a former Texas Supreme Court justice, also endorsed Willett. The &quot;San Antonio Express-News&quot; endorsed Willett, but the &quot;Fort Worth Star-Telegram&quot; backed Smith. Smith lost to Willett by 4,979 votes.

== Primary election of 2016 ==
Ten years after his last defeat for the state Supreme Court, Smith entered the Republican primary for the Place 5 seat on the Texas Court of Criminal Appeals being vacated by Republican Cheryl Johnson. He ran third among four candidates and finished with 393,458 votes (19.6%). The second-place candidate, Brent Webster of Williamson County, with 410,530 votes (20.5%), led Smith by 17,072 votes and secured the runoff berth against the top candidate, Scott Walker, who polled 832,685 (41.5%). Walker did virtually no campaigning, received no newspaper endorsements, funded no advertising, and entrusted his campaign to his son. He shares the name of the Republican governor of Wisconsin, who withdrew from the 2016 presidential election. Walker may have hence prevailed in the judicial race on the basis of a well-known name. Walker attributed his strong showing to divine intervention: &quot;I spent a lot of time praying. God really blessed me with a great victory.&quot; In last place was Sid Harle, the former prosecutor in the Bexar County district attorney&#x27;s office and a 27-year district court judge from San Antonio, who drew 370,766 votes (18.5%). Walker subsequently handily defeated Webster in their runoff contest, 207,195 (57.9%) to 150,722 (42.1%). The runoff attracted only 2.5% of all registered voters statewide. Walker now faces Dori Contreras Garza, who polled 1,020,753 primary votes running unopposed in the Democratic primary.

In his campaign, Smith had advocated consolidating the state Supreme Court with the Court of Criminal Appeals, both of which have nine members elected statewide, to reduce the number of judges required by the state. Smith is a former general counsel to the Texas Legal Foundation. In 2016, he was the editor of www.TexasLegalGuide.com.


==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7615378" start="0" end="18" title="Steven Wayne Smith" label="Steven Wayne Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="48" end="58" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q3694683" start="66" end="85" title="Texas Supreme Court" label="Texas Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589725" start="175" end="183" title="governor of Texas" label="Governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q215057" start="184" end="194" title="Rick Perry" label="Rick Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q16151740" start="215" end="228" title="Paul W. Green" label="Paul W. Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q5417302" start="528" end="547" title="Everman Joe C. Bean High School" label="Everman High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230739" start="607" end="639" title="University of Texas at Arlington" label="University of Texas at Arlington"/>
<link wikidata="Q798129" start="661" end="696" title="Bachelor of Business Administration" label="bachelor of business administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q7896446" start="807" end="837" title="University of Texas Law School" label="University of Texas Law School"/>
<link wikidata="Q515426" start="969" end="981" title="Texas Senate" label="Texas Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7305983" start="1166" end="1179" title="redistricting" label="redistricting"/>
<link wikidata="Q16195129" start="1888" end="1905" title="Wallace Jefferson" label="Wallace Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q67173512" start="2080" end="2097" title="Deborah Hankinson" label="Deborah Hankinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="2159" end="2173" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q8043301" start="2340" end="2356" title="Xavier Rodriguez" label="Xavier Rodriguez"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="2679" end="2687" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076105" start="2721" end="2737" title="general election" label="general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q5605224" start="2936" end="2947" title="Greg Abbott" label="Greg Abbott"/>
<link wikidata="Q719568" start="3269" end="3280" title="John Cornyn" label="John Cornyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7590449" start="3794" end="3834" title="St. Mary&amp;#x27;s University School of Law" label="St. Mary&amp;#x27;s University School of Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q5293724" start="4518" end="4529" title="Don Willett" label="Don Willett"/>
<link wikidata="Q812573" start="4543" end="4549" title="Baylor University" label="Baylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5312901" start="4554" end="4580" title="Duke University Law School" label="Duke University Law School"/>
<link wikidata="Q239928" start="4739" end="4759" title="Kay Bailey Hutchison" label="Kay Bailey Hutchison"/>
<link wikidata="Q3946733" start="4965" end="4989" title="San Antonio Express-News" label="San Antonio Express-News"/>
<link wikidata="Q2408536" start="5028" end="5052" title="Fort Worth Star-Telegram" label="Fort Worth Star-Telegram"/>
<link wikidata="Q3694688" start="5269" end="5300" title="Texas Court of Criminal Appeals" label="Texas Court of Criminal Appeals"/>
<link wikidata="Q112686" start="5466" end="5483" title="Williamson County, Texas" label="Williamson County"/>
<link wikidata="Q48799183" start="5595" end="5607" title="Scott Walker (judge)" label="Scott Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q553254" start="5786" end="5790" title="Scott Walker (politician)" label="name"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112727" start="5809" end="5830" title="governor of Wisconsin" label="governor of Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q699872" start="5854" end="5880" title="U.S. presidential election, 2016" label="2016 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q40953" start="6059" end="6066" title="Prayer" label="praying"/>
<link wikidata="Q190" start="6068" end="6071" title="God" label="God"/>
<link wikidata="Q16861" start="6176" end="6188" title="Bexar County, Texas" label="Bexar County"/>
<link wikidata="Q653368" start="6189" end="6206" title="district attorney" label="district attorney"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1329358" wikidata="Q1413077" url="?curid=1329358" title="Javadoc">
<text>Javadoc (also capitalized as JavaDoc or javadoc) is an API documentation generator for the Java programming language. Based on information in Java source code, Javadoc generates documentation formatted as HTML and via extensions, other formats. Javadoc was created by Sun Microsystems and is owned by Oracle today.

The content and formatting of a resulting document are controlled via special markup in source code comments. As this markup is de facto standard and ubiquitous for documenting Java code, many IDEs extract and display the Javadoc information while viewing the source code; often via hover over an associated symbol. Some IDEs, like IntelliJ IDEA, NetBeans and Eclipse, support generating Javadoc template comment blocks. The codice_1 syntax of Javadoc markup has been re-used by other documentation generators, including Doxygen, JSDoc, EDoc and HeaderDoc.

Javadoc supports extension via doclets and taglets, which allow for generating different output formats and for static analysis of a codebase. For example, JDiff reports changes between two versions of an API.

Although some criticize Javadoc and API document generators in general, one motivation for creating Javadoc was that more traditional (less automated) API documentation is often out-of-date or does not exist due to business constraints such as limited availability of technical writers. 

Javadoc has been part of Java since its first release, and is often updated with each release of the Java Development Kit. 

Javadoc and the source code comments used by Javadoc, do not affect the performance of a Java executable since comments are ignored by the compiler. 

== Markup ==

Javadoc ignores comments unless they are specially marked. A Javadoc comment is marked with an extra asterisk after the start of a multi-line comment: codice_2. A comment block pertains to the symbol that follows the block. 

An example of a class header block follows:
/**
 * Provides some service
 * @author Jill Smith &lt;address@example.com&gt;
 * @version 1.6
 * @since 1.2
public class Test {}
For a method, the first line is a short description of the method. If more detail is warranted, then it may be followed by a longer description in additional paragraphs. Following that are optionally various tags.

Various aspects of HTML as supported via Javadoc. For example codice_3 denotes a paragraph break.

An example of a method header block follows:
/**
 * One-line description
 * &lt;p&gt;
 * Longer description. If there were any, it would be here.
 * &lt;p&gt;
 * And even more explanation to follow in consecutive
 * paragraphs separated by paragraph break.
 * @param variableName Description...
 * @return Description...
public int methodName(...) { ... }
Variables can also be documented. For example:
/**
 * Description of the variable here
private int debug = 0;
A more complete example follows:
/**
 * Validates a chess move
 * &lt;p&gt;Use {@link #doMove(int fromFile, int fromRank, int toFile, int toRank)} to move a piece.
 * @param fromFile file from which a piece is being moved
 * @param fromRank rank from which a piece is being moved
 * @param toFile file to which a piece is being moved
 * @param toRank rank to which a piece is being moved
 * @return true if the move is valid, otherwise false
 * @since 1.0
boolean isValidMove(int fromFile, int fromRank, int toFile, int toRank) { ... }
 * Moves a chess piece
 * @see java.math.RoundingMode
void doMove(int fromFile, int fromRank, int toFile, int toRank) { ... }
== Markdown ==
From Java 23 onwards, Javadoc supports the Markdown standard CommonMark on comment lines that start with codice_4 instead of the older multiline format. 

== Doclets ==
A Doclet program works with Javadoc to select which content to include in the documentation, format the presentation of the content and create the file that contains the documentation. A Doclet is written in Java and uses the ,

The included with Javadoc generates API documentation as frame-based HTML files. Other Doclets are available on the web , often for free. These can be used to:
* Create other types of documentation (non-API)
* Output to a format other than HTML; such as PDF
* Output as HTML with additional features such as a search or with embedded UML diagrams generated from the Java classes

== Tags ==

Some of the available Javadoc tags are listed in the table below:

== See also ==
* Comparison of documentation generators
* .NET XML documentation comments

== References ==
== External links ==
* Java Platform, Standard Edition Javadoc Guide
* JSR 260 Javadoc Tag Technology Update Java Specification Request (defines new Javadoc tags)
* Improve on Javadoc with ashkelon
* Various Java documentations converted to Windows Help format</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1413077" start="0" end="7" title="Javadoc" label="Javadoc"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413077" start="29" end="36" title="Javadoc" label="JavaDoc"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413077" start="40" end="47" title="Javadoc" label="javadoc"/>
<link wikidata="Q165194" start="55" end="58" title="Application programming interface" label="API"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164323" start="59" end="82" title="documentation generator" label="documentation generator"/>
<link wikidata="Q251" start="91" end="116" title="Java (programming language)" label="Java programming language"/>
<link wikidata="Q128751" start="147" end="158" title="source code" label="source code"/>
<link wikidata="Q8811" start="205" end="209" title="HTML" label="HTML"/>
<link wikidata="Q184148" start="218" end="228" title="Plug-in (computing)" label="extensions"/>
<link wikidata="Q14647" start="268" end="284" title="Sun Microsystems" label="Sun Microsystems"/>
<link wikidata="Q19900" start="301" end="307" title="Oracle Corporation" label="Oracle"/>
<link wikidata="Q37045" start="394" end="400" title="Markup language" label="markup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141067" start="416" end="424" title="Comment (computer programming)" label="comments"/>
<link wikidata="Q385853" start="444" end="461" title="de facto standard" label="de facto standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q13741" start="509" end="512" title="Integrated Development Environment" label="IDE"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206660" start="648" end="661" title="IntelliJ IDEA" label="IntelliJ IDEA"/>
<link wikidata="Q264456" start="663" end="671" title="NetBeans" label="NetBeans"/>
<link wikidata="Q82268" start="676" end="683" title="Eclipse (software)" label="Eclipse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253530" start="837" end="844" title="Doxygen" label="Doxygen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2089685" start="846" end="851" title="JSDoc" label="JSDoc"/>
<link wikidata="Q17054924" start="862" end="871" title="HeaderDoc" label="HeaderDoc"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413077" start="905" end="912" title="doclets" label="doclets"/>
<link wikidata="Q7604153" start="986" end="1001" title="static analysis" label="static analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2425187" start="1007" end="1015" title="codebase" label="codebase"/>
<link wikidata="Q6108031" start="1030" end="1035" title="JDiff" label="JDiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q4653324" start="1353" end="1370" title="API writer" label="technical writers"/>
<link wikidata="Q741303" start="1475" end="1495" title="Java Development Kit" label="Java Development Kit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193600" start="3564" end="3572" title="Markdown" label="Markdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q165194" start="3955" end="3958" title="API" label="API"/>
<link wikidata="Q8811" start="3988" end="3992" title="HTML" label="HTML"/>
<link wikidata="Q42332" start="4173" end="4176" title="PDF" label="PDF"/>
<link wikidata="Q169411" start="4253" end="4256" title="Unified Modeling Language" label="UML"/>
<link wikidata="Q5155870" start="4395" end="4433" title="Comparison of documentation generators" label="Comparison of documentation generators"/>
<link wikidata="Q2313041" start="4436" end="4467" title=".NET documentation comments" label=".NET XML documentation comments"/>
<link wikidata="Q840596" start="4595" end="4621" title="Java Specification Request" label="Java Specification Request"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1329361" wikidata="Q3493378" url="?curid=1329361" title="Mitochondrial matrix">
<text>In the mitochondrion, the matrix is the space within the inner membrane. The word &quot;matrix&quot; stems from the fact that this space is viscous, compared to the relatively aqueous cytoplasm. The mitochondrial matrix contains the mitochondrial DNA, ribosomes, soluble enzymes, small organic molecules, nucleotide cofactors, and inorganic ions.[1] The enzymes in the matrix facilitate reactions responsible for the production of ATP, such as the citric acid cycle, oxidative phosphorylation, oxidation of pyruvate, and the beta oxidation of fatty acids.

The composition of the matrix based on its structures and contents produce an environment that allows the anabolic and catabolic pathways to proceed favorably. The electron transport chain and enzymes in the matrix play a large role in the citric acid cycle and oxidative phosphorylation. The citric acid cycle produces NADH and FADH2 through oxidation that will be reduced in oxidative phosphorylation to produce ATP.

The cytosolic, intermembrane space, compartment has a higher aqueous:protein content of around 3.8 μL/mg protein relative to that occurring in mitochondrial matrix where such levels typically are near 0.8 μL/mg protein. It is not known how mitochondria maintain osmotic balance across the inner mitochondrial membrane, although the membrane contains aquaporins that are believed to be conduits for regulated water transport. Mitochondrial matrix has a pH of about 7.8, which is higher than the pH of the intermembrane space of the mitochondria, which is around 7.0–7.4. Mitochondrial DNA was discovered by Nash and Margit in 1963. One to many double stranded mainly circular DNA is present in mitochondrial matrix. Mitochondrial DNA is 1% of total DNA of a cell. It is rich in guanine and cytosine content, and in humans is maternally derived. Mitochondria of mammals have 55s ribosomes.

== Composition ==

=== Metabolites ===
The matrix is host to a wide variety of metabolites involved in processes within the matrix. The citric acid cycle involves acyl-CoA, pyruvate, acetyl-CoA, citrate, isocitrate, α-ketoglutarate, succinyl-CoA, fumarate, succinate, -malate, and oxaloacetate. The urea cycle makes use of -ornithine, carbamoyl phosphate, and -citrulline. The electron transport chain oxidizes coenzymes NADH and FADH2. Protein synthesis makes use of mitochondrial DNA, RNA, and tRNA. Regulation of processes makes use of ions (Ca2+/K+/Mg+). Additional metabolites present in the matrix are CO2, H2O, O2, ATP, ADP, and Pi.

=== Enzymes ===
Enzymes from processes that take place in the matrix. The citric acid cycle is facilitated by pyruvate dehydrogenase, citrate synthase, aconitase, isocitrate dehydrogenase, α-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase, succinyl-CoA synthetase, fumarase, and malate dehydrogenase. The urea cycle is facilitated by carbamoyl phosphate synthetase I and ornithine transcarbamylase. β-Oxidation uses pyruvate carboxylase, acyl-CoA dehydrogenase, and β-ketothiolase. Amino acid production is facilitated by transaminases. Amino acid metabolism is mediated by proteases, such as presequence protease.

=== Inner membrane components ===
The inner membrane is a phospholipid bilayer that contains the complexes of oxidative phosphorylation. which contains the electron transport chain that is found on the cristae of the inner membrane and consists of four protein complexes and ATP synthase. These complexes are complex I (NADH:coenzyme Q oxidoreductase), complex II (succinate:coenzyme Q oxidoreductase), complex III (coenzyme Q: cytochrome c oxidoreductase), and complex IV (cytochrome c oxidase).

=== Inner membrane control over matrix composition ===
The electron transport chain is responsible for establishing a pH and electrochemical gradient that facilitates the production of ATP through the pumping of protons. The gradient also provides control of the concentration of ions such as Ca2+ driven by the mitochondrial membrane potential. The membrane only allows nonpolar molecules such as CO2 and O2 and small non charged polar molecules such as H2O to enter the matrix. Molecules enter and exit the mitochondrial matrix through transport proteins and ion transporters. Molecules are then able to leave the mitochondria through porin. These attributed characteristics allow for control over concentrations of ions and metabolites necessary for regulation and determines the rate of ATP production.

== Processes ==

=== Citric acid cycle ===
Following glycolysis, the citric acid cycle is activated by the production of acetyl-CoA. The oxidation of pyruvate by pyruvate dehydrogenase in the matrix produces CO2, acetyl-CoA, and NADH. Beta oxidation of fatty acids serves as an alternate catabolic pathway that produces acetyl-CoA, NADH, and FADH2. The production of acetyl-CoA begins the citric acid cycle while the co-enzymes produced are used in the electron transport chain.
All of the enzymes for the citric acid cycle are in the matrix (e.g. &quot;citrate synthase, isocitrate dehydrogenase, α-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase, fumarase, and malate dehydrogenase&quot;) except for succinate dehydrogenase which is on the inner membrane and is part of protein complex II in the electron transport chain. The cycle produces coenzymes NADH and FADH2 through the oxidation of carbons in two cycles. The oxidation of NADH and FADH2 produces GTP from succinyl-CoA synthetase.

=== Oxidative phosphorylation ===
NADH and FADH2 are produced in the matrix or transported in through porin and transport proteins in order to undergo oxidation through oxidative phosphorylation. NADH and FADH2 undergo oxidation in the electron transport chain by transferring an electrons to regenerate NAD+ and FAD. Protons are pulled into the intermembrane space by the energy of the electrons going through the electron transport chain. Four electrons are finally accepted by oxygen in the matrix to complete the electron transport chain. The protons return to the mitochondrial matrix through the protein ATP synthase. The energy is used in order to rotate ATP synthase which facilitates the passage of a proton, producing ATP. A pH difference between the matrix and intermembrane space creates an electrochemical gradient by which ATP synthase can pass a proton into the matrix favorably.

=== Urea cycle ===
The first two steps of the urea cycle take place within the mitochondrial matrix of liver and kidney cells. In the first step ammonia is converted into carbamoyl phosphate through the investment of two ATP molecules. This step is facilitated by carbamoyl phosphate synthetase I. The second step facilitated by ornithine transcarbamylase converts carbamoyl phosphate and ornithine into citrulline. After these initial steps the urea cycle continues in the inner membrane space until ornithine once again enters the matrix through a transport channel to continue the first to steps within matrix.

=== Transamination ===
α-Ketoglutarate and oxaloacetate can be converted into amino acids within the matrix through the process of transamination. These reactions are facilitated by transaminases in order to produce aspartate and asparagine from oxaloacetate. Transamination of α-ketoglutarate produces glutamate, proline, and arginine. These amino acids are then used either within the matrix or transported into the cytosol to produce proteins.

=== Regulation ===
Regulation within the matrix is primarily controlled by ion concentration, metabolite concentration and energy charge. Availability of ions such as Ca2+ control various functions of the citric acid cycle. in the matrix activates pyruvate dehydrogenase, isocitrate dehydrogenase, and α-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase which increases the reaction rate in the cycle. Concentration of intermediates and coenzymes in the matrix also increase or decrease the rate of ATP production due to anaplerotic and cataplerotic effects. NADH can act as an inhibitor for α-ketoglutarate, isocitrate dehydrogenase, citrate synthase, and pyruvate dehydrogenase. The concentration of oxaloacetate in particular is kept low, so any fluctuations in this concentrations serve to drive the citric acid cycle forward. The production of ATP also serves as a means of regulation by acting as an inhibitor for isocitrate dehydrogenase, pyruvate dehydrogenase, the electron transport chain protein complexes, and ATP synthase. ADP acts as an activator.

=== Protein synthesis ===
The mitochondria contains its own set of DNA used to produce proteins found in the electron transport chain. The mitochondrial DNA only codes for about thirteen proteins that are used in processing mitochondrial transcripts, ribosomal proteins, ribosomal RNA, transfer RNA, and protein subunits found in the protein complexes of the electron transport chain.

==See also==
* Matrix (biology)
* Mitochondrial DNA
* Mitochondrion

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q39572" start="7" end="20" title="mitochondrion" label="mitochondrion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3493378" start="26" end="32" title="Mitochondrial matrix" label="matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q4896390" start="57" end="71" title="Inner mitochondrial membrane" label="inner membrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q27075" start="233" end="250" title="mitochondrial DNA" label="mitochondrial DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q42244" start="252" end="260" title="ribosome" label="ribosome"/>
<link wikidata="Q8047" start="271" end="277" title="enzyme" label="enzyme"/>
<link wikidata="Q28745" start="305" end="315" title="nucleotide" label="nucleotide"/>
<link wikidata="Q6036601" start="331" end="345" title="inorganic ions" label="inorganic ions"/>
<link wikidata="Q80863" start="431" end="434" title="Adenosine triphosphate" label="ATP"/>
<link wikidata="Q133895" start="448" end="465" title="citric acid cycle" label="citric acid cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q227564" start="467" end="492" title="oxidative phosphorylation" label="oxidative phosphorylation"/>
<link wikidata="Q213580" start="507" end="515" title="pyruvate" label="pyruvate"/>
<link wikidata="Q97261657" start="525" end="554" title="Beta oxidation" label="beta oxidation of fatty acids"/>
<link wikidata="Q184681" start="663" end="671" title="Anabolism" label="anabolic"/>
<link wikidata="Q21130714" start="676" end="685" title="Catabolism" label="catabolic"/>
<link wikidata="Q211016" start="721" end="745" title="electron transport chain" label="electron transport chain"/>
<link wikidata="Q133895" start="797" end="814" title="citric acid cycle" label="citric acid cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q227564" start="819" end="844" title="oxidative phosphorylation" label="oxidative phosphorylation"/>
<link wikidata="Q133895" start="850" end="867" title="citric acid cycle" label="citric acid cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q12499775" start="877" end="881" title="Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide" label="NADH"/>
<link wikidata="Q28746" start="886" end="891" title="Flavin adenine dinucleotide" label="FADH2"/>
<link wikidata="Q227564" start="934" end="959" title="oxidative phosphorylation" label="oxidative phosphorylation"/>
<link wikidata="Q80863" start="971" end="974" title="Adenosine triphosphate" label="ATP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425206" start="992" end="1011" title="intermembrane space" label="intermembrane space"/>
<link wikidata="Q54237" start="1239" end="1246" title="Osmosis" label="osmotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q623090" start="1327" end="1336" title="aquaporin" label="aquaporin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430" start="1725" end="1728" title="DNA" label="DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q169313" start="1754" end="1761" title="guanine" label="guanine"/>
<link wikidata="Q178425" start="1766" end="1774" title="cytosine" label="cytosine"/>
<link wikidata="Q407595" start="1945" end="1955" title="metabolite" label="metabolite"/>
<link wikidata="Q133895" start="2002" end="2019" title="citric acid cycle" label="citric acid cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2699537" start="2029" end="2037" title="acyl-CoA" label="acyl-CoA"/>
<link wikidata="Q213580" start="2039" end="2047" title="pyruvate" label="pyruvate"/>
<link wikidata="Q715317" start="2049" end="2059" title="acetyl-CoA" label="acetyl-CoA"/>
<link wikidata="Q159683" start="2061" end="2068" title="citrate" label="citrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q288927" start="2070" end="2080" title="isocitrate" label="isocitrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q306140" start="2082" end="2097" title="α-ketoglutarate" label="α-ketoglutarate"/>
<link wikidata="Q419560" start="2099" end="2111" title="succinyl-CoA" label="succinyl-CoA"/>
<link wikidata="Q139857" start="2113" end="2121" title="fumarate" label="fumarate"/>
<link wikidata="Q213050" start="2123" end="2132" title="succinate" label="succinate"/>
<link wikidata="Q190143" start="2134" end="2141" title="malate" label="-malate"/>
<link wikidata="Q408658" start="2147" end="2159" title="oxaloacetate" label="oxaloacetate"/>
<link wikidata="Q595994" start="2165" end="2175" title="urea cycle" label="urea cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q410198" start="2189" end="2199" title="ornithine" label="-ornithine"/>
<link wikidata="Q21109242" start="2201" end="2220" title="Carbamoyl phosphate synthetase I" label="carbamoyl phosphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q408641" start="2226" end="2237" title="L-citrulline" label="-citrulline"/>
<link wikidata="Q12499775" start="2287" end="2291" title="NADH" label="NADH"/>
<link wikidata="Q28746" start="2296" end="2301" title="FADH2" label="FADH2"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430" start="2348" end="2351" title="DNA" label="DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q11053" start="2353" end="2356" title="RNA" label="RNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q201448" start="2362" end="2366" title="Transfer RNA" label="tRNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q60097" start="2411" end="2415" title="Ca2+" label="Ca2+"/>
<link wikidata="Q703" start="2416" end="2418" title="Potassium" label="K+"/>
<link wikidata="Q660" start="2419" end="2422" title="Magnesium" label="Mg+"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997" start="2474" end="2477" title="CO2" label="CO2"/>
<link wikidata="Q283" start="2479" end="2482" title="H2O" label="H2O"/>
<link wikidata="Q629" start="2484" end="2486" title="Oxygen" label="O2"/>
<link wikidata="Q80863" start="2488" end="2491" title="Adenosine triphosphate" label="ATP"/>
<link wikidata="Q185253" start="2493" end="2496" title="Adenosine diphosphate" label="ADP"/>
<link wikidata="Q46220103" start="2502" end="2504" title="Inorganic phosphate" label="Pi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4043300" start="2617" end="2639" title="pyruvate dehydrogenase" label="pyruvate dehydrogenase"/>
<link wikidata="Q21132608" start="2641" end="2657" title="citrate synthase" label="citrate synthase"/>
<link wikidata="Q342083" start="2659" end="2668" title="aconitase" label="aconitase"/>
<link wikidata="Q261968" start="2670" end="2694" title="isocitrate dehydrogenase" label="isocitrate dehydrogenase"/>
<link wikidata="Q309518" start="2696" end="2725" title="α-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase" label="α-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase"/>
<link wikidata="Q175732" start="2727" end="2750" title="succinyl coenzyme A synthetase" label="succinyl-CoA synthetase"/>
<link wikidata="Q21107515" start="2752" end="2760" title="fumarase" label="fumarase"/>
<link wikidata="Q412007" start="2766" end="2786" title="malate dehydrogenase" label="malate dehydrogenase"/>
<link wikidata="Q21109242" start="2821" end="2853" title="carbamoyl phosphate synthetase I" label="carbamoyl phosphate synthetase I"/>
<link wikidata="Q420678" start="2858" end="2884" title="ornithine transcarbamylase" label="ornithine transcarbamylase"/>
<link wikidata="Q21114968" start="2903" end="2923" title="pyruvate carboxylase" label="pyruvate carboxylase"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150892" start="2925" end="2947" title="Acyl CoA dehydrogenase" label="acyl-CoA dehydrogenase"/>
<link wikidata="Q14912985" start="2953" end="2967" title="β-ketothiolase" label="β-ketothiolase"/>
<link wikidata="Q424288" start="3009" end="3021" title="transaminase" label="transaminase"/>
<link wikidata="Q212410" start="3061" end="3069" title="protease" label="protease"/>
<link wikidata="Q18035459" start="3080" end="3100" title="PITRM1" label="presequence protease"/>
<link wikidata="Q423279" start="3161" end="3181" title="phospholipid bilayer" label="phospholipid bilayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q211016" start="3259" end="3283" title="electron transport chain" label="electron transport chain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140236" start="3305" end="3311" title="crista" label="crista"/>
<link wikidata="Q22327117" start="3378" end="3390" title="ATP synthase" label="ATP synthase"/>
<link wikidata="Q22326958" start="3412" end="3421" title="complex I" label="complex I"/>
<link wikidata="Q412837" start="3456" end="3466" title="complex II" label="complex II"/>
<link wikidata="Q412832" start="3506" end="3517" title="complex III" label="complex III"/>
<link wikidata="Q306116" start="3565" end="3575" title="complex IV" label="complex IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q211026" start="3726" end="3750" title="electrochemical gradient" label="electrochemical gradient"/>
<link wikidata="Q60097" start="3894" end="3898" title="Ca2" label="Ca2+"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997" start="3999" end="4002" title="Carbon dioxide" label="CO2"/>
<link wikidata="Q629" start="4007" end="4009" title="Oxygen" label="O2"/>
<link wikidata="Q283" start="4056" end="4059" title="H2O" label="H2O"/>
<link wikidata="Q2111029" start="4139" end="4156" title="transport protein" label="transport protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q911011" start="4162" end="4177" title="ion transporter" label="ion transporter"/>
<link wikidata="Q67101192" start="4238" end="4243" title="Porin (protein)" label="porin"/>
<link wikidata="Q36496" start="4319" end="4322" title="ion" label="ion"/>
<link wikidata="Q407595" start="4328" end="4338" title="metabolite" label="metabolite"/>
<link wikidata="Q213580" start="4559" end="4567" title="Pyruvic acid" label="pyruvate"/>
<link wikidata="Q97261657" start="4644" end="4658" title="Beta oxidation" label="Beta oxidation"/>
<link wikidata="Q21130714" start="4697" end="4706" title="Catabolism" label="catabolic"/>
<link wikidata="Q28746" start="4751" end="4756" title="Flavin adenine dinucleotide" label="FADH2"/>
<link wikidata="Q407280" start="4826" end="4836" title="Cofactor (biochemistry)" label="co-enzymes"/>
<link wikidata="Q211016" start="4862" end="4886" title="electron transport chain" label="electron transport chain"/>
<link wikidata="Q8047" start="4899" end="4905" title="enzyme" label="enzyme"/>
<link wikidata="Q159683" start="4963" end="4979" title="Citrate" label="citrate synthase"/>
<link wikidata="Q261968" start="4981" end="5005" title="isocitrate dehydrogenase" label="isocitrate dehydrogenase"/>
<link wikidata="Q306140" start="5007" end="5036" title="Alpha-Ketoglutaric acid" label="α-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase"/>
<link wikidata="Q139857" start="5038" end="5046" title="Fumarate" label="fumarase"/>
<link wikidata="Q412007" start="5052" end="5072" title="malate dehydrogenase" label="malate dehydrogenase"/>
<link wikidata="Q412837" start="5091" end="5114" title="succinate dehydrogenase" label="succinate dehydrogenase"/>
<link wikidata="Q412837" start="5169" end="5179" title="complex II" label="complex II"/>
<link wikidata="Q211016" start="5187" end="5211" title="electron transport chain" label="electron transport chain"/>
<link wikidata="Q28746" start="5424" end="5429" title="Flavin adenine dinucleotide" label="FADH2"/>
<link wikidata="Q2225" start="5661" end="5669" title="electron" label="electron"/>
<link wikidata="Q12499775" start="5685" end="5689" title="NAD+" label="NAD+"/>
<link wikidata="Q28746" start="5694" end="5697" title="Flavin adenine dinucleotide" label="FAD"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425206" start="5727" end="5746" title="intermembrane space" label="intermembrane space"/>
<link wikidata="Q22327117" start="5991" end="6003" title="ATP synthase" label="ATP synthase"/>
<link wikidata="Q4087" start="6422" end="6429" title="ammonia" label="ammonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q424409" start="6448" end="6467" title="carbamoyl phosphate" label="carbamoyl phosphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q21109242" start="6541" end="6573" title="carbamoyl phosphate synthetase I" label="carbamoyl phosphate synthetase I"/>
<link wikidata="Q420678" start="6606" end="6632" title="ornithine transcarbamylase" label="ornithine transcarbamylase"/>
<link wikidata="Q424409" start="6642" end="6661" title="carbamoyl phosphate" label="carbamoyl phosphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q410198" start="6666" end="6675" title="ornithine" label="ornithine"/>
<link wikidata="Q408641" start="6681" end="6691" title="citrulline" label="citrulline"/>
<link wikidata="Q306140" start="6915" end="6930" title="Alpha-Ketoglutaric acid" label="α-Ketoglutarate"/>
<link wikidata="Q408658" start="6935" end="6947" title="oxaloacetate" label="oxaloacetate"/>
<link wikidata="Q603891" start="7023" end="7037" title="transamination" label="transamination"/>
<link wikidata="Q178450" start="7108" end="7117" title="aspartate" label="aspartate"/>
<link wikidata="Q185906" start="7122" end="7132" title="asparagine" label="asparagine"/>
<link wikidata="Q181136" start="7195" end="7204" title="glutamate" label="glutamate"/>
<link wikidata="Q484583" start="7206" end="7213" title="proline" label="proline"/>
<link wikidata="Q173670" start="7219" end="7227" title="arginine" label="arginine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5018840" start="7507" end="7519" title="Calcium signaling" label="Ca2+ control"/>
<link wikidata="Q4043300" start="7588" end="7610" title="pyruvate dehydrogenase" label="pyruvate dehydrogenase"/>
<link wikidata="Q261968" start="7612" end="7636" title="isocitrate dehydrogenase" label="isocitrate dehydrogenase"/>
<link wikidata="Q309518" start="7642" end="7671" title="α-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase" label="α-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase"/>
<link wikidata="Q486104" start="7839" end="7850" title="Anaplerotic reactions" label="anaplerotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q427492" start="7896" end="7905" title="Enzyme inhibitor" label="inhibitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q306140" start="7910" end="7925" title="Alpha-Ketoglutaric acid" label="α-ketoglutarate"/>
<link wikidata="Q261968" start="7927" end="7951" title="isocitrate dehydrogenase" label="isocitrate dehydrogenase"/>
<link wikidata="Q21132608" start="7953" end="7969" title="citrate synthase" label="citrate synthase"/>
<link wikidata="Q412856" start="7975" end="7998" title="Pyruvate dehydrogenase complex" label="pyruvate dehydrogenase."/>
<link wikidata="Q422816" start="8369" end="8378" title="Enzyme activator" label="activator"/>
<link wikidata="Q3408228" start="8632" end="8649" title="ribosomal protein" label="ribosomal protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q215980" start="8652" end="8665" title="ribosomal RNA" label="ribosomal RNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q201448" start="8667" end="8679" title="transfer RNA" label="transfer RNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q899781" start="8685" end="8700" title="protein subunit" label="protein subunit"/>
<link wikidata="Q420927" start="8715" end="8732" title="Multiprotein complex" label="protein complexes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060013" start="8782" end="8798" title="Matrix (biology)" label="Matrix (biology)"/>
<link wikidata="Q27075" start="8801" end="8818" title="Mitochondrial DNA" label="Mitochondrial DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q39572" start="8821" end="8834" title="Mitochondrion" label="Mitochondrion"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1329366" wikidata="Q210401" url="?curid=1329366" title="Here Comes the Sun">
<text>&quot;Here Comes the Sun&quot; is a song by the English rock band the Beatles from their 1969 album &quot;Abbey Road&quot;. It was written and sung by George Harrison, and is one of his best-known compositions. Harrison wrote the song in early 1969 at the country house of his friend Eric Clapton, where Harrison had chosen to play truant for the day to avoid attending a meeting at the Beatles&#x27; Apple Corps organisation. The lyrics reflect his relief at the arrival of spring and the temporary respite he was experiencing from the band&#x27;s business affairs.

The Beatles recorded &quot;Here Comes the Sun&quot; at London&#x27;s EMI Studios in July and August of 1969. Led by Harrison&#x27;s acoustic guitar, the track features a Moog synthesiser, which he had introduced to the band&#x27;s sound after acquiring an early model of the instrument in California. Reflecting the continued influence of Indian classical music on Harrison&#x27;s writing, the composition includes several time signature changes.

&quot;Here Comes the Sun&quot; has received acclaim from music critics. Combined with his other contribution to &quot;Abbey Road&quot;, &quot;Something&quot;, it gained for Harrison the level of recognition as a songwriter previously reserved for his bandmates John Lennon and Paul McCartney. &quot;Here Comes the Sun&quot; was the track used to promote the 50th anniversary reissue of &quot;Abbey Road&quot; in 2019. It peaked at number 3 on the US &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot Rock Songs chart at that time and has since been certified triple platinum for UK sales since 2010. As of 2024, it is the most streamed Beatles song on Spotify globally.

Harrison played the song during many of his relatively rare live performances as a solo artist, including at the Concert for Bangladesh in 1971 with accompaniment by Pete Ham, and as a duet with Paul Simon during his appearance on &quot;Saturday Night Live&quot; in 1976. Richie Havens and Steve Harley &amp; Cockney Rebel each had hit singles with &quot;Here Comes the Sun&quot; in the 1970s. Nina Simone, George Benson, Booker T. &amp; the M.G.&#x27;s, Peter Tosh and Joe Brown are among the many other artists who have covered the song.
==Background and inspiration==

The early months of 1969 were a difficult period for Harrison: he had quit the Beatles temporarily, he was arrested for marijuana possession, and he had his tonsils removed. Writing in &quot;Oz&quot; magazine at the end of the year, Barry Miles commented on the &quot;isolated life&quot; of the individual Beatles, with &quot;George strangely upset by his bust, uncertain about his friends but singing &quot;Hare Krishna&quot;.&quot;

Harrison wrote &quot;Here Comes the Sun&quot; at the house of his friend Eric Clapton, in response to the dark mood surrounding the Beatles. Harrison states in his autobiography, &quot;I, Me, Mine&quot;:

Recalling the song&#x27;s creation in Martin Scorsese&#x27;s 2011 documentary &quot;George Harrison: Living in the Material World&quot;, Clapton said that he himself would never walk around outside playing guitar but &quot;this is what George brought to the situation.&quot; Clapton added: &quot;He was just a magical guy and he would show up, get out of the car with his guitar and come in and start playing... I just watched this thing come to life. I felt very proud that it was my garden that was inspiring it.&quot; 

Clapton&#x27;s house at the time was Hurtwood Edge, in Ewhurst, Surrey, and he later said the month was possibly April. Data from two meteorological stations in the London area show that April 1969 set a record for sunlight hours for the 1960s. The Greenwich station recorded 189 hours for April, a high that was not beaten until 1984. The Greenwich data also show that February and March were much colder than the norm for the 1960s, which would account for Harrison&#x27;s reference to a &quot;long, cold, lonely winter&quot;.

In his 1969 interview with reporter David Wigg for the BBC Radio 1 series &quot;Scene and Heard&quot;, subsequently included on the 1976 album &quot;The Beatles Tapes&quot;, Harrison recalled that, due to the many business meetings, he had not played guitar for a couple of weeks, &quot;And the first thing that came out was that song.&quot; He completed the song&#x27;s lyrics in June, while on holiday in Sardinia.

==Composition==
&quot;Here Comes the Sun&quot; is in the key of A major. The main refrain uses a IV (D chord) to V-of-V (B chord–a secondary dominant) progression (the reverse of that used in &quot;Eight Days a Week&quot; and &quot;Sgt. Pepper&#x27;s Lonely Hearts Club Band&quot;).&lt;ref name=&quot;Pollack/Notes&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; The melody in the verse and refrain follows the pentatonic scale from E up to C (scale steps 5, 6, 1, 2, 3).

One feature is the increasing syncopation in the vocal parts. Another feature is the guitar flat-picking that embellishes the E7 (V7) chord from 2:03 to 2:11, creating tension for resolution on the tonic A chord at &quot;Little darlin&#x27; &quot;. The bridge involves a III-VII-IV-I-V7 triple descending 4th (or Tri-Plagal) progression (with an extra V7) as the vocals move from &quot;Sun&quot; (III or C chord) to &quot;sun&quot; (VII or G chord) to &quot;sun&quot; (IV or D chord) to &quot;comes&quot; (I or A chord) and the additional 4th descent to a V7 (E7) chord. In musicologist Walter Everett&#x27;s view, the lyrics over the bridge (&quot;Sun, sun, sun, here it comes&quot;) take &quot;on the quality of a meditator&#x27;s mantra&quot;.

The song features 4/4 (in the verse) and a sequence of 11/8 + 4/4 + 7/8 (which can also be transcribed as 11/8 + 15/8) in the bridge, phrasing interludes that Harrison drew from Indian music influences. In the second verse (0:59–1:13), the Moog synthesiser doubles the solo guitar line and in the third verse the Moog adds a counter melody an octave above. The last four bars (2:54–3:04) juxtapose the guitar break with a repeat of the bridge.

The lyric&#x27;s affirmation of life through the natural occurrence of the sun was in keeping with a contemporary trend, following examples such as &quot;Good Morning Starshine&quot; and &quot;Aquarius/Let the Sunshine In&quot; from the popular musical &quot;Hair&quot;. Former &quot;Catholic Herald&quot; editor William Oddie wrote that the song conveys an &quot;almost Chestertonian gratitude for the beauty of creation&quot;.

==Recording==
Harrison, Paul McCartney and Ringo Starr recorded the rhythm track at EMI Studios (now known as Abbey Road Studios) in 13 takes on 7 July 1969. John Lennon did not contribute to the song, as he was recovering from a car crash. Towards the end of the session, Harrison spent an hour re-recording his acoustic guitar part. He capoed his guitar on the 7th fret, resulting in the final key of A major, which was then varispeeded less than a semitone higher. He had also used the same technique on his 1965 song &quot;If I Needed Someone&quot;, which shares a similar melodic pattern. The following day he taped his lead vocals, and he and McCartney recorded their backing vocals twice to give a fuller sound.
A harmonium and handclaps were added on 16 July. Harrison overdubbed an electric guitar run through a Leslie speaker on 6 August, and the orchestral parts (George Martin&#x27;s score for four violas, four cellos, double bass, two piccolos, two flutes, two alto flutes and two clarinets) were added on 15 August. He also added further acoustic guitar during the 6 and 11 August sessions. The master tapes reveal that Harrison recorded a guitar solo in the bridge which was not included in the final mix.

&quot;Here Comes the Sun&quot; was completed on 19 August with the addition of a Moog synthesiser part. After Harrison had used the Moog on his recent experimental album, &quot;Electronic Sound&quot;, the instrument had been installed at EMI Studios in August, with assistance from Mike Vickers of the band Manfred Mann, and became an important addition to the sound of the Beatles&#x27; final recording project. In the description of authors Trevor Pinch and Frank Trocco, writing in their book on the history and legacy of the Moog synthesiser, Harrison uses it throughout &quot;Here Comes the Sun&quot;, and the instrument&#x27;s &quot;increasing brilliance of timbre&quot; on the track serves to convey &quot;the sun&#x27;s increasing brilliance&quot;.

The mixing session on 20 August 1969, when the band oversaw the creation of the master tape for &quot;Abbey Road&quot;, marked the last time that all four Beatles were together in the recording studio. At this point, &quot;Here Comes the Sun&quot; was sequenced as the album&#x27;s opening song.
==Release==
&quot;Abbey Road&quot; was released on 26 September 1969 with &quot;Here Comes the Sun&quot; sequenced as the first track on side two of the LP. Along with &quot;Something&quot;, which was issued as a single from the album, the song established Harrison as a composer to match Lennon and McCartney. According to author Alan Clayson, Harrison&#x27;s two &quot;Abbey Road&quot; compositions received &quot;the most widespread syndication&quot; of all the tracks on the album, partly through the number of cover versions they attracted.

In his October 1969 interview with Harrison, Wigg suggested that &quot;Here Comes the Sun&quot; was the &quot;more obvious&quot; choice for a single. He also remarked on the attention afforded Harrison&#x27;s new songs in light of the longstanding dominance of the Lennon–McCartney partnership and expressed surprise at Harrison&#x27;s ascendancy. Harrison replied that &quot;Here Comes the Sun&quot; and &quot;Something&quot; were &quot;maybe a bit more commercial&quot; than his four compositions on the Beatles&#x27; 1968 self-titled double album, but &quot;not much better&quot; as songs.

In Japan, &quot;Here Comes the Sun&quot; was issued on a single in 1970, as the B-side to McCartney&#x27;s &quot;Abbey Road&quot; track &quot;Oh! Darling&quot;. In 1973, &quot;Here Comes the Sun&quot; and &quot;Something&quot; were included on the double album &quot;The Beatles 1967–1970&quot;, giving Harrison half the quota of songs representing &quot;Abbey Road&quot; on the compilation. In 1994, when BMI published its US radio airplay figures, &quot;Here Comes the Sun&quot; was listed as having been played more than 2 million times.

After the Beatles&#x27; catalogue becoming available for download on iTunes, &quot;Here Comes the Sun&quot; charted at number 64 on the UK Singles Chart in November 2010. It returned to the chart in April 2012, peaking at number 58.&lt;ref name=&quot;OCC/BeatlesSingles&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; The song reached number 14 on the US &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot Rock Songs chart in 2017. Two years later, it re-entered the list and became the Beatles&#x27; first top-ten hit on the Hot Rock Songs chart.

As of late September 2019, it was the most streamed Beatles song in the UK, with over 53 million plays, ahead of &quot;Let It Be&quot; on 26 million,&lt;ref name=&quot;Copsey/OCC&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; and the most streamed Beatles song on Spotify globally, with over 350 million plays.&lt;ref name=&quot;Beech/Forbes&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; Up to that time, it was also the most downloaded song from &quot;Abbey Road&quot;.&lt;ref name=&quot;Myers/OCC&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; Official Charts Company writer Rob Copsey describes the track as a &quot;staple of any summer playlist&quot;. As of August 2021, &quot;Here Comes the Sun&quot; was still the band&#x27;s most streamed song on Spotify, with more than 700 million plays.&lt;ref name=&quot;Light/Esquire&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; In May 2023, it became the Beatles&#x27; first song to surpass one billion plays on the platform, and the first song from the 1960s to achieve the milestone.

==Critical reception==
In the context of the late 1960s, according to cultural commentator Steven D. Stark, the song&#x27;s &quot;promise of a new dawn after a lonely winter caught the wearied sensibility of the counterculture&quot;. In her review of &quot;Abbey Road&quot; for &quot;Saturday Review&quot; magazine, Ellen Sander said that &quot;Here Comes the Sun&quot; was &quot;an awakening, an exaltation of the dawn&quot; and the start of a run of songs that represented &quot;the [LP&#x27;s] sun side, suffused with mellowed warmth, woven together with motifs, bridging, reprises, surprises, with all the songs set within one another&quot;. &quot;Time&quot; magazine described it as a &quot;dawn-flecked prelude&quot; to the side-two medley, which the reviewer deemed &quot;a kind of odyssey from innocence to experience&quot;, and said that Harrison had &quot;achieve[d] a new confidence in his own musical personality&quot; on &quot;Abbey Road&quot;. Lon Goddard of &quot;Record Mirror&quot; described &quot;Here Comes the Sun&quot; as his &quot;pet track&quot;, adding: &quot;Nice string picking backs it as the vocals approach Beach Boys or Vanity Fare. Excellent melody creates one of the best atmospheres present on the record.&quot;

Writing for &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; in 2002, Mikal Gilmore likened the song to the McCartney-written &quot;Let It Be&quot; and Lennon&#x27;s solo hit &quot;Imagine&quot;, as Harrison&#x27;s &quot;graceful anthem of hope amid difficult realities&quot;. In the same publication, Greg Kot described it as &quot;simpler, but just as intoxicating [as &#x27;Something&#x27;]&quot; and said that &quot;Harrison&#x27;s acoustic-guitar intro is a song in itself, its warmth and fragility presaging the guarded optimism of the lyric.&quot; While expressing regret at having underestimated Harrison as a songwriter, Martin described &quot;Here Comes the Sun&quot; as being &quot;in some ways one of the best songs ever written&quot;. Harrison was one of the first musicians in the UK to own a Moog synthesiser; although the instrument had been used by many American acts since 1967, author Thom Holmes says that with &quot;Abbey Road&quot; the Beatles were &quot;one of the first groups to effectively integrate the sounds of the Moog into their music&quot;. Pinch and Trocco describe &quot;Here Comes the Sun&quot; as &quot;one of the best known Beatles songs ever&quot; and the album&#x27;s &quot;Moog &quot;pièce de résistance&quot;&quot;.

&quot;Here Comes the Sun&quot; has appeared in critics&#x27; lists of the Beatles&#x27; best recordings. Among these, the &quot;NME&quot; placed it at number 4 in the magazine&#x27;s 2015 list of &quot;the 100 Greatest Beatles Songs&quot;. In a similar poll compiled by &quot;Mojo&quot; in 2006, where the song appeared at number 21, Danny Eccleston described it as &quot;perhaps the best song – outside &#x27;Jerusalem&#x27; – that religion can claim credit for&quot;, adding: &quot;Those who professed surprise at Harrison&#x27;s immediate elevation to Most Successful Solo Beatle status [in 1970] clearly weren&#x27;t listening to this.&quot;&lt;ref name=&quot;Mojo/101 Greatest&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; &quot;Here Comes the Sun&quot; appeared at number 28 on &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; 2010 list, where the editors commented that together with &quot;Something&quot;, &quot;it gave notice that the Beatles now had three formidable composers.&quot;

==Further releases and Harrison live performances==
In August 1971, Harrison performed &quot;Here Comes the Sun&quot; at the Concert for Bangladesh, accompanied by Pete Ham of the Apple group Badfinger. Among reviews of the &quot;Concert for Bangladesh&quot; live album, Ed Kelleher of &quot;Circus&quot; described the rendition as &quot;outstanding&quot;, while &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; Jon Landau cited it as the best example of Harrison&#x27;s &quot;capacity for pacing and timing&quot; in his organisation of the show, as the low-key performance provided an effective change of mood after Leon Russell&#x27;s songs and before Bob Dylan&#x27;s arrival on stage.

Harrison played the song during his appearance on &quot;Saturday Night Live&quot; in November 1976, as a duet with Paul Simon. That same month, Harrison was displeased that EMI included &quot;Here Comes the Sun&quot; and six of his other Beatles songs on the compilation album &quot;The Best of George Harrison&quot;. Since Harrison had signed with Warner Bros. Records, EMI timed the compilation&#x27;s release to steal sales from his first album for Warner&#x27;s, &quot;Thirty Three &amp; 1/3&quot;. Harrison performed the song, backed by a band that included Starr, Jeff Lynne and Elton John, during his brief set at the 1987 Prince&#x27;s Trust Concerts in London; these shows were Harrison&#x27;s first in the UK since 1966, aside from his semi-anonymous supporting role on Delaney &amp; Bonnie&#x27;s 1969 tour with Clapton. A live version from his 1991 Japanese tour with Clapton appeared on Harrison&#x27;s &quot;Live in Japan&quot; double album.

&quot;Here Comes the Sun&quot; was included on the Beatles&#x27; 2006 remix album &quot;Love&quot;,&lt;ref name=&quot;Willman/EW&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; which was created for the Cirque du Soleil stage show of the same name. This version of the track, created by Martin and his son Giles, incorporates elements from two of Harrison&#x27;s Indian-style songs with the Beatles. It begins with the tabla part from &quot;Within You Without You&quot; and ends by segueing into a transition piece featuring Indian instrumentation from &quot;The Inner Light&quot;.

In September 2019, &quot;Here Comes the Sun&quot; was the track used to promote the fiftieth anniversary reissue of &quot;Abbey Road&quot;. For this purpose, a music video was produced to accompany Giles Martin&#x27;s new stereo remix of the song. Directed by Alasdair Brotherston and Jock Mooney of Trunk Animation, the video includes photographs of the individual Beatles by Linda McCartney, animated to float through EMI Studios, and pictures taken from their final photo session at Lennon&#x27;s Tittenhurst Park estate in 1969.

==Cultural references and legacy==
In the early 1970s, &quot;Here Comes the Sun&quot; was adopted by George McGovern in his campaign for the US presidency. The initial success of the campaign, according to author Nicholas Schaffner, was a &quot;triumph for the counterculture&#x27;s attempt to wield power via conventional electoral politics&quot;.

In 1977, astronomer and science populariser Carl Sagan attempted to have &quot;Here Comes the Sun&quot; included on a disc of music accompanying the &quot;Voyager&quot; space mission.&lt;ref name=&quot;Fontenot/About&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; Titled the Voyager Golden Record, copies of the disc were put on board both spacecraft in the Voyager program in order to provide any entity that recovered them with a representative sample of human civilization. Writing in his book &quot;Murmurs of Earth&quot;, Sagan recalls that the Beatles favoured the idea, but &quot;[they] did not own the copyright, and the legal status of the piece seemed too murky to risk.&quot; Due to EMI&#x27;s intervention, when the probes were launched in 1977, the song was not included.

In 1979, Harrison released &quot;Here Comes the Moon&quot; as a lyrical successor to the song. Some critics disapproved of his apparent reworking of such a popular Beatles song. Harrison said he expected this scrutiny but other songwriters had had &quot;ten years to write &#x27;Here Comes the Moon&#x27; after &#x27;Here Comes the Sun&#x27;, but nobody else wrote it, [so] I might as well do it meself&quot;.

On the day after Harrison&#x27;s death in November 2001, fans sang &quot;Here Comes the Sun&quot; at a gathering in Strawberry Fields in New York&#x27;s Central Park. In 2004, Mike Love of the Beach Boys wrote &quot;Pisces Brothers&quot; as a tribute to Harrison and their shared experiences in India,&lt;ref name=&quot;Newman/RS&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; and referenced the song in his closing line &quot;Little darlin&#x27;, here comes the sun&quot;. Love released &quot;Pisces Brothers&quot; in February 2014, to commemorate what would have been Harrison&#x27;s 71st birthday, before including the track on his 2017 album &quot;Unleash the Love&quot;.

In August 2012, the Beatles&#x27; recording was played as part of the closing ceremony of the London Olympic Games. The performance was accompanied by sixteen dhol drummers and, in sociologist Rodanthi Tzanelli&#x27;s description, given the struggles that inspired Harrison to write the song, it suitably conveyed the leisure and labour themes of Olympic competition.

In July 2016, &quot;Here Comes the Sun&quot; was played as the entrance music for Ivanka Trump at the Republican National Convention. The George Harrison estate complained about the song being used to support Donald Trump&#x27;s presidential campaign, saying it was &quot;offensive&quot; and contrary to their wishes. The Harrison family later tweeted: &quot;If it had been Beware of Darkness, then we MAY have approved it! #TrumpYourself.&quot; That same year, British novelist David Mitchell quoted the lyrics to &quot;Here Comes the Sun&quot; in &quot;From Me Flows What You Call Time&quot;, a novella that will remain unpublished until 2114. Mitchell said he included the lyrics because the song is expected to be out of copyright by that time.

Writing for &quot;Esquire&quot; in August 2021, Alan Light cited the track&#x27;s continued standing as the Beatles&#x27; most-streamed song on Spotify, along with the reverence afforded Harrison&#x27;s 1970 solo album &quot;All Things Must Pass&quot;, as evidence that Harrison &quot;has emerged as Gen Z&#x27;s favorite Beatle&quot;. Tom Pinnock of &quot;Uncut&quot; similarly linked the song with &quot;All Things Must Pass&quot; to demonstrate that Harrison was possibly &quot;the best-loved Beatle in 2021&quot;. Pinnock added, &quot;Musically... he seems to make sense in our anxious times: the most played Beatles song on streaming services, by a country mile, is Here Comes The Sun.&quot;

==Cover versions==
===Richie Havens, Nina Simone and other artists from the early 1970s===

&quot;Here Comes the Sun&quot; has been recorded by many artists,&lt;ref name=&quot;Unterberger/AM&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; with the first cover versions appearing soon after the release of &quot;Abbey Road&quot;. In 1970, Booker T. &amp; the M.G.&#x27;s included the song, arranged as a jazz piece with a Moog intro, on their &quot;Abbey Road&quot; tribute album, &quot;McLemore Avenue&quot;, as did George Benson on his album &quot;The Other Side of Abbey Road&quot;. A recording was issued as a single in 1970 by English singer Paul Gadd, who later became the glam rock star Gary Glitter.

In May 1971 Richie Havens&#x27; version of the song peaked at number 16 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100 in the US,&lt;ref name=&quot;Havens/Billboard&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; giving him the highest-charting single of his entire career. Following the singer&#x27;s death in 2013, Wook Kim of &quot;Time&quot; described the track as a &quot;wonderful mid-tempo interpretation&quot; and included it among Havens&#x27; six &quot;essential performances&quot;. Among the other most notable covers, according to music critic Richie Unterberger, Nina Simone recorded &quot;Here Comes the Sun&quot; as the title track to her 1971 covers album.

Peter Tosh recorded the song in support of Michael Manley&#x27;s campaign in the 1972 Jamaican general election. Tosh biographer John Masouri writes that, given the singer&#x27;s frustrations with his Wailers bandmate Bob Marley, Tosh may have identified with Harrison&#x27;s plight in the Beatles. Jon Dennis of &quot;The Guardian&quot; includes a 1972 recording by Charles Wright – the former leader of the soul/funk Watts 103rd Street Rhythm Band – as one of the ten best cover versions of any Beatles song.
===Steve Harley &amp; Cockney Rebel===
In 1976, &quot;Here Comes the Sun&quot; was covered by the British rock band Steve Harley &amp; Cockney Rebel, and released as the lead single from their fifth studio album, &quot;Love&#x27;s a Prima Donna&quot;. It was the first cover version that the band had chosen to record. The song peaked at number 10 on the UK Singles Chart,&lt;ref name=&quot;Harley/OCC&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; number 7 in Ireland,&lt;ref name=&quot;Harley/IR&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; and number 21 in the Netherlands.&lt;ref name=&quot;Harley/NL&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;

The single&#x27;s success coincided with an unusually hot British summer and a wave of nostalgia for the Beatles, as EMI was contractually free to promote and repackage their music without the former band members&#x27; agreement. &quot;Here Comes the Sun&quot; was Steve Harley &amp; Cockney Rebel&#x27;s last UK top 40 hit.

===Other artists===

Sandy Farina covered &quot;Here Comes the Sun&quot; on the George Martin-produced soundtrack to the 1978 film &quot;Sgt. Pepper&#x27;s Lonely Hearts Club Band&quot;. Cover versions have also appeared in feature films such as &quot;The Parent Trap&quot; – which includes a scene referencing the &quot;Abbey Road&quot; sleeve photo – &quot;I Am Sam&quot;, &quot;Bee Movie&quot; and &quot;Imagine That&quot;.

On 29 November 2002, Joe Brown performed the song at the Concert for George tribute, which was organised by Clapton and held at the Royal Albert Hall in London. Brown&#x27;s performance was included on the &quot;Concert for George&quot; live album and in David Leland&#x27;s concert film from the event. In her review of the live album, Helen Wright of &quot;musicOMH&quot; deemed the combination of Brown and &quot;Here Comes the Sun&quot; &quot;an unlikely but triumphant pairing&quot;.

Further to their 1976 duet on &quot;SNL&quot;, Paul Simon has often performed &quot;Here Comes the Sun&quot; in concert,&lt;ref name=&quot;Strecker/BB&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; as a tribute to Harrison. In September 2014, Simon played it live on the TBS television show &quot;Conan&quot; as part of the show&#x27;s &quot;George Harrison Week&quot; initiative. He also played it, accompanied by David Crosby and Graham Nash, at the 25th Anniversary Rock and Roll Hall of Fame Concerts in October 2009. Described by Christel Loar of &quot;PopMatters&quot; as &quot;truly lovely&quot;, their version was later issued on DVD, Blu-ray and CD releases from the event.

In 2021, Jon Bon Jovi performed an acoustic rendition of &quot;Here Comes the Sun&quot; as part of the &quot;Celebrating America&quot; special during the inauguration of President Joe Biden.

==Personnel==
According to Ian MacDonald, the line-up on the Beatles&#x27; recording was as follows:

The Beatles
* George Harrison – lead and backing vocals, acoustic and electric guitars, harmonium, Moog synthesiser, handclaps
* Paul McCartney – backing vocals, bass, handclaps
* Ringo Starr – drums, handclaps

Additional musicians
* Uncredited – four violas, four cellos, double bass, two piccolos, two flutes, two alto flutes, two clarinets
* George Martin – orchestral arrangement and conducting

==Charts and certifications==

===Beatles recording===
====Weekly charts====
====Certifications====



===Richie Havens version===
===Steve Harley version===
==Notes==
==References==
==Sources==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


==External links==

* Full lyrics for the song at the Beatles&#x27; official website </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q210401" start="6" end="24" title="Here Comes the Sun" label="Here Comes the Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="66" end="77" title="the Beatles" label="the Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q173643" start="106" end="116" title="Abbey Road" label="Abbey Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q2643" start="151" end="166" title="George Harrison" label="George Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q48187" start="284" end="296" title="Eric Clapton" label="Eric Clapton"/>
<link wikidata="Q621231" start="401" end="412" title="Apple Corps" label="Apple Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q209651" start="637" end="648" title="EMI Studios" label="EMI Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q426035" start="738" end="754" title="Moog synthesiser" label="Moog synthesiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323698" start="907" end="929" title="Indian classical music" label="Indian classical music"/>
<link wikidata="Q155234" start="991" end="1005" title="time signature" label="time signature"/>
<link wikidata="Q210485" start="1158" end="1167" title="Something (Beatles song)" label="Something"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203" start="1277" end="1288" title="John Lennon" label="John Lennon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599" start="1293" end="1307" title="Paul McCartney" label="Paul McCartney"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1374" end="1398" title="Abbey Road: 50th Anniversary Edition" label="50th anniversary reissue"/>
<link wikidata="Q57516551" start="1466" end="1502" title="Hot Rock Songs" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Hot Rock Songs"/>
<link wikidata="Q220499" start="1619" end="1627" title="Streaming media" label="streamed"/>
<link wikidata="Q27661711" start="1644" end="1651" title="List of most streamed songs on Spotify" label="Spotify"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164558" start="1772" end="1798" title="the Concert for Bangladesh" label="the Concert for Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493339" start="1829" end="1837" title="Pete Ham" label="Pete Ham"/>
<link wikidata="Q4028" start="1858" end="1868" title="Paul Simon" label="Paul Simon"/>
<link wikidata="Q13979" start="1900" end="1919" title="Saturday Night Live" label="Saturday Night Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q505285" start="1935" end="1948" title="Richie Havens" label="Richie Havens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431236" start="1953" end="1985" title="Steve Harley &amp;amp; Cockney Rebel" label="Steve Harley &amp;amp; Cockney Rebel"/>
<link wikidata="Q174957" start="2057" end="2068" title="Nina Simone" label="Nina Simone"/>
<link wikidata="Q348459" start="2070" end="2083" title="George Benson" label="George Benson"/>
<link wikidata="Q893007" start="2085" end="2116" title="Booker T. &amp;amp; the M.G.&amp;#x27;s" label="Booker T. &amp;amp; the M.G.&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q273049" start="2118" end="2128" title="Peter Tosh" label="Peter Tosh"/>
<link wikidata="Q324588" start="2133" end="2142" title="Joe Brown (singer)" label="Joe Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="2310" end="2321" title="the Beatles" label="the Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2845" start="2355" end="2364" title="cannabis (drug)" label="marijuana"/>
<link wikidata="Q170381" start="2392" end="2407" title="tonsillectomy" label="tonsils removed"/>
<link wikidata="Q3359194" start="2426" end="2428" title="Oz (magazine)" label="Oz"/>
<link wikidata="Q809078" start="2468" end="2479" title="Barry Miles" label="Barry Miles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321147" start="2643" end="2655" title="Hare Krishna (mantra)" label="Hare Krishna"/>
<link wikidata="Q48187" start="2743" end="2755" title="Eric Clapton" label="Eric Clapton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5967452" start="2855" end="2866" title="I, Me, Mine" label="I, Me, Mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q41148" start="2913" end="2928" title="Martin Scorsese" label="Martin Scorsese"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2959" end="3004" title="George Harrison: Living in the Material World" label="George Harrison: Living in the Material World"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419030" start="3453" end="3468" title="Ewhurst, Surrey" label="Ewhurst, Surrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q795585" start="3983" end="3994" title="BBC Radio 1" label="BBC Radio 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q7716131" start="4077" end="4094" title="The Beatles Tapes from the David Wigg Interviews" label="The Beatles Tapes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462" start="4335" end="4343" title="Sardinia" label="Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q534932" start="4403" end="4406" title="Key (music)" label="key"/>
<link wikidata="Q277793" start="4410" end="4417" title="A major" label="A major"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411564" start="4477" end="4495" title="secondary dominant" label="secondary dominant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1303515" start="4544" end="4561" title="Eight Days a Week" label="Eight Days a Week"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326986" start="4578" end="4620" title="Sgt. Pepper&amp;#x27;s Lonely Hearts Club Band (song)" label="Sgt. Pepper&amp;#x27;s Lonely Hearts Club Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q191345" start="4731" end="4747" title="pentatonic scale" label="pentatonic scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q319526" start="4823" end="4834" title="syncopation" label="syncopation"/>
<link wikidata="Q463342" start="4885" end="4897" title="Flatpicking" label="flat-picking"/>
<link wikidata="Q16210942" start="5380" end="5394" title="Walter Everett (musicologist)" label="Walter Everett"/>
<link wikidata="Q131510" start="5526" end="5532" title="mantra" label="mantra"/>
<link wikidata="Q426035" start="5781" end="5797" title="Moog synthesiser" label="Moog synthesiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q5582793" start="6140" end="6162" title="Good Morning Starshine" label="Good Morning Starshine"/>
<link wikidata="Q623177" start="6179" end="6207" title="Aquarius/Let the Sunshine In" label="Aquarius/Let the Sunshine In"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165499" start="6245" end="6249" title="Hair (musical)" label="Hair"/>
<link wikidata="Q633906" start="6270" end="6285" title="Catholic Herald" label="Catholic Herald"/>
<link wikidata="Q183167" start="6357" end="6370" title="G. K. Chesterton" label="Chestertonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599" start="6440" end="6454" title="Paul McCartney" label="Paul McCartney"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632" start="6459" end="6470" title="Ringo Starr" label="Ringo Starr"/>
<link wikidata="Q209651" start="6526" end="6544" title="Abbey Road Studios" label="Abbey Road Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203" start="6574" end="6585" title="John Lennon" label="John Lennon"/>
<link wikidata="Q177792" start="6754" end="6758" title="Capo (musical device)" label="capo"/>
<link wikidata="Q636309" start="6783" end="6787" title="fret" label="fret"/>
<link wikidata="Q2027065" start="6843" end="6852" title="varispeed" label="varispeed"/>
<link wikidata="Q738785" start="6867" end="6875" title="semitone" label="semitone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269445" start="6943" end="6962" title="If I Needed Someone" label="If I Needed Someone"/>
<link wikidata="Q12460259" start="7137" end="7146" title="Pump organ" label="harmonium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322478" start="7151" end="7160" title="Clapping" label="handclaps"/>
<link wikidata="Q78987" start="7207" end="7222" title="electric guitar" label="electric guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1820781" start="7237" end="7251" title="Leslie speaker" label="Leslie speaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q191819" start="7291" end="7304" title="George Martin" label="George Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q426035" start="7720" end="7736" title="Moog synthesiser" label="Moog synthesiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q988681" start="7816" end="7832" title="Electronic Sound" label="Electronic Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q6849166" start="7921" end="7933" title="Mike Vickers" label="Mike Vickers"/>
<link wikidata="Q319265" start="7946" end="7958" title="Manfred Mann" label="Manfred Mann"/>
<link wikidata="Q3538596" start="8082" end="8094" title="Trevor Pinch" label="Trevor Pinch"/>
<link wikidata="Q173643" start="8499" end="8509" title="Abbey Road" label="Abbey Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q4706381" start="9024" end="9036" title="Alan Clayson" label="Alan Clayson"/>
<link wikidata="Q239177" start="9505" end="9521" title="Lennon–McCartney" label="Lennon–McCartney"/>
<link wikidata="Q3295515" start="9765" end="9789" title="The Beatles (album)" label="self-titled double album"/>
<link wikidata="Q215233" start="9914" end="9920" title="B-side" label="B-side"/>
<link wikidata="Q210399" start="9976" end="9987" title="Oh! Darling" label="Oh! Darling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1950377" start="10101" end="10122" title="The Beatles 1967–1970" label="The Beatles 1967–1970"/>
<link wikidata="Q891885" start="10240" end="10243" title="Broadcast Music, Inc." label="BMI"/>
<link wikidata="Q9589" start="10445" end="10451" title="iTunes" label="iTunes"/>
<link wikidata="Q193259" start="10512" end="10528" title="UK Singles Chart" label="UK Singles Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q57516551" start="10705" end="10741" title="Hot Rock Songs" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Hot Rock Songs"/>
<link wikidata="Q220499" start="10917" end="10925" title="Streaming media" label="streamed"/>
<link wikidata="Q184259" start="10993" end="11002" title="Let It Be (song)" label="Let It Be"/>
<link wikidata="Q27661711" start="11113" end="11120" title="List of most-streamed songs on Spotify" label="Spotify"/>
<link wikidata="Q2072376" start="11346" end="11369" title="Official Charts Company" label="Official Charts Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q50614210" start="11901" end="11916" title="Steven D. Stark" label="Steven D. Stark"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995893" start="12022" end="12036" title="Counterculture of the 1960s" label="counterculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q15846515" start="12094" end="12109" title="Saturday Review (U.S. magazine)" label="Saturday Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="12462" end="12466" title="Time (magazine)" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12540" end="12555" title="Abbey Road#Medley" label="side-two medley"/>
<link wikidata="Q844480" start="12789" end="12802" title="Record Mirror" label="Record Mirror"/>
<link wikidata="Q183048" start="12946" end="12956" title="The Beach Boys" label="Beach Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q626398" start="12960" end="12971" title="Vanity Fare" label="Vanity Fare"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="13074" end="13087" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q6845669" start="13103" end="13116" title="Mikal Gilmore" label="Mikal Gilmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1971" start="13214" end="13221" title="Imagine (John Lennon song)" label="Imagine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028115" start="13335" end="13343" title="Greg Kot" label="Greg Kot"/>
<link wikidata="Q192632" start="14419" end="14422" title="NME" label="NME"/>
<link wikidata="Q261633" start="14567" end="14571" title="Mojo (magazine)" label="Mojo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14701" end="14710" title="And did those feet in ancient time#Parry&amp;#x27;s setting of &amp;quot;Jerusalem&amp;quot;" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164558" start="15360" end="15386" title="the Concert for Bangladesh" label="the Concert for Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493339" start="15403" end="15411" title="Pete Ham" label="Pete Ham"/>
<link wikidata="Q798993" start="15431" end="15440" title="Badfinger" label="Badfinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q11704384" start="15469" end="15491" title="The Concert for Bangladesh (album)" label="Concert for Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q867562" start="15531" end="15537" title="Circus (magazine)" label="Circus"/>
<link wikidata="Q522288" start="15628" end="15638" title="Jon Landau" label="Jon Landau"/>
<link wikidata="Q319374" start="15833" end="15845" title="Leon Russell" label="Leon Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q392" start="15870" end="15879" title="Bob Dylan" label="Bob Dylan"/>
<link wikidata="Q13979" start="15962" end="15981" title="Saturday Night Live" label="Saturday Night Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q4028" start="16021" end="16031" title="Paul Simon" label="Paul Simon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283159" start="16189" end="16216" title="The Best of George Harrison" label="The Best of George Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q67030918" start="16255" end="16275" title="Warner Bros. Records" label="Warner Bros. Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930164" start="16379" end="16401" title="Thirty Three &amp;amp; 1/3" label="Thirty Three &amp;amp; 1/3"/>
<link wikidata="Q314358" start="16476" end="16486" title="Jeff Lynne" label="Jeff Lynne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2808" start="16491" end="16501" title="Elton John" label="Elton John"/>
<link wikidata="Q7758242" start="16536" end="16555" title="Prince&amp;#x27;s Trust" label="Prince&amp;#x27;s Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183865" start="16686" end="16706" title="Delaney &amp;amp; Bonnie" label="Delaney &amp;amp; Bonnie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1523643" start="16828" end="16841" title="Live in Japan (George Harrison album)" label="Live in Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q214272" start="16933" end="16938" title="remix" label="remix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324743" start="16951" end="16955" title="Love (Beatles album)" label="Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q504715" start="17040" end="17056" title="Cirque du Soleil" label="Cirque du Soleil"/>
<link wikidata="Q2511457" start="17057" end="17084" title="Love (Cirque du Soleil)" label="stage show of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q723009" start="17143" end="17148" title="Giles Martin" label="Giles"/>
<link wikidata="Q213100" start="17256" end="17261" title="tabla" label="tabla"/>
<link wikidata="Q541835" start="17278" end="17300" title="Within You Without You" label="Within You Without You"/>
<link wikidata="Q670989" start="17396" end="17411" title="The Inner Light (song)" label="The Inner Light"/>
<link wikidata="Q228899" start="17797" end="17812" title="Linda McCartney" label="Linda McCartney"/>
<link wikidata="Q4458348" start="17920" end="17936" title="Tittenhurst Park" label="Tittenhurst Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q331742" start="18055" end="18070" title="George McGovern" label="George McGovern"/>
<link wikidata="Q15059588" start="18167" end="18185" title="Nicholas Schaffner" label="Nicholas Schaffner"/>
<link wikidata="Q410" start="18348" end="18358" title="Carl Sagan" label="Carl Sagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q156315" start="18554" end="18575" title="Voyager Golden Record" label="Voyager Golden Record"/>
<link wikidata="Q155311" start="18637" end="18652" title="Voyager program" label="Voyager program"/>
<link wikidata="Q17632506" start="19098" end="19117" title="Here Comes the Moon" label="Here Comes the Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156980" start="19592" end="19609" title="Strawberry Fields (memorial)" label="Strawberry Fields"/>
<link wikidata="Q160409" start="19629" end="19641" title="Central Park" label="Central Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q453330" start="19652" end="19661" title="Mike Love" label="Mike Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q41638590" start="20103" end="20119" title="Unleash the Love" label="Unleash the Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q8577" start="20222" end="20242" title="2012 Summer Olympics" label="London Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207707" start="20287" end="20291" title="dhol" label="dhol"/>
<link wikidata="Q239411" start="20579" end="20591" title="Ivanka Trump" label="Ivanka Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q16156282" start="20599" end="20629" title="2016 Republican National Convention" label="Republican National Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q20121517" start="20706" end="20747" title="Donald Trump 2016 presidential campaign" label="Donald Trump&amp;#x27;s presidential campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q4899718" start="20871" end="20889" title="Beware of Darkness (song)" label="Beware of Darkness"/>
<link wikidata="Q40479" start="20976" end="20990" title="David Mitchell (author)" label="David Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q96378765" start="21052" end="21084" title="From Me Flows What You Call Time (novella)" label="From Me Flows What You Call Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q149537" start="21094" end="21101" title="novella" label="novella"/>
<link wikidata="Q762195" start="21265" end="21272" title="Esquire (magazine)" label="Esquire"/>
<link wikidata="Q4707154" start="21295" end="21305" title="Alan Light" label="Alan Light"/>
<link wikidata="Q654204" start="21472" end="21492" title="All Things Must Pass" label="All Things Must Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987589" start="21547" end="21552" title="Gen Z" label="Gen Z"/>
<link wikidata="Q795422" start="21604" end="21609" title="Uncut (magazine)" label="Uncut"/>
<link wikidata="Q893007" start="22257" end="22288" title="Booker T. &amp;amp; the M.G.&amp;#x27;s" label="Booker T. &amp;amp; the M.G.&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="22322" end="22326" title="jazz" label="jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q3303705" start="22405" end="22420" title="McLemore Avenue" label="McLemore Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q348459" start="22435" end="22448" title="George Benson" label="George Benson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3988589" start="22468" end="22496" title="The Other Side of Abbey Road" label="The Other Side of Abbey Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q76092" start="22597" end="22606" title="glam rock" label="glam rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q355384" start="22612" end="22624" title="Gary Glitter" label="Gary Glitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q505285" start="22639" end="22652" title="Richie Havens" label="Richie Havens"/>
<link wikidata="Q180072" start="22706" end="22735" title="Billboard Hot 100" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q7330590" start="23147" end="23165" title="Richie Unterberger" label="Richie Unterberger"/>
<link wikidata="Q174957" start="23167" end="23178" title="Nina Simone" label="Nina Simone"/>
<link wikidata="Q765260" start="23245" end="23262" title="Here Comes the Sun (Nina Simone album)" label="1971 covers album"/>
<link wikidata="Q273049" start="23265" end="23275" title="Peter Tosh" label="Peter Tosh"/>
<link wikidata="Q365395" start="23308" end="23322" title="Michael Manley" label="Michael Manley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3587181" start="23346" end="23376" title="1972 Jamaican general election" label="1972 Jamaican general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q15485727" start="23394" end="23406" title="John Masouri" label="John Masouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q2525354" start="23466" end="23473" title="Bob Marley and the Wailers" label="Wailers"/>
<link wikidata="Q409" start="23483" end="23493" title="Bob Marley" label="Bob Marley"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="23584" end="23596" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q65042495" start="23632" end="23646" title="Charles Wright (musician)" label="Charles Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q443266" start="23684" end="23714" title="Charles Wright &amp;amp; the Watts 103rd Street Rhythm Band" label="Watts 103rd Street Rhythm Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431236" start="23892" end="23924" title="Steve Harley &amp;amp; Cockney Rebel" label="Steve Harley &amp;amp; Cockney Rebel"/>
<link wikidata="Q16997058" start="23995" end="24020" title="Love&amp;#x27;s a Prima Donna" label="Love&amp;#x27;s a Prima Donna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056800" start="24212" end="24219" title="Irish Singles Chart" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366358" start="24292" end="24303" title="Dutch Top 40" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1287455" start="24762" end="24795" title="Sgt. Pepper&amp;#x27;s Lonely Hearts Club Band (soundtrack)" label="George Martin-produced soundtrack"/>
<link wikidata="Q2532586" start="24819" end="24861" title="Sgt. Pepper&amp;#x27;s Lonely Hearts Club Band (film)" label="Sgt. Pepper&amp;#x27;s Lonely Hearts Club Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q729782" start="24934" end="24949" title="The Parent Trap (1998 film)" label="The Parent Trap"/>
<link wikidata="Q640387" start="25041" end="25049" title="I Am Sam" label="I Am Sam"/>
<link wikidata="Q275167" start="25063" end="25072" title="Bee Movie" label="Bee Movie"/>
<link wikidata="Q228585" start="25089" end="25101" title="Imagine That (film)" label="Imagine That"/>
<link wikidata="Q324588" start="25131" end="25140" title="Joe Brown (singer)" label="Joe Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q868678" start="25167" end="25185" title="Concert for George" label="Concert for George"/>
<link wikidata="Q193639" start="25242" end="25259" title="Royal Albert Hall" label="Royal Albert Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757554" start="25322" end="25340" title="Concert for George (album)" label="Concert for George"/>
<link wikidata="Q325805" start="25365" end="25377" title="David Leland" label="David Leland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5158515" start="25385" end="25397" title="Concert for George (film)" label="concert film"/>
<link wikidata="Q1938544" start="25469" end="25477" title="musicOMH" label="musicOMH"/>
<link wikidata="Q543534" start="25846" end="25849" title="TBS (U.S. TV channel)" label="TBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q2814593" start="25872" end="25877" title="Conan (talk show)" label="Conan"/>
<link wikidata="Q370560" start="25990" end="26002" title="David Crosby" label="David Crosby"/>
<link wikidata="Q357211" start="26007" end="26018" title="Graham Nash" label="Graham Nash"/>
<link wikidata="Q65065730" start="26027" end="26079" title="25th Anniversary Rock and Roll Hall of Fame Concerts" label="25th Anniversary Rock and Roll Hall of Fame Concerts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322364" start="26133" end="26143" title="PopMatters" label="PopMatters"/>
<link wikidata="Q150916" start="26268" end="26280" title="Jon Bon Jovi" label="Jon Bon Jovi"/>
<link wikidata="Q105356031" start="26368" end="26387" title="Celebrating America" label="Celebrating America"/>
<link wikidata="Q97738250" start="26413" end="26448" title="Inauguration of Joe Biden" label="inauguration of President Joe Biden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630321" start="26478" end="26491" title="Ian MacDonald" label="Ian MacDonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q2643" start="26567" end="26582" title="George Harrison" label="George Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q12460259" start="26641" end="26650" title="Pump organ" label="harmonium"/>
<link wikidata="Q426035" start="26652" end="26668" title="Moog synthesiser" label="Moog synthesiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599" start="26682" end="26696" title="Paul McCartney" label="Paul McCartney"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632" start="26733" end="26744" title="Ringo Starr" label="Ringo Starr"/>
<link wikidata="Q80284" start="26806" end="26811" title="viola" label="viola"/>
<link wikidata="Q8371" start="26819" end="26824" title="cello" label="cello"/>
<link wikidata="Q80019" start="26827" end="26838" title="double bass" label="double bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q83509" start="26844" end="26851" title="piccolo" label="piccolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q11405" start="26858" end="26863" title="flute" label="flute"/>
<link wikidata="Q544352" start="26870" end="26880" title="alto flute" label="alto flute"/>
<link wikidata="Q8343" start="26887" end="26895" title="clarinet" label="clarinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q191819" start="26899" end="26912" title="George Martin" label="George Martin"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1329367" wikidata="Q6375383" url="?curid=1329367" title="Kate Botello">
<text>Kate Botello is a former American television personality best known for her work on the San Francisco, California-based ZDTV (later known as TechTV and then as G4).

==Career==
Botello was born in Dallas, Texas and raised in Santa Fe, New Mexico. She graduated high school in Mendocino, California and studied theater in San Francisco State University. Following a series of temp jobs, she joined Ziff Davis as a tech support staffer. Botello&#x27;s Judy Garland impression while installing a printer caught the attention of Leo Laporte, who offered her a co-hosting position on the technology-oriented television program &quot;The Screen Savers&quot;. In 1999, Botello and Laporte were described as &quot;the two most popular personalities on the only 24-hour national cable channel devoted exclusively to computers and the Internet&quot;. When the pair appeared at a promotional event in York, Pennsylvania that year: &quot;Geeks swarmed the local electronics store where Kate Botello and Leo Laporte were signing autographs. Security had to be called to help guide the two computer advice experts to their car.&quot;

In 2000, Botello left &quot;The Screen Savers&quot; to co-host &quot;GameSpot TV&quot;, a video game review show, with Adam Sessler. In February 2001, the show was renamed &quot;Extended Play&quot;. She also co-hosted a TechTV video on computer basics with Chris Pirillo.

Botello left TechTV in 2002 and moved to Brooklyn, New York where she worked on Broadway as a freelance actor, singer and playwright. In her time there, she starred Off-Broadway as Judy Garland in the cabaret musical, &quot;Judy Garland and the Uninvited Company&quot; and the annual holiday musical, &quot;Judy&#x27;s Christmas Garland&quot;. The cabaret show later toured other cities. A critic wrote that &quot;Botello nails Garland&#x27;s familiar speaking voice, singing voice and facial expressions&quot;.

In November 2005, Botello moved to Traverse City, Michigan where she and Raymond Weigel founded Traverse City Web Design.

In June 2011, Botello began hosting Weird News Radio, a weekly audio podcast, with Jim Harold. She is also on the air from 7 to 10 am Eastern on &quot;Classical IPR&quot;, part of Interlochen Public Radio, WIAA (FM), Interlochen, Michigan. Her latest endeavor is &quot;Showtunes with Kate Botello&quot; airing on Classical IPR, Sunday evenings at 7 pm EST.

==References==
==External links==
* A Fond Farewell From Kate Botello
* WeirdNewsRadio.com
* Traverse City Web Design
* Search results for Botello on the web site of La Voz... México
* The New Screen Savers 52: Kate Botello Returns!</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6375383" start="0" end="12" title="Kate Botello" label="Kate Botello"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="88" end="101" title="San Francisco" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="103" end="113" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q514487" start="120" end="124" title="ZDTV" label="ZDTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q514487" start="141" end="147" title="TechTV" label="TechTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006978" start="160" end="162" title="G4 (U.S. TV channel)" label="G4"/>
<link wikidata="Q16557" start="197" end="203" title="Dallas" label="Dallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="205" end="210" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q38555" start="225" end="245" title="Santa Fe, New Mexico" label="Santa Fe, New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1920378" start="276" end="297" title="Mendocino, California" label="Mendocino, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256981" start="321" end="351" title="San Francisco State University" label="San Francisco State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q199296" start="397" end="407" title="Ziff Davis" label="Ziff Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q11637" start="450" end="462" title="Judy Garland" label="Judy Garland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2071994" start="525" end="536" title="Leo Laporte" label="Leo Laporte"/>
<link wikidata="Q7762707" start="628" end="645" title="The Screen Savers" label="The Screen Savers"/>
<link wikidata="Q821105" start="890" end="908" title="York, Pennsylvania" label="York, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q4679756" start="1240" end="1252" title="Adam Sessler" label="Adam Sessler"/>
<link wikidata="Q795602" start="1299" end="1312" title="X-Play" label="Extended Play"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813023" start="1378" end="1391" title="Chris Pirillo" label="Chris Pirillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q18419" start="1435" end="1443" title="Brooklyn" label="Brooklyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="1445" end="1453" title="New York (state)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q235065" start="1474" end="1482" title="Broadway theatre" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058828" start="1559" end="1571" title="Off-Broadway" label="Off-Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q131183" start="1595" end="1602" title="cabaret" label="cabaret"/>
<link wikidata="Q984544" start="1942" end="1955" title="Traverse City, Michigan" label="Traverse City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166" start="1957" end="1965" title="Michigan" label="Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6047125" start="2210" end="2234" title="Interlochen Public Radio" label="Interlochen Public Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7950534" start="2236" end="2245" title="WIAA (FM)" label="WIAA (FM)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6047142" start="2247" end="2268" title="Interlochen, Michigan" label="Interlochen, Michigan"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1329378" wikidata="Q1712826" url="?curid=1329378" title="Julius Mayer">
<text>Julius Mayer may refer to:
* Julius Robert von Mayer (1814–1878), German physicist and physician
* Julius Marshuetz Mayer (1865–1925), United States lawyer and federal judge</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q57171" start="29" end="52" title="Julius Robert von Mayer" label="Julius Robert von Mayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q15463563" start="99" end="121" title="Julius Marshuetz Mayer" label="Julius Marshuetz Mayer"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1329385" wikidata="Q7383635" url="?curid=1329385" title="Ruy Teixeira">
<text>Ruy Teixeira (; born December 15, 1951) is an American political scientist and commentator who has written several books on various topics in political science and political strategy. He is most noted for his work on political demography, and particularly for &quot;The Emerging Democratic Majority&quot; (2002), which he co-wrote with John Judis, a book arguing that the Democratic Party is demographically destined to become a majority party in the United States of the early 21st century. He writes and edits the blog &quot;The Democratic Strategist&quot;.

==Life and career==
After graduate school, he moved to New York and worked for a polling firm for a year before moving to Washington to do consulting work, chiefly at Abt Associates. In 1987, his dissertation was published as the book &quot;Why Americans Don&#x27;t Vote&quot;, by Greenwood Press. The book was well received and led to several writing assignments in &quot;Public Opinion Quarterly&quot; and &quot;The New Republic&quot; on the role of voter turnout in the 1988 election. The articles were widely cited as showing that increased voter turnout was not the solution to the Democrats&#x27; electoral woes—a hotly debated thesis at that time within the Democratic Party.

Teixeira left consulting after several years and took a government job at the Economic Research Service, where he studied labor market issues, chiefly the so-called skills mismatch between low-skilled and high-skilled workers. From there, he moved as a visiting fellow to the Brookings Institution, where in 1992, he published the book &quot;The Disappearing American Voter&quot;, focusing on voter turnout. Afterwards, he moved to the Progressive Policy Institute, the think tank of the Democratic Leadership Council, to start a political studies program. In 1994, Teixeira went to work at another think tank, the Economic Policy Institute, to direct their politics and public opinion program, and he stayed there until 1999.

In 1999, he moved to the Century Foundation&#x27;s Washington office, where he is a senior fellow, and in 2003, he became a senior fellow of the newly formed Center for American Progress, headed by John Podesta, Chief of Staff to President Bill Clinton and co-chair of President Barack Obama&#x27;s transition team.

Teixeira has also been a guest scholar at the Brookings Institution, where he co-directed a joint Brookings-American Enterprise Institute project on political demography and geography, &quot;the Future of Red, Blue and, Purple America&quot;, and wrote a series of reports with William Frey on the political geography of battleground states in the 2008 election. In July 2022, he left the Center for American Progress, joining the American Enterprise Institute as a nonresident senior fellow focusing &quot;on the transformation of the party coalitions and the future of American electoral politics&quot;.

Teixeira is the author or co-author of six books, including &quot;Red, Blue and Purple America: The Future of Election Demographics&quot;; &quot;The Emerging Democratic Majority&quot;; &quot;America&#x27;s Forgotten Majority: Why the White Working Class Still Matters&quot;; and &quot;The Disappearing American Voter&quot;, as well as hundreds of articles, both scholarly and popular. He also writes &quot;Public Opinion Snapshot&quot;, a weekly feature on the CAP and TCF websites.

Teixeira&#x27;s book &quot;The Emerging Democratic Majority&quot;, written with John Judis (Scribner, 2002), was the most widely discussed political book of that year and generated praise across the political spectrum, from George Will on the right to E.J. Dionne on the left. It was selected as one of the best books of the year by &quot;The Economist&quot; magazine.

Since 2020, Teixeira has written about a leftward shift within progressive segments of the Democratic Party.

==References==
==External links==
* Video (and audio) debate/discussion about the future of the Republican and Democratic parties with Teixeira and Ross Douthat on Bloggingheads.tv
* Video (and audio) discussion with Ruy Teixeira and Reihan Salam on Bloggingheads.tv
* &quot;Is there (still) an emerging progressive majority in the United States?&quot; by Ruy Teixeira, published on Sens Public</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7383635" start="0" end="12" title="Ruy Teixeira" label="Ruy Teixeira"/>
<link wikidata="Q36442" start="55" end="74" title="political scientist" label="political scientist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7210282" start="217" end="237" title="political demography" label="political demography"/>
<link wikidata="Q130492692" start="266" end="298" title="The Emerging Democratic Majority" label="The Emerging Democratic Majority"/>
<link wikidata="Q10307858" start="336" end="346" title="John Judis" label="John Judis"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="372" end="388" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q37732" start="392" end="407" title="demographically" label="demographically"/>
<link wikidata="Q30849" start="516" end="520" title="blog" label="blog"/>
<link wikidata="Q3116159" start="842" end="857" title="Greenwood Press" label="Greenwood Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q7257479" start="934" end="958" title="Public Opinion Quarterly" label="Public Opinion Quarterly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329873" start="975" end="991" title="The New Republic" label="The New Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4348212" start="1034" end="1047" title="1988 United States Senate elections" label="1988 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q3718734" start="1323" end="1348" title="Economic Research Service" label="Economic Research Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q929154" start="1521" end="1542" title="Brookings Institution" label="Brookings Institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339847" start="1638" end="1651" title="voter turnout" label="voter turnout"/>
<link wikidata="Q7248800" start="1681" end="1709" title="Progressive Policy Institute" label="Progressive Policy Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q3705326" start="1733" end="1762" title="Democratic Leadership Council" label="Democratic Leadership Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282092" start="1860" end="1885" title="Economic Policy Institute" label="Economic Policy Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q7721962" start="1994" end="2016" title="the Century Foundation" label="the Century Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q368035" start="2131" end="2159" title="Center for American Progress" label="Center for American Progress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290476" start="2171" end="2183" title="John Podesta" label="John Podesta"/>
<link wikidata="Q786242" start="2185" end="2199" title="White House Chief of Staff" label="Chief of Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124" start="2213" end="2225" title="Bill Clinton" label="Bill Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="2252" end="2264" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q464135" start="2398" end="2427" title="American Enterprise Institute" label="American Enterprise Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q195594" start="2610" end="2629" title="battleground states" label="battleground states"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035725" start="2637" end="2650" title="2008 United States elections" label="2008 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q10307858" start="3460" end="3470" title="John Judis" label="John Judis"/>
<link wikidata="Q845617" start="3472" end="3480" title="Charles Scribner&amp;#x27;s Sons" label="Scribner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1270178" start="3604" end="3615" title="George Will" label="George Will"/>
<link wikidata="Q129436" start="3632" end="3643" title="E.J. Dionne" label="E.J. Dionne"/>
<link wikidata="Q180089" start="3719" end="3732" title="The Economist" label="The Economist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7369293" start="4008" end="4020" title="Ross Douthat" label="Ross Douthat"/>
<link wikidata="Q4927377" start="4024" end="4040" title="Bloggingheads.tv" label="Bloggingheads.tv"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310120" start="4094" end="4106" title="Reihan Salam" label="Reihan Salam"/>
<link wikidata="Q4927377" start="4110" end="4126" title="Bloggingheads.tv" label="Bloggingheads.tv"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1329390" wikidata="Q577520" url="?curid=1329390" title="Pod (The Breeders album)">
<text>Pod is the debut studio album by American alternative rock band the Breeders, released by 4AD records on May 29, 1990. Engineered by Steve Albini, the album features band leader Kim Deal on vocals and guitar, Josephine Wiggs on bass, Britt Walford on drums, and Tanya Donelly on guitar. Albini&#x27;s production prioritized sound over technical accomplishment; the final takes favor the band&#x27;s spontaneous live &quot;in studio&quot; performances.

The Breeders formed in 1988 when Deal, bass player for Pixies, befriended Donelly of Throwing Muses during a European tour. They recorded a country-infused demo in 1989, leading to 4AD co-founder Ivo Watts-Russell funding an album, &quot;Pod&quot;, recorded that year at the Palladium studio in Edinburgh, Scotland.

Due in part to Deal&#x27;s work with the Pixies, the album was widely anticipated, particularly in Europe. It became a critical and popular success, reaching number 22 in the UK. Critics praised its dark, sexualized lyrics, and compared it favorably to the Pixies. Nirvana&#x27;s Kurt Cobain said it was one of his favorite records, and &quot;Pitchfork&quot; ranked it number 81 on its list of the best albums of the 1990s. The cover art was designed by Vaughan Oliver and portrays a man performing a fertility dance while wearing a belt of eels.

==Background==
In 1988, Kim Deal of the Pixies became friends with Tanya Donelly of Throwing Muses when their respective bands undertook a joint tour of Europe. Deal and Donelly spent time together playing guitar, drinking beer, and sharing musical ideas. They often went clubbing together in the bands&#x27; hometown of Boston. While attending a Sugarcubes concert, the two drunkenly decided to write and record dance songs. Their first attempt to work together was based around the idea of an &quot;organic dance band&quot; consisting of Deal on bass, Donelly on guitar, and two drummers. They recorded Donelly&#x27;s &quot;Rise&quot; with Throwing Muses&#x27; David Narcizo, and planned more originals, as well as a cover of Rufus and Chaka Khan&#x27;s &quot;Tell Me Something Good&quot;.

A year and a half passed without the pair recording new material. During this time, they decided their attempt at dance music was not working, and resolved to repurpose their songs for a different genre. Deal became more serious about her work with Donnelly when the Pixies&#x27; Black Francis announced he was undertaking a solo tour. She decided that if he could be active outside of the Pixies, then she could too.

Journalists have speculated that Deal felt motivated to start a new band because of her diminishing role and lack of creative input in the Pixies, which Deal has often denied. However, in one interview she complained angrily about Francis singing lead vocals in almost all of the band&#x27;s songs and said that if she could not sing more in the Pixies, she would sing in another band instead. Pixies&#x27; guitarist Joey Santiago later recalled that Deal had a strong desire to contribute songs to the group to express her creativity, but eventually resigned herself and begrudgingly accepted Francis as the band&#x27;s sole singer and songwriter. According to Francis, Deal had once offered several new songs to the group that were not accepted because they sounded too different from the band&#x27;s repertoire; in Santiago&#x27;s view, Francis’ own rejection of the songs reflected his attitude that the group &quot;made pizzas, not cookies&quot;. Francis admitted in the mid-1990s to not especially liking Deal&#x27;s non-Pixies music, due to &quot;personal taste&quot;.

Because the Pixies and Throwing Muses were signed to different American record labels, Deal and Donelly could not both be principal songwriters for their joint project. They focused on Deal&#x27;s compositions for what would become &quot;Pod&quot;, intending to use Donelly&#x27;s songs for a subsequent album. After &quot;Pod&quot;″s release, Deal and Donelly recorded a demo of the latter&#x27;s songs in preparation for the Breeders&#x27; second album. Donelly left the group in 1991, and used her compositions for her new band, Belly. Before parting, she contributed guitar and vocals to the Breeders&#x27; 1992 &quot;Safari&quot; EP, although none of her compositions appear on the record.

===Demo===
In 1989 the pair recorded a country music-influenced demo with violinist Carrie Bradley and bassist Ray Holiday. Paul Kolderie engineered several of the songs, but Deal found his production &quot;too clean&quot; and employed Joe Harvard of Fort Apache Studios to remix. Deal called the project &quot;the Breeders&quot;, a name she and her sister Kelley had used when performing as teenagers. The name comes from a slang term used in the LGBT community to refer to straight people, which Kim found amusing. Ivo Watts-Russell, co-founder of the Pixies&#x27; and Throwing Muses&#x27; UK label 4AD, was enthusiastic about the demo and Deal&#x27;s potential as a songwriter, and gave the band an advance of $11,000 to record an album.

Although Deal played bass with the Pixies, she changed to guitar for the Breeders, finding it an easier instrument to manage while singing, and so recruited Josephine Wiggs of the Perfect Disaster on bass. Deal asked Steve Albini, who had worked on the Pixies&#x27; &quot;Surfer Rosa&quot;, to engineer the album. Deal thought it would be fun to form an all-female band, &quot;[like] the Bangles from Hell&quot;. She wanted Kelley to be the Breeders&#x27; drummer, but Kelley could not get time away from her job as a program analyst. As an alternative, Albini suggested they try Slint&#x27;s Britt Walford, who used the pseudonym Shannon Doughton for &quot;Pod&quot; because he did not want his contribution to the album to overshadow his role in Slint. Deal, Wiggs, and Walford rehearsed for a week at Wiggs&#x27; house in Bedfordshire, England, before joining Donelly in London for further rehearsals.

==Recording==
&quot;Pod&quot; was recorded in January 1990 at Palladium studio, in Edinburgh, Scotland, which had recording equipment on the first floor and bedrooms upstairs. During the sessions, the band sometimes wore pajamas, and more than once went to a local pub without changing. Although 4AD booked the studio for two weeks, the band completed their recording in a single week. To use the remaining time, the label hired a television crew to film a music video, and the band recorded a session for John Peel&#x27;s show on BBC Radio 1.

Albini—who worked on thousands of recordings including albums by Nirvana, Page and Plant, and PJ Harvey—described his role as more technical than artistic, and preferred to be described as an engineer rather than producer. He had a preference for analogue recording techniques, and was noted for his careful placement of microphones in the studio to achieve a nuanced &quot;roomy&quot; sound. Further, in Albini&#x27;s ethical approach to recording and to the mechanics of the music industry, he made a point of not attempting to influence the band&#x27;s song arrangements. He was known for his vocal and dim view of the music industry, and the press often depicted him as not easy to work with. He also sometimes had a reputation for being misogynist, in part from the name of his former band Rapeman.

Despite his reputation, Donelly recalls being especially comfortable working with Albini, whom she found &quot;sweet&quot;. Wiggs and Donelly have both commented that although Albini often downplays his degree of influence on an album&#x27;s quality, for &quot;Pod&quot; his contributions were considerable. Donelly has praised Albini for the input that he gave the band prior to recording. This included convincing the band to reduce the number of vocal harmonies and give more prominence to Deal&#x27;s vocals. Donelly believes the removal of harmonies made the performances &quot;more effective and sadder and ... focused&quot;. Albini paid attention to capturing strong live performances in the studio. His main concern was achieving the best sound, rather than seeking the best technical performances.

Albini had a policy of never doing more than two takes of each song. This led to confrontations with Donelly, who remembers: &quot;For all the fights we had with him in the studio, for all the times I&#x27;d stomp upstairs in my pajamas screaming that I couldn&#x27;t live with such-and-such a guitar part, the next morning I realized he was usually right.&quot; Deal also often fought with Albini. Wiggs was struck with how quickly Albini and the other musicians resolved issues through short, intense arguments, an ability she attributed to their being American. Albini saw Walford&#x27;s drumming as an integral part of the band&#x27;s sound. Then 19 years old, Walford was a confident and hard-hitting drummer who typically played one of his drums behind the beat. Song tempos were faster than Wiggs had expected, which arose in part because Deal lacked the breath control to sing her lines in a slower manner.

==Music and lyrics==
&quot;Pod&quot; has sparse instrumentation. Music critic Colin Larkin likened the album to the Pixies for its threatening melodies and loud, resounding guitars. &quot;The New York Times&quot;″ Karen Schoemer also found similarities to the Pixies, citing &quot;Pod&quot;″s &quot;angular melodies, shattered tempos and screeching dynamics&quot;, but felt the album nonetheless had its own identity distinct from Deal&#x27;s previous band. Unlike the demo, the album does not have a country-influenced sound.

Other writers have noted the album&#x27;s sinister, sexual and youthful feel. Matt LeMay of &quot;Pitchfork&quot; wrote that Deal&#x27;s singing is spooky, and evokes a mythical siren or a young girl hiding a weapon. &quot;Melody Maker&quot;s Ted Mico compared the tone of the songs to the innocent-looking girl in &quot;Poltergeist&quot; who dribbles blood. Albini said that &quot;there was a simultaneous charm to Kim&#x27;s presentation to her music that&#x27;s both childlike and giddy and also completely mature and kind of dirty ... [it had a] sort of girlish fascination with things that were pretty but it was also kind of horny. That was a juxtaposition that, at the time, was unusual. You didn&#x27;t get a lot of knowing winks from female artists at the time.&quot;

===Songs===
Deal has said that many of the songs are sexual in nature. The slow-paced opening track &quot;Glorious&quot; describes an adult who has vague but pleasant memories of being molested as a child by an aunt. It and the next song, &quot;Doe&quot;, were co-written by Ray Halliday. &quot;Doe&quot; concerns a schizophrenic teenage couple losing their grip of reality after taking Thorazine; in a delusional state they plan to burn down their town. LeMay described this track as possessing a beautiful, gripping quality, while &quot;NME&quot;″s Steve Lamacq cited it as an example of using reduced instrumentation to good effect (&quot;stripped down but punchy&quot;).

Larkin believes that the band&#x27;s cover of the Beatles&#x27; &quot;Happiness Is a Warm Gun&quot; achieves a friction that the original only hints at, and Lamacq commented on its tight sound and prominent drum part. The Breeders recorded the song at the suggestion of Watts-Russell. &quot;Oh!&quot; has—according to writer Martin Aston—a slow tempo, restrained drumming, a sad violin performance by Carrie Bradley, and unexpectedly raw singing by Deal. She had planned to use the title &quot;The Insect Song&quot; because its lyrics tell the story of one insect encouraging others, hoping they do not get stepped on.

Deal has said that &quot;Hellbound&quot; described a fetus that survives an abortion, and that the song is &quot;kinda like a heavy metal hymnal, &#x27;We&#x27;re all hellbound.″&quot; She cited the line &quot;It lives, despite the knives internal&quot; as containing the most embarrassing lyrics she has written. Before recording, the other band members teased her about the line, but since she could not think of a better alternative, she kept the phrase but mumbled the line to make the words harder to understand. For Sasha Alcott, writing for the &quot;Boston Herald&quot;, the song contains elements of &quot;fierce head-banging sing-a-long&quot; as well as gentle whimsy. About &quot;When I Was a Painter&quot;, the next track, Lamacq was struck by Deal&#x27;s gruff vocals and praised its stop-start guitar riff. Critic Rob Sheffield named the song as a highlight of the album in the &quot;Spin Alternative Record Guide&quot;, and Piers Clifton interpreted it as being about strange or otherwise unsatisfying sex.

Side 2 of the LP version starts with &quot;Fortunately Gone&quot;, which Lamacq described as an appealing pop-flavored opening for the album&#x27;s second half. Deal had originally practiced the song with Kelley several years previously. The lyrics concern a woman who has died but continues to obsessively watch over her lover, not able to give him up, even after death. &quot;Iris&quot; was interpreted by Larkin and critic Wif Stenger as being about menstruation. In a 1990 interview, Deal said the song related to something &quot;like a pea pod flowering and then getting ripe and stinky&quot;, and connected it to the Surrealists&#x27; &quot;associat[ing] women with fish&quot;. The writer Simon Reynolds described Deal&#x27;s wolfish, staccato delivery of the repeated word &quot;Oh!&quot;, as well as the &quot;little gashes of gruelling, groiny feedback&quot;.

A recurring sexual dream of Walford&#x27;s inspired the lyrics of &quot;Opened&quot;. The track features a buoyant rhythm and was described by Stenger as exhilaratingly bringing the listener somewhere between reality and the supernatural. &quot;Only in 3s&quot;, which Deal wrote with Donelly, is about a &quot;ménage à trois&quot; sexual relationship. AllMusic&#x27;s Heather Phares characterized the recording as &quot;sensual&quot; and said that it was more benign and friendly-sounding than the Pixies&#x27; work.

&quot;Lime House&quot; was described in a &quot;Billboard&quot; review as feeling &quot;avant-garage&quot;. The song concerns Sherlock Holmes spending long and comfortable hours in an opium den. Wiggs co-wrote and played Spanish guitar on the final track, &quot;Metal Man&quot;. The song contains harmonies between her and Deal; Wiggs&#x27; spoken vocals were compared by Stenger to those of the group Wire and by Reynolds to the vocal style of Sonic Youth&#x27;s Kim Gordon. Aston likened the melody to the Pixies&#x27; &quot;Cactus&quot;.

==Release==
&quot;Pod&quot; was released in the UK on May 29, 1990, by 4AD. Watts-Russell planned the date to be not too close to the release of the Pixies&#x27; &quot;Bossanova&quot; two and a half months later, for more effective publicity of both albums. Watts-Russell believed the album would be better suited to a US independent distribution label rather than the Pixies&#x27; American distributor Elektra, and licensed &quot;Pod&quot; to Rough Trade America. When this division of Rough Trade went bankrupt, Elektra assumed distribution of &quot;Pod&quot; in the US. Deal has noted that the Breeders did not receive any royalties from initial US sales because of Rough Trade&#x27;s bankruptcy.

The album was widely anticipated by the British music press due to the involvement of Deal and Donelly—known from their highly regarded work with the Pixies and Throwing Muses, respectively—and Albini, who likewise had a strong reputation for his previous engineering work. It reached number 22 in the UK, where it was promoted by a full-page ad in &quot;Melody Maker&quot;, and number 73 in the Netherlands. &quot;Pod&quot; sold moderately well, although Deal has noted it &quot;never sold [anything]&quot; compared to their next album, &quot;Last Splash&quot; (1993), which was certified platinum in the US and silver in the UK.

Deal took the idea for the album&#x27;s title from a painting that she saw in Boston; for her, the word &quot;pod&quot; evoked a uterus, which Wiggs has noted relates to the theme of fertility and the group&#x27;s name. The cover art was designed by longtime 4AD album designer Vaughan Oliver and employs photography by Kevin Westenberg. Oliver, in an attempt to seduce Deal, who he believed would appreciate the humor, attached a belt of dead eels over his underwear, which he intended as phallic symbols. He performed a fertility dance, while Westenberg took pictures of him using a long exposure to achieve blurring and other visual effects.

==Reception==
The album was generally well received. Several music critics favorably compared the album to Deal&#x27;s work with the Pixies, among which were William Van Meter, Rob Sheffield, and Steve Kandell of &quot;Spin&quot;. Kandell and Sheffield mentioned tracks including &quot;Fortunately Gone&quot; as superior to songs by that group. Kandell noted &quot;Pod&quot; appealed to fans of the Pixies&#x27; &quot;Gigantic&quot;, which was written and sung by Deal. In AllMusic, Heather Phares described &quot;Pod&quot; as a &quot;vibrantly creative debut&quot; that was better than the Pixies&#x27; 1990 album &quot;Bossanova&quot;, and argued that the Pixies should have recorded more of Deal&#x27;s compositions.

&quot;The Rough Guide to Rock&quot;″s Piers Clifton and &quot;Melody Maker&quot;″s Simon Reynolds viewed &quot;Pod&quot; as lacking energy in comparison to the Pixies&#x27; work. To Clifton, it was &quot;plodding&quot;, while Reynolds felt it sounded &quot;inhibited, moribund, stilted&quot; and &quot;never [let] it rip like the Pixies&quot;. Reynolds added that &quot;Whenever a song gathers momentum or thrust, [the Breeders] throw in a weird bit, a gear change or an abrupt stop. They seem unhappy with the idea of simple rock exuberance.&quot; Steve Taylor of &quot;The A to X of Alternative Music&quot; also found &quot;Pod&quot; inferior to music of the Pixies, but was impressed with Deal&#x27;s ability to move from bass to guitar.

Some reviews found &quot;Pod&quot; under-developed or insubstantial. Jon Dolan in &quot;Blender&quot; likened it to a poorly-constructed building. Robert Christgau of &quot;The Village Voice&quot; described it unfavorably as more &quot;art project&quot; than the work of a band, and Greg Sandow in &quot;Entertainment Weekly&quot; felt the lyrics were sometimes forced.

Wif Stenger of &quot;Trouser Press&quot; called the first side &quot;a bit shaky&quot; but considered side 2 to be &quot;damn near perfect&quot;. &quot;NME&quot;″s Steve Lamacq described the album as &quot;a tight-ish piece of tantalising rock&quot;, and said that listeners who found it too minimalist would soon warm to it. Karen Schoemer of &quot;The New York Times&quot; praised &quot;Pod&quot;″s intelligence and originality.

==Legacy==
Nirvana singer Kurt Cobain often described &quot;Pod&quot; as one of his favorite albums. He listed it as his seventh and then third favorite album in his private journals, and said it was his number-one favorite album in a 1992 &quot;Melody Maker&quot; article, in which he said: &quot;The way they structure [the songs is] totally unique, very atmospheric.&quot; Cobain had wished to work with Steve Albini since first listening to his band Big Black in the 1980s. Cobain&#x27;s special admiration of &quot;Pod&quot; and &quot;Surfer Rosa&quot;—as well as his desire for a similar drum sound, a &quot;natural, powerful sound produced with canny microphone placement rather than phony sounding effects boxes&quot;, that he found reminiscent of Aerosmith&#x27;s &quot;Rocks&quot;—then led him to select Albini as the producer of Nirvana&#x27;s third studio album, &quot;In Utero&quot;. &quot;Pod&quot; also influenced Courtney Love&#x27;s songwriting on &quot;Live Through This&quot;, the second album by her band Hole. In 2018 critic Amanda Petrusich noted the enduring influence of &quot;Pod&quot; on contemporary indie rock musicians Courtney Barnett, Lucy Dacus, and Julien Baker.

In 2007 Albini said he felt &quot;Pod&quot; was among the best albums he had engineered; a 2015 article in &quot;Stereogum&quot; ranked it as Albini&#x27;s eighth best album. Donelly described it as the &quot;truest&quot; of her albums and said that &quot;it really feels exactly the way it was when we were doing it.&quot; Wiggs has spoken of her ongoing fondness for &quot;Pod&quot;, and recalls that everyone in the making of the album was dedicated and attentive; for Deal, the album is &quot;just magic&quot;. In 2003 &quot;Pitchfork&quot; placed the album as the 81st best of the 1990s. It was ranked number 463 in &quot;NME&quot;″s 500 Greatest Albums of All Time list (2013) and included in &quot;The Guardian&quot;″s 1000 Albums to Hear Before You Die (2007). Separate articles in both publications have ranked the Breeders&#x27; version of &quot;Happiness Is a Warm Gun&quot; among the best cover versions of a Beatles song.

==Track listing==
==Personnel==
The Breeders
* Kim Deal – lead vocals, guitar
* Tanya Donelly – guitar, backing vocals
* Britt Walford (credited as Shannon Doughton) – drums, backing vocals
* Josephine Wiggs –bass, backing vocals, Spanish guitar and lead vocals on &quot;Metal Man&quot;

Additional personnel
* Steve Albini – engineer, spoken vocals
* Carrie Bradley – violin
* Michael Allen – backing vocals on &quot;Oh!&quot;
* Vaughan Oliver/V23 – sleeve design
* Kevin Westenberg – photography

==Charts==
==References==
===Notes===
===Footnotes===
===Citations===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q11366" start="42" end="58" title="alternative rock" label="alternative rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332134" start="64" end="76" title="the Breeders" label="the Breeders"/>
<link wikidata="Q238095" start="90" end="93" title="4AD" label="4AD"/>
<link wikidata="Q128124" start="119" end="129" title="Audio engineer" label="Engineered"/>
<link wikidata="Q435060" start="133" end="145" title="Steve Albini" label="Steve Albini"/>
<link wikidata="Q240509" start="178" end="186" title="Kim Deal" label="Kim Deal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3185915" start="209" end="224" title="Josephine Wiggs" label="Josephine Wiggs"/>
<link wikidata="Q4971564" start="234" end="247" title="Britt Walford" label="Britt Walford"/>
<link wikidata="Q434464" start="262" end="275" title="Tanya Donelly" label="Tanya Donelly"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="371" end="376" title="Take#Music recording" label="takes"/>
<link wikidata="Q188464" start="508" end="514" title="Pixies (band)" label="Pixies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1595152" start="538" end="552" title="Throwing Muses" label="Throwing Muses"/>
<link wikidata="Q83440" start="593" end="600" title="country music" label="country"/>
<link wikidata="Q220935" start="609" end="613" title="Demo (music)" label="demo"/>
<link wikidata="Q948832" start="649" end="666" title="Ivo Watts-Russell" label="Ivo Watts-Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q11649" start="1035" end="1042" title="Nirvana (band)" label="Nirvana"/>
<link wikidata="Q8446" start="1050" end="1061" title="Kurt Cobain" label="Kurt Cobain"/>
<link wikidata="Q721140" start="1113" end="1122" title="Pitchfork (website)" label="Pitchfork"/>
<link wikidata="Q2511468" start="1224" end="1238" title="Vaughan Oliver" label="Vaughan Oliver"/>
<link wikidata="Q240509" start="1342" end="1350" title="Kim Deal" label="Kim Deal"/>
<link wikidata="Q188464" start="1354" end="1364" title="Pixies (band)" label="the Pixies"/>
<link wikidata="Q434464" start="1385" end="1398" title="Tanya Donelly" label="Tanya Donelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1595152" start="1402" end="1416" title="Throwing Muses" label="Throwing Muses"/>
<link wikidata="Q876705" start="1665" end="1675" title="The Sugarcubes" label="Sugarcubes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2271288" start="1981" end="1994" title="David Narcizo" label="David Narcizo"/>
<link wikidata="Q155171" start="2037" end="2042" title="Cover version" label="cover"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506315" start="2046" end="2066" title="Rufus (band)" label="Rufus and Chaka Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7697462" start="2080" end="2102" title="Tell Me Something Good" label="Tell Me Something Good"/>
<link wikidata="Q11627" start="2391" end="2404" title="Black Francis" label="Black Francis"/>
<link wikidata="Q576535" start="2947" end="2960" title="Joey Santiago" label="Joey Santiago"/>
<link wikidata="Q816079" start="4139" end="4144" title="Belly (band)" label="Belly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745802" start="4229" end="4235" title="Safari (EP)" label="Safari"/>
<link wikidata="Q83440" start="4342" end="4355" title="country music" label="country music"/>
<link wikidata="Q220935" start="4367" end="4371" title="Demo (music)" label="demo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5046209" start="4387" end="4401" title="Carrie Bradley" label="Carrie Bradley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645322" start="4427" end="4440" title="Paul Q. Kolderie" label="Paul Kolderie"/>
<link wikidata="Q5470739" start="4554" end="4573" title="Fort Apache Studios" label="Fort Apache Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282821" start="4660" end="4666" title="Kelley Deal" label="Kelley"/>
<link wikidata="Q948832" start="4820" end="4837" title="Ivo Watts-Russell" label="Ivo Watts-Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q238095" start="4904" end="4907" title="4AD" label="4AD"/>
<link wikidata="Q3185915" start="5202" end="5217" title="Josephine Wiggs" label="Josephine Wiggs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7756684" start="5221" end="5241" title="the Perfect Disaster" label="the Perfect Disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q435060" start="5262" end="5274" title="Steve Albini" label="Steve Albini"/>
<link wikidata="Q571213" start="5317" end="5328" title="Surfer Rosa" label="Surfer Rosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q214418" start="5429" end="5440" title="the Bangles" label="the Bangles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2112188" start="5563" end="5578" title="Program analysis" label="program analyst"/>
<link wikidata="Q578979" start="5625" end="5630" title="Slint" label="Slint"/>
<link wikidata="Q4971564" start="5638" end="5651" title="Britt Walford" label="Britt Walford"/>
<link wikidata="Q23143" start="5870" end="5882" title="Bedfordshire" label="Bedfordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q326542" start="6457" end="6466" title="John Peel" label="John Peel"/>
<link wikidata="Q795585" start="6482" end="6493" title="BBC Radio 1" label="BBC Radio 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q11649" start="6561" end="6568" title="Nirvana (band)" label="Nirvana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516315" start="6570" end="6584" title="Page and Plant" label="Page and Plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q219772" start="6590" end="6599" title="PJ Harvey" label="PJ Harvey"/>
<link wikidata="Q308857" start="7238" end="7248" title="Misogyny" label="misogynist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1469850" start="7291" end="7298" title="Rapeman" label="Rapeman"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8158" end="8163" title="Take#Music recording" label="takes"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8971" end="8985" title="Vocal pedagogy#Breathing and breath support" label="breath control"/>
<link wikidata="Q5145275" start="9103" end="9115" title="Colin Larkin (writer)" label="Colin Larkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="9213" end="9231" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q721140" start="9651" end="9660" title="Pitchfork (website)" label="Pitchfork"/>
<link wikidata="Q150986" start="9722" end="9736" title="Siren (mythology)" label="mythical siren"/>
<link wikidata="Q580896" start="9776" end="9788" title="Melody Maker" label="Melody Maker"/>
<link wikidata="Q497622" start="9874" end="9885" title="Poltergeist (1982 film)" label="Poltergeist"/>
<link wikidata="Q407972" start="10718" end="10727" title="Chlorpromazine" label="Thorazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q192632" start="10870" end="10873" title="NME" label="NME"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="11053" end="11064" title="the Beatles" label="the Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416923" start="11077" end="11100" title="Happiness Is a Warm Gun" label="Happiness Is a Warm Gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q773802" start="12185" end="12198" title="Boston Herald" label="Boston Herald"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567963" start="12262" end="12273" title="Sing-along" label="sing-a-long"/>
<link wikidata="Q3486861" start="12455" end="12468" title="Rob Sheffield" label="Rob Sheffield"/>
<link wikidata="Q20875838" start="12525" end="12554" title="Spin Alternative Record Guide" label="Spin Alternative Record Guide"/>
<link wikidata="Q841983" start="12664" end="12666" title="LP record" label="LP"/>
<link wikidata="Q39427" start="13273" end="13284" title="Surrealism" label="Surrealists"/>
<link wikidata="Q202676" start="13345" end="13359" title="Simon Reynolds" label="Simon Reynolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1159593" start="13831" end="13845" title="ménage à trois" label="ménage à trois"/>
<link wikidata="Q31181" start="13873" end="13881" title="AllMusic" label="AllMusic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4653" start="14165" end="14180" title="Sherlock Holmes" label="Sherlock Holmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q847761" start="14223" end="14232" title="opium den" label="opium den"/>
<link wikidata="Q930531" start="14260" end="14274" title="Flamenco guitar" label="Spanish guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135620" start="14441" end="14445" title="Wire (band)" label="Wire"/>
<link wikidata="Q188626" start="14484" end="14495" title="Sonic Youth" label="Sonic Youth"/>
<link wikidata="Q240570" start="14503" end="14513" title="Kim Gordon" label="Kim Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3324869" start="14566" end="14572" title="Cactus (Pixies song)" label="Cactus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093303" start="14749" end="14758" title="Bossanova (Pixies album)" label="Bossanova"/>
<link wikidata="Q385558" start="15025" end="15044" title="Rough Trade Records" label="Rough Trade America"/>
<link wikidata="Q2136712" start="15826" end="15837" title="Last Splash" label="Last Splash"/>
<link wikidata="Q2511468" start="16192" end="16206" title="Vaughan Oliver" label="Vaughan Oliver"/>
<link wikidata="Q271960" start="16504" end="16512" title="Exposure (photography)" label="exposure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025912" start="16779" end="16783" title="Spin (magazine)" label="Spin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3324944" start="16978" end="16986" title="Gigantic (song)" label="Gigantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q804471" start="18111" end="18118" title="Blender (magazine)" label="Blender"/>
<link wikidata="Q314382" start="18170" end="18186" title="Robert Christgau" label="Robert Christgau"/>
<link wikidata="Q876158" start="18196" end="18213" title="The Village Voice" label="The Village Voice"/>
<link wikidata="Q5606215" start="18306" end="18317" title="Greg Sandow" label="Greg Sandow"/>
<link wikidata="Q275033" start="18327" end="18347" title="Entertainment Weekly" label="Entertainment Weekly"/>
<link wikidata="Q3142472" start="18558" end="18570" title="Steve Lamacq" label="Steve Lamacq"/>
<link wikidata="Q8446" start="18852" end="18863" title="Kurt Cobain" label="Kurt Cobain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3706795" start="19000" end="19008" title="Journals (Cobain)" label="journals"/>
<link wikidata="Q572821" start="19280" end="19289" title="Big Black" label="Big Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q126826" start="19582" end="19591" title="Aerosmith" label="Aerosmith"/>
<link wikidata="Q830738" start="19605" end="19610" title="Rocks (Aerosmith album)" label="Rocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q222001" start="19707" end="19715" title="In Utero (album)" label="In Utero"/>
<link wikidata="Q222071" start="19755" end="19768" title="Courtney Love" label="Courtney Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q946807" start="19797" end="19814" title="Live Through This" label="Live Through This"/>
<link wikidata="Q624790" start="19851" end="19855" title="Hole (band)" label="Hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q16199458" start="19872" end="19888" title="Amanda Petrusich" label="Amanda Petrusich"/>
<link wikidata="Q16390683" start="19974" end="19990" title="Courtney Barnett" label="Courtney Barnett"/>
<link wikidata="Q27967785" start="19992" end="20002" title="Lucy Dacus" label="Lucy Dacus"/>
<link wikidata="Q22003277" start="20008" end="20020" title="Julien Baker" label="Julien Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q2532689" start="20136" end="20145" title="Stereogum" label="Stereogum"/>
<link wikidata="Q18378807" start="20662" end="20693" title="NME&amp;#x27;s The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time" label="500 Greatest Albums of All Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="20728" end="20740" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q240509" start="21006" end="21014" title="Kim Deal" label="Kim Deal"/>
<link wikidata="Q434464" start="21039" end="21052" title="Tanya Donelly" label="Tanya Donelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q4971564" start="21080" end="21093" title="Britt Walford" label="Britt Walford"/>
<link wikidata="Q3185915" start="21151" end="21166" title="Josephine Wiggs" label="Josephine Wiggs"/>
<link wikidata="Q435060" start="21270" end="21282" title="Steve Albini" label="Steve Albini"/>
<link wikidata="Q5046209" start="21311" end="21325" title="Carrie Bradley" label="Carrie Bradley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2511468" start="21389" end="21403" title="Vaughan Oliver" label="Vaughan Oliver"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1329392" wikidata="Q1381389" url="?curid=1329392" title="John Szarkowski">
<text>Thaddeus John Szarkowski (December 18, 1925 – July 7, 2007) was an American photographer, curator, historian, and critic. From 1962 to 1991 Szarkowski was the director of photography at New York&#x27;s Museum of Modern Art (MoMA).

==Early life and career==
He was born and grew up in the small northern Wisconsin city of Ashland, and became interested in photography at age eleven. In World War II Szarkowski served in the U.S. Army, after which he graduated in 1947 in art history from the University of Wisconsin–Madison. He then began his career as a museum photographer at the Walker Art Center, Minneapolis.

At this time he was also a practicing art photographer; he had his first solo show at the Walker Art Center in 1949, the first of a number of solo exhibitions. In 1954 Szarkowski received the first of two Guggenheim Fellowships, resulting in the book &quot;The Idea of Louis Sullivan&quot; (1956). Between 1958 and 1962, he returned to rural Wisconsin. There, he undertook a second Guggenheim fellowship in 1961, researching into ideas about wilderness and the relationship between people and the land.

==Museum of Modern Art==
New York&#x27;s Museum of Modern Art appointed Szarkowski director of its department of photography, beginning July 1, 1962. Edward Steichen chose Szarkowski as his successor. In 1973 Szarkowski began service to the National Endowment for the Arts as one of its three photography panelists.

In 1973 Szarkowski published &quot;Looking at Photographs,&quot; a practical set of examples on how to write about photographs. The book is still required reading for students of photography, and argues for the importance of looking carefully and bringing to bear every bit of intelligence and understanding possessed by the viewer. Szarkowski has also published numerous books on individual photographers, including, with Maria Morris Hamburg, the definitive four-volume work on the photography of Atget.

He wrote &quot;Mirrors and Windows: American Photography Since 1960&quot; (1978) identifying a dichotomy between strategies of pictorial expression in American photography; &quot;It seems to this viewer that the difference between [Minor] White and [Robert] Frank relates to the difference between the goal of self-expression and the goal of exploration.&quot; Though not all photographers in the book are American (Frank was Swiss, for example), the pictures were taken and/or exhibited there. The publication is divided almost equally into Parts I (pp. 29–86) and II (pp. 87–148). His &#x27;Mirror&#x27; analogy represents self-reflective photography, represented in the book by Jerry Uelsmann, Paul Caponigro, Ralph Gibson, Duane Michals, Judy Dater and others; while the idea of the &#x27;Window&#x27; is found in the documentary approach, exemplified by inclusions of work by Diane Arbus, Lee Friedlander, Henry Wessel, Joel Meyerowitz, and Garry Winogrand.

He taught at Harvard, Yale, and New York University, and continued to lecture and teach. From 1983 to 1989, he was an Andrew Dickson White Professor-at-Large at Cornell University. For the 150th anniversary of the invention of photography he curated a final major exhibition before his retirement, and wrote an accompanying book: &quot;Photography Until Now&quot;. In 1990, &quot;U.S. News &amp; World Report&quot; said: &quot;Szarkowski&#x27;s thinking, whether Americans know it or not, has become our thinking about photography&quot;.

==Retirement==
In 1991 Szarkowski retired from his post at the MoMA and became the museum&#x27;s photography director emeritus. He was succeeded by Peter Galassi, the Joel and Anne Ehrenkranz chief curator of the department of photography at The Museum of Modern Art.

Szarkowski continued to write and curate exhibitions at MoMA and elsewhere, like &quot;Alfred Stieglitz at Lake George&quot; and &quot;Ansel Adams at 100&quot;. Another monograph on Atget was also published. He returned to making his own photographic work, mostly attempting to picture a spirit of place in the American landscape. In 2005 he co-curated his first retrospective of his own work with Sandra S. Phillips at the San Francisco Museum of Modern Art, subsequently exhibited at MoMA in early 2006.
In retirement, Szarkowski served on the boards of several of the mutual funds sold by Dreyfus Corporation.

Szarkowski died from complications of a stroke on July 7, 2007, in Pittsfield, Massachusetts, aged 81.

==Publications of photographic works==
*&quot;The Idea of Louis Sullivan&quot;, Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1956. ASIN B0041LVXMS.
*&quot;The Face of Minnesota&quot;, Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1958. ASIN: B0000CK4KY.
*&quot;Mr. Bristol&#x27;s Barn&quot;, Harry N Abrams, 1997. .
*&quot;John Szarkowski: Photographs.&quot; New York: Bulfinch, 2005. . Retrospective exhibition at San Francisco Museum of Modern Art, text by Sandra S. Phillips. Toured to Museum of Modern Art, New York

==Exhibitions curated by Szarkowski and accompanying publications==
&quot;If not indicated otherwise, all books were published by the Museum of Modern Art, New York. References link to the individual webpage of the exhibition in the museum&#x27;s digitized archives (MAID). The pages comprise installation views, the original press releases of each exhibition with extensive text, the text of the wall label written by Szarkowski and a complete checklist of the works displayed. The exhibition catalogues (until 1981) are oftentimes also available in digitized form. Exhibitions without accompanying catalogue are simply integrated here, as are the only books not published in conjunction with an exhibition: Looking at Photographs (1973) and the 2000 monograph on Atget.&quot;

*1962: with Grace M. Mayer: &quot;Ernst Haas: Color Photography&quot;. (No catalogue.)
*1963: &quot;Five Unrelated Photographers: Ken Heyman. George Krause. Jerome Liebling. Minor White, and Garry Winogrand&quot;. (No catalogue.)
*1963: &quot;The Photographs of Jacques Henri Lartigue&quot;. (No ISBN), ASIN B0018MX7JK.
*1963: &quot;The Photographer and the American Landscape&quot;. . (Reprints in 1966 and 1971.)
*1964: &quot;André Kertész, Photographer&quot;. . Retrospective exhibition.
*1965: &quot;The Photo Essay&quot;. (No catalogue.) Survey on magazine work.
*1966: &quot;The Photographer&#x27;s Eye&quot;. ISBN 0-87070-525-3. Exhibited in several parts since 1964.
*1966: &quot;Dorothea Lange&quot;. (No ISBN). Retrospective exhibition. Introductory essay by George P. Elliott.
*1967: &quot;Once Invisible&quot;. (No catalogue.)
*1967: &quot;New Documents&quot;. (No catalogue.) Seminal exhibition featuring Diane Arbus, Lee Friedlander and Garry Winogrand.
*1968: &quot;Henri Cartier-Bresson&quot;. (No catalogue.) &quot;Recent Photographs [...] of the past decade [...] drawn entirely from the Museum&#x27;s collection and includes a retrospective gallery of about 30 photographs from 1929 to about 1950.&quot;
*1968: &quot;Brassaï, Photographs&quot;. Retrospective exhibition.
*1969: &quot;Bill Brandt&quot;. &quot;The first major one-man exhibition in the country&quot;, later touring the US and UK. Instead of a catalogue &quot;Shadow of Light,&quot; Viking, New York 1966, was offered.
*1969/1970: &quot;Atget&quot;. (No catalogue.) Retrospective exhibition.
*1969/1970: &quot;Garry Winogrand: The Animals&quot;. 2nd ed. 2004, ISBN 0-87070-633-0.
*1970/1971: &quot;E.J. Bellocq: Storyville Portraits&quot;. ISBN 0-87070-250-5.
*1970: &quot;Bruce Davidson: East 100th Street&quot;. Harvard University Press, ISBN 0-67422-436-1. 
** German/English reprint: In Focus Galerie/Locher, Cologne 1999, no ISBN.
** expd. ed.: St. Ann&#x27;s Press, Los Angeles 2003, ISBN 0-97136-813-9.
*1971: &quot;Walker Evans&quot;. ISBN 0-87070-312-9. Retrospective exhibition.
*1972: &quot;Atget&#x27;s Trees&quot;. (No catalogue.)
*1972/1973: &quot;Diane Arbus&quot;. The retrospective exhibition was accompanied by the Aperture monograph edited by Doon Arbus and Marvin Israel. ISBN 0-912334-40-1.
*1973: &quot;Looking at Photographs. 100 Pictures from the Collection of The Museum of Modern Art&quot;. ISBN 0-87070-514-8. (Book only.)
*1973: &quot;From the Picture Press&quot;. ISBN 0-87070-334-X. Survey on photo-journalism.
*1974: with Shoji Yamagishi: &quot;New Japanese Photography&quot;. ISBN 0-87070-503-2.
*1976: &quot;William Eggleston&#x27;s Guide&quot;. ISBN 0-87070-317-X.
**2002: newly mastered edition. ISBN 0-87070-378-1.
*1976: &quot;Callahan&quot;. ISBN 0-900406-83-6.
*1978: &quot;Mirrors and Windows: American Photography since 1960&quot;. ISBN 0-87070-475-3.
*1979: &quot;Ansel Adams and the West&quot;. Retrospective with 153 prints. Accompanying book published as &quot;Yosemite and the Range of Light,&quot; ISBN 0-87070-649-7.
*1981: &quot;American Landscapes&quot;. ISBN 0-87070-207-6.
*1981–1985: with Maria Morris Hambourg: &quot;The Work of Atget&quot;. Spring Industries Series on the Art of Photography. ISBN 0-87070-205-X (Four volume set). Each exhibition travelled through the US.
**1981: &quot;Volume 1, Old France.&quot; ISBN 0-87070-204-1.
**1982: &quot;Volume 2, The Art of Old Paris&quot;. ISBN 0-87070-212-2.
**1983: &quot;Volume 3, The Ancien Régime&quot;. ISBN 0-87070-217-3.
**1985: &quot;Volume 4, Modern Times&quot;. ISBN 0-87070-218-1.
*1982: &quot;20th Century Photographs from the Museum of Modern Art = 20世紀の写真 : ニューヨーク近代美術館コレクション展&quot;. (English and Japanese). Exhibition at Seibu Museum of Art, Tokyo. Selection by Szarkowski and Susan Kismaric, essay by Szarkowski.
*with John Pultz: &quot;Big Pictures by Contemporary Photographers&quot;. (No catalogue.)
*1984: &quot;Irving Penn&quot;. ISBN 0-87070-562-8.
*1988: &quot;Winogrand: Figments from the Real World&quot;. ISBN 0-87070-640-3.
*1989: &quot;Photography Until Now&quot;. ISBN 0-87070-573-3. Historical survey on the occasion of photography&#x27;s 150th anniversary.
*1995: &quot;Alfred Stieglitz at Lake George&quot;. ISBN 0-87070-138-X.
*1997: with Richard Benson: &quot;A Maritime Album: 100 Photographs and Their Stories&quot;. New Haven: Yale University Press, and Newport News: The Mariners&#x27; Museum. ISBN 0-300-07342-9.
*2000: &quot;Atget.&quot; ISBN 0-87070-094-4. (Book only.)
*2001: with Sandra S. Phillips: &quot;Ansel Adams at 100&quot;. San Francisco Museum of Modern Art. ISBN 0-316-85862-5. Exhibition toured to the Art Institute of Chicago, the Hayward Gallery, London, Kunstbibliothek Berlin, Los Angeles County Museum of Art and MoMA, New York in 2003.

===Writing contributions by Szarkowski ===
*Robert Adams: &quot;The New West. Landscapes along the Colorado Front Range.&quot; Boulder: Colorado Associated University Press, 1974. ISBN 0-87081-058-8.
*&quot;The Portfolios of Ansel Adams.&quot; Boston: Bulfinch, 1977. ISBN 0-8212-0723-7.
*&quot;Ansel Adams: Classic Images.&quot; Boston: Little, Brown &amp; Co, 1986. ISBN 0-8212-1629-5. &quot;The Museum Set&quot; selected by Adams, introduction by Szarkowski, essay by James Alinder.
* &quot;Lee Friedlander,&quot; Seibu Museum of Art and the Asahi Shimbun, Tadashi Furukawa &amp; Kosei, 1987, ISBN 4333012708 (Japanese/English).
*&quot;Wright Morris: Origin of a Species.&quot; San Francisco: San Francisco Museum of Modern Art, 1992. ISBN 0-918471-24-9. Ed. by Sandra S. Phillips.
*&quot;Jan Groover: Photographs.&quot; Boston: Bulfinch, 1993. ISBN 0-8212-2006-3.
*&quot;Bellocq: Photographs from Storyville, the Red-Light District of New Orleans.&quot; New York: Random House, 1996. ISBN 0-679-44975-2.
*&quot;Still Life: Irving Penn Photographs, 1938–2000.&quot; Boston: Bulfinch, 2001. ISBN 0-8212-2702-5.
*&quot;Slide Show: The Color Photographs of Helen Levitt.&quot; New York: powerHouse Books, 2005. ISBN 1-57687-252-1.

==Further reading==
*Hilton Als: &quot;Looking at Pictures.&quot; &quot;Grand Street.&quot; No. 59, p. 102.year missing
*Philip Gefter: &quot;The Photographer&#x27;s Curator Curates His Own.&quot; &quot;The New York Times&quot;, (January 30, 2005)
*Andy Grundberg: &quot;An Interview with John Szarkowski.&quot; &quot;Afterimage&quot;, Volume 12 No. 3 (October 1984), pages 12–13.
*Mark Haworth-Booth: &quot;An Interview with John Szarkowski.&quot; &quot;History of Photography&quot;, Vol. 15, No. 4 (1991), pages 302–306.
*Sarah Hermanson Meister: &quot;Arbus, Friedlander, Winogrand. New Documents, 1967.&quot; Essay by Max Kozloff. New York: Museum of Modern Art, 2017. ISBN 978-0-87070-955-5.
*&quot;An interview with John Szarkowski.&quot; &quot;Modern Painters&quot; (Spring 2004).author missing

==Documentaries about Szarkowski==
*&quot;John Szarkowski: A Life in Photography.&quot; 48-minute documentary on his life and work, produced by Richard B. Woodward, directed by Sandy McLeod. Checkerboard Film Foundation, 1998. VHS , DVD . 
** online video: San Francisco: Kanopy Streaming, 2015. .
*&quot;Speaking of Art: John Szarkowski on Ansel Adams.&quot; 37-minute film of a slide-lecture. Checkerboard/Films Media Group, 2004. DVD .
** online video: San Francisco: Kanopy Streaming, 2015. .
*&quot;Speaking of Art: John Szarkowski on Eugène Atget.&quot; 45-minute film of a slide-show lecture. Checkerboard/Films Media Group, 2004. DVD .
** online video: San Francisco: Kanopy Streaming, 2015. .
*&quot;Speaking of Art: John Szarkowski on John Szarkowski.&quot; 60-minute film of a lecture on his own photography. Checkerboard/Films Media Group, 2005. .
** online video: San Francisco: Kanopy Streaming, 2015. .

==External links==
*John Szarkowski on MoMA homepage with 40 photographs of his in the museum&#x27;s collection.
*&quot;LA Weekly&quot; interview with Szarkowski from December 2006. &quot;Talking Pictures&quot; by Holly Myers and Tom Christie.
*&quot;New York Times&quot; obituary in 2007

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1381389" start="0" end="24" title="John Szarkowski" label="Thaddeus John Szarkowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q674426" start="90" end="97" title="curator" label="curator"/>
<link wikidata="Q188740" start="202" end="222" title="Museum of Modern Art" label="Museum of Modern Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q725594" start="322" end="329" title="Ashland, Wisconsin" label="Ashland"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="424" end="433" title="U.S. Army" label="U.S. Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q50637" start="471" end="482" title="art history" label="art history"/>
<link wikidata="Q838330" start="492" end="523" title="University of Wisconsin–Madison" label="University of Wisconsin–Madison"/>
<link wikidata="Q1851516" start="582" end="599" title="Walker Art Center" label="Walker Art Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q36091" start="601" end="612" title="Minneapolis" label="Minneapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316544" start="820" end="841" title="Guggenheim Fellowship" label="Guggenheim Fellowship"/>
<link wikidata="Q243240" start="884" end="898" title="Louis Sullivan" label="Louis Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q313899" start="1269" end="1284" title="Edward Steichen" label="Edward Steichen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967116" start="1360" end="1391" title="National Endowment for the Arts" label="National Endowment for the Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q322030" start="1935" end="1940" title="Eugène Atget" label="Atget"/>
<link wikidata="Q712996" start="2174" end="2187" title="Minor White" label="[Minor] White"/>
<link wikidata="Q467574" start="2192" end="2206" title="Robert Frank" label="[Robert] Frank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1285072" start="2624" end="2638" title="Jerry Uelsmann" label="Jerry Uelsmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q15516576" start="2640" end="2654" title="Paul Caponigro" label="Paul Caponigro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233831" start="2656" end="2668" title="Ralph Gibson" label="Ralph Gibson"/>
<link wikidata="Q931923" start="2670" end="2683" title="Duane Michals" label="Duane Michals"/>
<link wikidata="Q6304405" start="2685" end="2695" title="Judy Dater" label="Judy Dater"/>
<link wikidata="Q615498" start="2765" end="2776" title="Documentary photography" label="documentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q234608" start="2824" end="2835" title="Diane Arbus" label="Diane Arbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q711391" start="2837" end="2852" title="Lee Friedlander" label="Lee Friedlander"/>
<link wikidata="Q373689" start="2854" end="2866" title="Henry Wessel, Jr." label="Henry Wessel"/>
<link wikidata="Q322577" start="2868" end="2883" title="Joel Meyerowitz" label="Joel Meyerowitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q121903" start="2889" end="2904" title="Garry Winogrand" label="Garry Winogrand"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="2920" end="2927" title="Harvard" label="Harvard"/>
<link wikidata="Q49112" start="2929" end="2933" title="Yale" label="Yale"/>
<link wikidata="Q49210" start="2939" end="2958" title="New York University" label="New York University"/>
<link wikidata="Q49115" start="3068" end="3086" title="Cornell University" label="Cornell University"/>
<link wikidata="Q848629" start="3287" end="3315" title="U.S. News &amp;amp; World Report" label="U.S. News &amp;amp; World Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q56000434" start="3594" end="3607" title="Peter Galassi" label="Peter Galassi"/>
<link wikidata="Q313055" start="3802" end="3818" title="Alfred Stieglitz" label="Alfred Stieglitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q60809" start="3850" end="3861" title="Ansel Adams" label="Ansel Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q30317892" start="4003" end="4018" title="spirit of place" label="spirit of place"/>
<link wikidata="Q913672" start="4139" end="4173" title="San Francisco Museum of Modern Art" label="San Francisco Museum of Modern Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q5307363" start="4307" end="4326" title="Dreyfus Corporation" label="Dreyfus Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q49184" start="4396" end="4421" title="Pittsfield, Massachusetts" label="Pittsfield, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895804" start="4526" end="4555" title="University of Minnesota Press" label="University of Minnesota Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q4669411" start="4722" end="4736" title="Abrams Books" label="Harry N Abrams"/>
<link wikidata="Q552959" start="4799" end="4807" title="Bulfinch Press" label="Bulfinch"/>
<link wikidata="Q913672" start="4845" end="4879" title="San Francisco Museum of Modern Art" label="San Francisco Museum of Modern Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q188740" start="4919" end="4939" title="Museum of Modern Art" label="Museum of Modern Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q55419639" start="5742" end="5756" title="Grace M. Mayer" label="Grace M. Mayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q78767" start="5764" end="5774" title="Ernst Haas" label="Ernst Haas"/>
<link wikidata="Q42315105" start="5860" end="5870" title="Ken Heyman" label="Ken Heyman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5541425" start="5872" end="5885" title="George Krause" label="George Krause"/>
<link wikidata="Q15462930" start="5887" end="5902" title="Jerome Liebling" label="Jerome Liebling"/>
<link wikidata="Q712996" start="5904" end="5915" title="Minor White" label="Minor White"/>
<link wikidata="Q121903" start="5921" end="5936" title="Garry Winogrand" label="Garry Winogrand"/>
<link wikidata="Q382329" start="5992" end="6014" title="Jacques Henri Lartigue" label="Jacques Henri Lartigue"/>
<link wikidata="Q241754" start="6158" end="6171" title="André Kertész" label="André Kertész"/>
<link wikidata="Q230673" start="6418" end="6432" title="Dorothea Lange" label="Dorothea Lange"/>
<link wikidata="Q33128865" start="6499" end="6516" title="George P. Elliott" label="George P. Elliott"/>
<link wikidata="Q25041243" start="6582" end="6595" title="New Documents" label="New Documents"/>
<link wikidata="Q234608" start="6648" end="6659" title="Diane Arbus" label="Diane Arbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q711391" start="6661" end="6676" title="Lee Friedlander" label="Lee Friedlander"/>
<link wikidata="Q156567" start="6711" end="6732" title="Henri Cartier-Bresson" label="Henri Cartier-Bresson"/>
<link wikidata="Q354804" start="6966" end="6973" title="Brassaï" label="Brassaï"/>
<link wikidata="Q63184" start="7033" end="7044" title="Bill Brandt" label="Bill Brandt"/>
<link wikidata="Q322030" start="7250" end="7255" title="Eugene Atget" label="Atget"/>
<link wikidata="Q121903" start="7323" end="7338" title="Garry Winogrand" label="Garry Winogrand"/>
<link wikidata="Q712326" start="7411" end="7423" title="E.J. Bellocq" label="E.J. Bellocq"/>
<link wikidata="Q962520" start="7486" end="7500" title="Bruce Davidson (photographer)" label="Bruce Davidson"/>
<link wikidata="Q363308" start="7736" end="7748" title="Walker Evans" label="Walker Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q234608" start="7875" end="7886" title="Diane Arbus" label="Diane Arbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4779388" start="7946" end="7954" title="Aperture Foundation" label="Aperture"/>
<link wikidata="Q5297144" start="7975" end="7985" title="Doon Arbus" label="Doon Arbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6778377" start="7990" end="8003" title="Marvin Israel" label="Marvin Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q389912" start="8354" end="8371" title="William Eggleston" label="William Eggleston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1383354" start="8477" end="8485" title="Harry Callahan (photographer)" label="Callahan"/>
<link wikidata="Q60809" start="8619" end="8630" title="Ansel Adams" label="Ansel Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q318604" start="9648" end="9659" title="Irving Penn" label="Irving Penn"/>
<link wikidata="Q313055" start="9917" end="9933" title="Alfred Stieglitz" label="Alfred Stieglitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7324110" start="9988" end="10002" title="Richard Benson (photographer)" label="Richard Benson"/>
<link wikidata="Q255147" start="10080" end="10101" title="Yale University Press" label="Yale University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q30123030" start="10239" end="10257" title="Sandra S. Phillips" label="Sandra S. Phillips"/>
<link wikidata="Q60809" start="10265" end="10276" title="Ansel Adams" label="Ansel Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q913672" start="10291" end="10325" title="San Francisco Museum of Modern Art" label="San Francisco Museum of Modern Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q239303" start="10372" end="10396" title="Art Institute of Chicago" label="Art Institute of Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q779736" start="10402" end="10417" title="Hayward Gallery" label="Hayward Gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q6445022" start="10427" end="10449" title="Kunstbibliothek Berlin" label="Kunstbibliothek Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641836" start="10451" end="10483" title="Los Angeles County Museum of Art" label="Los Angeles County Museum of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q1392710" start="10557" end="10569" title="Robert Adams (photographer)" label="Robert Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q552959" start="10765" end="10773" title="Bulfinch Press" label="Bulfinch"/>
<link wikidata="Q920901" start="11152" end="11165" title="Wright Morris" label="Wright Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q913672" start="11209" end="11243" title="San Francisco Museum of Modern Art" label="San Francisco Museum of Modern Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q3431793" start="11305" end="11316" title="Jan Groover" label="Jan Groover"/>
<link wikidata="Q712326" start="11388" end="11395" title="E. J. Bellocq" label="Bellocq"/>
<link wikidata="Q744182" start="11481" end="11493" title="Random House" label="Random House"/>
<link wikidata="Q318604" start="11540" end="11551" title="Irving Penn" label="Irving Penn"/>
<link wikidata="Q242849" start="11670" end="11682" title="Helen Levitt" label="Helen Levitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7236199" start="11700" end="11716" title="powerHouse Books" label="powerHouse Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q6767966" start="12127" end="12145" title="Mark Haworth-Booth" label="Mark Haworth-Booth"/>
<link wikidata="Q6888806" start="12496" end="12511" title="Modern Painters (magazine)" label="Modern Painters"/>
<link wikidata="Q183976" start="12775" end="12778" title="VHS" label="VHS"/>
<link wikidata="Q5294" start="12781" end="12784" title="DVD" label="DVD"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1329394" wikidata="Q1329931" url="?curid=1329394" title="Rhett Akins">
<text>Thomas Rhett Akins Sr. (born October 13, 1969) is an American country music singer and songwriter. Signed to Decca Records between 1994 and 1997, he released two albums for that label (1995&#x27;s &quot;A Thousand Memories&quot; and 1996&#x27;s &quot;Somebody New&quot;), followed by 1998&#x27;s &quot;What Livin&#x27;s All About&quot; on MCA Nashville. &quot;Friday Night in Dixie&quot; was released in 2002 on Audium Entertainment. Overall, his albums have accounted for fourteen singles on the &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot Country Songs, including the number one &quot;Don&#x27;t Get Me Started&quot; from 1996.

Although he has not charted a single since 2006, Akins has written singles for other country music singers, primarily as one-third of the songwriting team The Peach Pickers, alongside Dallas Davidson and Ben Hayslip. He is also the father of fellow country singer Thomas Rhett.

==Early life==
Thomas Rhett Akins Sr. was born on October 13, 1969, in Valdosta, Georgia, to Pamela (née LaHood) and Thomas Akins. By age 11, he and his two younger brothers had formed a band. Rhett played football at the University of Georgia and studied business but gave up his studies after a year. He then worked for his father’s oil and gas distribution company.

==Career==
===1992–1994: Move to Nashville and recording contract===
In 1992, after performing in the theme park show &quot;Music Country Music&quot; at Fiesta Texas in San Antonio, Texas, Akins moved to Nashville, Tennessee, and performed in &quot;Country Music USA&quot; at Opryland Theme Park. Akins then became a demo singer before Decca Records signed him to a recording contract.

===1994–1997: &quot;A Thousand Memories&quot; and &quot;Somebody New&quot;===
Akins&#x27;s first single was &quot;What They&#x27;re Talkin&#x27; About&quot;, a No. 35 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; country charts in late 1994, followed by the No. 36 &quot;I Brake for Brunettes&quot;. After these first two singles came his signature song, &quot;That Ain&#x27;t My Truck&quot;. This was his breakthrough hit, peaking at No. 3 on the country charts in mid-1995. All three of these songs were included on his 1995 debut album &quot;A Thousand Memories&quot;, which also produced the No. 17 &quot;She Said Yes&quot;. Also in 1995 and 1996, Akins toured with Reba McEntire. In 1995, he was named one of &quot;Country America&#x27;s&quot; &quot;Top New Stars&quot;.

Akins&#x27; second album, &quot;Somebody New&quot;, produced his only number one hit in &quot;Don&#x27;t Get Me Started&quot;, which peaked in August 1996. The other three singles from &quot;Somebody New&quot; were less successful, with &quot;Love You Back&quot; (the second single) becoming his last top 40 hit at No. 38.

===1997–2004: Transfer to MCA Nashville, &quot;What Livin&#x27;s All About&quot;, and &quot;Friday Night in Dixie&quot;===
After Decca&#x27;s Nashville division was merged into MCA Nashville in 1997, Akins was transferred to MCA Nashville for the release of his third album, 1998&#x27;s &quot;What Livin&#x27;s All About&quot;. This album was even less successful, however, with its lead-off single &quot;More Than Everything&quot; falling one space short of top 40 in the U.S., although it was a No. 25 hit on the &quot;RPM&quot; country charts in Canada. Also in 1998, Akins charted with a cover of Eddie Rabbitt&#x27;s 1980 number one hit &quot;Drivin&#x27; My Life Away&quot;, which Akins covered on the soundtrack to the 1998 film &quot;Black Dog&quot;.

In 2000, he voiced the character of Tom Sawyer in MGM&#x27;s animated remake of &quot;Tom Sawyer&quot; alongside fellow country singer Mark Wills, who voiced Huckleberry Finn, as well as Lee Ann Womack, who voiced Becky&#x27;s singing voice. A fourth album, &quot;Friday Night in Dixie&quot;, was released in 2002 on Koch Records. This album&#x27;s only two singles, &quot;Highway Sunrise&quot; and &quot;In Your Love&quot;, peaked at No. 55 and No. 57, respectively.

===2005–2006: BNA Records and &quot;People Like Me&quot;===
Akins did not release another single until his signing with BNA Records in 2005, when he released the No. 57-peaking &quot;Kiss My Country Ass&quot;, which was later recorded by Blake Shelton for his 2010 extended play &quot;Hillbilly Bone&quot;. It was included on his album &quot;People Like Me&quot;, which was originally to have been released via BNA on June 14, 2006, but was ultimately self-released in June 2007. &quot;If Heaven Wasn&#x27;t So Far Away&quot; was the second single from &quot;People Like Me&quot;, which failed to chart for Akins, but was later recorded by Justin Moore, whose version went to number 1. &quot;Down South&quot; followed in 2008, as did its only single, the title track, which again failed to chart.

===2009–2010: &quot;Michael Waddell&#x27;s Bone Collector: The Brotherhood Album&quot;===
In 2009, Akins released the single &quot;Hung Up&quot;, which did not chart. It was later included on the 2010 album &quot;Michael Waddell&#x27;s Bone Collector: The Brotherhood Album&quot;, a collaboration with fellow country music singer Dallas Davidson, released through Reprise Records Nashville.

===Songwriting career===
In the late 2000s, Akins began writing songs for other artists, primarily with Ben Hayslip and Dallas Davidson, collaboratively known as The Peach Pickers. Among the singles that Akins has co-written are &quot;Put a Girl in It&quot; recorded by Brooks &amp; Dunn, &quot;Barefoot and Crazy&quot; by Jack Ingram, &quot;Gimmie That Girl&quot; and &quot;The Shape I&#x27;m In&quot; by Joe Nichols, &quot;All About Tonight&quot;, &quot;Honey Bee&quot;, &quot;I Lived It&quot;, and &quot;Boys &#x27;Round Here&quot; by Blake Shelton, &quot;When She Says Baby&quot;, &quot;Just Gettin&#x27; Started&quot;, &quot;Tonight Looks Good on You&quot; by Jason Aldean, &quot;All Over Me&quot; by Josh Turner, &quot;Hot Mess&quot; by Tyler Farr, &quot;Farmer&#x27;s Daughter&quot; and &quot;Take a Back Road&quot; by Rodney Atkins, &quot;Bait a Hook&quot; and &quot;Point at You&quot; by Justin Moore, &quot;I Can Take It from There&quot; by Chris Young, &quot;I Know Somebody&quot; by LoCash, &quot;Parking Lot Party&quot;, &quot;That Don&#x27;t Sound Like You&quot; by Lee Brice, &quot;Hey Girl&quot; by Billy Currington, &quot;I Don&#x27;t Want This Night to End&quot;, &quot;Huntin&#x27;, Fishin&#x27; and Lovin&#x27; Every Day&quot; by Luke Bryan, &quot;Wild in Your Smile&quot;, &quot;Mind Reader&quot;, &quot;Small Town Boy&quot; by Dustin Lynch, &quot;It Goes Like This&quot;, &quot;Get Me Some of That&quot; and &quot;Star of the Show&quot; by Thomas Rhett, &quot;Granddaddy&#x27;s Gun&quot; by Aaron Lewis and &quot;A Buncha Girls&quot;, &quot;Young &amp; Crazy&quot; by Frankie Ballard, &quot;Kick It in the Sticks&quot;, &quot;Small Town Throwdown&quot; by Brantley Gilbert., &quot;Ready Set Roll&quot; by Chase Rice, &quot;Dirt on My Boots&quot; by Jon Pardi, “To Be Loved By You” by Parker McCollum and &quot;Missing&quot; by William Michael Morgan.

==Personal life==
Akins married Paige Braswell in 1989, but they have since divorced. They have a son, Thomas Rhett Akins Jr. (b. March 30, 1990) and a daughter, Kasey Lee Akins (b. 1993). The younger Rhett is also a country music singer.

Akins married Sonya Mansfield in 2017. They had their first child on March 13, 2020, a boy.

==Discography==
===Studio albums===
===Collaboration albums===
===Singles===
===Other charted songs===
===Music videos===
==Filmography==
== Awards and nominations ==
=== As a recording artist ===
=== As a songwriter ===
==References==
==External links==
* Official website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1329931" start="0" end="22" title="Rhett Akins" label="Thomas Rhett Akins Sr."/>
<link wikidata="Q83440" start="62" end="75" title="country music" label="country music"/>
<link wikidata="Q557632" start="109" end="122" title="Decca Records" label="Decca Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q4660090" start="203" end="222" title="A Thousand Memories" label="A Thousand Memories"/>
<link wikidata="Q7559570" start="251" end="263" title="Somebody New (album)" label="Somebody New"/>
<link wikidata="Q7991306" start="302" end="329" title="What Livin&amp;#x27;s All About" label="What Livin&amp;#x27;s All About"/>
<link wikidata="Q4043197" start="339" end="352" title="Universal Music Group Nashville" label="MCA Nashville"/>
<link wikidata="Q5503542" start="360" end="381" title="Friday Night in Dixie" label="Friday Night in Dixie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344736" start="412" end="432" title="Audium Entertainment" label="Audium Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q862771" start="497" end="536" title="Hot Country Songs" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Hot Country Songs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5291616" start="569" end="594" title="Don&amp;#x27;t Get Me Started" label="Don&amp;#x27;t Get Me Started"/>
<link wikidata="Q7756428" start="768" end="785" title="The Peach Pickers" label="The Peach Pickers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5211314" start="797" end="812" title="Dallas Davidson" label="Dallas Davidson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4885820" start="817" end="828" title="Ben Hayslip" label="Ben Hayslip"/>
<link wikidata="Q7793491" start="877" end="889" title="Thomas Rhett" label="Thomas Rhett"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010240" start="963" end="980" title="Valdosta, Georgia" label="Valdosta, Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q761534" start="1114" end="1135" title="University of Georgia" label="University of Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q23197" start="1466" end="1486" title="Nashville, Tennessee" label="Nashville, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q557632" start="1598" end="1611" title="Decca Records" label="Decca Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q485240" start="1829" end="1838" title="Billboard (magazine)" label="Billboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7711136" start="1993" end="2017" title="That Ain&amp;#x27;t My Truck" label="That Ain&amp;#x27;t My Truck"/>
<link wikidata="Q4660090" start="2177" end="2196" title="A Thousand Memories" label="A Thousand Memories"/>
<link wikidata="Q229430" start="2302" end="2315" title="Reba McEntire" label="Reba McEntire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7559570" start="2441" end="2453" title="Somebody New (album)" label="Somebody New"/>
<link wikidata="Q5291616" start="2503" end="2528" title="Don&amp;#x27;t Get Me Started" label="Don&amp;#x27;t Get Me Started"/>
<link wikidata="Q4043197" start="2910" end="2923" title="Universal Music Group Nashville" label="MCA Nashville"/>
<link wikidata="Q7991306" start="3026" end="3053" title="What Livin&amp;#x27;s All About" label="What Livin&amp;#x27;s All About"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344164" start="3254" end="3257" title="RPM (magazine)" label="RPM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282956" start="3334" end="3347" title="Eddie Rabbitt" label="Eddie Rabbitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5308041" start="3381" end="3406" title="Drivin&amp;#x27; My Life Away" label="Drivin&amp;#x27; My Life Away"/>
<link wikidata="Q880226" start="3475" end="3484" title="Black Dog (1998 film)" label="Black Dog"/>
<link wikidata="Q2388653" start="3579" end="3589" title="Tom Sawyer (2000 film)" label="Tom Sawyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1683659" start="3628" end="3638" title="Mark Wills" label="Mark Wills"/>
<link wikidata="Q454082" start="3680" end="3694" title="Lee Ann Womack" label="Lee Ann Womack"/>
<link wikidata="Q5503542" start="3757" end="3778" title="Friday Night in Dixie" label="Friday Night in Dixie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273666" start="3810" end="3822" title="Koch Records" label="Koch Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q4836116" start="4082" end="4093" title="BNA Records" label="BNA Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q94831" start="4200" end="4213" title="Blake Shelton" label="Blake Shelton"/>
<link wikidata="Q17091674" start="4247" end="4261" title="Hillbilly Bone" label="Hillbilly Bone"/>
<link wikidata="Q5990331" start="4448" end="4481" title="If Heaven Wasn&amp;#x27;t So Far Away" label="If Heaven Wasn&amp;#x27;t So Far Away"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333234" start="4602" end="4614" title="Justin Moore" label="Justin Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q83440" start="5069" end="5082" title="country music" label="country music"/>
<link wikidata="Q5211314" start="5090" end="5105" title="Dallas Davidson" label="Dallas Davidson"/>
<link wikidata="Q645889" start="5124" end="5139" title="Reprise Records" label="Reprise Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q4885820" start="5256" end="5267" title="Ben Hayslip" label="Ben Hayslip"/>
<link wikidata="Q5211314" start="5272" end="5287" title="Dallas Davidson" label="Dallas Davidson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7756428" start="5314" end="5331" title="The Peach Pickers" label="The Peach Pickers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7262146" start="5387" end="5403" title="Put a Girl in It" label="Put a Girl in It"/>
<link wikidata="Q929683" start="5422" end="5439" title="Brooks &amp;amp; Dunn" label="Brooks &amp;amp; Dunn"/>
<link wikidata="Q4860359" start="5447" end="5465" title="Barefoot and Crazy" label="Barefoot and Crazy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1677067" start="5475" end="5486" title="Jack Ingram" label="Jack Ingram"/>
<link wikidata="Q5562743" start="5494" end="5510" title="Gimmie That Girl" label="Gimmie That Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q7763662" start="5527" end="5548" title="The Shape I&amp;#x27;m In (Joe Nichols song)" label="The Shape I&amp;#x27;m In"/>
<link wikidata="Q777990" start="5558" end="5569" title="Joe Nichols" label="Joe Nichols"/>
<link wikidata="Q4728523" start="5577" end="5594" title="All About Tonight (Blake Shelton song)" label="All About Tonight"/>
<link wikidata="Q5893427" start="5608" end="5617" title="Honey Bee (Blake Shelton song)" label="Honey Bee"/>
<link wikidata="Q51268929" start="5631" end="5641" title="I Lived It" label="I Lived It"/>
<link wikidata="Q13357799" start="5659" end="5680" title="Boys &amp;#x27;Round Here" label="Boys &amp;#x27;Round Here"/>
<link wikidata="Q94831" start="5690" end="5703" title="Blake Shelton" label="Blake Shelton"/>
<link wikidata="Q17066514" start="5711" end="5729" title="When She Says Baby" label="When She Says Baby"/>
<link wikidata="Q18636084" start="5743" end="5768" title="Just Gettin&amp;#x27; Started" label="Just Gettin&amp;#x27; Started"/>
<link wikidata="Q19898047" start="5782" end="5807" title="Tonight Looks Good on You" label="Tonight Looks Good on You"/>
<link wikidata="Q195439" start="5817" end="5829" title="Jason Aldean" label="Jason Aldean"/>
<link wikidata="Q4729217" start="5837" end="5848" title="All Over Me (Josh Turner song)" label="All Over Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q452682" start="5858" end="5869" title="Josh Turner" label="Josh Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q7860004" start="5895" end="5905" title="Tyler Farr" label="Tyler Farr"/>
<link wikidata="Q5435684" start="5913" end="5935" title="Farmer&amp;#x27;s Daughter (Rodney Atkins song)" label="Farmer&amp;#x27;s Daughter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7677851" start="5952" end="5968" title="Take a Back Road (song)" label="Take a Back Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q165864" start="5978" end="5991" title="Rodney Atkins" label="Rodney Atkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q4848718" start="5999" end="6010" title="Bait a Hook" label="Bait a Hook"/>
<link wikidata="Q16165248" start="6027" end="6039" title="Point at You" label="Point at You"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333234" start="6049" end="6061" title="Justin Moore" label="Justin Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q5976609" start="6069" end="6093" title="I Can Take It from There" label="I Can Take It from There"/>
<link wikidata="Q952176" start="6103" end="6114" title="Chris Young (singer)" label="Chris Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q22678078" start="6122" end="6137" title="I Know Somebody" label="I Know Somebody"/>
<link wikidata="Q6663066" start="6147" end="6153" title="LoCash" label="LoCash"/>
<link wikidata="Q17062468" start="6161" end="6178" title="Parking Lot Party" label="Parking Lot Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q20648752" start="6192" end="6222" title="That Don&amp;#x27;t Sound Like You" label="That Don&amp;#x27;t Sound Like You"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811729" start="6232" end="6241" title="Lee Brice" label="Lee Brice"/>
<link wikidata="Q16995308" start="6249" end="6257" title="Hey Girl (Billy Currington song)" label="Hey Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q452441" start="6267" end="6283" title="Billy Currington" label="Billy Currington"/>
<link wikidata="Q3313603" start="6291" end="6326" title="I Don&amp;#x27;t Want This Night to End" label="I Don&amp;#x27;t Want This Night to End"/>
<link wikidata="Q23057998" start="6340" end="6392" title="Huntin&amp;#x27;, Fishin&amp;#x27; and Lovin&amp;#x27; Every Day" label="Huntin&amp;#x27;, Fishin&amp;#x27; and Lovin&amp;#x27; Every Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q166197" start="6402" end="6412" title="Luke Bryan" label="Luke Bryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q17066016" start="6420" end="6438" title="Wild in Your Smile" label="Wild in Your Smile"/>
<link wikidata="Q21160092" start="6452" end="6463" title="Mind Reader (Dustin Lynch song)" label="Mind Reader"/>
<link wikidata="Q30599334" start="6477" end="6491" title="Small Town Boy (song)" label="Small Town Boy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5317118" start="6501" end="6513" title="Dustin Lynch" label="Dustin Lynch"/>
<link wikidata="Q16158039" start="6521" end="6538" title="It Goes Like This (song)" label="It Goes Like This"/>
<link wikidata="Q16156353" start="6552" end="6571" title="Get Me Some of That" label="Get Me Some of That"/>
<link wikidata="Q27814283" start="6588" end="6604" title="Star of the Show" label="Star of the Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q7793491" start="6614" end="6626" title="Thomas Rhett" label="Thomas Rhett"/>
<link wikidata="Q302280" start="6665" end="6676" title="Aaron Lewis (musician)" label="Aaron Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4655682" start="6687" end="6701" title="A Buncha Girls" label="A Buncha Girls"/>
<link wikidata="Q18663826" start="6715" end="6732" title="Young &amp;amp; Crazy (Frankie Ballard song)" label="Young &amp;amp; Crazy"/>
<link wikidata="Q15059504" start="6742" end="6757" title="Frankie Ballard" label="Frankie Ballard"/>
<link wikidata="Q6404232" start="6765" end="6786" title="Kick It in the Sticks" label="Kick It in the Sticks"/>
<link wikidata="Q18163865" start="6800" end="6820" title="Small Town Throwdown" label="Small Town Throwdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q4957684" start="6830" end="6846" title="Brantley Gilbert" label="Brantley Gilbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q17042808" start="6855" end="6869" title="Ready Set Roll" label="Ready Set Roll"/>
<link wikidata="Q5087189" start="6879" end="6889" title="Chase Rice" label="Chase Rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q26963208" start="6897" end="6913" title="Dirt on My Boots" label="Dirt on My Boots"/>
<link wikidata="Q6271354" start="6923" end="6932" title="Jon Pardi" label="Jon Pardi"/>
<link wikidata="Q108365871" start="6935" end="6953" title="To Be Loved by You (Parker McCollum song)" label="To Be Loved By You"/>
<link wikidata="Q20684755" start="6958" end="6973" title="Parker McCollum" label="Parker McCollum"/>
<link wikidata="Q22073664" start="7001" end="7023" title="William Michael Morgan" label="William Michael Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7793491" start="7129" end="7151" title="Thomas Rhett" label="Thomas Rhett Akins Jr."/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1329395" wikidata="Q4614620" url="?curid=1329395" title="Roger de Clare, 2nd Earl of Hertford">
<text>Roger de Clare, 2nd Earl of Hertford, 5th Lord of Clare, 5th Lord of Tonbridge, 5th Lord of Cardigan (1116–1173) was a powerful Anglo-Norman noble in 12th-century England. He succeeded to the Earldom of Hertford and Honor of Clare, Tonbridge and Cardigan when his brother Gilbert died without issue.

==Life==
Roger was a son of Richard Fitz Gilbert de Clare and Alice de Gernon. In 1153, he appears with his cousin, Richard Strongbow, Earl of Pembroke, as one of the signatories to the Treaty of Wallingford, in which Stephen recognises Henry of Anjou as his successor.

Roger is found signing charters at Canterbury and Dover in 1156. Next year, according to Powell, he received from Henry II a grant of whatever lands he could conquer in South Wales. This is probably only an expansion of the statement of the Welsh chronicles that in this year (about 1 June) he entered Cardigan and &#x27;stored&#x27; the castles of Humfrey, Aberdyfi, Dineir, and Rhystud. Rhys ap Gruffydd, the prince of South Wales, appears to have complained to Henry II of these encroachments ; but being unable to obtain redress from the king of England sent his nephew Einion ab Anarawd to attack Humfrey and the other Norman fortresses. The &#x27;Annales Cambriæ seem to assign these events to the year 1159 ; and the &#x27;Brut&#x27; adds that Prince Rhys burnt all the French castles in Cardigan.

In 1158 or 1160, Roger advanced with an army to the relief of Carmarthen Castle, then besieged by Rhys, and pitched his camp at Dinweilir. Not daring to attack the Welsh prince, the English army offered peace and retired home. In 1163, Rhys again invaded the conquests of Clare, who,learn incidentally, has at some earlier period caused Einion, the capturer of Humfrey Castle, to be murdered by domestic treachery. In 1164 he assisted with the Constitutions of Clarendon. From his munificence to the Church and his numerous acts of piety, Roger was called the &quot;Good Earl of Hertford&quot;. He was the founder of Little Marcis Nunnery prior to 1163.

A second time all Cardigan was wrested from the Norman hands; and things now wore so threatening an aspect that Henry II led an army into Wales in 1165, although, according to one Welsh account, Rhys had made his peace with the king in 1164, and had even visited him in England. The causes assigned by the Welsh chronicle for this fresh outbreak of hostility are that Henry failed to keep his promises – presumably of restitution – and secondly that Roger, earl of Clare, was honourably receiving Walter, the murderer of Rhys&#x27;s nephew Einion. 
For the third time it is shown that Cardigan was overrun and the Norman castles burnt; but it is possible that the events assigned by the &#x27;Annales Cambræ&#x27; to the year 1165 are the same as those assigned by the &#x27;Brut y Tywysogion&#x27; to 1163.
In the intervening years, Roger had been abroad, and is found signing charters at Le Mans, probably about Christmas 1160, and again at Rouen in 1161. In July 1163 he was summoned by Thomas Becket to do homage in his capacity of steward to the archbishops of Canterbury for the castle of Tonbridge. In his refusal, which he based on the grounds that he held the castle of the king and not of the archbishop, he was supported by Henry II. Next year he was one of the &quot;recognisers&quot; of the Constitutions of Clarendon. Early in 1170 he was appointed one of a band of commissioners for Kent, Surrey, and other arts of southern England. His last known signature seems to belong to June or July 1171, and is dated abroad from Chevaillée.He appears to have died in 1173, and certainly before July or August 1174, when Richard, earl of Clare, his son, went to the king at Northampton.

==Family==
Roger married Matilda (or Maud) de St. Hilary, daughter of Jean or James de St. Hilary and Aveline, later married to William d&#x27;Aubigny, 2nd Earl of Arundel. Together they had seven children:
* Mabel de Clare, d. 1204, m. (c. 1175), Nigel de Mowbray.
* Richard de Clare, b. c. 1153, Tonbridge Castle, Kent, England, d. 28 November 1217, 3rd Earl of Hertford
* James de Clare
* Eveline (Aveline) de Clare, d. 4 June 1225, m. [1] (c. 1204), Geoffrey IV Fitz Piers (Fitz Peter), 1st Earl of Essex. m. [2] Sir William Munchensy, (b. c. 1184), son of Warin de Munchensy and Agnes Fitz John.
* Roger de Clare, d. 1241, Middleton, Norfolk, England, m. Alix de Dammartin-en-Goële.
* John de Clare
* Henry de Clare

==Notes==
==References==
===Attribution===</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4614620" start="0" end="100" title="Roger de Clare, 2nd Earl of Hertford" label="Roger de Clare, 2nd Earl of Hertford, 5th Lord of Clare, 5th Lord of Tonbridge, 5th Lord of Cardigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4138270" start="272" end="279" title="Gilbert de Clare, 1st Earl of Hertford" label="Gilbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1380966" start="329" end="358" title="Richard Fitz Gilbert de Clare" label="Richard Fitz Gilbert de Clare"/>
<link wikidata="Q437952" start="417" end="452" title="Richard de Clare, 2nd Earl of Pembroke" label="Richard Strongbow, Earl of Pembroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q967289" start="487" end="508" title="Treaty of Wallingford" label="Treaty of Wallingford"/>
<link wikidata="Q102140" start="538" end="552" title="Henry II of England" label="Henry of Anjou"/>
<link wikidata="Q102140" start="686" end="694" title="Henry II of England" label="Henry II"/>
<link wikidata="Q741855" start="961" end="977" title="Rhys ap Gruffydd" label="Rhys ap Gruffydd"/>
<link wikidata="Q16863293" start="1146" end="1163" title="Einion ab Anarawd" label="Einion ab Anarawd"/>
<link wikidata="Q14906524" start="1440" end="1457" title="Carmarthen Castle" label="Carmarthen Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q940111" start="1822" end="1848" title="Constitutions of Clarendon" label="Constitutions of Clarendon"/>
<link wikidata="Q192236" start="3023" end="3036" title="Thomas Becket" label="Thomas Becket"/>
<link wikidata="Q940111" start="3337" end="3363" title="Constitutions of Clarendon" label="Constitutions of Clarendon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1311712" start="3855" end="3898" title="William d&amp;#x27;Aubigny, 2nd Earl of Arundel" label="William d&amp;#x27;Aubigny, 2nd Earl of Arundel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3936" end="3950" title="Mabel de Clare" label="Mabel de Clare"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3975" end="3991" title="Nigel de Mowbray" label="Nigel de Mowbray"/>
<link wikidata="Q2151007" start="3995" end="4011" title="Richard de Clare, 3rd Earl of Hertford" label="Richard de Clare"/>
<link wikidata="Q7820768" start="4025" end="4041" title="Tonbridge Castle" label="Tonbridge Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647030" start="4083" end="4099" title="Earl of Hertford" label="Earl of Hertford"/>
<link wikidata="Q16209208" start="4119" end="4145" title="Aveline de Clare, Countess of Essex" label="Eveline (Aveline) de Clare"/>
<link wikidata="Q5534602" start="4181" end="4203" title="Geoffrey Fitz Peter, 1st Earl of Essex" label="Geoffrey IV Fitz Piers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277289" start="4222" end="4235" title="Earl of Essex" label="Earl of Essex"/>
<link wikidata="Q24970042" start="4288" end="4306" title="Warin de Munchensy" label="Warin de Munchensy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2657926" start="4355" end="4373" title="Middleton, Norfolk" label="Middleton, Norfolk"/>
<link wikidata="" start="4387" end="4413" title=":fr:Maison de Dammartin-en-Goële" label="Alix de Dammartin-en-Goële"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1329397" wikidata="Q335046" url="?curid=1329397" title="Passion (emotion)">
<text>Passion (Greek &quot;πάσχω&quot; &quot;to suffer, to be acted on&quot; and Late Latin (chiefly Christian) &quot;passio&quot; &quot;passion; suffering&quot;) denotes strong and intractable or barely controllable emotion or inclination with respect to a particular person or thing. Passion can range from eager interest in, or admiration for, an idea, proposal, or cause; to enthusiastic enjoyment of an interest or activity; to strong attraction, excitement, or emotion towards a person. It is particularly used in the context of romance or sexual desire, though it generally implies a deeper or more encompassing emotion than that implied by the term &quot;lust&quot;, often incorporating ideas of ecstasy and/or suffering. 

Denis Diderot (1713–1784) describes passions as &quot;penchants, inclinations, desires and aversions carried to a certain degree of intensity, combined with an indistinct sensation of pleasure or pain, occasioned or accompanied by some irregular movement of the blood and animal spirits, are what we call passions. They can be so strong as to inhibit all practice of personal freedom, a state in which the soul is in some sense rendered passive; whence the name passions. This inclination or so-called disposition of the soul, is born of the opinion we hold that a great good or a great evil is contained in an object which in and of itself arouses passion&quot;.
Diderot further breaks down pleasure and pain, which he sees as the guiding principles of passion, into four major categories:

# Pleasures and pains of the senses 
# Pleasures of the mind or of the imagination 
# Our perfection or our imperfection of virtues or vices 
# Pleasures and pains in the happiness or misfortunes of others

Modern pop-psychologies and employers tend to favor and even encourage the expression of a &quot;passion&quot;; previous generations sometimes expressed more nuanced viewpoints.

== Emotion ==
&quot;The standard definition for emotion is a &quot;&quot;Natural instinctive state of mind deriving from one&#x27;s circumstances, mood, or relationships with others&quot;. Emotion, William James describes emotions as &quot;corporeal reverberations such as surprise, curiosity, rapture, fear, anger, lust, greed and the like.&quot; These are all feelings that affect our mental perception. Our body is placed into this latter state, which is caused by one&#x27;s mental affection. This state gives signals to our body which cause &quot;bodily expressions.&quot;

The philosopher Robert Solomon developed his own theory and definition of &quot;emotion&quot;. His view is that emotion is not a bodily state, but instead a type of judgment. &quot;It is necessary that we choose our emotions, in much the same way that we choose our actions&quot; With regard to the relationship between emotion and our rational will, Solomon believes that people are responsible for their emotions. Emotions are rational and purposive, just as actions are. &quot;We choose an emotion much as we choose a course of action.&quot; Recent studies, also traditional studies have placed emotions to be a physiological disturbance. William James takes such consciousness of emotion to be not a choice but a physical occurrence rather than a disturbance. It is an occurrence that happens outside of our control, and our bodies are just affected by these &quot;emotions.&quot; We produce these actions based on the instinctive state that these feelings lead us towards.

This concept of emotion was derived from passion. Emotions were created as a category within passion.

==Reason==

Strong Desire for something: 
In whatever context, if someone desires for something and that desire has some strong feeling or emotion is defined in terms of passion. Passion has no boundary, being passionate about something which is boundless can be sometimes dangerous, In which person forget about everything and is fully determined towards the particular thing-(Sanyukta)

In his wake, Stoics like Epictetus emphasized that &quot;the most important and especially pressing field of study is that which has to do with the stronger emotions...sorrows, lamentations, envies...passions which make it impossible for us even to listen to reason&quot;. The Stoic tradition still lay behind Hamlet&#x27;s plea to &quot;Give me that man That is not passion&#x27;s slave, and I will wear him In my heart&#x27;s core&quot;, or Erasmus&#x27;s lament that &quot;Jupiter has bestowed far more passion than reason – you could calculate the ratio as 24 to one&quot;. It was only with the Romantic movement that a valorisation of passion &quot;over&quot; reason took hold in the Western tradition: &quot;the more Passion there is, the better the Poetry&quot;.

The recent concerns of emotional intelligence have been to find a synthesis of the two forces—something that &quot;turns the old understanding of the tension between reason and feeling on its head: it is not that we want to do away with emotion and put reason in its place, as Erasmus had it, but instead find the intelligent balance of the two&quot;.

===&quot;Descartes&#x27; Error&quot;===
Antonio Damasio studied what ensued when something &quot;severed ties between the lower centres of the emotional brain...and the thinking abilities of the neocortex&quot;. He found that while &quot;emotions and feelings can cause havoc in the processes of reasoning...the &quot;absence&quot; of emotion and feeling is no less damaging&quot;; and was led to &quot;the counter-intuitive position that feelings are typically &quot;indispensable&quot; for rational decisions&quot;. The passions, he concluded, &quot;have a say on how the rest of the brain and cognition go about their business. Their influence is immense...[providing] a frame of reference – as opposed to Descartes&#x27; error...the Cartesian idea of a disembodied mind&quot;.

==In marriage==

A tension or dialectic between marriage and passion can be traced back in Western society at least as far as the Middle Ages, and the emergence of the cult of courtly love. Denis de Rougemont has argued that &#x27;since its origins in the twelfth century, passionate love was constituted in opposition to marriage&#x27;. Stacey Oliker writes that while &quot;Puritanism prepared the ground for a marital love ideology by prescribing love in marriage&quot;, only from the eighteenth century has &quot;romantic love ideology resolved the Puritan antagonism between passion and reason&quot; in a marital context. (Note though that Saint Paul spoke of loving one&#x27;s wife in Ephesians 5.)

==Intellectual passions==

George Bernard Shaw &quot;insists that there are passions far more exciting than the physical ones...&#x27;intellectual passion, mathematical passion, passion for discovery and exploration: the mightiest of all passions&#x27;&quot;. His contemporary, Sigmund Freud, argued for a continuity (not a contrast) between the two, physical and intellectual, and commended the way Leonardo da Vinci &quot;had energetically sublimated his sexual passions into the passion for independent scientific research&quot;.

==As a motivation in an occupation==
There are different reasons individuals are motivated in an occupation. These may include a passion for the occupation, for a firm, or for an activity. When Canadian managers or professionals score as passionate about their occupation they tend to be less obsessive about their behavior while on their job, resulting in more work being done and more work satisfaction. These same individuals have higher levels of psychological well-being. When people genuinely enjoy their profession and are motivated by their passion, they tend to be more satisfied with their work and more psychologically healthy. When managers or professionals are unsatisfied with their profession they tend to also be dissatisfied with their family relationships and to experience psychological distress. Other reasons people are more satisfied when they are motivated by their passion for their occupation include the effects of intrinsic and external motivations. When Canadian managers or professionals do a job to satisfy others, they tend to have lower levels of satisfaction and psychological health. Also, these same individuals have shown they are motivated by several beliefs and fears concerning other people. Thirdly, though some individuals believe one should not work extreme hours, many prefer it because of how passionate they are about the occupation. On the other hand, this may also put a strain on family relationships and friendships. The balance of the two is something that is hard to achieve and it is always hard to satisfy both parties.

===Work enjoyment vs. inner pressures===
There are different components that qualify as reasons for considering an individual as a workaholic. Burke &amp; Fiksenbaum refer to Spence and Robbins (1992) by stating two of the three workaholism components that are used to measure workaholism. These include feeling driven to work because of inner pressure and work enjoyment. Both of these affect an individual differently and each has different outcomes. To begin, work enjoyment brings about more positive work outcomes and is unrelated to health indicators. Inner pressure, on the other hand, is negatively related with work outcomes and has been related negatively to measures of psychological health. Burke &amp; Fiksenbaum make a reference to Graves et al. (2006) when examining work enjoyment and inner pressures. Work enjoyment and inner pressure were tested with performance ratings. The former was positively related to performance ratings while the latter interfered with the performance-enhancing aspects of work enjoyment. Burke &amp; Fiksenbaum refer to Virick and Baruch (2007) when explaining how these two workaholism components affect life satisfaction. Not surprisingly, inner pressure lowered the balance between work-life and life satisfaction but enhanced people&#x27;s performance at their occupation, whereas work enjoyment led to a positive balance between the two. Again, when managers and professionals are passionate about their occupation and put in many hours, they then become concerned that their occupation will satisfy personal relationships and the balance must then be found according to the importance levels of the individual.

====Motivation and outcomes====
The researchers indicate different patterns of correlations between these two components. These patterns include antecedents and consequences. The two components offer unique motivations or orientations to work which result in its effects on work and well-being. Inner pressures will hinder performance while work enjoyment will smooth performance. Inner pressures of workaholism have characteristics such as persistence, rigidity, perfectionism, and heightened levels of job stress. This component is also associated with working harder, not smarter. On a more positive note, individuals who enjoy their work will have higher levels of performance for several reasons. These include creativity, trust in their colleagues, and reducing levels of stress.

====Good and bad workaholics====
Burke and Fiksenbaum refer to Schaufeli, Taris, and Bakker (2007) when they made a distinction between an individual good workaholics and bad workaholics. A good workaholic will score higher on measures of work engagement and a bad workaholic will score higher on measures of burnout. They{mentioned above} also suggest why this is – some individuals work because they are satisfied, engaged, and challenged and to prove a point. On the other hand, the opposite kind work hard because they are addicted to work; they see that the occupation makes a contribution to finding an identity and purpose.

====Desire in an occupation====
Passion and desire go hand in hand, especially as a motivation. Linstead &amp; Brewis refer to Merriam-Webster to say that passion is an &quot;intense, driving, or overmastering feeling or conviction&quot;. This suggests that passion is a very intense emotion, but can be positive or negative. Negatively, it may be unpleasant at times. It could involve pain and has obsessive forms that can destroy the self and even others. In an occupation, when an individual is very passionate about their job, they may be so wrapped up in work that they cause pain to their loved ones by focusing more on their job than on their friendships and relationships. This is a constant battle of balance that is difficult to achieve and only an individual can decide where that line lies. Passion is connected to the concept of desire. In fact, they are inseparable, according to a (mostly western) way of thinking related to Plato, Aristotle, and Augustine. These two concepts cause individuals to reach out for something, or even someone. They both can either be creative or destructive and this dark side can very well be dangerous to the self or to others.

==As a motivation for hobbies==
Hobbies require a certain level of passion in order to continue engaging in the hobby. Singers, athletes, dancers, artists, and many others describe their emotion for their hobby as a passion. Although this might be the emotion they&#x27;re feeling, passion is serving as a motivation for them to continue their hobby. Recently there has been a model to explain different types of passion that contribute to engaging in an activity.

=== Dualistic model ===
According to researchers who have tested this model, &quot;A dualistic model in which passion is defined as a strong inclination or desire toward a self-defining activity that one likes (or even loves), that one finds important (high valuation), and in which one invests time and energy.&quot; It is proposed that there exist two types of passion. The first type of passion is harmonious passion.

&quot;A harmonious passion refers to a strong desire to engage in the activity that remains under the person&#x27;s control.&quot; This is mostly obtained when the person views their activity as part of their identity. Furthermore, once an activity is part of the person&#x27;s identity then the motivation to continue the specific hobby is even stronger. The harmony obtained with this passion is conceived when the person is able both to freely engage in or to stop the hobby. It&#x27;s not so much that the person is forced to continue this hobby, but on his or her own free will is able to engage in it. For example, if a girl loves to play volleyball, but she has a project due the next day and her friends invite her to play, she should be able to say &quot;no&quot; on the basis of her own free will.

The second kind of passion in the dualistic model is &quot;obsessive passion&quot;. Being the opposite of &quot;harmonious passion&quot;. This type has a strong desire to engage in the activity, but it&#x27;s not under the person&#x27;s own control and he or she is forced to engage in the hobby. This type of passion has a negative effect on a person where they could feel they need to engage in their hobby to continue, for example, interpersonal relationships, or &quot;fit in&quot; with the crowd. To change the above example, if the girl has an obsessive passion towards volleyball and she is asked to play with her friends, she will likely say &quot;yes&quot; even though she needs to finish her project for the next day.

==== Intrinsic motivation ====
Since passion can be a type of motivation in hobbies then assessing intrinsic motivation is appropriate. Intrinsic motivation helps define these types of passion. Passion naturally helps the needs or desires that motivate a person to some particular action or behavior. Certain abilities and hobbies can be developed early and the innate motivation is also something that comes early in life. Although someone might know how to engage in a hobby, this does not necessarily mean they are motivated to do it. Christine Robinson makes the point in her article that, &quot; ...knowledge of your innate motivation can help guide action toward what will be fulfilling.&quot; Feeling satisfied and fulfilled builds the passion for the hobby to continue a person&#x27;s happiness.

==Fictional examples==

In Margaret Drabble&#x27;s &quot;The Realms of Gold&quot;, the hero flies hundreds of miles to reunite with the heroine, only to miss her by 24 hours – leaving the onlookers &quot;wondering what grand passion could have brought him so far...a quixotic look about him, a look of harassed desperation&quot;. When the couple &quot;do&quot; finally reunite, however, the heroine is less than impressed. &quot;&#x27;If you ask me, it was a very &quot;childish&quot; gesture. You&#x27;re not twenty-one now, you know&#x27;. &#x27;No, I know. It was my last fling&#x27;&quot;.

In Alberto Moravia&#x27;s &quot;1934&quot;, the revolutionary double-agent, faced with the girl he is betraying, &quot;was seized by violent desire...he never took his eyes off my bosom...I believe those two dark spots at the end of my breasts were enough to make him forget tsarism, revolution, political faith, ideology, and betrayal&quot;.

==See also==
==References==
===Footnotes===
===Sources===
*Diderot&#x27;s Encyclopédie

==Further reading==
* René Descartes, &quot;Passions of the Soul&quot; in J. Cottingham &quot;et al.&quot; eds., &quot;The Philosophical Writings of Descartes&quot; Vol I (Cambridge 1985)

==External links==
* Sophie de Mijolla-Mellor, &quot;Passion&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q335046" start="0" end="7" title="Passion (emotion)" label="Passion"/>
<link wikidata="Q47728" start="222" end="233" title="Hobby" label="inclination"/>
<link wikidata="Q6498477" start="657" end="661" title="lust" label="lust"/>
<link wikidata="Q625143" start="698" end="705" title="Ecstasy (emotion)" label="ecstasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5780945" start="713" end="722" title="suffering" label="suffering"/>
<link wikidata="Q448" start="726" end="739" title="Denis Diderot" label="Denis Diderot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1874033" start="1732" end="1748" title="Pop psychologist" label="pop-psychologies"/>
<link wikidata="Q48235" start="3967" end="3973" title="Stoicism" label="Stoics"/>
<link wikidata="Q183144" start="3979" end="3988" title="Epictetus" label="Epictetus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2809148" start="4122" end="4129" title="Sorrow (emotion)" label="sorrows"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471717" start="4131" end="4143" title="Lament" label="lamentations"/>
<link wikidata="Q188739" start="4145" end="4151" title="Envy" label="envies"/>
<link wikidata="Q178354" start="4213" end="4219" title="reason" label="reason"/>
<link wikidata="Q41567" start="4264" end="4270" title="Hamlet" label="Hamlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q43499" start="4397" end="4404" title="Erasmus" label="Erasmus"/>
<link wikidata="Q37068" start="4553" end="4570" title="Romanticism" label="Romantic movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q191591" start="4748" end="4770" title="emotional intelligence" label="emotional intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q380207" start="5118" end="5133" title="Antonio Damasio" label="Antonio Damasio"/>
<link wikidata="Q726562" start="5273" end="5282" title="neocortex" label="neocortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q9191" start="5787" end="5796" title="Descartes" label="Descartes"/>
<link wikidata="Q9453" start="5890" end="5899" title="dialectic" label="dialectic"/>
<link wikidata="Q851650" start="6036" end="6048" title="courtly love" label="courtly love"/>
<link wikidata="Q123698" start="6050" end="6068" title="Denis de Rougemont" label="Denis de Rougemont"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6198" end="6211" title="Stacey Oliker" label="Stacey Oliker"/>
<link wikidata="Q137073" start="6236" end="6246" title="Puritanism" label="Puritanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9200" start="6505" end="6515" title="Saint Paul" label="Saint Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q408673" start="6551" end="6560" title="Ephesians" label="Ephesians"/>
<link wikidata="Q19185" start="6593" end="6612" title="George Bernard Shaw" label="George Bernard Shaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q9215" start="6844" end="6857" title="Sigmund Freud" label="Sigmund Freud"/>
<link wikidata="Q762" start="6966" end="6983" title="Leonardo da Vinci" label="Leonardo da Vinci"/>
<link wikidata="Q644302" start="7181" end="7190" title="Motivation" label="motivated"/>
<link wikidata="Q268378" start="7197" end="7207" title="Job (role)" label="occupation"/>
<link wikidata="Q361075" start="7393" end="7402" title="obsession (disambiguation)" label="obsessive"/>
<link wikidata="Q629463" start="7487" end="7504" title="job satisfaction" label="work satisfaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q317309" start="7551" end="7575" title="mental health" label="psychological well-being"/>
<link wikidata="Q629149" start="8805" end="8815" title="workaholic" label="workaholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1117179" start="9824" end="9841" title="life satisfaction" label="life satisfaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q815298" start="10841" end="10851" title="job stress" label="job stress"/>
<link wikidata="Q170658" start="11053" end="11063" title="creativity" label="creativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q227672" start="11733" end="11741" title="identity (disambiguation)" label="identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q47728" start="12964" end="12971" title="Hobbies" label="Hobbies"/>
<link wikidata="Q844569" start="14029" end="14037" title="Identity (social science)" label="identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q9476" start="14393" end="14402" title="free will" label="free will"/>
<link wikidata="Q1734" start="14465" end="14475" title="volleyball" label="volleyball"/>
<link wikidata="Q239307" start="16190" end="16206" title="Margaret Drabble" label="Margaret Drabble"/>
<link wikidata="Q23307150" start="16220" end="16238" title="The Realms of Gold" label="The Realms of Gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q161933" start="16761" end="16776" title="Alberto Moravia" label="Alberto Moravia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1329398" wikidata="Q8012808" url="?curid=1329398" title="William Ince">
<text>William Ince may refer to:

*William Ince (cabinet maker) (?–1804), English cabinet maker with John Mayhew, as Ince and Mayhew
*William Ince (theologian) (1825–1910), British theologian
*William Ince (MP), MP for Chester, 1660–1661
*William Ince (priest), provost of St John&#x27;s Cathedral, Oban</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6014226" start="29" end="57" title="William Ince (cabinet maker)" label="William Ince (cabinet maker)"/>
<link wikidata="Q8012809" start="128" end="153" title="William Ince (theologian)" label="William Ince (theologian)"/>
<link wikidata="Q8012807" start="187" end="204" title="William Ince (MP)" label="William Ince (MP)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="233" end="254" title="William Ince (priest)" label="William Ince (priest)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2942356" start="267" end="297" title="St John&amp;#x27;s Cathedral, Oban" label="St John&amp;#x27;s Cathedral, Oban"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1329399" wikidata="Q7502337" url="?curid=1329399" title="Shoshanna Lonstein Gruss">
<text>Shoshanna Lonstein Gruss (born May 29, 1975) is an American writer and fashion designer and the founder and creative director of the fashion label Shoshanna, which was launched in 1998.

==Career==
With a loan from her father, Zach Lonstein, chief executive officer of Infocrossing, she started her clothing company in 1998 with the mission to design a clothing line that appealed to different body types, specifically, large-breasted young women. In 2013, Elizabeth Arden, Inc. named Gruss the brand&#x27;s first-ever Style Director. In this new role, Gruss served as a spokesperson and adviser for the design label.

===Television===
Gruss has appeared in numerous television programs, webcasts, and interviews, including a 2008 episode of &quot;America&#x27;s Next Top Model&quot;.

==Personal life==
As a 17-year-old high school student, she met then 38-year-old Jerry Seinfeld in Central Park. At that point, Seinfeld got her phone number. Lonstein later came to public attention by dating Seinfeld, who was at the time starring in his eponymous sitcom. Early in their relationship, &quot;Spy&quot; magazine referred to her as &quot;a legal voter&quot;, since she had turned 18 by then. They dated for approximately four years, from 1993 to 1997. During the relationship, she transferred from George Washington University to UCLA, in part to be with Seinfeld; she cited constant press coverage and missing New York City as reasons for the relationship ending.

Lonstein married Josh Gruss on May 10, 2003, and they had three children. They announced their plan to divorce in November 2014 and divorced later that year.

As of 2016, she was living on the Upper East Side of Manhattan with their children.

==Philanthropy==
Gruss is a trustee of Reform synagogue Temple Emanu-El of New York, and the Nightingale-Bamford School where she is also a member of its Alumnae Board Committee. Gruss was Vice Chairman of the associate committee of the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center and its Children&#x27;s Committee from 2012 to 2014.

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7502337" start="0" end="24" title="Shoshanna Lonstein Gruss" label="Shoshanna Lonstein Gruss"/>
<link wikidata="Q29583" start="71" end="87" title="fashion designer" label="fashion designer"/>
<link wikidata="Q484876" start="242" end="265" title="CEO" label="chief executive officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5362329" start="457" end="478" title="Elizabeth Arden, Inc." label="Elizabeth Arden, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q31426" start="748" end="777" title="America&amp;#x27;s Next Top Model" label="America&amp;#x27;s Next Top Model"/>
<link wikidata="Q215506" start="867" end="881" title="Jerry Seinfeld" label="Jerry Seinfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q23733" start="1037" end="1057" title="Seinfeld" label="his eponymous sitcom"/>
<link wikidata="Q3494289" start="1094" end="1097" title="Spy (magazine)" label="Spy"/>
<link wikidata="Q432637" start="1298" end="1326" title="George Washington University" label="George Washington University"/>
<link wikidata="Q174710" start="1330" end="1334" title="UCLA" label="UCLA"/>
<link wikidata="Q112030533" start="1483" end="1493" title="Josh Gruss" label="Josh Gruss"/>
<link wikidata="Q455587" start="1659" end="1674" title="Upper East Side" label="Upper East Side"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133485" start="1749" end="1755" title="Reform Judaism" label="Reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q56316084" start="1766" end="1793" title="Temple Emanu-El of New York" label="Temple Emanu-El of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q580905" start="1803" end="1829" title="Nightingale-Bamford School" label="Nightingale-Bamford School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1808012" start="1947" end="1985" title="Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center" label="Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1329400" wikidata="Q5415348" url="?curid=1329400" title="Evan Coyne Maloney">
<text>Evan Coyne Maloney (born October 27, 1972), is an inactive American documentary filmmaker, the editor of the now defunct website &quot;Brain Terminal&quot; and a video blogger. A &quot;New York Sun&quot; profile in 2005 said that Maloney &quot;may very well be America&#x27;s most promising conservative documentary filmmaker.&quot; He has been described as the conservative answer to Michael Moore. Since 2013, Maloney has not been active in politics or filmmaking and his whereabouts and activities are unknown.

==Early life and education==
&quot;Shortly after his tenth birthday,&quot; according to Maloney&#x27;s biography on his own website, Brain Terminal, he &quot;was introduced to his two main passions: politics and technology.&quot; Politics was the subject of family dinner-table discussions, and his parents were liberal, so he handed out flyers in Manhattan for Walter Mondale&#x27;s presidential campaign. Talk radio, however, introduced him to conservative ideas, and when Maloney, as a student at JHS 167, had to give a classroom presentation on nuclear weapons, he rejected &quot;the propaganda propagated in schools... that President Reagan was going to drive us headlong into nuclear war,&quot; knowing &quot;viscerally that our weapons protected our country and helped keep the peace.&quot; In an interview with the New York Sun, Maloney described that incident in this way: when delivering a classroom presentation &quot;about the danger of nuclear weapons,&quot; he &quot;realized I didn&#x27;t believe a word I was saying.&quot; In 1989 he volunteered on Rudolph Giuliani&#x27;s mayoral campaign.

Maloney learned at an early age about computer programming, and at age twelve wrote an Apple II program called Foscil DOS, &quot;a disk operating system that was marketed through magazines and stores.&quot;

He attended Bucknell University, where he published a conservative newspaper, &quot;The Sentinel&quot;.

He later said that he and other students at Bucknell &quot;were being preached to about sensitivity and tolerance, but when no tolerance was shown to people sharing my opinion, it seemed that the university didn&#x27;t care.&quot;

He graduated from Bucknell University in 1994 with a Bachelor of Science in Business Administration.

==Career==
In the mid-1990s, Maloney served as chief of staff for a New York State Assembly campaign and as campaign manager for two candidates in Civil Court Judge races.

From 1994 to early 2002, Maloney worked principally as a software developer for Internet start-ups. From 1995 thru 1998, Maloney was the lead developer of UNET&#x27;s KeepTalking web chat server.

In 1996, Maloney co-developed &quot;DarkHorse: The Virtual Campaign Game&quot; for MSNBC and Byron Preiss Multimedia.

In February 2003, Maloney posted the video &quot;Protesting the Protesters&quot; to his website. The video featured street interviews at an anti-war protest in New York City. Although his site was fairly obscure at the time, several media outlets took notice, and within a day of his posting the video it was featured on &quot;Special Report with Brit Hume&quot;. A day later, audio clips from the interviews were featured on Rush Limbaugh&#x27;s radio show.

Since then, Maloney&#x27;s website has become popular, receiving more than 5 million hits by the end of 2003 and logging over 6 million hits in 2004.

He then took a position as communications director for a New York State Senate campaign.

Since then he has been working as a freelance writer, business consultant, software developer, and filmmaker.

==Filmmaking==
According to one account, a PBS report&#x27;s suggestion that anti-Iraq War protesters waving pictures of George W. Bush with a Hitler mustache represented mainstream American opinion inspired Maloney &quot;to take to the streets, infiltrate anti-war marches and rallies, film what went on and post the results online.&quot; The resulting video, &quot;Protesting the Protesters&quot;, was posted on his website in February 2003. Although his site was fairly obscure at the time, several media outlets took notice, and within a day of his posting the video it was featured on Special Report with Brit Hume. A day later, audio clips from the interviews were featured on Rush Limbaugh&#x27;s radio show.

After that episode, Maloney&#x27;s website became popular, receiving more than 5 million hits by the end of 2003 and logging over 6 million hits in 2004.

According to one account, Maloney&#x27;s career as a documentary filmmaker began when he &quot;confronted Moore outside his Manhattan apartment in autumn 2003 with charges that he had shamelessly used his public platform to promote liberal causes.&quot; Moore &quot;was charm itself&quot; and pleaded guilty, adding &quot;that if Maloney felt so strongly, he should have a crack at his own film project. So Maloney used his online video of the exchange to put out an appeal for funding.&quot; He received support from entrepreneur Stuart Browning.

In late 2003, Maloney co-founded &quot;On The Fence Films&quot;, a film production company with entrepreneur Stuart Browning and entertainment attorney Blaine Greenberg. Their first release, &quot;Brainwashing 101&quot; is a short documentary analyzing the political environments on three college campuses: Bucknell University, the University of Tennessee and California Polytechnic. The film was named one of the &quot;10 Best Documentary Films of 2004&quot; by the Liberty Film Festival, and John Fund of &quot;The Wall Street Journal&quot; reported that it was &quot;the clear favorite of festival attendees&quot; at the American Film Renaissance.

Browning, founder of Embarcadero Technologies, &quot;suggested that he make a full-length feature about the tyranny of political correctness and affirmative action on campuses.&quot; Browning gave him $250,000 to make the film that became &quot;Brainwashing 101&quot;, which examines the political environments on three college campuses: Bucknell University, the University of Tennessee, and California Polytechnic.

In the fall of 2005, &quot;On The Fence Films&quot; released Maloney&#x27;s follow-up film &quot;Brainwashing 201: The Second Semester&quot;, another short film focusing on higher education. &quot;Brainwashing 201&quot; has only been screened once, at the Liberty Film Festival, where it won the award for &quot;Best Short Film of 2005.&quot;

&quot;On The Fence Films&quot; released &quot;Indoctrinate U&quot;, the feature-length follow-up to &quot;Brainwashing 101&quot; and &quot;Brainwashing 201: The Second Semester&quot;, in April 2007. An article
in &quot;The New York Times&quot; mentioning &quot;Indoctrinate U&quot; attracted strong criticism from Maloney
and Greg Lukianoff of the Foundation for Individual Rights in Education.

==Brainwashing 101==
Maloney wrote, directed, and edited the short documentary &quot;Brainwashing 101&quot; (2004). It examines left-wing intolerance at three colleges, Bucknell, Cal Poly, and the University of Tennessee. &quot;The New York Sun&quot; called it an &quot;attempt to confirm the worst assumptions that conservatives have about what goes on at universities,&quot; and described its subjects as &quot;the spread of noxious speech codes, abuses of power by vindictive administrators, and the arbitrary restrictions on academic freedom imposed on conservative students—cases of which, the film argues, are increasingly cropping up in universities.&quot;

According to &quot;the Sun&quot;, &quot;Brainwashing 101&quot; &quot;was hailed as the &#x27;most anticipated&#x27; documentary in 2005 by the American Film Renaissance, an upstart film institute based in Dallas.&quot; An audience at the Liberty Festival in Los Angeles reportedly gave a preview version of the film a standing ovation. And a critic for the Hollywood Web site &quot;Ain&#x27;t It Cool News&quot; said that the film, in its first cut, was one of the most &quot;horrifying and hysterical documentaries I have ever seen.&quot;

One reviewer commented: &quot;Maloney tells the truth when he says the academic world is run by intolerant leftist ideologues, who try to stamp out dissent while proclaiming themselves the apostles of &#x27;diversity.&#x27; The film is fast-paced, easy to watch, and done in a light enough style to keep it from sounding doom-and-gloom.&quot;

==Indoctrinate U==
Maloney wrote and directed the full-length documentary &quot;Indoctrinate U &quot;(2007). In &quot;Indoctrinate U&quot;, reported &quot;the Times&quot; Higher Education Supplement, Maloney &quot;levels his video camera at campuses that, he says, have become hotbeds of America-bashing radicalism and zealous political correctness and that tolerate no dissenting (read conservative) opinions.&quot; &quot;Judging by the rough cut&quot; of &quot;Indoctrinate U&quot;, wrote Damian Thompson in &quot;The Daily Telegraph&quot; before the film&#x27;s release, &quot;the movie will be as slick and incisive as anything by Michael Moore.&quot; Describing Maloney as &quot;the Anti-Michael Moore,&quot; Thompson wrote that the filmmaker &quot;is on a mission to expose through his film what he sees as the astonishingly vicious persecution of conservative students by university professors and administrators.&quot; Stanley Kurtz wrote at &quot;National Review&quot; that the film was &quot;a fun and powerful piece of work that deserves a wide audience,&quot; and that its &quot;real force...flows from Maloney&#x27;s recounting of a series of incidents of campus political correctness. I had never heard of any of these cases. Yet each of them is remarkable.&quot;

==Hating Breitbart==

Maloney produced the 2012 documentary &quot;Hating Breitbart&quot;, directed by Andrew Marcus. &quot;The movie follows Breitbart for two years, chronicling his fight against the mainstream media and his battles with the institutional left,&quot; according to an account at National Review. Andrew Leigh, also writing in National Review, notes that the filmmakers appeared &quot;to have followed Breitbart everywhere: to tea-party rallies, inside media interviews, through dense convention crowds, in the car, into hotel rooms, even standing watch as he ironed his pants and brushed his teeth. But we don&#x27;t mind, because the movie delivers generous doses of Breitbart&#x27;s offbeat charm, and for that alone we ought to be grateful to director Andrew Marcus and producers Maura Flynn and Evan Coyne Maloney.&quot;

==The Machine==
Maloney&#x27;s 2012 film &quot;The Machine&quot; is about &quot;how public sector unions corrupt politicians, pick taxpayers&#x27; pockets, and make it nearly impossible to hold teachers and other government employees accountable...American taxpayers, by subsidizing public sector unions and the politicians who support them, are being compelled to fund &#x27;the machine&#x27;—which, in turn, leads to the perpetual growth of unions and big government.&quot;

==Political views==
&quot;Despite ticking so many Democrat boxes - Irish name, New Yorker, software designer, gay-friendly, non-churchgoer - Evan Maloney is a Republican,&quot; wrote a &quot;Daily Telegraph&quot; reporter in 2005. The reporter noted that Maloney, whom he met in a Union Square coffeeshop, said with anger, &quot;Right here, two days after 9/11, there was a demonstration of people saying we got what we deserved. I was sickened - it was like saying a rape victim had it coming because she dressed provocatively. That&#x27;s when my passion for politics reignited.&quot;

Describing him as &quot;the right&#x27;s best answer to [Michael] Moore,&quot; &quot;The New York Sun&quot; reported in 2005 that &quot;Maloney describes himself as a &#x27;libertarian conservative&#x27; and considers Ronald Reagan his political hero.&quot;

==Honors and awards==
&quot;Indoctrinate U&quot; won the &quot;Special Jury Prize for Libertarian Ideals&quot; at the 2011 Anthem Awards.

==References==
==External links==
*Brain Terminal
*On The Fence Films</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5415348" start="0" end="18" title="Evan Coyne Maloney" label="Evan Coyne Maloney"/>
<link wikidata="Q846570" start="59" end="67" title="Americans" label="American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2585032" start="362" end="374" title="Conservatism in the United States" label="conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q174908" start="385" end="398" title="Michael Moore" label="Michael Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q49216" start="877" end="891" title="Walter Mondale" label="Walter Mondale"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="1144" end="1160" title="Ronald Reagan" label="President Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q212648" start="1580" end="1596" title="Rudolph Giuliani" label="Rudolph Giuliani"/>
<link wikidata="Q3444679" start="2186" end="2205" title="Bucknell University" label="Bucknell University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470702" start="2338" end="2361" title="New York State Assembly" label="New York State Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q13973" start="2723" end="2728" title="MSNBC" label="MSNBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="2919" end="2932" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q11033" start="2992" end="2997" title="Mass media" label="media"/>
<link wikidata="Q2245635" start="3106" end="3115" title="Brit Hume" label="Brit Hume"/>
<link wikidata="Q319072" start="3185" end="3198" title="Rush Limbaugh" label="Rush Limbaugh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1722258" start="3427" end="3448" title="New York State Senate" label="New York State Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q215616" start="3614" end="3617" title="PBS" label="PBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="3692" end="3706" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="3714" end="3720" title="Hitler" label="Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q7626365" start="5101" end="5116" title="Stuart Browning" label="Stuart Browning"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5144" end="5160" title="Blaine Greenberg" label="Blaine Greenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q6025694" start="5189" end="5205" title="Brainwashing 101" label="Brainwashing 101"/>
<link wikidata="Q3444679" start="5299" end="5318" title="Bucknell University" label="Bucknell University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150105" start="5324" end="5347" title="University of Tennessee" label="University of Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026846" start="5352" end="5374" title="California Polytechnic State University" label="California Polytechnic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6541712" start="5459" end="5480" title="Liberty Film Festival" label="Liberty Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q6234404" start="5486" end="5495" title="John Fund" label="John Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q164746" start="5505" end="5528" title="The Wall Street Journal" label="The Wall Street Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4743777" start="5616" end="5641" title="American Film Renaissance" label="American Film Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150105" start="6007" end="6030" title="University of Tennessee" label="University of Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026846" start="6036" end="6058" title="California Polytechnic State University" label="California Polytechnic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6025694" start="6451" end="6465" title="Indoctrinate U" label="Indoctrinate U"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="6624" end="6642" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q5605934" start="6731" end="6745" title="Greg Lukianoff" label="Greg Lukianoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q17006246" start="6753" end="6798" title="Foundation for Individual Rights in Education" label="Foundation for Individual Rights in Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q16557" start="7671" end="7677" title="Dallas" label="Dallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="7724" end="7735" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="10999" end="11007" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="11108" end="11118" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q110007" start="11230" end="11242" title="Union Square (New York City)" label="Union Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519334" start="11622" end="11638" title="The New York Sun" label="The New York Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q853562" start="11710" end="11734" title="Libertarian conservatism" label="libertarian conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="11755" end="11768" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1329408" wikidata="Q2165707" url="?curid=1329408" title="Kym Valentine">
<text>Kym Valentine (born 24 May 1977) is an Australian actress, best known for her long running intermittent portrayal of Libby Kennedy in the soap opera &quot;Neighbours.&quot;

==Early life==
Valentine was born in Blacktown, Sydney, and grew up in Granville. She began dance classes when she was two and attended her first dance school aged six. When she was five years old, Valentine began acting in television commercials and stage plays. She appeared in about 30 commercials.

She studied dance, singing and drama at the Performing Arts School in Sydney.

==Career==
Valentine&#x27;s early television appearances included guests roles in &quot;Brides of Christ&quot;, and &quot;Home and Away&quot;, and a regular role as Lisa in &quot;My Two Wives&quot;.

In 1994, at age 17, Valentine joined the cast of &quot;Neighbours&quot; as Libby Kennedy. She moved to Melbourne to take the role and remained on the show until 2004. Valentine opted to leave, wanting to start a family and extend her acting repertoire by returning to the stage. Libby was written out of the storyline in a way that allowed for her potential return.

In 2005, Valentine took the lead role of Baby in &quot;Dirty Dancing: The Classic Story on Stage&quot; at the Theatre Royal, Sydney, which also toured to Melbourne and Perth. She was set to reprise her role, when the production moved to London’s West End. In June 2007, Valentine rejoined &quot;Neighbours&quot; on a permanent basis. On 8 April 2009, Valentine made an appearance as herself on &quot;The Wright Stuff&quot;, a UK TV programme. In April 2011, Valentine took indefinite leave from &quot;Neighbours&quot;.

Valentine appeared as a housewife in Nine Network&#x27;s miniseries &quot;Fat Tony &amp; Co.&quot;, which was broadcast in 2014. Valentine returned to &quot;Neighbours&quot; as part of a storyline to celebrate 20 years of the Kennedy family in 2014.

In 2017, Valentine was cast in Michael Wormald&#x27;s independent film &quot;Choir Girl&quot;, which was released in 2019. In 2018, she appeared in a Melbourne stage production of &quot;Unsolicited Male&quot; (which she repeated in 2022). She also starred alongside her daughter in the short film &quot;Treetment&quot;, which was filmed in Melbourne in December 2018.

Valentine has produced the upcoming film titled &quot;Residence&quot;, in which she also appears as the character Connie the Phlegmatic.

In addition to her stage and screen work, Valentine teaches acting classes.

==Filmography==

===Film===
===Television===
==Stage==

==Personal life==
Valentine married singer Fabio Tolli. They have a daughter, Millana Valentine-Tolli (b. 21 August 2003). The couple separated in 2007.

In April 2008, it was rumoured that Valentine was involved in a relationship with Australian actor Vince Colosimo, the ex-husband of fellow &quot;Neighbours&quot; actor Jane Hall. In October 2008, Valentine stated that they had only ever been friends.

Valentine was engaged to former AFL player Trent Croad in March 2015. In November, Valentine and Croad confirmed they were expecting their first child together. Valentine gave birth to a son named Phoenix in March 2016.

Their relationship ended in December 2017.

===Health issues===
On 4 July 2008, Valentine collapsed on a flight home from New York and was diagnosed with pneumonia and pneumothorax. The cabin crew gave the actress oxygen during the flight and when she arrived in Melbourne was taken to hospital for further treatment where she stayed for several days before recuperating at home. Valentine was told that she needed to rest for a month and she could not return to work on &quot;Neighbours&quot;. On 10 August 2008, it was reported that New Zealand actress Michala Banas would take over the role of Libby for a month. Valentine resumed the role at the start of the 2009 series.

On 6 July 2010, Valentine was hospitalised with a life-threatening blood clot on her lung. Valentine was ordered to stay in hospital for four days. In December, Valentine checked herself into a clinic as she was suffering from exhaustion.

Valentine returned to the &quot;Neighbours&quot; set in January 2011. A few months after her return to filming, Valentine took indefinite leave from &quot;Neighbours&quot;. Fiona Byrne of the &quot;Herald Sun&quot; reported the actress was undergoing treatment in hospital for a depressive illness. She returned for two weeks in 2014.

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2165707" start="0" end="13" title="Kym Valentine" label="Kym Valentine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6540438" start="117" end="130" title="Libby Kennedy" label="Libby Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q908708" start="155" end="165" title="Neighbours" label="Neighbours"/>
<link wikidata="Q5596852" start="245" end="254" title="Granville, New South Wales" label="Granville"/>
<link wikidata="Q4966140" start="644" end="660" title="Brides of Christ" label="Brides of Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324189" start="678" end="691" title="Home and Away" label="Home and Away"/>
<link wikidata="Q6946556" start="735" end="747" title="My Two Wives" label="My Two Wives"/>
<link wikidata="Q908708" start="811" end="821" title="Neighbours" label="Neighbours"/>
<link wikidata="Q6540438" start="831" end="844" title="Libby Kennedy" label="Libby Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q253978" start="1178" end="1219" title="Dirty Dancing" label="Dirty Dancing: The Classic Story on Stage"/>
<link wikidata="Q7777440" start="1233" end="1254" title="Theatre Royal, Sydney" label="Theatre Royal, Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q460735" start="1360" end="1377" title="West End of London" label="London’s West End"/>
<link wikidata="Q7776313" start="1523" end="1539" title="The Wright Stuff" label="The Wright Stuff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432195" start="1680" end="1692" title="Nine Network" label="Nine Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q16014695" start="1717" end="1735" title="Fat Tony &amp;amp; Co." label="Fat Tony &amp;amp; Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q7931468" start="2787" end="2801" title="Vince Colosimo" label="Vince Colosimo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1822300" start="2857" end="2866" title="Jane Hall (actress)" label="Jane Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q50783" start="2973" end="2976" title="Australian Football League" label="AFL"/>
<link wikidata="Q7838385" start="2984" end="2995" title="Trent Croad" label="Trent Croad"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="3697" end="3708" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q261377" start="3717" end="3730" title="Michala Banas" label="Michala Banas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1634594" start="4277" end="4287" title="Herald Sun" label="Herald Sun"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1329412" wikidata="Q3108997" url="?curid=1329412" title="Lawrence Tynes">
<text>Lawrence James Henry Tynes (born 3 May 1978) is a former professional American football placekicker. After he played soccer for Milton High School, a coach suggested he try out for the football team as a kicker. He played college football at Troy and was signed by the Kansas City Chiefs as an undrafted free agent in 2001. He spent two seasons on the practice squad in Kansas City, then played in NFL Europe and in the Canadian Football League (CFL). He came back to Kansas City and played for the Chiefs for three seasons, and was then traded to the Giants in 2007. In his first season with the Giants, he kicked the game-winning field goal in overtime against the Green Bay Packers in the 2007–08 NFC Championship Game, which qualified the Giants for Super Bowl XLII. Four years later, he kicked another overtime field goal against the San Francisco 49ers in the 2011–12 NFC Championship Game, which qualified the Giants for Super Bowl XLVI. He experienced his best success with the Giants, winning Super Bowl championships in 2007 and 2011, defeating the New England Patriots in both games.

Tynes is the only player in NFL history to have two overtime game-winning field goals in the playoffs. Tynes kicked the longest post-season field goal in Lambeau Field post-season history (47 yards) in the 2007 NFC Championship Game. He then kicked a 31-yard chip shot in overtime in the NFC Championship game to advance the New York Giants to Super Bowl XLVI in 2011.

==Professional career==
===Kansas City Chiefs (2001–2002)===
Signed as an undrafted free agent, Tynes spent the first two seasons with the Chiefs but only on their practice squad.

===Scottish Claymores (2002)===
Tynes spent a short period of time with the Scottish Claymores of NFL Europe during 2002.

===Ottawa Renegades (2002–2003)===
After his departure from the Claymores, Tynes signed for the Renegades organization in the Canadian Football League.

===Second stint with the Kansas City Chiefs (2004–2006)===
Tynes re-signed for the Chiefs and was ready to be the next full-time kicker for the team. During the 2004 season, he converted 17 field goals out of 23 opportunities. In 2005, he made 27 field goals out of 33 opportunities. In 2006, he made 24 field goals out of 31 opportunities.

===New York Giants (2007–2012)===
====2007====
Tynes&#x27;s first year with the Giants saw him miss 4 field goals of less than 40 yards, completing 23 out of 27 attempts overall. During the NFC Championship game in Green Bay against the Packers, played in sub-zero Fahrenheit temperatures, Tynes hit his first two field goal attempts, then missed two field goal attempts in the fourth quarter, the latter after a bad snap. In overtime he made the game-winning 47-yard field goal to win the game for the Giants, 23–20, as the team moved on to play in the Super Bowl with the win. Tynes earned his first career championship ring as the Giants defeated the New England Patriots in Super Bowl XLII, ruining what would have been an unprecedented 19–0 season for the Patriots.

====2008====
Tynes was limited to only two games during the 2008 season due to a torn meniscus that was bothering him since training camp. He still made one field goal before undergoing season-ending knee surgery. During his absence, John Carney replaced him as the kicker.

====2009====
During the 2009 season, Tynes converted 27 field goals out of 32 opportunities.

====2010====
Playing 15 games of the 2010 regular season, Tynes made 19 field goals out of 23 opportunities.

====2011====
In 2011, Tynes converted 19 field goals out of 24 opportunities. During the NFC Championship game against the San Francisco 49ers, Tynes kicked another walk-off field goal in overtime to win the game, 20–17. Tynes got his second championship title as the Giants won Super Bowl XLVI against the Patriots. In the game, he converted one extra point and two field goals (a 38-yarder and a 33-yarder, both in the third quarter).

====2012====
In the 2012 season, Tynes made a career-high 33 field goals out of 39 opportunities.

===Tampa Bay Buccaneers (2013)===
On 17 July 2013, the Buccaneers signed Tynes to a one-year contract worth $905,000 after Connor Barth suffered a season-ending torn Achilles tendon. He contracted MRSA (methicillin-resistant &quot;Staphylococcus aureus)&quot; in August 2013, after his toe failed to heal from surgery to remove an ingrown toenail. After spending the entire season on injured reserve, Tynes was released on 11 March 2014, and the infection effectively ended his NFL career. Tynes sued the Buccaneers in 2015 for $20 million, claiming that unsanitary conditions led to his MRSA infection. Other teammates, including Carl Nicks and Johnthan Banks, also contracted MRSA around the same time while with the Buccaneers, and while Nicks also found his career at an end, Banks went on to play several more seasons in the NFL. Tynes and the Buccaneers agreed to a confidential settlement in 2017.

==Personal life==
Tynes is married to Amanda, and the couple have twin sons. Tynes is the seventh Scottish-born player in NFL history. He is the son of a former attached support US Navy serviceman to NSWU-2 and a Scottish mother. The family lived in Campbeltown until he was 10 years old, before moving to the United States. His father, Larry, a US Navy retiree was a supportive US Navy member of SEAL Team 2, stationed in Scotland in the mid-1980s. Larry is a retired major crimes detective of the Santa Rosa County, Florida, Sheriff&#x27;s Department in Milton, Florida. One of Lawrence Tynes&#x27;s brothers, Jason, served in the United States Army in Iraq and Kuwait.

His other brother, Mark, is serving 27 years in federal prison on drug and witness intimidation charges stemming from his 2004 involvement in a plan to move of marijuana between Texas and Florida. Tynes has sought a presidential pardon to shorten or commute his brother&#x27;s sentence. He has acknowledged his brother&#x27;s guilt but feels the sentence was too harsh. However, in the proceedings, Mark was reportedly belligerent and uncooperative. The judge who presided at the case had parameters in which to sentence Mark and, because of his foul and unruly behaviour, gave Mark the maximum sentence.

Tynes enjoys soccer and supports Celtic Football Club.

===Legal trouble===
On 17 August 2005, Tynes turned himself in to Pierce County, Wisconsin, jail after punching a bar patron and breaking a bouncer&#x27;s nose in a bar fight the previous weekend (the Chiefs&#x27; training camp at the time was based out of River Falls). Tynes was charged with one felony count of substantial battery and one count of misdemeanor battery. He was released on a $15,000 signature bond. Tynes paid a $397 fine for the incident.

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3108997" start="0" end="26" title="Lawrence Tynes" label="Lawrence James Henry Tynes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546270" start="70" end="87" title="gridiron football" label="American football"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638113" start="88" end="99" title="placekicker" label="placekicker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109032" start="222" end="238" title="college football" label="college football"/>
<link wikidata="Q7847015" start="242" end="246" title="Troy Trojans football" label="Troy"/>
<link wikidata="Q223522" start="269" end="287" title="Kansas City Chiefs" label="Kansas City Chiefs"/>
<link wikidata="Q969772" start="294" end="314" title="undrafted free agent" label="undrafted free agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960112" start="318" end="322" title="2001 NFL season" label="2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q724353" start="398" end="408" title="NFL Europe" label="NFL Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032175" start="420" end="444" title="Canadian Football League" label="Canadian Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q213837" start="667" end="684" title="Green Bay Packers" label="Green Bay Packers"/>
<link wikidata="Q597314" start="754" end="769" title="Super Bowl XLII" label="Super Bowl XLII"/>
<link wikidata="Q337758" start="839" end="858" title="San Francisco 49ers" label="San Francisco 49ers"/>
<link wikidata="Q849079" start="928" end="943" title="Super Bowl XLVI" label="Super Bowl XLVI"/>
<link wikidata="Q597314" start="1030" end="1034" title="Super Bowl XLII" label="2007"/>
<link wikidata="Q849079" start="1039" end="1043" title="Super Bowl XLVI" label="2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q193390" start="1059" end="1079" title="New England Patriots" label="New England Patriots"/>
<link wikidata="Q860790" start="1250" end="1263" title="Lambeau Field" label="Lambeau Field"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1302" end="1328" title="2007–08 NFL playoffs#NFC Championship: New York Giants 23.2C Green Bay Packers 20 .28OT.29" label="2007 NFC Championship Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q849079" start="1440" end="1455" title="Super Bowl XLVI" label="Super Bowl XLVI"/>
<link wikidata="Q213837" start="2502" end="2509" title="Green Bay Packers" label="Packers"/>
<link wikidata="Q32096" start="2819" end="2829" title="Super Bowl" label="Super Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q193390" start="2919" end="2939" title="New England Patriots" label="New England Patriots"/>
<link wikidata="Q597314" start="2943" end="2958" title="Super Bowl XLII" label="Super Bowl XLII"/>
<link wikidata="Q16195457" start="3271" end="3282" title="John Carney (American football)" label="John Carney"/>
<link wikidata="Q337758" start="3639" end="3658" title="San Francisco 49ers" label="San Francisco 49ers"/>
<link wikidata="Q849079" start="3795" end="3810" title="Super Bowl XLVI" label="Super Bowl XLVI"/>
<link wikidata="Q3687080" start="4176" end="4188" title="Connor Barth" label="Connor Barth"/>
<link wikidata="Q595158" start="4250" end="4254" title="Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus" label="MRSA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060425" start="4384" end="4399" title="ingrown toenail" label="ingrown toenail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1663627" start="4437" end="4452" title="Injured reserve list" label="injured reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q3658791" start="4684" end="4694" title="Carl Nicks (American football)" label="Carl Nicks"/>
<link wikidata="Q6268826" start="4699" end="4713" title="Johnthan Banks" label="Johnthan Banks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012490" start="5209" end="5220" title="Campbeltown" label="Campbeltown"/>
<link wikidata="Q494500" start="5458" end="5484" title="Santa Rosa County, Florida" label="Santa Rosa County, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q962936" start="5515" end="5530" title="Milton, Florida" label="Milton, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q537151" start="5848" end="5867" title="presidential pardon" label="presidential pardon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="6251" end="6257" title="association football" label="soccer"/>
<link wikidata="Q19593" start="6271" end="6291" title="Celtic F.C." label="Celtic Football Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q501575" start="6360" end="6384" title="Pierce County, Wisconsin" label="Pierce County, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569304" start="6551" end="6562" title="River Falls, Wisconsin" label="River Falls"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1329423" wikidata="Q1170216" url="?curid=1329423" title="Working title">
<text>A working title is a preliminary name for a product or project. The usage is especially common in film and TV, gaming, music and publishing. It is often styled in trade publications as (wt) and is synonymous with production title and tentative title.

== Usage ==
Working titles are commonly used in film and TV, gaming, music, and publishing. They are used mainly because an official title has not yet been decided upon or to intentionally disguise the real nature of a project.

It is often styled in trade publications as (wt). 

=== Usage as production titles ===
The terms &quot;production title&quot; and &quot;tentative title&quot; are sometimes used instead of &quot;working title&quot;. Working titles are primarily a practical matter, just to prevent confusion as ideas for release titles can keep on changing for a variety of reasons. For example, while James Bond films are commonly produced under numerical titles such as &quot;Bond 22&quot; until the official title is announced as part of its marketing, release titles may also change because of significant changes to the plot during production, as happened with Disney&#x27;s &quot;The Emperor&#x27;s New Groove,&quot; whose working title was &quot;Kingdom of the Sun&quot;.

In some cases a working title may ultimately be used as the release title, as in the case of leading man Samuel L. Jackson insisting on the title &quot;Snakes on a Plane&quot;, after he learned the title was going to be changed to &quot;Pacific Air Flight 121&quot; upon release.

=== Usage as a ruse title ===
Fake production titles are frequently used by high-profile films or television series to prevent undesired attention by the press or fandom, price gouging by suppliers and casual or targeted theft. Notable examples of ruse titles include &quot;Blue Harvest&quot; (&quot;Return of the Jedi&quot;), &quot;Red Gun&quot; (&quot;House of the Dragon&quot;), and the Batman films &quot;Batman Begins&quot;, &quot;The Dark Knight&quot; and &quot;The Dark Knight Rises&quot;, which were produced under the titles &quot;The Intimidation Game&quot;, &quot;Rory&#x27;s First Kiss&quot; and &quot;Magnus Rex&quot;.

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1170216" start="2" end="15" title="Working title" label="working title"/>
<link wikidata="Q932586" start="98" end="102" title="filmmaking" label="film"/>
<link wikidata="Q15416" start="107" end="109" title="television production" label="TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061635" start="111" end="117" title="video game development" label="gaming"/>
<link wikidata="Q746359" start="119" end="124" title="music industry" label="music"/>
<link wikidata="Q3972943" start="129" end="139" title="publishing" label="publishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1170216" start="185" end="189" title="Working title" label="(wt)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1170216" start="213" end="229" title="Working title" label="production title"/>
<link wikidata="Q1170216" start="234" end="249" title="Working title" label="tentative title"/>
<link wikidata="Q932586" start="300" end="304" title="filmmaking" label="film"/>
<link wikidata="Q15416" start="309" end="311" title="television production" label="TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061635" start="313" end="319" title="video game development" label="gaming"/>
<link wikidata="Q746359" start="321" end="326" title="music industry" label="music"/>
<link wikidata="Q3972943" start="332" end="342" title="publishing" label="publishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q783521" start="385" end="390" title="title (publishing)" label="title"/>
<link wikidata="Q844" start="865" end="875" title="James Bond" label="James Bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q7414" start="1129" end="1135" title="Disney" label="Disney"/>
<link wikidata="Q223163" start="1149" end="1178" title="The Emperor&amp;#x27;s New Groove" label="The Emperor&amp;#x27;s New Groove"/>
<link wikidata="Q172678" start="1348" end="1365" title="Samuel L. Jackson" label="Samuel L. Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q822660" start="1395" end="1412" title="Snakes on a Plane" label="Snakes on a Plane"/>
<link wikidata="Q181803" start="1824" end="1842" title="Return of the Jedi" label="Return of the Jedi"/>
<link wikidata="Q72930269" start="1878" end="1897" title="House of the Dragon" label="House of the Dragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2695156" start="1914" end="1920" title="Batman" label="Batman"/>
<link wikidata="Q166262" start="1933" end="1946" title="Batman Begins" label="Batman Begins"/>
<link wikidata="Q163872" start="1960" end="1975" title="The Dark Knight" label="The Dark Knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q189330" start="1992" end="2013" title="The Dark Knight Rises" label="The Dark Knight Rises"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1329424" wikidata="Q7190576" url="?curid=1329424" title="Pickaninny (disambiguation)">
<text>[[Pickaninny]], also spelled picaninny, piccaninnie, piccaninny, and pickaninnie, is a derogatory term for a black child. It may also refer to:

* Piccaninny crater, impact structure in Western Australia
* Pickaninny Buttes, summit in California
* Piccaninny tribe, fictional Native American tribe in the children&#x27;s novel &quot;Peter and Wendy&quot;
* Pickaninny, a type of chess problem

==See also==
* Piccaninny Plains Sanctuary, nature reserve in Queensland, Australia
* Piccaninnie Ponds Conservation Park, South Australia</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7190576" start="0" end="14" title="Pickaninny (disambiguation)" label="[[Pickaninny]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q7190576" start="29" end="38" title="Pickaninny (disambiguation)" label="picaninny"/>
<link wikidata="Q7190576" start="40" end="51" title="Pickaninny (disambiguation)" label="piccaninnie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7190576" start="53" end="63" title="Pickaninny (disambiguation)" label="piccaninny"/>
<link wikidata="Q7190576" start="69" end="80" title="Pickaninny (disambiguation)" label="pickaninnie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092091" start="147" end="164" title="Piccaninny crater" label="Piccaninny crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q18158491" start="206" end="223" title="Pickaninny Buttes" label="Pickaninny Buttes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3435337" start="333" end="348" title="Peter and Wendy" label="Peter and Wendy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4712421" start="371" end="392" title="Albino (chess)" label="type of chess problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q7190575" start="409" end="436" title="Piccaninny Plains Sanctuary" label="Piccaninny Plains Sanctuary"/>
<link wikidata="Q7190574" start="480" end="515" title="Piccaninnie Ponds Conservation Park" label="Piccaninnie Ponds Conservation Park"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1329431" wikidata="Q584459" url="?curid=1329431" title="Alastair Gillespie">
<text>Alastair William Gillespie, (May 1, 1922 – August 19, 2018) was a Canadian politician and businessman.

Gillespie was born in Victoria, British Columbia, the son of Errol Pilkington Gillespie and Catherine Beatrice (Oliver) Gillespie.

He attended Brentwood College School where he was an avid rugby player. He received a Bachelor of Commerce degree from McGill University in 1947 and a Masters of Arts from Oxford University as a Rhodes Scholar in 1949. He later received a Master of Commerce from the University of Toronto in 1958.

Gillespie worked at educational publisher W.J. Gage &amp; Co from 1949 to 1970, beginning in warehouse operations and finishing as director and vice president.

During World War II, Gillespie served in Europe as a pilot in the Canadian Fleet Air Arm and was a Lieutenant in the Royal Canadian Navy from 1941 to 1945.

He was elected to the House of Commons of Canada as a Liberal Member of Parliament (MP) for the Toronto area riding of Etobicoke in the 1968 election. He was re-elected in the 1972 and 1974 elections. His district was divided by electoral redistribution in 1976, which took effect at the election of 1979. He ran in 1979, losing to Progressive Conservative candidate Michael Wilson in Etobicoke Centre.

Gillespie held various ministerial positions in Prime Minister Pierre Elliot Trudeau&#x27;s government, including: Minister of Industry, Trade and Commerce; Minister of Energy, Mines and Resources; Minister of State for Science and Technology; and Parliamentary Secretary to the President of the Treasury Board. He is one of the longest-serving Privy Counsellors of the Queen&#x27;s Privy Council for Canada, having been nominated to that body in 1971 by Prime Minister Trudeau.

In 1998, he was made an Officer of the Order of Canada.

Gillespie was director and chairman of Creemore Springs Brewery from 1996 to 2005. He was director of the Canadian Opera Company from 1981 to 1993 and president from 1986 to 1988. A member of the Campaign for Scottish Studies at the University of Guelph, he was named 2003 Scot of the Year by the Scottish Studies Society. In 2010, he was awarded the office of Honorary President of the Champlain Society for his support of the advancement of knowledge of Canadian history through the publication and study of primary records.

Alastair Gillespie was married to Diana Christie Gillespie (Clark, d. 2010) and has two children, Ian Gillespie and Cynthia Webb. He is the grandfather of former Canadian professional tennis player, Olympian, NCAA Division I women&#x27;s tennis champion and Duke University Athletics Hall of Fame member Vanessa Webb. He died in August 2018 at the age of 96.

==Bibliography==
* Gillespie, Alastair W. and Irene Sage, &quot;Made in Canada: A Businessman&#x27;s Adventures in Politics&quot;, Robin Brass Studio, 2010.

==Archives==
There is an Alastair Gillespie fonds at Library and Archives Canada.

==Electoral record==
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q584459" start="0" end="26" title="Alastair Gillespie" label="Alastair William Gillespie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2132" start="126" end="152" title="Victoria, British Columbia" label="Victoria, British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057804" start="248" end="272" title="Brentwood College School" label="Brentwood College School"/>
<link wikidata="Q201492" start="355" end="372" title="McGill University" label="McGill University"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="408" end="425" title="University of Oxford" label="Oxford University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204346" start="431" end="445" title="Rhodes Scholar" label="Rhodes Scholar"/>
<link wikidata="Q180865" start="503" end="524" title="University of Toronto" label="University of Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q5516836" start="577" end="595" title="Gage Educational Publishing Company" label="W.J. Gage &amp;amp; Co"/>
<link wikidata="Q383590" start="875" end="901" title="House of Commons of Canada" label="House of Commons of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q138345" start="907" end="914" title="Liberal Party of Canada" label="Liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q383590" start="915" end="935" title="House of Commons of Canada" label="Member of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="949" end="956" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q958740" start="972" end="981" title="Etobicoke (federal electoral district)" label="Etobicoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q951012" start="989" end="1002" title="1968 Canadian federal election" label="1968 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q951046" start="1029" end="1033" title="1972 Canadian federal election" label="1972"/>
<link wikidata="Q954802" start="1038" end="1052" title="1974 Canadian federal election" label="1974 elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q954886" start="1141" end="1157" title="1979 Canadian federal election" label="election of 1979"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292617" start="1185" end="1209" title="Progressive Conservative Party of Canada" label="Progressive Conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308582" start="1220" end="1234" title="Michael Wilson (Canadian politician)" label="Michael Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3059353" start="1238" end="1254" title="Etobicoke Centre (federal electoral district)" label="Etobicoke Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q839078" start="1305" end="1319" title="Prime Minister of Canada" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q8619" start="1320" end="1341" title="Pierre Trudeau" label="Pierre Elliot Trudeau"/>
<link wikidata="Q6565699" start="1372" end="1412" title="List of Canadian Ministers of Industry, Trade and Commerce" label="Minister of Industry, Trade and Commerce"/>
<link wikidata="Q3251824" start="1414" end="1453" title="List of Canadian Ministers of Energy, Mines and Resources" label="Minister of Energy, Mines and Resources"/>
<link wikidata="Q6866202" start="1455" end="1499" title="Minister for Science (Canada)" label="Minister of State for Science and Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q3253692" start="1536" end="1567" title="President of the Treasury Board" label="President of the Treasury Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q16148011" start="1586" end="1664" title="List of longest-serving current Privy Counsellors of Canada" label="longest-serving Privy Counsellors of the Queen&amp;#x27;s Privy Council for Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q99700" start="1776" end="1791" title="Order of Canada" label="Order of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q18089633" start="2181" end="2198" title="Champlain Society" label="Champlain Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q7914727" start="2626" end="2638" title="Vanessa Webb" label="Vanessa Webb"/>
<link wikidata="Q3052382" start="2884" end="2889" title="fonds" label="fonds"/>
<link wikidata="Q913250" start="2893" end="2920" title="Library and Archives Canada" label="Library and Archives Canada"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1329440" wikidata="Q7989778" url="?curid=1329440" title="Westville, New Haven">
<text>Westville is a neighborhood of the city of New Haven, Connecticut, United States. The area is positively reviewed for its walkability, diverse population, and livability. It is more expensive than the average American city, has lower crime rates, and graduates children from high school at rates above the national average.

==Geography==

Westville is located in the western part of the city west of the West River. The official neighborhood planning area for Westville is defined to be the area bordered by the neighboring town of Woodbridge, Connecticut on the west (the border runs roughly along the Wilbur Cross Parkway), by the Amity neighborhood on the north (along Fountain Street), by the West Rock neighborhood on the northeast (along Valley Street), by the West River on the east, and by the city of West Haven on the south. Whalley Avenue, Edgewood Avenue, Fountain Street and Forest Road are the main through routes of the neighborhood.

Westville is a mixed-use district, with both residential and commercial zoning space. Generally, as elevation rises, the neighborhood becomes more residential. The eastern half of the residential portion of the neighborhood is a state historic district known as &quot;Suburban Westville Historic District&quot;. Primarily commercial buildings are located along Whalley Avenue, which runs from the southeast to northwest. The commercial district of Westville that runs along Whalley Avenue has also been officially designated as a &quot;Connecticut Main Street&quot;.

==Commercial District==

The &quot;downtown&quot; area of Westville, which is zoned for commercial use, is listed as the Westville Village Historic District on the National Register of Historic Places. The commercial area runs roughly from Fitch Street to Emerson Street along Whalley Avenue and is more commonly referred to as &quot;Westville Village&quot;.

In 2003, the listed area was and there were 30 contributing buildings in the district. In 2006, the listing was amended to add the former Westville Theater building at 827 Whitney Avenue, an Early Commercial style building that was built in 1912. The theater building is now occupied by Lyric Hall, a local theater and antique restoration and conservation studio.

The commercial area of Westville was once known for its antique stores that lined the streets. As those businesses close, the storefronts are now home to many artists galleries, hair salons, and cafes. Being home to several popular breakfast spots in New Haven, the area has been dubbed by locals as &quot;Brunchville&quot; on the weekends.

There is a sustained effort to increase and maintain public art in the Westville Village Historic District. There is currently work by nationally recognized artists such as Swoon and Faring Purth dotting the map of the commercial district.

==Local events==
Every year the Westville Village Renassiance Alliance, dedicated to preserving and highlighting the Westville area, hosts annual events meant to engage the residents of New Haven and beyond. These include the 20+ year long tradition of the Westville Artwalk, as well as the Halloween Puppet Parade and Summer Concert Series. Each year there is a tree lighting and menorah ceremony hosted in the commercial district.

==Other features==

Several of Yale University&#x27;s primary athletic facilities are located in Westville. These include the Yale Bowl (football), Yale Field (baseball), Cultman Courts (tennis), and the Yale Golf Course.

The Hopkins School, one of the oldest private high schools in the nation is based here.

Westville is the home to much of the New Haven area&#x27;s Jewish population. Synagogues in the neighborhood include 
Congregation Beth El-Keser Israel (BEKI), Bikur Cholim Shevet Achim, and 
Westville Synagogue - Beth Hamedrosh Hagodol - B’nai Israel.

The neighborhood of Westville butts up against Edgewood Park—one of the largest and most scenic in New Haven. It is home to tennis courts, walking trails, a duck pond, dog park, playground area, soccer field, and more.

At the end of Alden Avenue, intersecting Fountain Street, is home to one of the few lone-standing United States Post Offices in New Haven.

The corner of W Rock Avenue and Whalley Avenue, which touches the commercial district of Westville, houses a popular City Seed Farmers&#x27; Market during the warmer months.

==References==

==External links==
*Westville Village Renaissance Alliance - local non-profit providing information on neighborhood resources and events
*Westville Village Historic District, New Haven Preservation Trust website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7989778" start="0" end="9" title="Westville, New Haven" label="Westville"/>
<link wikidata="Q49145" start="43" end="65" title="New Haven, Connecticut" label="New Haven, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q7986366" start="405" end="415" title="West River (Connecticut)" label="West River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898540" start="533" end="556" title="Woodbridge, Connecticut" label="Woodbridge, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q2112986" start="604" end="624" title="Wilbur Cross Parkway" label="Wilbur Cross Parkway"/>
<link wikidata="Q4746956" start="634" end="652" title="Amity, Connecticut" label="Amity neighborhood"/>
<link wikidata="Q2261612" start="673" end="688" title="Route 243 (Connecticut)" label="Fountain Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q7986387" start="698" end="720" title="West Rock (neighborhood)" label="West Rock neighborhood"/>
<link wikidata="Q7986366" start="768" end="778" title="West River (Connecticut)" label="West River"/>
<link wikidata="Q54219" start="811" end="821" title="West Haven (CT)" label="West Haven"/>
<link wikidata="Q2261612" start="869" end="884" title="Route 243 (Connecticut)" label="Fountain Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q2249229" start="889" end="900" title="Route 122 (Connecticut)" label="Forest Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q702232" start="1023" end="1029" title="zoning" label="zoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q7989788" start="1640" end="1675" title="Westville Village Historic District" label="Westville Village Historic District"/>
<link wikidata="Q76321820" start="1926" end="1948" title="contributing buildings" label="contributing buildings"/>
<link wikidata="Q3506692" start="2759" end="2764" title="Swoon (artist)" label="Swoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q49112" start="3292" end="3307" title="Yale University" label="Yale University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1535796" start="3387" end="3396" title="Yale Bowl" label="Yale Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q8047378" start="3409" end="3419" title="Yale Field" label="Yale Field"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3432" end="3446" title="Cultman Courts" label="Cultman Courts"/>
<link wikidata="Q8047441" start="3465" end="3481" title="Yale Golf Course" label="Yale Golf Course"/>
<link wikidata="Q5900712" start="3488" end="3502" title="Hopkins School" label="Hopkins School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="3632" end="3638" title="Jewish" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q48740897" start="3874" end="3887" title="Edgewood Park, New Haven" label="Edgewood Park"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1329441" wikidata="Q737541" url="?curid=1329441" title="Gentinnes">
<text>Gentinnes () is a village of Wallonia and district of the municipality of Chastre, located in the province of Walloon Brabant, Belgium.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q737541" start="0" end="9" title="Gentinnes" label="Gentinnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q231" start="29" end="37" title="Wallonia" label="Wallonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q618054" start="74" end="81" title="Chastre" label="Chastre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122" start="110" end="125" title="Walloon Brabant" label="Walloon Brabant"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="127" end="134" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1329450" wikidata="Q7354324" url="?curid=1329450" title="Rock City (venue)">
<text>Rock City is a music venue and nightclub located in Nottingham, England. It is owned by venue operator and concert promoter DHP Family.

It opened in December 1980, first hosting The Undertones, and has gone on to host some of the biggest names in alternative music, as well as maintaining a number of weekly club nights. It has been described by &quot;NME&quot; as &quot;sweaty but truly indie&quot; and has received numerous awards, including &quot;Kerrang!&quot; magazine&#x27;s Venue of the Year for ten consecutive years.

==Overview==
Rock City is based in Nottingham City Centre, with a capacity of 2,000. The club features six bars spread across three rooms. The Main Hall and the Basement (Beta) rooms are all-standing during gigs. The third room, the Black Cherry Lounge, is operated separately (prior to September 2011 it was known as The Rig). Rock City plays host to various sized gigs, from smaller upcoming bands of the underground and local scene, to bands that are in the charts.

==History==

===Pre-Rock City and foundation===
The building opened as the Alexandra Skating Rink on 23 November 1876 and was renamed Victoria Halls in 1887. It closed in May 1928 and the proprietor, Mr. Walker started a new venture with a new Palais de Danse which was opened in 1929 in Greyfriars Hall, Greyfriar Gate.

Prior to Rock City the building was called &quot;The Heart of the Midlands&quot;, which hosted variety acts as well as the inaugural World Professional Darts Championship in 1978. The building was taken over by Sammy Jackson, who already owned a club called the Retford Porterhouse where he had booked bands such as AC/DC and The Clash, along with George Akins Snr., a local bookmaker, who bankrolled the new venture. The club was managed by Paul Mason, who would go on to manage Manchester&#x27;s Haçienda nightclub, and had Iron Maiden booked to be the band to open the venue, although unfinished electrics resulted in the gig being cancelled. As a result, Orange Juice became the first band to play at Rock City on 11 December 1980 supporting The Undertones, who ended the gig with &quot;Teenage Kicks&quot;.

===The 1980s and 1990s===
Rock City underwent a major refit in 1982 which included a purpose-built sound system, lighting rig and two video screens. Although the club remained faithful to the spirit of rock, with riots at sold-out gigs by The Pogues and Ozzy Osbourne, it was never restricted by genre as by 1982 the club already had a well-established Futurist night every Saturday and were considering starting a student night on Thursdays, approaching DJ Jonathan Woodliffe, who performed the first Thursday night to a crowd of about 400 people. Following the success of Thursday nights the club looked at introducing a dance night, initially playing a mixture of European electronica and American releases, although this was not as successful and was cancelled after a few months. It was replaced by a jazz, funk and soul night which was advertised by word of mouth and was well received. To add to the diversity in music, Rock City also hosted all-age hip-hop jams on Saturday afternoons, establishing breakdancers the Rock City Crew, and the club would also host the first performance of Bring the Noise in the UK by Public Enemy.

As alternative music changed, Rock City changed with it. Grunge and punk became popular in the first part of the 90&#x27;s, with bands such as Nirvana and Rage Against the Machine appearing. The intimate environment allowed for band members such as Eddie Vedder and Kurt Cobain to sit at the bar with fans after their gigs. Equally, as Britpop became established, Rock City found itself hosting the likes of Oasis and Blur. The Nineties also saw the club change management, as George Akins Jnr. took over at his father&#x27;s request in 1994, aged just 19 and having previously worked on the bar and cloakroom.

===The 2000s===
In keeping with music trends, the new millennium saw Rock City play host to more dance music events. &quot;The Rig&quot; situated beneath the Main Hall was annexed and operated as a separate venue.

Rock City has remained one of the biggest names on the live circuit for alternative bands and celebrated its 35th anniversary in 2016. In January 2019, the dancefloor was replaced for the first time in forty years.

=== The 2010s ===

==== The Lil Pump gig evacuation ====
In November 2018, over 2000 concertgoers were evacuated from the sold out Lil Pump gig. Nottinghamshire police stated this was due to a smoke flare. The situation was described as &quot;panic&quot; as people struggled to breathe, vomited and cried. The area was cordoned off as emergency workers attended the venue. Only minor injuries were said to have been sustained. Later that evening, as the gig had been cancelled, Lil Pump performed on top of his tour bus at the back of the venue for waiting fans.

=== The 2020s ===

==== The Yard Bar ====
During the 2020 Coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic that hit the UK, Rock City, upon the gradual re-opening of bars, pubs, restaurants and cafes from 4 July in England, which excluded club venues, utilised their outdoor car-parking space to newly establish the Yard Bar in order to engage in commerce while maintaining government guided social distancing measures.

==Theft problem==
In January 2013, Nottinghamshire police stated that between September 2011 and August 2012, 10% of all mobile phones stolen in the Nottinghamshire area were stolen at Rock City. Bart Easter, the club&#x27;s general manager, claimed that organised crime gangs who followed bands on tour were partly to blame. Rock City also faced backlash because of the increase in spiking through needles in Nottingham in 2021

==Club Nights==
The venue currently hosts four club nights:

*Wednesday: CRISIS – Exclusive club night for University of Nottingham students.
*Thursday: TUNED – Two for one drinks, primarily R&amp;B music.
*Friday: Get Lucky – Pop music from the 1990s, 2000s and current hits.
*Saturday: Rebel Rebel (formerly Hey Hey Hey) – The greatest songs in the world and sing-along anthems.

==Band recordings==

The following is a list of recordings made at Rock City:

* Richard Thompson - &quot;Live at Rock City, Nottingham - November 1986&quot; (2020)
*Frank Turner - Show 2000 (2016)
*Ferocious Dog - &quot;Live at Rock City&quot; (2015)
*The Wildhearts – &quot;Rock City vs The Wildhearts&quot; (2014)
*Jimi Jamison – &quot;Live at Firefest&quot; (2011)
*Enter Shikari – Live at Rock City Bootleg (2009)
*Shaped by Fate – &quot;Shaped By Fate tour DVD&quot; (2008)
*Bonfire – &quot;Double Vision (2006)
*The Libertines – &quot;Libertines live at Rock City with Radio 1&quot; (2004)
*Pitchshifter – &quot;P.S.I.entology&quot; (2004)
*The Wildhearts – &quot;The Wildhearts Strike Back&quot; (2004)
*Morbid Angel – &quot;Altars of Madness&quot; (2003)
*Linkin Park - &quot;Radio 1 broadcast bootleg&quot; (2003)
*Cradle of Filth – &quot;Live Bait for the Dead&quot; (2001)
*Cradle of Filth – &quot;Heavy, Left-Handed and Candid&quot; (2001)
*At the Gates&quot; – Live in Nottingham at Rock City&quot; (1996)
*Radiohead – &quot;The Bends Pinkpop&quot; (1995)
*The Fall – &quot;BBC Radio 1 Live in Concert&quot; (1989)
*Napalm Death – &quot;The DVD&quot; (1989)
*Into A Circle – &quot;Live&quot; (1987)
*Gene Loves Jezebel - &quot;Glad To Be Alive&quot; (1986)
*Play Dead – &quot;Caught from Behind: Live in England, France, Germany, and Switzerland&quot; (1985)
*R.E.M. - &quot;R.E.M. at the BBC&quot;, Disc 3 (1984)
*Tygers of Pan Tang – &quot;Live at Nottingham Rock City&quot; (1981)
• New Model Army - Live at Rock City - Nottingham - 28th Feb 1989 (2020)

==References==

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7354324" start="0" end="9" title="Rock City (venue)" label="Rock City"/>
<link wikidata="Q41262" start="52" end="62" title="Nottingham" label="Nottingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="64" end="71" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501348" start="179" end="193" title="The Undertones" label="The Undertones"/>
<link wikidata="Q192632" start="353" end="356" title="NME" label="NME"/>
<link wikidata="Q43281" start="451" end="459" title="Kerrang!" label="Kerrang!"/>
<link wikidata="Q7063611" start="563" end="585" title="Nottingham City Centre" label="Nottingham City Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q55137011" start="1286" end="1317" title="Ocean, Nottingham" label="Greyfriars Hall, Greyfriar Gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431735" start="1453" end="1490" title="World Professional Darts Championship" label="World Professional Darts Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q27593" start="1636" end="1641" title="AC/DC" label="AC/DC"/>
<link wikidata="Q125603" start="1646" end="1655" title="The Clash" label="The Clash"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390959" start="1818" end="1826" title="The Haçienda" label="Haçienda"/>
<link wikidata="Q42482" start="1846" end="1857" title="Iron Maiden" label="Iron Maiden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2400080" start="2111" end="2124" title="Teenage Kicks" label="Teenage Kicks"/>
<link wikidata="Q48304" start="2372" end="2382" title="The Pogues" label="The Pogues"/>
<link wikidata="Q133151" start="2387" end="2400" title="Ozzy Osbourne" label="Ozzy Osbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1298934" start="2486" end="2494" title="synthpop" label="Futurist"/>
<link wikidata="Q817138" start="2809" end="2820" title="electronica" label="electronica"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="2939" end="2943" title="jazz" label="jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q164444" start="2945" end="2949" title="funk" label="funk"/>
<link wikidata="Q131272" start="2954" end="2958" title="soul music" label="soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q11401" start="3090" end="3097" title="hip-hop" label="hip-hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q169737" start="3140" end="3151" title="breakdancer" label="breakdancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7354327" start="3157" end="3171" title="Rock City Crew" label="Rock City Crew"/>
<link wikidata="Q2397570" start="3227" end="3242" title="Bring the Noise" label="Bring the Noise"/>
<link wikidata="Q209182" start="3256" end="3268" title="Public Enemy (band)" label="Public Enemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11649" start="3414" end="3421" title="Nirvana (band)" label="Nirvana"/>
<link wikidata="Q72092" start="3426" end="3450" title="Rage Against the Machine" label="Rage Against the Machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q221535" start="3520" end="3532" title="Eddie Vedder" label="Eddie Vedder"/>
<link wikidata="Q8446" start="3537" end="3548" title="Kurt Cobain" label="Kurt Cobain"/>
<link wikidata="Q189045" start="3607" end="3614" title="Britpop" label="Britpop"/>
<link wikidata="Q382890" start="3679" end="3684" title="Oasis (band)" label="Oasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q485820" start="3689" end="3693" title="Blur (band)" label="Blur"/>
<link wikidata="Q38002101" start="4445" end="4453" title="Lil Pump" label="Lil Pump"/>
<link wikidata="Q7063746" start="4459" end="4481" title="Nottinghamshire Police" label="Nottinghamshire police"/>
<link wikidata="Q84263196" start="4936" end="4958" title="Coronavirus disease 2019" label="Coronavirus (COVID-19)"/>
<link wikidata="Q12184" start="4959" end="4967" title="pandemic" label="pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q30314010" start="5253" end="5270" title="social distancing" label="social distancing"/>
<link wikidata="Q539955" start="6175" end="6191" title="Richard Thompson (musician)" label="Richard Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q451028" start="6260" end="6272" title="Frank Turner" label="Frank Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q16992120" start="6293" end="6306" title="Ferocious Dog" label="Ferocious Dog"/>
<link wikidata="Q4347440" start="6347" end="6361" title="The Wildhearts" label="The Wildhearts"/>
<link wikidata="Q17021357" start="6370" end="6397" title="Rock City vs The Wildhearts" label="Rock City vs The Wildhearts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2661614" start="6412" end="6424" title="Jimi Jamison" label="Jimi Jamison"/>
<link wikidata="Q912581" start="6464" end="6477" title="Enter Shikari" label="Enter Shikari"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277107" start="6514" end="6528" title="Shaped by Fate" label="Shaped by Fate"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6537" end="6560" title="Shaped By Fate tour DVD" label="Shaped By Fate tour DVD"/>
<link wikidata="Q682299" start="6575" end="6582" title="Bonfire (band)" label="Bonfire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5299939" start="6591" end="6604" title="Double Vision (Bonfire album)" label="Double Vision"/>
<link wikidata="Q214350" start="6613" end="6627" title="The Libertines" label="The Libertines"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6636" end="6677" title="Libertines live at Rock City with Radio 1" label="Libertines live at Rock City with Radio 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q2005871" start="6692" end="6704" title="Pitchshifter" label="Pitchshifter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7117069" start="6713" end="6727" title="P.S.I.entology" label="P.S.I.entology"/>
<link wikidata="Q4347440" start="6742" end="6756" title="The Wildhearts" label="The Wildhearts"/>
<link wikidata="Q309001" start="6806" end="6818" title="Morbid Angel" label="Morbid Angel"/>
<link wikidata="Q434675" start="6827" end="6844" title="Altars of Madness" label="Altars of Madness"/>
<link wikidata="Q261" start="6859" end="6870" title="Linkin Park" label="Linkin Park"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6879" end="6904" title="Radio 1 broadcast bootleg" label="Radio 1 broadcast bootleg"/>
<link wikidata="Q487479" start="6919" end="6934" title="Cradle of Filth" label="Cradle of Filth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753469" start="6943" end="6965" title="Live Bait for the Dead" label="Live Bait for the Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969562" start="7004" end="7033" title="Heavy, Left-Handed and Candid" label="Heavy, Left-Handed and Candid"/>
<link wikidata="Q540368" start="7048" end="7060" title="At the Gates" label="At the Gates"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7069" end="7100" title="Live in Nottingham at Rock City" label="Live in Nottingham at Rock City"/>
<link wikidata="Q44190" start="7115" end="7124" title="Radiohead" label="Radiohead"/>
<link wikidata="Q221246" start="7133" end="7150" title="The Bends Pinkpop" label="The Bends Pinkpop"/>
<link wikidata="Q909916" start="7165" end="7173" title="The Fall (band)" label="The Fall"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7182" end="7209" title="BBC Radio 1 Live in Concert (The Fall album)" label="BBC Radio 1 Live in Concert"/>
<link wikidata="Q321762" start="7224" end="7236" title="Napalm Death" label="Napalm Death"/>
<link wikidata="Q7728593" start="7245" end="7252" title="The DVD (Napalm Death)" label="The DVD"/>
<link wikidata="Q6057903" start="7267" end="7280" title="Into A Circle" label="Into A Circle"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7289" end="7293" title="Live (Nottingham Rock City, February 1987)" label="Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q2087679" start="7308" end="7326" title="Gene Loves Jezebel" label="Gene Loves Jezebel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7335" end="7351" title="Glad To Be Alive" label="Glad To Be Alive"/>
<link wikidata="Q3392098" start="7366" end="7375" title="Play Dead (band)" label="Play Dead"/>
<link wikidata="" start="7384" end="7453" title="Caught from Behind: Live in England, France, Germany, and Switzerland" label="Caught from Behind: Live in England, France, Germany, and Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q134969" start="7468" end="7474" title="R.E.M." label="R.E.M."/>
<link wikidata="Q56491357" start="7483" end="7500" title="R.E.M. at the BBC" label="R.E.M. at the BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753013" start="7523" end="7541" title="Tygers of Pan Tang" label="Tygers of Pan Tang"/>
<link wikidata="Q6656306" start="7550" end="7578" title="Live at Nottingham Rock City" label="Live at Nottingham Rock City"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1329453" wikidata="Q3486721" url="?curid=1329453" title="USS Mississippi (1841)">
<text>USS &quot;Mississippi&quot;, a paddle frigate, was the first ship of the United States Navy to bear that name. She was named for the Mississippi River. Her sister ship was . Her keel was laid down by the Philadelphia Navy Yard in 1839; built under the personal supervision of Commodore Matthew Perry. She was commissioned on 22 December 1841, with Captain W. D. Salter in command and launched several weeks later.

==Service history==

===Mexican–American War===
After several years of service in the Home Squadron, during which she performed experiments crucial to development of the steam Navy, &quot;Mississippi&quot; joined the West Indian Squadron in 1845 as flagship for Commodore Perry. During the Mexican–American War, she took part in expeditions against Alvarado, Tampico, Pánuco, and Laguna de Términos, all successful in tightening American control of the Mexican coastline and interrupting coastwise commerce and military supply operations.

She returned to Norfolk for repairs on 1 January 1847, then arrived at Veracruz on 21 March 1847, carrying Perry to take command of the American fleet. At once she and her men plunged into amphibious operations against Veracruz, supplying guns and their crews to be taken ashore for the battery which fought the city to surrender in four days. Through the remainder of the war, &quot;Mississippi&quot; contributed guns, men, and boats to a series of coastal raids on Mexico&#x27;s east coast, taking part in the capture of Tabasco in June 1847.

===Mission to Japan===
&quot;Mississippi&quot; cruised the Mediterranean Sea during 1849–1851. On 28 August 1851, &quot;Mississippi&quot; ran aground off Smyrna, Ottoman Empire whilst on her way to collect Louis Kossuth before taking him into exile in the United States. Initial attempts to refloat her by the British paddle steamer and three other vessels were unsuccessful. She was refloated on 26 August. &quot;Mississippi&quot; was then prepared for Commodore Perry&#x27;s expedition to Japan. Serving as the flagship; it was commanded by Sydney Smith Lee. The squadron cleared Hampton Roads on 24 November 1852, for Madeira, the Cape of Good Hope, Hong Kong, and Shanghai, which was reached 4 May 1853.

The squadron now approached Japan by calls in the Ryukyu Islands and Bonin Islands, and entered Edo Bay on 8 July 1853, remaining until the Japanese accepted an official letter by President Millard Fillmore on 14 July. After further cruising in the Far East, &quot;Mississippi&quot; and the squadron returned to Japan on 12 February 1854, remaining as part of Perry&#x27;s show of force until the signing of the Convention of Kanagawa on 31 March. &quot;Mississippi&quot; returned to New York City on 23 April 1855, and again sailed for the Far East on 19 August 1857, to base at Shanghai and patrol in support of America&#x27;s burgeoning trade with the Orient. As the flagship for Commodore Josiah Tattnall III, she was present during the British and French attack on the Chinese forts at Taku in June 1859, and two months later, she landed a force at Shanghai when the American consul requested her aid in restoring order to the city, torn by civil strife. She returned to ordinary at Boston, Massachusetts, in January 1860, but was reactivated when the American Civil War became inevitable.

===Civil War===
&quot;Mississippi&quot; arrived off Key West, Florida, to institute the blockade there on 8 June 1861, and five days later made her first capture, the schooner &quot;Forest King&quot; bound with coffee from Rio de Janeiro to New Orleans, Louisiana. On 27 November 1861, off Northeast Pass of the Mississippi River, she joined in capturing the British bark &quot;Empress&quot;, again carrying coffee from Rio to New Orleans. The following spring, she joined Farragut&#x27;s squadron for the planned assault on New Orleans. After several attempts, on 7 April 1862, she and successfully passed over the bar at Southwest Pass, the heaviest ships ever to enter the river to that time.
As Farragut brought his fleet up the river, a key engagement occurred at the Battle of Forts Jackson and St. Philip on 24 April 1862, during which &quot;Mississippi&quot; ran the Confederate ram &quot;Manassas&quot; ashore, wrecking her with two mighty broadsides. One of her sailors, Seaman Christopher Brennan, was awarded the Medal of Honor for his part in the battle. The city was now doomed, and &quot;Mississippi&quot;, her heavy draft making her less suitable to river operations than lighter ships, remained off New Orleans for much of the next year.

Ordered upriver for the operations against Port Hudson, Louisiana, &quot;Mississippi&quot; sailed with six other ships lashed in pairs, while she sailed alone. On 14 March 1863, she grounded while attempting to pass the forts guarding Port Hudson. Under enemy fire, every effort was made to refloat her by Captain Melancton Smith and his executive officer George Dewey (later to achieve fame as an admiral). At last, her machinery was destroyed, her battery spiked, and she was fired to prevent Confederate capture. When the flames reached her magazines, she blew up and sank. Three of &quot;Mississippi&#x27;s&quot; men, Seaman Andrew Brinn, Boatswain&#x27;s Mate Peter Howard, and U.S. Marine Corps Sergeant Pinkerton R. Vaughn, were awarded the Medal of Honor for their actions during the abandonment. She lost 64 men, with the accompanying ships saving 223 of her crew.

==See also==

*List of steam frigates of the United States Navy
*Bibliography of early American naval history

== References ==

==External links==

* Japan America Society of Greater Philadelphia The Philadelphia origins of U.S.S. Mississippi 
*Journal of the U.S.S. Columbia and U.S.S. Mississippi, 1843-1846 MS 272 held by Special Collection &amp; Archives, Nimitz Library at the United States Naval Academy</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3486721" start="0" end="21" title="USS Mississippi (1841)" label="USS &amp;quot;Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2506352" start="31" end="45" title="paddle frigate" label="paddle frigate"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="73" end="91" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497" start="133" end="150" title="Mississippi River" label="Mississippi River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548690" start="204" end="226" title="Philadelphia Navy Yard" label="Philadelphia Navy Yard"/>
<link wikidata="Q61855" start="286" end="299" title="Matthew Perry (naval officer)" label="Matthew Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q14475832" start="309" end="321" title="ship commissioning" label="commissioned"/>
<link wikidata="Q596643" start="384" end="392" title="ship naming and launching" label="launched"/>
<link wikidata="Q1625943" start="501" end="514" title="Home Squadron" label="Home Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q7985538" start="632" end="652" title="West Indies Squadron (United States)" label="West Indian Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q6683" start="705" end="725" title="Mexican–American War" label="Mexican–American War"/>
<link wikidata="Q448370" start="764" end="772" title="Alvarado, Veracruz" label="Alvarado"/>
<link wikidata="Q273014" start="774" end="781" title="Tampico" label="Tampico"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991100" start="783" end="789" title="Pánuco (Veracruz)" label="Pánuco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650280" start="795" end="813" title="Laguna de Términos" label="Laguna de Términos"/>
<link wikidata="Q173270" start="1026" end="1034" title="Veracruz, Veracruz" label="Veracruz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745368" start="1144" end="1182" title="Siege of Veracruz" label="amphibious operations against Veracruz"/>
<link wikidata="Q80914" start="1478" end="1485" title="Tabasco" label="Tabasco"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="1560" end="1577" title="Mediterranean Sea" label="Mediterranean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379299" start="1655" end="1661" title="Smyrna" label="Smyrna"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="1663" end="1677" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q157040" start="1707" end="1720" title="Louis Kossuth" label="Louis Kossuth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7169780" start="1978" end="1988" title="Perry Expedition" label="expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q7660153" start="2044" end="2060" title="Sydney Smith Lee" label="Sydney Smith Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011895" start="2083" end="2096" title="Hampton Roads" label="Hampton Roads"/>
<link wikidata="Q26253" start="2122" end="2129" title="Madeira" label="Madeira"/>
<link wikidata="Q4092" start="2135" end="2152" title="Cape of Good Hope" label="Cape of Good Hope"/>
<link wikidata="Q6897416" start="2260" end="2274" title="Ryukyu Islands" label="Ryukyu Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q243634" start="2279" end="2292" title="Bonin Islands" label="Bonin Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q141017" start="2306" end="2313" title="Tokyo Bay" label="Edo Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q12306" start="2400" end="2416" title="Millard Fillmore" label="Millard Fillmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q771451" start="2622" end="2644" title="Convention of Kanagawa" label="Convention of Kanagawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3039839" start="2903" end="2922" title="Josiah Tattnall III" label="Josiah Tattnall III"/>
<link wikidata="Q548289" start="3001" end="3005" title="Taku Forts" label="Taku"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="3198" end="3204" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="3267" end="3285" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q485186" start="3358" end="3366" title="Key West" label="Key West"/>
<link wikidata="Q8678" start="3529" end="3543" title="Rio de Janeiro" label="Rio de Janeiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q34404" start="3547" end="3558" title="New Orleans" label="New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497" start="3618" end="3635" title="Mississippi River" label="Mississippi River"/>
<link wikidata="Q315607" start="3779" end="3787" title="David Farragut" label="Farragut"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497" start="3982" end="3987" title="Mississippi River" label="river"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647769" start="4079" end="4117" title="Battle of Forts Jackson and St. Philip" label="Battle of Forts Jackson and St. Philip"/>
<link wikidata="Q5014316" start="4203" end="4211" title="CSS Manassas" label="Manassas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5111982" start="4294" end="4313" title="Christopher Brennan (sailor)" label="Christopher Brennan"/>
<link wikidata="Q203535" start="4331" end="4345" title="Medal of Honor" label="Medal of Honor"/>
<link wikidata="Q860295" start="4605" end="4627" title="Siege of Port Hudson" label="Port Hudson, Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q6811209" start="4876" end="4891" title="Melancton Smith (1810–1893)" label="Melancton Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q467093" start="4918" end="4930" title="George Dewey" label="George Dewey"/>
<link wikidata="Q16200724" start="5191" end="5203" title="Andrew Brinn" label="Andrew Brinn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7174747" start="5227" end="5239" title="Peter Howard (Medal of Honor)" label="Peter Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q11218" start="5245" end="5262" title="United States Marine Corps" label="U.S. Marine Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q7196178" start="5272" end="5291" title="Pinkerton R. Vaughn" label="Pinkerton R. Vaughn"/>
<link wikidata="Q6585412" start="5452" end="5500" title="List of steam frigates of the United States Navy" label="List of steam frigates of the United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4903414" start="5502" end="5546" title="Bibliography of early American naval history" label="Bibliography of early American naval history"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1329454" wikidata="Q7872957" url="?curid=1329454" title="USS Plymouth (1844)">
<text>USS &quot;Plymouth&quot; was a sloop-of-war constructed and commissioned just prior to the Mexican–American War. She was heavily gunned, and traveled to Japan as part of Commodore Matthew C. Perry&#x27;s effort to force Japan to open her ports to international trade. She also served in European and Caribbean waters and, later in her career, she was used to train midshipmen.

&quot;Plymouth&quot; was the first ship of the United States Navy to be named for Plymouth, Massachusetts, a town on Plymouth Bay, about southeast of Boston, Massachusetts. Plymouth was founded by the Pilgrims in 1620.

==Built in Boston==
Built by the Boston Navy Yard, she departed Boston, Massachusetts, on 3 April 1844 for the Mediterranean Sea, Commander Henry Henry in command.

After over a year in European waters, she sailed westward and arrived at New York City on 4 October 1846.

==Far East==
Following service on the U.S. East Coast, &quot;Plymouth&quot; departed New York City, 13 February 1848, for the Far East, returning to Norfolk, Virginia, from the East Indies on 29 January 1851. On 23 August 1851 she stood out from Hampton Roads, Virginia, bound once again for the Orient.

After duty on the East India Squadron, she joined Commodore Matthew C. Perry&#x27;s expedition to Japan, entering Edo Bay on 8 July 1853 and departing on 17 July. She returned in February of the following year and before heading home put into Shanghai where she sent a party ashore to support a coordinated British-American expedition against hostile forts in the area.

==Training Navy midshipmen==
Returning to Norfolk, Virginia, 11 January 1855, &quot;Plymouth&quot; began an extended tour in the Atlantic Ocean. Assigned as a midshipmen training ship during the summers of 1855 and 1856, she tested new ordnance under the command of Commander John A. Dahlgren in 1858 and resumed duties as a training ship for midshipmen during the summers of 1859 and 1860.

==American Civil War==
&quot;Plymouth&quot; was at Norfolk, Virginia, for repairs during the secession crises in the winter of 1860–1861. After Virginia seceded from the Union, she was scuttled and partially burned there, 20 April 1861, to prevent her capture by the forces of the Confederate States of America when the Gosport Navy Yard fell into their hands.

The Confederates raised her by 23 June 1861, despite her being deep in mud and water, and planned to sail her up the James River to Richmond. However, when the Navy Yard was recaptured by the Union on 10 May 1862, she had not been moved and the Confederates scuttled her to avoid capture. She was again raised and her hulk sold at auction on 8 February 1864.

==See also==

* Union Navy

==References==

==External links==
*George P. Ryan Journal of the U.S.S. &quot;Plymouth&quot;, 1860, MS 9 and George M. Bache Journal of the U.S.S. &quot;Plymouth&quot;, 1860, MS 10 held by Special Collections &amp; Archives, Nimitz Library at the United States Naval Academy</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7872957" start="0" end="18" title="USS Plymouth (1844)" label="USS &amp;quot;Plymouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q928235" start="31" end="43" title="sloop-of-war" label="sloop-of-war"/>
<link wikidata="Q6683" start="91" end="111" title="Mexican–American War" label="Mexican–American War"/>
<link wikidata="Q61855" start="180" end="196" title="Matthew C. Perry" label="Matthew C. Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q11141137" start="365" end="375" title="midshipmen" label="midshipmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="425" end="443" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q326295" start="460" end="483" title="Plymouth, Massachusetts" label="Plymouth, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q4377338" start="495" end="507" title="Plymouth Bay" label="Plymouth Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="528" end="549" title="Boston, Massachusetts" label="Boston, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q855700" start="579" end="587" title="Pilgrim (Plymouth Colony)" label="Pilgrims"/>
<link wikidata="Q894573" start="631" end="647" title="Boston Navy Yard" label="Boston Navy Yard"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="662" end="683" title="Boston, Massachusetts" label="Boston, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="709" end="726" title="Mediterranean Sea" label="Mediterranean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="836" end="849" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q49231" start="1019" end="1036" title="Norfolk, Virginia" label="Norfolk, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011895" start="1116" end="1139" title="Hampton Roads, Virginia" label="Hampton Roads, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035639" start="1193" end="1212" title="East India Squadron" label="East India Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q61855" start="1235" end="1251" title="Matthew C. Perry" label="Matthew C. Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7169780" start="1259" end="1278" title="Perry Expedition" label="expedition to Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q141017" start="1289" end="1296" title="Tokyo Bay" label="Edo Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q8686" start="1418" end="1426" title="Shanghai" label="Shanghai"/>
<link wikidata="Q708255" start="1822" end="1838" title="John A. Dahlgren" label="John A. Dahlgren"/>
<link wikidata="Q660668" start="1871" end="1884" title="training ship" label="training ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q81931" start="2219" end="2248" title="Confederate States of America" label="Confederate States of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999049" start="2258" end="2275" title="Gosport Navy Yard" label="Gosport Navy Yard"/>
<link wikidata="Q81931" start="2304" end="2316" title="Confederate States of America" label="Confederates"/>
<link wikidata="Q3550003" start="2676" end="2686" title="Union Navy" label="Union Navy"/>
</links>
</doc>
