<doc id="187749" wikidata="Q115" url="?curid=187749" title="Ethiopia">
<text>Ethiopia, officially the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia, is a landlocked country located in the Horn of Africa region of East Africa. It shares borders with Eritrea to the north, Djibouti to the northeast, Somalia to the east, Kenya to the south, South Sudan to the west, and Sudan to the northwest. Ethiopia covers a land area of . , it is home to around 132 million inhabitants, making it the 10th-most populous country in the world, the 2nd-most populous in Africa after Nigeria, and the most populated landlocked country on Earth. The national capital and largest city, Addis Ababa, lies several kilometres west of the East African Rift that splits the country into the African and Somali tectonic plates.

Anatomically modern humans emerged from modern-day Ethiopia and set out for the Near East and elsewhere in the Middle Paleolithic period. In 980 BC, the Kingdom of D&#x27;mt extended its realm over Eritrea and the northern region of Ethiopia, while the Kingdom of Aksum maintained a unified civilization in the region for 900 years. Christianity was embraced by the kingdom in 330, and Islam arrived by the first Hijra in 615. After the collapse of Aksum in 960, the Zagwe dynasty ruled the north-central parts of Ethiopia until being overthrown by Yekuno Amlak in 1270, inaugurating the Ethiopian Empire and the Solomonic dynasty, claimed descent from the biblical Solomon and Queen of Sheba under their son Menelik I. By the 14th century, the empire had grown in prestige through territorial expansion and fighting against adjacent territories; most notably, the Ethiopian–Adal War (1529–1543) contributed to fragmentation of the empire, which ultimately fell under a decentralization known as &quot;Zemene Mesafint&quot; in the mid-18th century. Emperor Tewodros II ended &quot;Zemene Mesafint&quot; at the beginning of his reign in 1855, marking the reunification and modernization of Ethiopia.

From 1878 onwards, Emperor Menelik II launched a series of conquests known as Menelik&#x27;s Expansions, which resulted in the formation of Ethiopia&#x27;s current border. Externally, during the late 19th century, Ethiopia defended itself against foreign invasions, including from Egypt and Italy; as a result, Ethiopia preserved its sovereignty during the Scramble for Africa. In 1936, Ethiopia was occupied by Fascist Italy and annexed with Italian-possessed Eritrea and Somaliland, later forming Italian East Africa. In 1941, during World War II, it was occupied by the British Army, and its full sovereignty was restored in 1944 after a period of military administration. The Derg, a Soviet-backed military junta, took power in 1974 after deposing Emperor Haile Selassie and the Solomonic dynasty, and ruled the country for nearly 17 years amidst the Ethiopian Civil War. Following the dissolution of the Derg in 1991, the Ethiopian People&#x27;s Revolutionary Democratic Front (EPRDF) dominated the country with a new constitution and ethnic-based federalism. Since then, Ethiopia has suffered from prolonged and unsolved inter-ethnic clashes and political instability marked by democratic backsliding. From 2018, regional and ethnically based factions carried out armed attacks in multiple ongoing wars throughout Ethiopia.

Ethiopia is a multi-ethnic state with over 80 different ethnic groups. Christianity is the most widely professed faith in the country, with the largest denomination being the Ethiopian Orthodox Tewahedo Church. After Christianity, Ethiopia houses a significant minority of adherents to Islam and a small percentage to traditional faiths. This sovereign state is a founding member of the UN, the Group of 24, the Non-Aligned Movement, the Group of 77, and the Organisation of African Unity. Addis Ababa is the headquarters of the African Union, the Pan African Chamber of Commerce and Industry, the United Nations Economic Commission for Africa, the African Standby Force and many of the global non-governmental organizations focused on Africa. Ethiopia became a full member of BRICS in 2024. Ethiopia is one of the least developed countries but is sometimes considered an emerging power, having the fastest economic growth in sub-Saharan African countries because of foreign direct investment in expansion of agricultural and manufacturing industries; agriculture is the country&#x27;s largest economic sector, accounting for over 37% of the gross domestic product as of 2022. However, in terms of per capita income and the Human Development Index, the country is still developing. Ethiopia faces numerous challenges, including high rates of poverty, human rights violations, widespread ethnic discrimination, and a literacy rate of 52%. 

==Etymology==
Tradition holds that the name Ethiopia (ኢትዮጵያ) comes from the name of the first King of Ethiopia, Ethiop, or Ethiopis.

Ayele Berkerie explains: According to an Ethiopian tradition, the term Ethiopia is derived from the word Ethiopis, a name of the Ethiopian king, the seventh in the ancestral lines. Metshafe Aksum or the Ethiopian Book of Aksum identifies Itiopis as the twelfth king of Ethiopia and the father of Aksumawi. The Ethiopians pronounce Ethiopia እትዮጵያ with a Sades or the sixth sound እ as in incorporate and the graph ጰ has no equivalent in English or Latin graphs. Ethiopis is believed to be the twelfth direct descendant of Adam. His father is identified as Kush, while his grandfather is known as Kam.In the 15th-century Ge&#x27;ez &quot;Book of Axum&quot;, the name is ascribed to a legendary individual called &quot;Ityopp&#x27;is&quot;. He was an extra-biblical son of Cush, son of Ham, said to have founded the city of Axum.

The Greek name Αἰθιοπία (from , &quot;an Ethiopian&quot;) is a compound word, later explained as derived from the Greek words and (&quot;eithō&quot; &quot;I burn&quot; + &quot;ōps&quot; &quot;face&quot;). According to the Liddell-Scott Jones Greek-English Lexicon, the designation properly translates as &quot;burnt-face&quot; in noun form and &quot;red-brown&quot; in adjectival form. The historian Herodotus used the appellation to denote those parts of Africa south of the Sahara that were then known within the Ecumene (habitable world). The earliest mention of the term is found in the works of Homer, where it is used to refer to two people groups, one in Africa and one in the east from eastern Turkey to India. This Greek name was borrowed into Amharic as ኢትዮጵያ, &quot;ʾĪtyōṗṗyā&quot;.

In Greco-Roman epigraphs, &quot;Aethiopia&quot; was a specific toponym for ancient Nubia. At least as early as , the name &quot;Aethiopia&quot; also occurs in many translations of the Old Testament in allusion to Nubia. The ancient Hebrew texts identify Nubia instead as Kush. However, in the New Testament, the Greek term Aithiops does occur, referring to a servant of the Kandake, the queen of Kush.

Following the Hellenic and biblical traditions, the Monumentum Adulitanum, a 3rd-century inscription belonging to the Aksumite Empire, indicates that Aksum&#x27;s ruler governed an area that was flanked to the west by the territory of Ethiopia and Sasu. The Aksumite King Ezana eventually conquered Nubia the following century, and the Aksumites thereafter appropriated the designation &quot;Ethiopians&quot; for their own kingdom. In the Ge&#x27;ez version of the Ezana inscription, Aἰθίοπες is equated with the unvocalized &quot;Ḥbšt&quot; and &quot;Ḥbśt&quot; (Ḥabashat), and denotes for the first time the highland inhabitants of Aksum. This new demonym was subsequently rendered as &quot;ḥbs&quot; (&#x27;Aḥbāsh) in Sabaic and as &quot;Ḥabasha&quot; in Arabic. Derivatives of this are used in some languages that use loanwords from Arabic, for example in Malay &quot;Habsyah&quot;.

In English, and generally outside of Ethiopia, the country was historically known as Abyssinia. This toponym was derived from the Latinized form of the ancient &quot;Habash&quot;.

==History==

=== Prehistory ===


Several important finds have propelled Ethiopia and the surrounding region to the forefront of palaeontology. The oldest hominid discovered to date in Ethiopia is the 4.2 million-year-old &quot;Ardipithecus ramidus&quot; (Ardi) found by Tim D. White in 1994. The most well-known hominid discovery is &quot;Australopithecus afarensis&quot; (Lucy). Known locally as &quot;Dinkinesh&quot;, the specimen was found in the Awash Valley of Afar Region in 1974 by Donald Johanson, and is one of the most complete and best-preserved adult Australopithecine fossils ever uncovered. Lucy&#x27;s taxonomic name refers to the region where the discovery was made. This hominid is estimated to have lived 3.2 million years ago.

Ethiopia is also considered one of the earliest sites of the emergence of anatomically modern humans, &quot;Homo sapiens&quot;. The oldest of these local fossil finds, the Omo remains, were excavated in the southwestern Omo Kibish area and have been dated to the Middle Paleolithic, around 200,000 years ago. Additionally, skeletons of &quot;Homo sapiens idaltu&quot; were found at a site in the Middle Awash valley. Dated to approximately 160,000 years ago, they may represent an extinct subspecies of &quot;Homo sapiens&quot;, or the immediate ancestors of anatomically modern humans. Archaic &quot;Homo sapiens&quot; fossils excavated at the Jebel Irhoud site in Morocco have since been dated to an earlier period, about 300,000 years ago, while Omo-Kibish I (Omo I) from southern Ethiopia is the oldest anatomically modern &quot;Homo sapiens&quot; skeleton currently known (196 ± 5 kya).

According to some anthropologists, the first Afroasiatic-speaking populations arrived in the region during the ensuing Neolithic era from the family&#x27;s proposed urheimat (&quot;original homeland&quot;) in the Nile Valley, or the Near East. The majority of scholars today propose that the Afroasiatic family developed in northeast Africa because of the higher diversity of lineages in that region, a telltale sign of linguistic origin.

In 2019, archaeologists discovered a 30,000-year-old Middle Stone Age rock shelter at the Fincha Habera site in Bale Mountains at an elevation of above sea level. At this high altitude, humans are susceptible both to hypoxia and to extreme weather. According to a study published in the journal &quot;Science&quot;, this dwelling is proof of the earliest permanent human occupation at high altitude yet discovered. Thousands of animal bones, hundreds of stone tools, and ancient fireplaces were discovered, revealing a diet that featured giant mole rats.

Evidence of some of the earliest known stone-tipped projectile weapons (a characteristic tool of &quot;Homo sapiens&quot;), the stone tips of javelins or throwing spears, were discovered in 2013 at the Ethiopian site of Gademotta, which date to around 279,000 years ago. In 2019, additional Middle Stone Age projectile weapons were found at Aduma, dated 100,000–80,000 years ago, in the form of points considered likely to belong to darts delivered by spear throwers.

===Antiquity===

In 980 BC, Dʿmt was established in present-day Eritrea and the northern part of Ethiopia in the Tigray region, and is widely believed to be the successor state to Punt. This polity&#x27;s capital was located at Yeha in what is now northern Ethiopia. Most modern historians consider this civilization to be a native Ethiopian one, although in earlier times many suggested it was Sabaean-influenced because of the latter&#x27;s hegemony of the Red Sea.

Other scholars regard Dʿmt as the result of a union of Afroasiatic-speaking cultures of the Cushitic and Semitic branches; namely, local Agaw peoples and Sabaeans from Southern Arabia. However, Ge&#x27;ez, the ancient Semitic language of Ethiopia, is thought to have developed independently from the Sabaean language. As early as 2000 BC, other Semitic speakers were living in Ethiopia and Eritrea where Ge&#x27;ez developed. Sabaean influence is now thought to have been minor, limited to a few localities, and disappearing after a few decades or a century. It may have been a trading or military colony in alliance with the Ethiopian civilization of Dʿmt or some other proto-Axumite state.

After the fall of Dʿmt during the 4th century BC, the Ethiopian plateau came to be dominated by smaller successor kingdoms. In the 1st century AD, the Kingdom of Aksum emerged in what is now Tigray Region and Eritrea. According to the medieval &quot;Book of Axum&quot;, the kingdom&#x27;s first capital, Mazaber, was built by Itiyopis, son of Cush. Aksum would later at times extend its rule into Yemen on the other side of the Red Sea. The Persian prophet Mani listed Axum with Rome, Persia, and China as one of the four great powers of his era, during the 3rd century. It is also believed that there was a connection between Egyptian and Ethiopian churches. There is diminutive evidence that the Aksumites were associated with the Queen of Sheba, via their royal inscription.

Around 316 AD, Frumentius and his brother Edesius from Tyre accompanied their uncle on a voyage to Ethiopia. When the vessel stopped at a Red Sea port, the natives killed all the travellers except the two brothers, who were taken to the court as slaves. They were given positions of trust by the monarch, and they converted members of the royal court to Christianity. Frumentius became the first bishop of Aksum. A coin dated to 324 shows that Ethiopia was the second country to officially adopt Christianity (after Armenia did so in 301), although the religion may have been at first confined to court circles; it was the first major power to do so. The Aksumites were accustomed to the Greco-Roman sphere of influence, but embarked on significant cultural ties and trade connections between the Indian subcontinent and the Roman Empire via the Silk Road, primarily exporting ivory, tortoise shell, gold and emeralds, and importing silk and spices. The country&#x27;s gold production in 2015 is 9 metric tons.

===Middle Ages===
The kingdom adopted the name &quot;Ethiopia&quot; during the reign of Ezana in the 4th century. After the conquest of Kingdom of Kush in 330, the Aksumite territory reached its peak between the 5th and 6th centuries. This period was interrupted by several incursions into the South Arabian protectorate, including Jewish Dhu Nuwas of the Himyarite Kingdom and the Aksumite–Persian wars. In 575, the Aksumites besieged and retook Sana&#x27;a following the assassination of its governor Sayf ibn Dhī Yazan. The Red Sea was left to the Rashidun Caliphate in 646, and the port city of Adulis was plundered by Arab Muslims in the 8th century; along with irrevocable land degradation, claimed climate change and sporadic rainfall precipitation from 730 to 760, these factors likely caused the kingdom to decline in power as part of an important trade route. Aksum came to an end in 960 when Queen Gudit defeated the last king of Aksum. In response, the remnant of the Aksumite population to shift into the southern region and establish the Zagwe dynasty, changing its capital to Lalibela. Zagwe&#x27;s rule ended when an Amhara noble man Yekuno Amlak revolted against King Yetbarak and established the Ethiopian Empire (known by exonym &quot;Abyssinia&quot;).

The Ethiopian Empire initiated territorial expansion under the leadership of Amda Seyon I. He launched campaigns against his Muslim adversaries to the east, resulting in a significant shift in the balance of power in favor of the Christians for the next two centuries. After Amda Seyon&#x27;s successful eastern campaigns, most of the Muslim principalities in the Horn of Africa came under the suzerainty of the Ethiopian Empire. Stretching from Gojjam to the Somali Coast in Zelia. Among these Muslim entities was the Sultanate of Ifat. During the reign of Emperor Zara Yaqob, the Ethiopian Empire reached its pinnacle. His rule was marked by the consolidation of territorial acquisitions from earlier rulers, the oversight of the construction of numerous churches and monasteries, the active promotion of literature and art, and the strengthening of central imperial authority. Ifat&#x27;s successor, the Adal Sultanate, tried to conquer Ethiopia during the Ethiopian–Adal War, but was ultimately defeated at the 1543 Battle of Wayna Daga.

By the 16th century, an influx of migration by ethnic Oromo into northern parts of the region fragmented the empire&#x27;s power. Embarking from present-day Guji and Borena Zone, the Oromos were largely motivated by several folkloric conceptions—beginning with &quot;Moggaasaa&quot; and &quot;Liqimssa&quot;—many of whom related to their raids. This persisted until &quot;gada&quot; of Meslé. According to Abba Bahrey, the earliest expansion occurred under Emperor Dawit II (&quot;luba&quot; Melbah), when they encroached to Bale before invading Adal Sultanate.

Ethiopia saw major diplomatic contact with Portugal from the 17th century, mainly related to religion. Beginning in 1555, Portuguese Jesuits attempted to develop Roman Catholicism as the state religion. After several failures, they sent several missionaries in 1603, including the most influential, Spanish Jesuit Pedro Paez. Under Emperor Susenyos I, Roman Catholicism became the state religion of the Ethiopian Empire in 1622. This decision caused an uprising by the Orthodox populace.

===Early Modern Period (1632–1855)===
In 1632, Emperor Fasilides halted Roman Catholic state administration, restoring Orthodox Tewahedo as the state religion. Fasilides&#x27; reign solidified imperial power, relocating the capital to Gondar in 1636, marking the beginning of the &quot;Gondarine period&quot;. He expelled Jesuits, reclaimed lands, and relocated them to Fremona. During his rule, Fasilides constructed the iconic royal fortress, Fasil Ghebbi, built forty-four churches, and revived Ethiopian art. He is also credited with building seven stone bridges over the Blue Nile River.

Gondar&#x27;s power declined after the death of Iyasu I in 1706. Following Iyasu II&#x27;s death in 1755, Empress Mentewab brought her brother, Ras Wolde Leul, to Gondar, making him Ras Bitwaded. This led to regnal conflict between Mentewab&#x27;s &quot;Quaregnoch&quot; and the Wollo group led by Wubit. In 1767, Ras Mikael Sehul, a regent in Tigray Province, seized Gondar, killing the child Iyoas I in 1769, the reigning emperor, and installed 70-year-old Yohannes II.

Between 1769 and 1855, Ethiopia witnessed the Zemene Mesafint or &quot;Age of Princes,&quot; a period of isolation. Emperors became figureheads, controlled by regional lords and noblemen like &quot;Ras&quot; Mikael Sehul, Ras Wolde Selassie of Tigray, and by the Yejju Oromo dynasty of the Wara Sheh, including Ras Gugsa of Yejju. Before the Zemene Mesafint, Emperor Iyoas I had introduced the Oromo language (&quot;Afaan Oromo&quot;) at court, replacing Amharic.

=== Age of Imperialism (1855–1916) ===

Ethiopian isolationism ended following a British mission that concluded with an alliance between the two nations, but it was not until 1855 that the Amhara kingdoms of northern Ethiopia (Gondar, Gojjam, and Shewa) were briefly united after the power of the emperor was restored beginning with the reign of Tewodros II. Tewodros II began a process of consolidation, centralisation, and state-building that would be continued by succeeding emperors. This process reduced the power of regional rulers, restructured the empire&#x27;s administration, and created a professional army. These changes created the basis for establishing the effective sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Ethiopian state. In 1875 and 1876, Ottoman and Egyptian forces, accompanied by many European and American advisors, twice invaded Abyssinia but were initially defeated. From 1885 to 1889 (under Yohannes IV), Ethiopia joined the Mahdist War allied to Britain, Turkey, and Egypt against the Sudanese Mahdist State. In 1887, Menelik II, king of Shewa, invaded the Emirate of Harar after his victory at the Battle of Chelenqo. On 10 March 1889, Yohannes IV was killed by the Sudanese Khalifah Abdullah&#x27;s army whilst leading his army in the Battle of Gallabat.

Ethiopia, in roughly its current form, began under the reign of Menelik II, who was Emperor from 1889 until his death in 1913. From his base in the central province of Shewa, Menelik set out to annex territories to the south, east, and west — areas inhabited by the Oromo, Sidama, Gurage, Welayta, and other peoples. He achieved this with the help of &quot;Ras&quot; Gobana Dacche&#x27;s Shewan Oromo militia, which occupied lands that had not been held since Ahmad ibn Ibrahim al-Ghazi&#x27;s war, as well as other areas that had never been under Ethiopian rule.

For his leadership, despite opposition from more traditional elements of society, Menelik II was heralded as a national hero. He had signed the Treaty of Wuchale with Italy in May 1889, by which Italy would recognize Ethiopia&#x27;s sovereignty so long as Italy could control an area north of Ethiopia (now part of modern Eritrea). In return, Italy was to provide Menelik with weapons and support him as emperor. The Italians used the time between the signing of the treaty and its ratification by the Italian government to expand their territorial claims. This First Italo–Ethiopian War culminated in the Battle of Adwa on 1 March 1896, in which Italy&#x27;s colonial forces were defeated by the Ethiopians. During this time, about a third of the population died in the Great Ethiopian Famine (1888 to 1892), and the rinderpest swept through the area, destroying much of the herd economy. On 11 October 1897, Ethiopia adopted the colours of the pan-African flag with green, yellow and red stripes in representation of pan-Africanist ideology.

===Haile Selassie I era (1916–1974)===

The early 20th century was marked by the reign of Emperor Haile Selassie &quot;(Ras Tafari)&quot;. He came to power after Lij Iyasu was deposed, and undertook a nationwide modernization campaign from 1916 when he was made a &quot;Ras&quot; and Regent (&quot;Inderase&quot;) for the Empress Regnant Zewditu, and became the &quot;de facto&quot; ruler of the Ethiopian Empire. Following Zewditu&#x27;s death, on 2 November 1930, he succeeded her as emperor. In 1931, Haile Selassie endowed Ethiopia with its first-ever Constitution in emulation of Imperial Japan&#x27;s 1890 Constitution.
The independence of Ethiopia was interrupted by the Second Italo-Ethiopian War, beginning when it was invaded by Fascist Italy in early October 1935, and by subsequent Italian rule of the country (1936–1941) after Italian victory in the war. Italy, however, never managed to secure the country in its totality, due to resistance from the Arbegnoch, this made Ethiopia, along with Liberia, the only African countries to never be colonized. Following the entry of Italy into World War II, British Empire forces, together with the &quot;Arbegnoch&quot;, liberated Ethiopia in the course of the East African campaign in 1941. The country was placed under British military administration, and then Ethiopia&#x27;s full sovereignty was restored with the signing of the Anglo-Ethiopian Agreement in December 1944.

On 24 October 1945, Ethiopia became a founding member of the United Nations. In 1952, Haile Selassie orchestrated a federation with Eritrea. He dissolved this in 1962 and annexed Eritrea, resulting in the Eritrean War of Independence. Haile Selassie also played a leading role in the formation of the Organisation of African Unity (OAU). Opinion within Ethiopia turned against Haile Selassie, owing to the worldwide 1973 oil crisis causing a sharp increase in gasoline prices starting on 13 February 1974, leading to student and worker protests. The feudal oligarchical cabinet of Aklilu Habte-Wold was toppled, and a new government was formed with Endelkachew Makonnen serving as Prime Minister.

===Derg era (1974–1991)===

Haile Selassie&#x27;s rule ended on 12 September 1974, when he was deposed by the Derg, a committee made up of military and police officers. After the execution of 60 former government and military officials, the new Provisional Military Administrative Council abolished the monarchy in March 1975 and established Ethiopia as a Marxist-Leninist state. The abolition of feudalism, increased literacy, nationalization, and sweeping land reform including the resettlement and villagization from the Ethiopian Highlands became priorities.

After a power struggle in 1977, Mengistu Halie Mariam gained undisputed leadership of the Derg. In 1977, Somalia, which had previously been receiving assistance and arms from the USSR, invaded Ethiopia in the Ogaden War, capturing part of the Ogaden region. Ethiopia recovered it after it began receiving massive military aid from the Soviet bloc countries. By the end of the seventies, Mengistu presided over the second-largest army in all of sub-Saharan Africa, as well as a formidable air force and navy.

In 1976–78, up to 500,000 were killed as a result of the Red Terror, a violent political repression campaign by the Derg against various opposition groups. In 1987, the Derg dissolved itself and established the People&#x27;s Democratic Republic of Ethiopia (PDRE) upon the adoption of the 1987 Constitution of Ethiopia. A 1983–85 famine affected around 8 million people, resulting in 1 million dead. Insurrections against authoritarian rule sprang up, particularly in the northern regions of Eritrea and Tigray. The Tigray People&#x27;s Liberation Front (TPLF) merged with other ethnically based opposition movements in 1989, to form the Ethiopian People&#x27;s Revolutionary Democratic Front (EPRDF).

The collapse of Marxism–Leninism during the revolutions of 1989 coincided with the Soviet Union stopping aid to Ethiopia altogether in 1990. EPRDF forces advanced on Addis Ababa in May 1991, and Mengistu fled the country and was granted asylum in Zimbabwe.

===Federal Democratic Republic (1991–present)===

In July 1991, the EPRDF convened a National Conference to establish the Transitional Government of Ethiopia composed of an 87-member Council of Representatives and guided by a national charter that functioned as a transitional constitution. In 1994, a new constitution was written that established a parliamentary republic with a bicameral legislature and a judicial system.

In April 1993, Eritrea gained independence from Ethiopia after a national referendum. In May 1998, a border dispute with Eritrea led to the Eritrean–Ethiopian War, which lasted until June 2000 and cost both countries an estimated $1 million a day. This had a negative effect on Ethiopia&#x27;s economy, and a border conflict between the two countries would continue until 2018. As of 2018, further civil war in Ethiopia continues, mainly due to destabilization of the country.

Ethnic violence rose during the late 2010s and early 2020s, with various clashes and conflicts leading to millions of Ethiopians being displaced.

The federal government decided that elections for 2020 (later being rescheduled to 2021) be cancelled, due to health and safety concerns about COVID-19. The Tigray Region&#x27;s TPLF opposed this, and proceeded to hold elections anyway on 9 September 2020. Relations between the federal government and Tigray deteriorated rapidly, and in November 2020, Ethiopia began a military offensive in Tigray in response to attacks on army units stationed there, marking the beginning of the Tigray war. By March 2022, as many as 500,000 people had died as a result of violence and famine. After a number of peace and mediation proposals in the intervening years, Ethiopia and the Tigrayan rebel forces agreed to a cessation of hostilities on 2 November 2022. Coupled with OLA insurgency, the federal government relations with Fano militias, who previously allied to the government in the Tigray War, deteriorated in mid-2023, resulting in a war in the Amhara Region. According to reports conducted by the Ethiopian Human Rights Commission (EHRC), mass human rights violations carried out by ENDF troops including door-to-door searches, extrajudicial killings, massacres and detentions. Notable incident includes the Merawi massacre in early 2024, which left 50 to 100 residents deaths in Merawi town in Amhara.

==Geography==
At , Ethiopia is the world&#x27;s 26th-largest country, comparable in size to Bolivia. It lies between the 3rd parallel north and the 15th parallel north and longitudes 33rd meridian east and 48th meridian east.

The major portion of Ethiopia lies in the Horn of Africa, which is the easternmost part of the African landmass. The territories that have frontiers with Ethiopia are Eritrea to the north and then, moving in a clockwise direction, Djibouti, Somalia, Kenya, South Sudan and Sudan. Within Ethiopia is a vast highland complex of mountains and dissected plateaus divided by the Great Rift Valley, which runs generally southwest to northeast and is surrounded by lowlands, steppes, or semi-desert. There is a great diversity of terrain with wide variations in climate, soils, natural vegetation and settlement patterns.

Ethiopia is an ecologically diverse country, ranging from the deserts along the eastern border to the tropical forests in the south to extensive Afromontane in the northern and southwestern parts. Lake Tana in the north is the source of the Blue Nile. It also has many endemic species, notably the gelada, the walia ibex and the Ethiopian wolf (&quot;Simien fox&quot;). The wide range of altitude has given the country a variety of ecologically distinct areas, and this has helped to encourage the evolution of endemic species in ecological isolation.

The nation is a land of geographical contrasts, ranging from the vast fertile west, with its forests and numerous rivers, to the world&#x27;s hottest settlement of Dallol in its north. The Ethiopian Highlands are the largest continuous mountain ranges in Africa, and the Sof Omar Caves contains the largest cave on the continent. Ethiopia also has the second-largest number of UNESCO World Heritage Sites in Africa.

===Climate===
The predominant climate type is tropical monsoon, with wide topographic-induced variation. The Ethiopian Highlands cover most of the country and have a climate which is generally considerably cooler than other regions at similar proximity to the Equator. Most of the country&#x27;s major cities are located at elevations of around above sea level, including historic capitals such as Gondar and Axum. The modern capital, Addis Ababa, is situated on the foothills of Mount Entoto at an elevation of around . It experiences a mild climate year round. With temperatures fairly uniform year round, the seasons in Addis Ababa are largely defined by rainfall: a dry season from October to February, a light rainy season from March to May, and a heavy rainy season from June to September. The average annual rainfall is approximately .

There are on average seven hours of sunshine per day. The dry season is the sunniest time of the year, though even at the height of the rainy season in July and August there are still usually several hours per day of bright sunshine. The average annual temperature in Addis Ababa is , with daily maximum temperatures averaging throughout the year, and overnight lows averaging .

Most major cities and tourist sites in Ethiopia lie at a similar elevation to Addis Ababa and have a comparable climate. In less elevated regions, particularly the lower lying Ethiopian xeric grasslands and shrublands in the east of Ethiopia, the climate can be significantly hotter and drier. Dallol, in the Danakil Depression in this eastern zone, has the world&#x27;s highest average annual temperature of .
Ethiopia is vulnerable to many of the effects of climate change. These include increases in temperature and changes in precipitation. Climate change in these forms threatens food security and the economy, which is agriculture based. Many Ethiopians have been forced to leave their homes and travel as far as the Gulf, Southern Africa and Europe.

Since April 2019, the Ethiopian Prime Minister Abiy Ahmed has promoted Beautifying Sheger, a development project that aims to reduce the negative effects of climate change – among other things – in the capital city Addis Ababa. In the following May, the government held &quot;Dine for Sheger&quot;, a fundraising event in order to cover some of the $1 billion needed through the public. $25 million was raised through the expensive event, both through the cost of attending and donations. Two Chinese railway companies under the Belt and Road Initiative between China and Ethiopia had supplied funds to develop 12 of the total 56 kilometres.

===Biodiversity===

Ethiopia is a global centre of avian diversity. To date more than 856 bird species have been recorded in Ethiopia, twenty of which are endemic to the country. Sixteen species are endangered or critically endangered. Many of these birds feed on butterflies, like the &quot;Bicyclus anynana&quot;.

Historically, throughout the African continent, wildlife populations have been rapidly declining due to logging, civil wars, pollution, poaching, and other human factors. A 17-year-long civil war, along with severe drought, negatively affected Ethiopia&#x27;s environmental conditions, leading to even greater habitat degradation. Habitat destruction is a factor that leads to endangerment. When changes to a habitat occur rapidly, animals do not have time to adjust. Human impact threatens many species, with greater threats expected as a result of climate change induced by greenhouse gases. With carbon dioxide emissions in 2010 of 6,494,000 tonnes, Ethiopia contributes just 0.02% to the annual human-caused release of greenhouse gases.

Ethiopia has 31 endemic species of mammals. Ethiopia has many species listed as critically endangered and vulnerable to global extinction. The threatened species in Ethiopia can be broken down into three categories (based on IUCN ratings): critically endangered, endangered, and vulnerable.

Ethiopia is one of the eight fundamental and independent centres of origin for cultivated plants in the world. However, deforestation is a major concern for Ethiopia as studies suggest loss of forest contributes to soil erosion, loss of nutrients in the soil, loss of animal habitats, and reduction in biodiversity. At the beginning of the 20th century, around 420,000 km2 (or 35%) of Ethiopia&#x27;s land was covered by trees, but recent research indicates that forest cover is now approximately 11.9% of the area. The country had a 2018 Forest Landscape Integrity Index mean score of 7.16/10, ranking it 50th globally out of 172 countries.

Ethiopia loses an estimated 1,410 km2 of natural forests each year due to firewood collection, conversion to farmland, overgrazing, and use of forest wood for building material. Between 1990 and 2005 the country lost approximately 21,000 km2 of forests. Current government programs to control deforestation consist of education, promoting reforestation programs, and providing raw materials which are alternatives to timber. In rural areas the government also provides non-timber fuel sources and access to non-forested land to promote agriculture without destroying forest habitat.

Organizations such as SOS and Farm Africa are working with the federal government and local governments to create a system of forest management.

==Government and politics==
=== Government ===

Ethiopia is a federal parliamentary republic, wherein the Prime Minister is the head of government, and the President is the head of state but with largely ceremonial powers. Executive power is exercised by the government and federal legislative power vested in both the government and the two chambers of parliament. The House of Federation is the upper chamber of the bicameral legislature with 108 seats, and the lower chamber is the House of Peoples&#x27; Representatives (HoPR) with 547 seats. The House of Federation is chosen by the regional councils whereas MPs of the HoPR are elected directly, in turn, they elect the president for a six-year term and the prime minister for a 5-year term.

The Ethiopian judiciary consists of dual system with two court structures: the federal and state courts. The FDRE Constitution vested federal judicial authority to the Federal Supreme Court which can overturn and review decisions of subordinate federal courts; itself has regular division assigned for fundamental errors of law. In addition, the Supreme Court can perform circuit hearings in established five states at any states of federal levels or &quot;area designated for its jurisdiction&quot; if deemed &quot;necessary for the efficient rendering of justice&quot;.

The Federal Supreme Proclamation granted three subject matter principles: laws, parties and place to federal court jurisdiction, first &quot;cases arising under the Constitution, federal laws and international treaties&quot;, second over &quot;parties specified by federal laws&quot;.

On the basis of Article 78 of the 1994 Ethiopian Constitution, the judiciary is completely independent of the executive and the legislature. To ensure this, the President and Vice President of the Supreme Court are appointed by Parliament on the nomination of Prime Minister. Once elected, the executive power has no authority to remove them from office. Other judges are nominated by the Federal Judicial Administration Council (FJAC) on the basis of transparent criteria and the Prime Minister&#x27;s recommendation for appointment in the HoPR. In all cases, judges cannot be removed from their duty unless they retired, violated disciplinary rules, gross incompatibility, or inefficiency to unfit due to ill health. Contrary, the majority vote of HoPR have the right to sanction removal in federal judiciary level or state council in cases of state judges. In 2015, the realities of this provision were questioned in a report prepared by Freedom House.

===Politics===
Post-1995, Ethiopia&#x27;s politics has been liberalized which promotes all-encompassing reforms to the country. Today, its economy is based on mixed, market-oriented principles. Ethiopia has eleven semi-autonomous administrative regions that have the power to raise and spend their own revenues.

The first multiparty election took place in May 1995, which was won by the EPRDF. The president of the transitional government, EPRDF leader Meles Zenawi, became the first Prime Minister of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia, and Negasso Gidada was elected its president. Meles&#x27; government was consistently re-elected; however, these results were heavily criticized by international observers, and denounced by the opposition as fraudulent.

Meles died on 20 August 2012 in Brussels, where he was being treated for an unspecified illness. Deputy Prime Minister Hailemariam Desalegn was appointed as a new prime minister until the 2015 elections, and remained so afterwards with his party in control of every parliamentary seat. On 15 February 2018, Hailemariam resigned as Prime Minister, following years of protests and a state of emergency. Abiy Ahmed became prime minister following Hailemariam&#x27;s resignation. He made a historic visit to Eritrea in 2018, ending the state of conflict between the two countries, and was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 2019.

According to the Democracy Index published by the United Kingdom-based Economist Intelligence Unit in late 2010, Ethiopia was an &quot;authoritarian regime&quot;, ranking as the 118th-most democratic out of 167 countries. Ethiopia had dropped 13 places on the list since 2008, and the 2010 report attributed the drop to the government&#x27;s crackdown on opposition activities, media, and civil society before the 2010 parliamentary election, which the report argued had made Ethiopia a &quot;de facto&quot; one-party state.

Accompanied by pervasive internal and intercommunal conflicts in the 21st century, the Ethiopian government resorted to authoritarian structure, severing democratic and human rights. Freedom House, who has worked on Ethiopia since 2008, indicates that Ethiopia is &quot;Not Free&quot; state due to very poor fundamental rights (political and civil liberties) recorded in both EPRDF and Prosperity Party regimes. Under Abiy Ahmed, Ethiopia is experiencing democratic backsliding since 2019 marked by turbulent period of internal conflict, jailing opposition group members and limit media freedom.

===Administrative divisions===
Ethiopia is administratively divided into four levels: regions, zones, &quot;woredas&quot; (districts) and &quot;kebele&quot; (wards). The country comprises 12 regions and two city administrations under these regions, plenty of zones, woredas and neighbourhood administration: kebeles. The two federal-level city administrations are Addis Ababa and Dire Dawa.

===Foreign relations===
Ethiopia was historically a trading nation that exported goods such as gold, ivory, exotic animals, and incense. Modern Ethiopian foreign relations began under Emperor Tewodros II, who during his reign sought to re-establish a cohesive Ethiopian state, but was thwarted by the British expedition of 1868. Since then, the country was seen redundant by world powers until the opening of Suez Canal due to an influence of Mahdist War.

Today, Ethiopia maintains strong relations with China, Israel, Mexico, Turkey and India as well as neighboring countries. Ethiopia is a strategic partner of Global War on Terrorism and African Growth and Opportunity Act (AGOA). US. Former U.S. President Barack Obama was the first incumbent U.S. president to visit Ethiopia in July 2015; the speech he gave in African Union during this trip focused on combatting Islamic terrorism. Emigration from Ethiopia is primarily directed towards Europe, including Italy, the United Kingdom and Sweden, as well as Canada and Australia, while emigration to the Middle East is primarily to Saudi Arabia and Israel. Ethiopia is founding member of the Group of 24 (G-24), the Non-Aligned Movement and the G77. In 1963, the Organization of African Unity, which later renamed itself the African Union, was founded in Addis Ababa, which today hosts the secretariat of the African Union, the African Union Commission. In addition, Ethiopia is also a member of the Pan African Chamber of Commerce and Industry, the United Nations Economic Commission for Africa, the African Standby Force and many of global NGOs focused on Africa. 

Ethiopia&#x27;s foreign relations with both Sudan and Egypt are somewhat fraught owing to the effects the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam project, which was escalated in 2020, would have on water rights in the region. Despite six upstream countries (Ethiopia, Kenya, Uganda, Rwanda, Burundi, and Tanzania) signing the Nile Basin Initiative in 2010, Egypt and Sudan rejected a water sharing treaty, citing the reduction of amount of water to the Nile Basin and the challenge it would pose to their historic connection of water rights. In 2020, Prime Minister Abiy Ahmed warned that &quot;No force can stop Ethiopia from building a dam. If there is need to go to war, we could get millions readied.&quot;

Ethiopia is one of the African countries that was a founding member of League of Nations, which served as the predecessor for the United Nations, since 1923. UN taskforces in Ethiopia deal primarily with humanitarian issues and development. Some of its agencies maintain regional ties with United Nations Economic Commission for Africa and the African Union. The UN prioritizes sustainable development in Ethiopia, including fighting poverty, sustainable economic growth, climate change policy, educational and healthcare provisions, increasing employment, and environmental protection.

===Military===
The Ethiopian army&#x27;s origins and military traditions date back to the earliest history of Ethiopia. Due to Ethiopia&#x27;s location between the Middle East and Africa, it has long been in the middle of Eastern and Western politics and has been subject to foreign invasions. In 1579, the Ottoman Empire&#x27;s attempt to expand from a coastal base at Massawa during the Ottoman conquest of Habesh was defeated. The Army of the Ethiopian Empire was also able to defeat the Egyptians in 1876 at Gura, led by Ethiopian Emperor Yohannes IV. Ethiopia only has 3 branches inside the military, consisting of the Army, Airforce, and a Navy although it is landlocked. With an annual budget of over $1 billion dollars, it is the largest armed force in East Africa, and one of the largest in Africa.
=== Law enforcement ===
Ethiopia has two main federal law enforcement agencies at the federal level, to which being the Ethiopian Federal Police, and the National Intelligence Security Service. The NISS serving both as a spy agency and domestic law enforcement agency has national jurisdiction for counterterrorism, and foreign related counter espionage activities and protecting national security. It also has authority related to international economic crimes related of which to Ethiopia as a whole. It alongside the EFP (Ethiopian Federal Police) who both enforce federal laws domestically and for the National Intelligence Security Service cooperate internationally and enforce border regulations and peoples and products coming in and out in Ethiopia. The EFP mostly enforcing non-international, and non-espionage crimes, enforcing civil rights related subjects of matter and domestic financial crimes. At the regional level Ethiopia has 12 regionals statewide police departments, and 2 federally chartered police forces, those being the Addis Ababa Police, and Dire Dawa Police forces.

==Economy==
Ethiopia registered the fastest economic growth under Meles Zenawi&#x27;s administration.
According to the IMF, Ethiopia was one of the fastest growing economies in the world, registering over 10% economic growth from 2004 through 2009. It was the fastest-growing non-oil-dependent African economy in the years 2007 and 2008. In 2015, the World Bank highlighted that Ethiopia had witnessed rapid economic growth with real domestic product (GDP) growth averaging 10.9% between 2004 and 2014.

In 2008 and 2011, Ethiopia&#x27;s growth performance and considerable development gains were challenged by high inflation and a difficult balance of payments situation. Inflation surged to 40% in August 2011 because of loose monetary policy, large civil service wage increase in early 2011, and high food prices.

In spite of fast growth in recent years, GDP per capita is one of the lowest in the world, and the economy faces a number of serious structural problems. Based on the most recent data from 2019, 68.7% of the population is affected by multidimensional poverty and an additional 18.4% vulnerable to it.

With a focused investment in public infrastructure and industrial parks, Ethiopia is attempting to address its structural problems by becoming a hub for light manufacturing in Africa. In 2019 a law was passed allowing expatriate Ethiopians to invest in Ethiopia&#x27;s financial service industry.

The Ethiopian constitution specifies that rights to own land belong only to &quot;the state and the people&quot;, but citizens may lease land for up to 99 years, but are unable to mortgage or sell. Renting out land for a maximum of twenty years is allowed and this is expected to ensure that land goes to the most productive user. Land distribution and administration is considered an area where corruption is institutionalized, and facilitation payments as well as bribes are often demanded when dealing with land-related issues. As there is no land ownership, infrastructural projects are most often simply done without asking the land users, which then end up being displaced and without a home or land. A lot of anger and distrust sometimes results in public protests. In addition, agricultural productivity remains low, and frequent droughts still beset the country, also leading to internal displacement.

=== Energy and hydropower ===

Ethiopia has 14 major rivers flowing from its highlands, including the Nile. It has the largest water reserves in Africa. , hydroelectric plants represented around 88.2% of the total installed electricity generating capacity.

The remaining electrical power was generated from fossil fuels (8.3%) and renewable sources (3.6%).

The electrification rate for the total population in 2016 was 42%, with 85% coverage in urban areas and 26% coverage in rural areas. , total electricity production was 11.15 TW⋅h and consumption was 9.062 TW⋅h. There were 0.166 TW⋅h of electricity exported, 0 kW⋅h imported, and 2.784 GW of installed generating capacity.

Ethiopia delivers roughly 81% of water volume to the Nile through the river basins of the Blue Nile, Sobat River and Atbara. In 1959, Egypt and Sudan signed a bilateral treaty, the 1959 Nile Waters Agreement, which gave both countries exclusive maritime rights over the Nile waters. Ever since, Egypt has discouraged almost all projects in Ethiopia that sought to use the local Nile tributaries. This had the effect of discouraging external financing of hydropower and irrigation projects in western Ethiopia, thereby impeding water resource-based economic development projects. However, Ethiopia is in the process of constructing a large 6,450 MW hydroelectric dam on the Blue Nile river. Completed in 2023, this Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam is slated to be the largest hydroelectric power station in Africa. The Gibe III hydroelectric project is so far the largest in the country with an installed capacity of 1,870 MW. For the year 2017–18 (2010 E.C) this hydroelectric dam generated 4,900 GW⋅h.

===Agriculture===
Agriculture constitutes around 85% of the labour force. However, the service sector represents the largest portion of the GDP. Many other economic activities depend on agriculture, including marketing, processing, and export of agricultural products. Production is overwhelmingly by small-scale farmers and enterprises, and a large part of commodity exports are provided by the small agricultural cash-crop sector. Principal crops include coffee, legumes, oilseeds, cereals, potatoes, sugarcane, and vegetables. Ethiopia is also a Vavilov centre of diversity for domesticated crops, including enset, coffee Okra and teff.

Exports are almost entirely agricultural commodities (with the exception of gold exports), and coffee is the largest foreign exchange earner. Ethiopia is Africa&#x27;s second biggest maize producer. According to UN estimations, the per capita GDP of Ethiopia has reached $357 .

===Exports===

Ethiopia is often considered as the birthplace of coffee since cultivation began in the 9th century. Exports from Ethiopia in the 2009–2010 financial year totalled US$1.4 billion. Ethiopia produces more coffee than any other nation on the continent. &quot;Coffee provides a livelihood for close to 15 million Ethiopians, 16% of the population. Farmers in the eastern part of the country, where a warming climate is already impacting production, have struggled in recent years, and many are currently reporting largely failed harvests as a result of a prolonged drought&quot;.

Ethiopia also has the fifth largest inventory of cattle. Other main export commodities are khat, gold, leather products, and oilseeds. Recent development of the floriculture sector means Ethiopia is poised to become one of the top flower and plant exporters in the world.

Cross-border trade by pastoralists is often informal and beyond state control and regulation. In East Africa, over 95% of cross-border trade is through unofficial channels. The unofficial trade of live cattle, camels, sheep, and goats from Ethiopia sold to Somalia, Djibouti, and Kenya generates an estimated total value of US$250–300 million annually (100 times more than the official figure).

This trade helps lower food prices, increase food security, relieve border tensions, and promote regional integration. However, the unregulated and undocumented nature of this trade runs risks, such as allowing disease to spread more easily across national borders. Furthermore, the government of Ethiopia is purportedly unhappy with lost tax revenue and foreign exchange revenues. Recent initiatives have sought to document and regulate this trade.

With the private sector growing slowly, designer fashion and leather products like bags are becoming a big export business, with Taytu becoming the first luxury designer label in the country. Additional small-scale export products include cereals, pulses, cotton, sugarcane, potatoes, and hides. With the construction of various new dams and growing hydroelectric power projects around the country, Ethiopia also plans to export electric power to its neighbours.

Most regard Ethiopia&#x27;s large water resources and potential as its &quot;white oil&quot; and its coffee resources as &quot;black gold&quot;.

===Transport===

Two trans-African automobile routes pass through Ethiopia: the Cairo-Cape Town Highway and the N&#x27;Djamena-Djibouti Highway. Ethiopia has 926 km of electrified standard gauge railways, 656 km for the Addis Ababa–Djibouti Railway between Addis Ababa and the Port of Djibouti (via Awash) and 270 km for the Awash–Hara Gebeya Railway between Addis Ababa and the twin cities of Dessie/Kombolcha.

Ethiopia had 58 airports , and 61 . Among these, the Bole International Airport in Addis Ababa and the Aba Tenna Dejazmach Yilma International Airport in Dire Dawa accommodate international flights.

===Science and technology===


Science and technology in Ethiopia emerging as progressive due to lack of organized institutions. Manufacturing and service providers often place themselves in competitive programming in order to advance innovative and technological solutions through in-house arenas. The Ethiopian Space Science and Technology is responsible for conducting multifaceted tasks regarding space and technology. In addition, Ethiopia also launched 70 kg ET-RSS1 multi-spectral remote sensing satellite in December 2019. The President Sahle-Work Zewde told prior in October 2019 that &quot;the satellite will provide all the necessary data on changes in climate and weather-related phenomena that would be used for the country&#x27;s key targets in agriculture, forestry as well as natural resources protection initiatives.&quot; By January 2020, satellite manufacturing, assembling, integrating and testing began. This would also incremented facility built by French company funded by European Investment Bank (EIB). The main observatory Entoto Observatory and Space Science Research Center (EORC) allocated space programmes. The Ethiopian Biotechnology Institute is a part of Scientific Research &amp; Development Services Industry, responsible for environmental and climate conservation. Numerous profound scientists have contributed degree of honours and reputations. Some are Kitaw Ejigu, Mulugeta Bekele, Aklilu Lemma, Gebisa Ejeta and Melaku Worede. Computer scientist Timnit Gebru, named one of Time&#x27;s most influential people in 2022, was born in Ethiopia.

Ethiopia is known for use of traditional medicine since millennia. The first epidemic occurred in Ethiopia was in 849, causing the Aksumite Emperor Abba Yohannes evicted from place due to &quot;God&#x27;s punishment for misdeeds&quot;. The first traditional medicine was claimed to be derived from this catastrophe, but the exact source is debated. Though differ from ethnic groups, traditional medicine often implements herbs, spiritual healing, bone-setting and minor surgical procedures in treating disease.

Ethiopia was ranked 130th in the Global Innovation Index in 2024.

==Demographics==

Ethiopia is the most populous landlocked country in the world. Its total population has grown from 38.1 million in 1983 to 109.5 million in 2018. According to UN estimations in 2013, life expectancy had improved substantially over time, with male life expectancy reported to be 56 years and for women 60 years.

Ethiopia&#x27;s population is highly diverse, containing over 80 different ethnic groups, the four largest of which are the Oromo, Amhara, Somali and Tigrayans. According to the Ethiopian national census of 2007, the Oromo are the largest ethnic group in Ethiopia, at 34.4% of the nation&#x27;s population. The Amhara represent 27.0% of the country&#x27;s inhabitants, while Somalis and Tigrayans represent 6.2% and 6.1% of the population respectively.

Afroasiatic-speaking communities make up the majority of the population. Among these, Semitic speakers often collectively refer to themselves as the Habesha people. The Arabic form of this term (&quot;al-Ḥabasha&quot;) is the etymological basis of &quot;Abyssinia&quot;, the former name of Ethiopia in English and other European languages.

In 2009, Ethiopia hosted a population of refugees and asylum seekers numbering approximately 135,200. The majority of this population came from Somalia (approximately 64,300 persons), Eritrea (41,700) and Sudan (25,900). The Ethiopian government required nearly all refugees to live in refugee camps.

===Urbanization===
Population growth, migration, and urbanization are all straining both governments&#x27; and ecosystems&#x27; capacity to provide people with basic services. Urbanization has steadily been increasing in Ethiopia, with two periods of significantly rapid growth. First, in 1936–1941 during the Italian occupation under Mussolini&#x27;s fascist government, and then from 1967 to 1975 when the populations of urban areas tripled.

In 1936, Italy annexed Ethiopia, building infrastructure to connect major cities, and a dam providing power and water. This, along with the influx of Italians and labourers, was the major cause of rapid growth during this period. The second period of growth was from 1967 to 1975, when rural populations migrated to towns seeking work and better living conditions.

This pattern slowed due to the 1975 Land Reform program instituted by the government, which provided incentives for people to stay in rural areas. As people moved from rural areas to the cities, there were fewer people to grow food for the population. The Land Reform Act was meant to increase agriculture since food production was not keeping up with population growth over the period of 1970–1983. This program encouraged the formation of peasant associations, large villages based on agriculture. The legislation did lead to an increase in food production, although there is debate over the cause; it may be related to weather conditions more than the reform. Urban populations have continued to grow with an 8.1% increase from 1975 to 2000.
As of at least 2024, Ethiopia is one of the most rapidly urbanizing countries in the world, although its population is still largely rural.

====Rural and urban life====
Migration to urban areas is usually motivated by the hope of better lives. In peasant associations, daily life is a struggle to survive. About 16% of the population in Ethiopia lives on less than one dollar per day (2008). Only 65% of rural households in Ethiopia consume the World Health Organization&#x27;s (WHO&#x27;s) minimum standard of food per day (2,200 kilocalories), with 42% of children under five years old being underweight.

Most poor families (75%) share their sleeping quarters with livestock, and 40% of children sleep on the floor, where nighttime temperatures average 5 degrees Celsius in the cold season. The average family size is six or seven, living in a 30 square metre mud and thatch hut, with less than two hectares of land to cultivate.

The peasant associations face a cycle of poverty. Since the landholdings are so small, farmers cannot allow the land to lie fallow, which reduces soil fertility. This land degradation reduces the production of fodder for livestock, which causes low milk yields. Since the community burns livestock manure as fuel, rather than plowing the nutrients back into the land, the crop production is reduced. The low productivity of agriculture leads to inadequate incomes for farmers, hunger, malnutrition and disease. These unhealthy farmers have difficulty working the land and the productivity drops further.

Although conditions are drastically better in cities, all of Ethiopia suffers from poverty and poor sanitation. However, poverty in Ethiopia fell from 44% to 29.6% during 2000–2011, according to the World Bank. In the capital city of Addis Ababa, 55% of the population used to live in slums. Now, however, a construction boom in both the private and the public sector has led to a dramatic improvement in living standards in major cities, particularly in Addis Ababa. Notably, government-built condominium housing complexes have sprung up throughout the city, benefiting close to 600,000 individuals. Sanitation is the most pressing need in the city, with most of the population lacking access to waste treatment facilities. This contributes to the spread of illness through unhealthy water.

Despite the living conditions in the cities, the people of Addis Ababa are much better off than people living in the peasant associations owing to their educational opportunities. Unlike rural children, 69% of urban children are enrolled in primary school, and 35% of those are eligible to attend secondary school. Addis Ababa has its own university as well as many other secondary schools. The literacy rate is 82%.

Many NGOs (Non-Governmental Organizations) are working to solve this problem; however, most are far apart, uncoordinated, and working in isolation. The Sub-Saharan Africa NGO Consortium is attempting to coordinate efforts.

===Languages===
According to Glottolog, there are 109 languages spoken in Ethiopia, while &quot;Ethnologue&quot; lists 90 individual languages spoken in the country. Most people in the country speak Afroasiatic languages of the Cushitic or Semitic branches. The former includes the Oromo language, spoken by the Oromo, and Somali, spoken by the Somalis; the latter includes Amharic, spoken by the Amhara, and Tigrinya, spoken by the Tigrayans. Together, these four groups make up about three-quarters of Ethiopia&#x27;s population. Other Afroasiatic languages with a significant number of speakers include the Cushitic Sidamo, Afar, Hadiyya and Agaw languages, as well as the Semitic Gurage languages, Harari, Silt&#x27;e, and Argobba languages. Arabic, which also belongs to the Afroasiatic family, is likewise spoken in some areas.

English is the most widely spoken foreign language, the medium of instruction in secondary schools and all tertiary education; federal laws are also published in British English in the Federal Negarit Gazeta including the 1995 constitution.

Amharic was the language of primary school instruction, but has been replaced in many areas by regional languages such as Oromo, Somali or Tigrinya. All languages enjoy equal state recognition in the 1995 Constitution of Ethiopia.

====Script====
Ethiopia&#x27;s principal orthography is the Ge&#x27;ez script. Employed as an abugida for several of the country&#x27;s languages, it first came into usage in the 6th and 5th centuries BC as an abjad to transcribe the Semitic Ge&#x27;ez language. Ge&#x27;ez now serves as the liturgical language of both the Ethiopian Orthodox Tewahedo and Eritrean Orthodox Tewahedo Churches. During the 1980s, the Ethiopic character set was computerized. It is today part of the Unicode standard as Ethiopic, Ethiopic Extended, Ethiopic Supplement and Ethiopic Extended-A.

Other writing systems have also been used over the years by different Ethiopian communities. The latter include Bakri Sapalo&#x27;s script for Oromo.

===Religion===

According to the 2007 National Census, Christians make up 62.8% of the country&#x27;s population, Muslims 33.9%, practitioners of traditional faiths 2.6%, and other religions 0.6%. The ratio of the Christian to Muslim population has largely remained stable when compared to previous censuses conducted decades ago. Sunnis form the majority of Muslims with non-denominational Muslims being the second largest group of Muslims, and the Shia are a minority. Sunnis are largely Shafi&#x27;is or Salafis; there are also many Sufis there.

Ethiopia has close historical ties with all three of the world&#x27;s major Abrahamic religions. In the 4th century, the Ethiopian empire was one of the first in the world to officially adopt Christianity as the state religion. As a result of the resolutions of the Council of Chalcedon, in 451 the Miaphysites, which included the vast majority of Christians in Egypt and Ethiopia, were accused of monophysitism and designated as heretics under the common name of Coptic Christianity (see Oriental Orthodoxy).

The Ethiopian Orthodox Tewahedo Church is part of Oriental Orthodoxy. It is by far the largest Christian denomination, although a number of P&#x27;ent&#x27;ay (Protestant) churches have recently gained ground. Since 1930, a relatively small Ethiopian Catholic Church has existed in full communion with Rome, with adherents making up less than 1% of the total population.

Islam in Ethiopia dates back to the founding of the religion in 622 when a group of Muslims were counselled by Muhammad to escape persecution in Mecca. The disciples subsequently migrated to Abyssinia via modern-day Eritrea, which was at the time ruled by Ashama ibn-Abjar, a pious Christian emperor.

===Health===

Only a minority of Ethiopians are born in hospitals, while most are born in rural households. Those who are expected to give birth at home have elderly women serve as midwives who assist with the delivery. The &quot;WHO estimates that a majority of maternal fatalities and disabilities could be prevented if deliveries were to take place at well-equipped health centres, with adequately trained staff&quot;. Birth rates, infant mortality rates, and death rates are lower in cities than in rural areas due to better access to education, medicines, and hospitals. Life expectancy is better in cities compared to rural areas, but there have been significant improvements witnessed throughout the country as of 2016, the average Ethiopian living to be 62.2 years old, according to a UNDP report. Despite sanitation being a problem, use of improved water sources is also on the rise; 81% in cities compared to 11% in rural areas.

Ethiopia&#x27;s main health problems are said to be communicable (contagious) diseases worsened by poor sanitation and malnutrition. Over 58 million people (nearly half the population) do not have access to clean water as of 2023. These problems are exacerbated by the shortage of trained doctors and nurses and health facilities. The World Health Organization&#x27;s 2006 World Health Report gives a figure of 1,936 physicians (for 2003), which comes to about 2.6 per 100,000.

The National Mental Health Strategy, published in 2012, introduced the development of policy designed to improve mental health care in Ethiopia. This strategy mandated that mental health be integrated into the primary health care system. However, the success of the National Mental Health Strategy has been limited. For example, the burden of depression is estimated to have increased 34.2% from 2007 to 2017. Furthermore, the prevalence of stigmatizing attitudes, inadequate leadership and co-ordination of efforts, as well as a lack of mental health awareness in the general population, all remain as obstacles to successful mental health care.

In the 2024 Global Hunger Index (GHI), &lt;mark&gt;Ethiopia ranks 102nd out of 127 countries and has a score of 26.2&lt;/mark&gt;, which indicates a serious level of hunger.

===Education===

The current system follows school expansion schemes which are very similar to the system in the rural areas during the 1980s, with an addition of deeper regionalization, providing rural education in students&#x27; own languages starting at the elementary level, and with more budgetary financing allocated to the education sector. Public education is free at primary levels and usually offers between age 7 and 12. The sequence of general education in Ethiopia is six years of primary school, then four years of lower secondary school followed by two years of higher secondary school.

The Ethiopian education is governed by the Ministry of Education and its cycle consists of a 4+4+2+2 system; elementary education consists of eight years, divided into two cycles of four years, and four years of secondary education, divided into two stages of two years. National exams are conducted by the National Education Assessment and Examination Agency (NEAEA). Since 2018, there are two national exams: the Ethiopian General Secondary Education Certificate Examination (EGSECE), also known as Grade 10 national exam and Grade 12 national exam.
As of 2022, there are 83 universities, 42 public universities, and more than 35 higher education institutions. Foreign students constitute 16,305 in higher education level. The overall number of tertiary students in both public and private institutions exploded by more than 2,000 percent, from 34,000 in 1991 to 757,000 in 2014, per UIS data. Access to education in Ethiopia has improved significantly. Approximately three million people were in primary school in 1994–95 but by 2008–09, primary enrolment had risen to 15.5 million – an increase of over 500%. In 2013–14, Ethiopia had witnessed a significant boost in gross enrolment across all regions. The national GER was 104.8% for boys, 97.8% for girls and 101.3% across both sexes.

The literacy rate has increased in recent years: according to the 1994 census, the literacy rate in Ethiopia was 23.4%. In 2007 it was estimated to be 39% (male 49.1% and female 28.9%). A report by UNDP in 2011 showed that the literacy rate in Ethiopia was 46.7%. The same report also indicated that the female literacy rate had increased from 27 to 39 per cent from 2004 to 2011, and the male literacy rate had increased from 49 to 59 per cent over the same period for persons 10 years and older. By 2015, the literacy rate had further increased, to 49.1% (57.2% male and 41.1% female).

==Culture==
Ethiopia&#x27;s culture heavily influenced by the local population, an interaction of Semitic, Cushitic and less populous Nilo-Saharan speaking people, which evolved from first millennium BC. Semitic Tigrayans and Amharas, who dominated the politics in the past, distinguished from other population by hierarchical structure and agrarian life derived partly from South Arabia as a result of back migration, while the southern Cushitic (Oromo and Somali) are strong adherents to egalitarianism and pastoral life. Others including Kaffa, Sidamo, and Afar tradition derived from the latter people.

=== Holidays ===
Ethiopia has 6 patriotic and public holidays and 9 major religious holidays given government recognition. The year (Gregorian calendar) starts with Ethiopian Christmas on January 7, it also has Epiphany or Timkat on January 19 or 20 depending on if the year is a leap, which celebrate the baptism of Jesus Christ by John the Baptist. Timkat is recognized by the United Nation&#x27;s as part of its &quot;Intangible Cultural Heritage Lists&quot; which are designated for important cultural and religious holidays. Three holidays are movable like Ramadan, Good Friday and Easter of which two are in spring and Ramadan in Islamic celebrations. Other holidays include Mawlid which begins on the 12th or 17th on the Islamic calendar depending on which Muslim denomination is the celebrator, nonetheless due to the fact the majority of Ethiopian Muslims are Sunni it is thus celebrated on the 12th day on the third month on the Islamic calendar which is in September. Other include Eid al-Fitr and Eid al-Adha for other Islamic holidays whilst for Christians, the finding of the true cross or otherwise called Meskel.

For public holidays the first of which falls on the calendar is Adwa Victory Day on 2 March, commemorating Emperor Menelik II&#x27;s victory over the attempted but failed colonization efforts of Italy in 1896. Other&#x27;s following such as the International Workers&#x27; Day on the 1st of May, the Ethiopian Patriots&#x27; Victory Day for celebrating the return of Emperor Haile Selassie I and thus the liberation of fascist Italian occupation on the 5th of May and the Downfall of the Derg on the 28th of May, a recent holiday promoted to a public status by the ruling government after 1991. And the most prominent of public holidays is Enkutatash which is the largest, celebrating the Ethiopian new year on September 11 or 12, which is approximately 7–8 years behind the rest of the world, depending on if the year is a leap, and thus behind ultimately the Georgian calendar by several years. Defense Day also exists for celebrating service men on the 26th of October the last holiday in the Gregorian calendar.

Nonetheless other festivals and holidays like the honoring of Saint Yohannes and others are celebrated across the country including Irrecha celebrated by the Oromo community.

=== Art and architecture ===
Arts of Ethiopia were largely influenced by Christian iconography throughout much of its history. This consisted of illuminated manuscripts, painting, crosses, icons and other metalwork such as crowns. Most historical arts were commissioned by the Ethiopian Orthodox Tewahedo Church, the state religion for a millennium. The earlier Aksumite period arts were stone carvings as evidenced in their stelae, though there is no surviving Christian art from this era. As Christianity was introduced, its iconography was partly influenced by Byzantine art. Most remaining arts beyond the early modern period were ruined as a result of invasion of the Adal Sultanate in the Ethiopian Highlands, but were revived by Catholic emissaries. The Western intervention in Ethiopian art began in the 20th century, while also maintaining traditional Ethiopian character. Some notable contemporary Ethiopian artists include Afewerk Tekle, Lemma Guya, Martha Nasibù, Ale Felege Selam and others.

Ethiopian architecture like the &quot;Bete Medhane Alem&quot; or &quot;House of our Saviour&quot; is one of the 12 churches in Lalibela built under Emperor Lalibela I. Emperor Lalibela I commissioned large portions of the Lalibela church complex promptly named after him. This was largely attested to the inspiration for Ethiopia during the medieval times due to blockage from Jerusalem by Muslim conquests to replicate its own form of a &quot;new Jerusalem&quot; at a national level. Perhaps one of the most notable architectures in antiquity was founded during the Dʿmt period. Ashlar masonry was an archetype of South Arabian architecture with most architectural structure similarity.

The Aksumite continued to flourish its architecture around the 4th century CE. Aksumite stelae commonly used single block and rocks. The Tomb of the False Door built for Aksumite emperors used monolithic style. The Lalibela civilization was largely of Aksumite influence, but the layer of stones or wood is quite different for some dwellings.

In the Gondarine period, the architecture of Ethiopia was influenced by Baroque, Arab, Turkish and Gujarati Indian styles independently taught by Portuguese emissaries in the 16th and 17th centuries. Examples include the imperial fortress Fasil Ghebbi, which is influenced by a mix of these styles. The medieval architecture also affected the later 19th- and 20th-century era.

===Literature===

Ethiopian literature traces back to the Aksumite period in the 4th century, mostly religious motifs. In royal inscription, it employed both Ge&#x27;ez and Greek language, but the latter was discontinued in 350. Unlike most Sub-Saharan African countries, Ethiopia has ancient distinct language, the Ge&#x27;ez, which dominated political and educational aspects. In spite of the current political instability in the country endangering cultural heritage of these works, preservation has improved in recent years.

During and the approximate time of the Middle Ages composers such as Abba Gorgoryos and Giyorgis of Segla have influenced Ethiopian languages such as writing one of the earliest instances of Amharic and dictionaries of Ge&#x27;ez and such. Also encompassing religious hymns and doctrine justifications regarding issues in the Ethiopian Orthodox church and practices.

The Ethiopian literary works mostly consisted of handwritten codex (branna, or ብራና in Amharic). It is prepared by gathering parchment leaves and sewing to stick together. The codex size varies considerably depending on volumes and preparation. For example, pocket size codex lengthens 45 cm, which is heavier in weight. Historians speculated that archaic codex existed in Ethiopia. Today manuscripts resembling primitive codex are still evident for existence where parchment leaves are convenient for writing.

Another notable writing book is protective (or magic) scroll, serving as written amulet. Some of these were intended for magical purpose, for example &quot;ketab&quot; is used for magical defence. Scrolls were typically produced by &quot;debtera&quot;, non-ordained clergy expertise on exorcism and healings. About 30 cm scroll is portable whereas 2 cm is often unrolled and hanged to the walls of houses. Scrolls emulating original medium of Ethiopia literature is highly disputed, where there is overwhelming evidence that Ge&#x27;ez language books were written in codex. In lesser, Ethiopia used accordion books (called &quot;sensul&quot;) which were dated to late 15th or 16th century, made up of folded parchment paper, with or without cover. Those books usually contain pictorial representation of life and death of religious figures, or significant texts have also juxtaposed.

Baalu Girma and Haddis Alemayehu have been noted as the most influential novelist in Ethiopian history. Girma giving a critique of the communist government in the 80s in Ethiopia in his works. Haddis Alemayehu giving rise to one of the first examinations of realism and a romance tragedy in his works of novel and having influenced the sphere of Ethiopian intellectual community.

Ethiopia is highly popularized in poetry. Most poets recount past events, social unrests, poverty and famine. &quot;Qene&quot; is the most used element of Ethiopian poetry – regarded as a form of Amharic poetry, though the term generally refers to any poems. True qene requires advanced ingenious mindset. By providing two metaphorical words, i.e. one with obvious clues and the other is too convoluted conundrum, one must answer parallel meanings. Thus, this is called &quot;sem ena work&quot; (gold and wax). The most notable poets are Tsegaye Gebre-Medhin, Kebede Michael and Mengistu Lemma.

Ethiopian philosophy has been superlatively prolific since ancient times in Africa, though offset of Greek and Patristic philosophy. The best known philosophical revival was in the early modern period figures such as Zera Yacob (1599–1692) and his student Walda Heywat, who wrote &quot;Hatata&quot; (&quot;Inquiry&quot;) in 1667 as an argument for the existence of God.

===Music===

The music of Ethiopia is extremely diverse, with each of the country&#x27;s 80 ethnic groups being associated with unique sounds. Ethiopian music uses a distinct modal system that is pentatonic, with characteristically long intervals between some notes. As with many other aspects of Ethiopian culture and tradition, tastes in music and lyrics are strongly linked with those in neighbouring Eritrea, Somalia, Djibouti, and Sudan. Traditional singing in Ethiopia presents diverse styles of polyphony (heterophony, drone, imitation, and counterpoint). Traditionally, lyricism in Ethiopian song writing is strongly associated with views of patriotism or national pride, romance, friendship, and a unique type of memoire known as &quot;tizita&quot;.

Saint Yared, a 6th-century Aksumite composer, is widely regarded as the forerunner of traditional music of Eritrea and Ethiopia, creating liturgical music of the Ethiopian and Eritrean Orthodox Tewahedo Church.

Modern music is traced back to the reign of Emperor Haile Selassie, where 40 Armenian orphans called Arba Lijoch arrived from Jerusalem to Addis Ababa. By 1924, the band was almost established as orchestral; but after World War II, several similar bands emerged such as Imperial Bodyguard Band, Army Band, and Police Band.

In the 1960s and 1970s, traditional infused modern Ethiopian music was revived in what is known as the &quot;Golden Age&quot;. Several notable musical artists emerged thereafter, for example, Tilahun Gessesse, Alemayehu Eshete, Bizunesh Bekele, Muluken Melesse and Mahmoud Ahmed. It also employed tradition style called &quot;tizita&quot;. During the Derg regime, these artists were prohibited to perform in the country and often forced into exile in North America and Europe, mixing with jazz and funk influences. For example, Roha Band, Walias Band, and Ethio Stars. By this time, Neway Debebe was critical of the Derg government.

Modern music became developed shortly in the 1990s and 2000s. In this period, the most popular artists were Aster Aweke, Gigi and Teddy Afro. Ethiopian music further modernized in the next decade, employing electronic type and more popular. DJ Rophnan was renowned for pioneering EDM after releasing his debut album &quot;Reflection&quot; in 2018.

===Calendar===
Ethiopia has several local calendars. The most widely known is the Ethiopian calendar, also known as the Ge&#x27;ez calendar, and written with the ancient Ge&#x27;ez script, one of the oldest alphabets still in use in the world. It is based on the older Alexandrian or Coptic calendar, which in turn derives from the Egyptian calendar. Like the Coptic calendar, the Ethiopian calendar has twelve months of exactly 30 days each plus five or six epagomenal days, which form a thirteenth month. The Ethiopian months begin on the same days as those of the Coptic calendar, but their names are in Ge&#x27;ez.

Like the Julian calendar, the sixth epagomenal day—which in essence is a leap day—is added every four years without exception on 29 August of the Julian calendar, six months before the Julian leap day. Thus, the first day of the Ethiopian year, 1Mäskäräm, for years between 1901 and 2099 (inclusive), is usually 11 September (Gregorian), but falls on 12 September in years before the Gregorian leap year. It is approximately seven years and three months behind the Gregorian calendar because of an alternate calculation in determining the date of the Annunciation of Jesus.

Another calendrical system was developed around 300 BC by the Oromo people. A lunar-stellar calendar, this Oromo calendar relies on astronomical observations of the moon in conjunction with seven particular stars or constellations. Oromo months (stars/lunar phases) are &quot;Bittottessa&quot; (Iangulum), &quot;Camsa&quot; (Pleiades), &quot;Bufa&quot; (Aldebarran), &quot;Waxabajjii&quot; (Belletrix), &quot;Obora Gudda&quot; (Central Orion-Saiph), &quot;Obora Dikka&quot; (Sirius), &quot;Birra&quot; (full moon), &quot;Cikawa&quot; (gibbous moon), &quot;Sadasaa&quot; (quarter moon), &quot;Abrasa&quot; (large crescent), &quot;Ammaji&quot; (medium crescent), and &quot;Gurrandala&quot; (small crescent).

===Media===

The Ethiopian Broadcasting Corporation (EBC), formerly known as ETV, is the state media. Radio broadcasting was commenced earlier in 1935 before the television service began in 1962 with assistance of British firm Thomson and Emperor Haile Selassie. Since 2015, EBC has upgraded its studios with modernized transmission.

Kana TV is the most popular TV channel in Ethiopia. It is mainly known for dubbing foreign content into Amharic. Over several decades, the state television has served as the major mass media until in the late 2000s, when EBS TV launched as the first private television channel. Moreover, numerous private channels were commenced in 2016, culminating in the growth of privately owned media companies in the country. As an example, Fana TV has been the largest TV network since its launch in 2017.

The most widely circulated newspapers in Ethiopia are Addis Fortune, Capital Ethiopia, Ethiopian Reporter, Addis Zemen (&quot;Amharic&quot;) and Ethiopian Herald.

The sole internet service provider is the national telecommunications firm Ethio telecom. A large portion of users in the country access the internet through mobile devices. , there are around 4.29 million people who have internet access at their home as compared to a quarter of a million users a decade before that. The Ethiopian government has at times intentionally shut down internet service in the country or restricted access to certain social media sites during periods of political unrest. In August 2016, following protest and demonstration in the Oromia Region, all access to the internet was shut down for a period of two days. In June 2017, the government shut down access to the internet for mobile users during a period that coincided with the administration of university entrance examination. Although the reason for the restriction was not confirmed by the government, the move was similar to a measure taken during the same period in 2016, after a leak of test questions.

===Cinema===

The first cinema was introduced in 1898, three years after the first world film was projected. Cinematic artifacts ascribed by Italian minister which then offered to Emperor Menelik II. The early 20th century appearance with spectacle was around 1909 and embraced by documentary or biographical films. &quot;Au de Menilek&quot; was the first film directed by Charles Martel. The first 16mm black-and-white film dedicated to coronation of Emperor Zewditu, then coronation of Emperor Haile Selassie was filmed. The 1990s saw international booming of Ethiopian films. The most influential people in this era were Haile Gerima, Salem Mekuria, Yemane Demissie, and Teshome Gabriel. Films began modernized in the 2000s and implemented Amharic language. The most internationally grossed films are &quot;Selanchi&quot;, &quot;Difret&quot;, &quot;Lamb&quot;, &quot;Prince of Love&quot; and &quot;Lambadina&quot;. The modern era saw several reoccurring actors including Selam Tesfaye, Fryat Yemane, Hanan Tarik, Mahder Assefa, Amleset Muchie and Ruth Negga.

One of the most prestigious film award is Gumma Film Awards held in Addis Ababa. The award, which was started in 2014, broadcast on live television in some stations. Festivals including Addis International Film Festival and the Ethiopian International Film Festival showcase amateur and professional filmmakers works; the latter being voted by judges. They were established in 2007 and 2005 respectively.

===Cuisine===

The best-known Ethiopian cuisine consists of various types of thick meat stews, known as &quot;wat&quot; in Ethiopian culture, and vegetable side dishes served on top of injera, a large sourdough flatbread made of teff flour. This is not eaten with utensils, but instead the injera is used to scoop up the entrées and side dishes. Almost universally in Ethiopia, it is common to eat from the same dish in the middle of the table with a group of people. It is also a common custom to feed others within a group or own hands—a tradition referred to as &quot;gursha&quot;. Traditional Ethiopian cuisine employs no pork, as it is forbidden in Ethiopian Orthodox Christian and Islamic faiths; Ethiopian Orthodox Christians also fast from meat on Wednesdays, Fridays, and leading up to Easter and Christmas.

Chechebsa, Marqa, Chukko, Michirra and Dhanga are the most popular dishes from the Oromo. Kitfo, which originated among the Gurage, is one of the country&#x27;s most popular delicacies. In addition, &quot;Doro Wot&quot; (ዶሮ ወጥ in Amharic) and Tsebehi Derho (ጽብሒ ድርሆ in Tigrinya), are other popular dishes, originating from northwestern Ethiopia. Tihlo (ጥሕሎ)—which is a type of dumpling—is prepared from roasted barley flour and originated in the Tigray Region. Tihlo is now very popular in Amhara and spreading further south.

===Sport===
The main sports in Ethiopia are track and field (particularly long distance running) and football. Ethiopian athletes have won many Olympic gold medals in track and field, most of them in long distance running. Abebe Bikila became the first athlete from a Sub-Saharan country to win an Olympic gold medal when he won the Marathon at the 1960 Rome Olympic Games in a world record time of 2:15:16.

The Ethiopia national football team was one of four founding members of the Confederation of African Football and won the Africa Cup of Nations in 1962. Ethiopia has Sub-Saharan Africa&#x27;s longest basketball tradition as it established a national basketball team in 1949.
==See also==

* Index of Ethiopia-related articles 
* Outline of Ethiopia

==Notes==
==References==
===Citations===
===General sources===
* 
* 
* 


==Further reading==
* 
* Deguefé, Taffara (2006). &quot;Minutes of an Ethiopian Century&quot;, Shama Books, Addis Ababa, .
* Hoskins, G. A. (1835), &quot;Travels in Ethiopia&quot;, above the second cataract of the Nile: exhibiting the state of that country, and its various inhabitants, under the dominion of Mohammed Ali. 
* Hugues Fontaine, &quot;Un Train en Afrique. African Train&quot;, Centre Français des Études Éthiopiennes / Shama Books. Édition bilingue français / anglais. Traduction : Yves-Marie Stranger. Postface : Jean-Christophe Belliard. Avec des photographies de Matthieu Germain Lambert et Pierre Javelot. Addis Abeba, 2012, . English and French. UN TRAIN EN AFRIQUE
* Reprint, Trenton, NJ: Red Sea, 1995. .
* Mauri, Arnaldo (2010). &quot;Monetary developments and decolonization in Ethiopia&quot;, Acta Universitatis Danubius Œconomica, VI, n. 1/2010, pp. 5–16. Monetary Developments and Decolonization in Ethiopia and WP Monetary developments and decolonization in Ethiopia
* Reprint, New York: Olive Branch, 2003. .
* Murphy, Dervla (1968). &quot;In Ethiopia with a Mule&quot;. London: Century, 1984, cop. 1968. &quot;N.B&quot;.: An account of the author&#x27;s travels in Ethiopia. 280 p., ill. with a b&amp;w map. 
* 
* Siegbert Uhlig, et al. (eds.) (2003). &quot;Encyclopaedia Aethiopica&quot;, Vol. 1: A–C. Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz Verlag.
* Siegbert Uhlig, et al. (eds.) (2005). &quot;Encyclopaedia Aethiopica&quot;, Vol. 2: D–Ha. Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz Verlag.
* Siegbert Uhlig, et al. (eds.) (2007). &quot;Encyclopaedia Aethiopica&quot;, Vol. 3: He–N. Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz Verlag.
* Siegbert Uhlig &amp; Alessandro Bausi, et al. (eds.) (2010). &quot;Encyclopaedia Aethiopica&quot;, Vol. 4: O–X. Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz Verlag.
* Alessandro Bausi &amp; S. Uhlig, et al. (eds.) (2014). &quot;Encyclopaedia Aethiopica&quot;, Vol. 5: Y–Z and addenda, corrigenda, overview tables, maps and general index. Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz Verlag.
* 


==External links==
* Ethiopia. &quot;The World Factbook&quot;. Central Intelligence Agency.
* BBC Ethiopia Profile
* World Bank Ethiopia Summary Trade Statistics
* Key Development Forecasts for Ethiopia from International Futures.
* Ethiopia pages – U.S. Dept. of State (which includes current State Dept. press releases and reports on Ethiopia)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q115" start="0" end="8" title="Ethiopia" label="Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q115" start="25" end="64" title="Ethiopia" label="Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q123480" start="71" end="89" title="landlocked country" label="landlocked country"/>
<link wikidata="Q40556" start="105" end="119" title="Horn of Africa" label="Horn of Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q27407" start="130" end="141" title="East Africa" label="East Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q986" start="166" end="173" title="Eritrea" label="Eritrea"/>
<link wikidata="Q3088818" start="181" end="186" title="Eritrea–Ethiopia border" label="north"/>
<link wikidata="Q977" start="188" end="196" title="Djibouti" label="Djibouti"/>
<link wikidata="Q3088652" start="204" end="213" title="Djibouti–Ethiopia border" label="northeast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045" start="215" end="222" title="Somalia" label="Somalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3088835" start="230" end="234" title="Ethiopia–Somalia border" label="east"/>
<link wikidata="Q114" start="236" end="241" title="Kenya" label="Kenya"/>
<link wikidata="Q3088827" start="249" end="254" title="Ethiopia–Kenya border" label="south"/>
<link wikidata="Q958" start="256" end="267" title="South Sudan" label="South Sudan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3088831" start="275" end="279" title="Ethiopia–South Sudan border" label="west"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049" start="285" end="290" title="Sudan" label="Sudan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3088830" start="298" end="307" title="Ethiopia–Sudan border" label="northwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q712280" start="404" end="422" title="List of countries and dependencies by population" label="10th-most populous"/>
<link wikidata="Q153211" start="449" end="476" title="List of African countries by population" label="2nd-most populous in Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033" start="483" end="490" title="Nigeria" label="Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q3624" start="583" end="594" title="Addis Ababa" label="Addis Ababa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234397" start="632" end="649" title="East African Rift" label="East African Rift"/>
<link wikidata="Q203548" start="683" end="690" title="African Plate" label="African"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415528" start="695" end="701" title="Somali Plate" label="Somali"/>
<link wikidata="Q7950" start="702" end="717" title="Plate tectonics" label="tectonic plates"/>
<link wikidata="Q115690473" start="720" end="746" title="Early modern human" label="Anatomically modern humans"/>
<link wikidata="Q48214" start="800" end="809" title="Near East" label="Near East"/>
<link wikidata="Q626270" start="831" end="849" title="Middle Paleolithic" label="Middle Paleolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q139315" start="884" end="893" title="Dʿmt" label="D&amp;#x27;mt"/>
<link wikidata="Q139377" start="973" end="989" title="Kingdom of Aksum" label="Kingdom of Aksum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402073" start="1127" end="1138" title="Migration to Abyssinia" label="first Hijra"/>
<link wikidata="Q140446" start="1187" end="1200" title="Zagwe dynasty" label="Zagwe dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q888003" start="1269" end="1281" title="Yekuno Amlak" label="Yekuno Amlak"/>
<link wikidata="Q207521" start="1308" end="1324" title="Ethiopian Empire" label="Ethiopian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q256187" start="1333" end="1350" title="Solomonic dynasty" label="Solomonic dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q37085" start="1386" end="1393" title="Solomon" label="Solomon"/>
<link wikidata="Q159888" start="1398" end="1412" title="Queen of Sheba" label="Queen of Sheba"/>
<link wikidata="Q365687" start="1429" end="1438" title="Menelik I" label="Menelik I"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915203" start="1585" end="1603" title="Ethiopian–Adal War" label="Ethiopian–Adal War"/>
<link wikidata="Q189297" start="1722" end="1737" title="Zemene Mesafint" label="Zemene Mesafint"/>
<link wikidata="Q10962705" start="1769" end="1776" title="Emperor of Ethiopia" label="Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q262589" start="1777" end="1788" title="Tewodros II" label="Tewodros II"/>
<link wikidata="Q244748" start="1947" end="1957" title="Menelik II" label="Menelik II"/>
<link wikidata="Q111950377" start="1998" end="2023" title="Menelik&amp;#x27;s Expansions" label="Menelik&amp;#x27;s Expansions"/>
<link wikidata="Q5403659" start="2201" end="2206" title="Ethiopian–Egyptian War" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q989115" start="2211" end="2216" title="First Italo-Ethiopian War" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q179848" start="2277" end="2296" title="Scramble for Africa" label="Scramble for Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q48742118" start="2332" end="2345" title="Fascist Italy (1922–1943)" label="Fascist Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1232988" start="2381" end="2388" title="Italian Eritrea" label="Eritrea"/>
<link wikidata="Q319984" start="2393" end="2403" title="Italian Somaliland" label="Somaliland"/>
<link wikidata="Q328478" start="2419" end="2438" title="Italian East Africa" label="Italian East Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="2456" end="2468" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052120" start="2477" end="2505" title="East African campaign (World War II)" label="occupied by the British Army"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2536" end="2552" title="Anglo-Ethiopian Agreement#Negotiating a new agreement" label="restored in 1944"/>
<link wikidata="Q65080864" start="2571" end="2594" title="Occupied Enemy Territory Administration (Ethiopia)" label="military administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q828005" start="2600" end="2604" title="Derg" label="Derg"/>
<link wikidata="Q114345062" start="2663" end="2671" title="1974 Ethiopian coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="deposing"/>
<link wikidata="Q41178" start="2680" end="2694" title="Haile Selassie" label="Haile Selassie"/>
<link wikidata="Q257724" start="2775" end="2794" title="Ethiopian Civil War" label="Ethiopian Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q112125056" start="2810" end="2833" title="Fall of the Derg" label="dissolution of the Derg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145280" start="2847" end="2901" title="Ethiopian People&amp;#x27;s Revolutionary Democratic Front" label="Ethiopian People&amp;#x27;s Revolutionary Democratic Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135135" start="2939" end="2955" title="1995 Constitution of Ethiopia" label="new constitution"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2960" end="2983" title="Ethnic federalism#Ethiopia" label="ethnic-based federalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q105123798" start="3047" end="3067" title="Ethnic discrimination in Ethiopia" label="inter-ethnic clashes"/>
<link wikidata="Q30676252" start="3104" end="3126" title="democratic backsliding" label="democratic backsliding"/>
<link wikidata="Q106959326" start="3207" end="3248" title="Ethiopian civil conflict (2018–present)" label="multiple ongoing wars throughout Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641089" start="3265" end="3283" title="Multinational state" label="multi-ethnic state"/>
<link wikidata="Q6619042" start="3307" end="3320" title="List of ethnic groups in Ethiopia" label="ethnic groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="3322" end="3334" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2855987" start="3537" end="3542" title="Islam in Ethiopia" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q386498" start="3569" end="3587" title="Traditional African religion" label="traditional faiths"/>
<link wikidata="Q3624078" start="3594" end="3609" title="sovereign state" label="sovereign state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1589222" start="3646" end="3657" title="Group of 24" label="Group of 24"/>
<link wikidata="Q83201" start="3663" end="3683" title="Non-Aligned Movement" label="Non-Aligned Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q477328" start="3689" end="3700" title="Group of 77" label="Group of 77"/>
<link wikidata="Q191703" start="3710" end="3739" title="Organisation of African Unity" label="Organisation of African Unity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7159" start="3780" end="3793" title="African Union" label="African Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q7129539" start="3799" end="3843" title="Pan African Chamber of Commerce and Industry" label="Pan African Chamber of Commerce and Industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144508" start="3849" end="3894" title="United Nations Economic Commission for Africa" label="United Nations Economic Commission for Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4689918" start="3900" end="3921" title="African Standby Force" label="African Standby Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q79913" start="3945" end="3974" title="non-governmental organization" label="non-governmental organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q243630" start="4028" end="4033" title="BRICS" label="BRICS"/>
<link wikidata="Q752401" start="4066" end="4091" title="least developed countries" label="least developed countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q5370783" start="4123" end="4137" title="emerging power" label="emerging power"/>
<link wikidata="Q39088107" start="4150" end="4173" title="List of African countries by GDP growth" label="fastest economic growth"/>
<link wikidata="Q132959" start="4177" end="4195" title="sub-Saharan Africa" label="sub-Saharan Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q490513" start="4218" end="4243" title="foreign direct investment" label="foreign direct investment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2827172" start="4303" end="4314" title="Agriculture in Ethiopia" label="agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="4393" end="4415" title="gross domestic product" label="gross domestic product"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="4449" end="4466" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q176793" start="4475" end="4498" title="List of countries by Human Development Index" label="Human Development Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q60763444" start="4593" end="4600" title="Poverty in Ethiopia" label="poverty"/>
<link wikidata="Q3509432" start="4602" end="4614" title="Human rights in Ethiopia" label="human rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q105123798" start="4638" end="4659" title="Ethnic discrimination in Ethiopia" label="ethnic discrimination"/>
<link wikidata="Q115816786" start="4814" end="4822" title="Ethiopis" label="Ethiopis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4942993" start="5460" end="5472" title="Book of Axum" label="Book of Axum"/>
<link wikidata="Q115816786" start="5540" end="5554" title="Ethiopis" label="Ityopp&amp;#x27;is"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138595" start="5594" end="5610" title="Cush (Bible)" label="Cush, son of Ham"/>
<link wikidata="Q5832" start="5645" end="5649" title="Axum" label="Axum"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="5656" end="5661" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q300426" start="5874" end="5915" title="A Greek–English Lexicon" label="Liddell-Scott Jones Greek-English Lexicon"/>
<link wikidata="Q26825" start="6052" end="6061" title="Herodotus" label="Herodotus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6583" start="6128" end="6134" title="Sahara" label="Sahara"/>
<link wikidata="Q838988" start="6167" end="6174" title="Ecumene" label="Ecumene"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691" start="6252" end="6257" title="Homer" label="Homer"/>
<link wikidata="Q28244" start="6405" end="6412" title="Amharic" label="Amharic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="6450" end="6455" title="Ancient Greece" label="Greco"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="6456" end="6461" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q135028" start="6530" end="6535" title="Nubia" label="Nubia"/>
<link wikidata="Q19786" start="6631" end="6644" title="Old Testament" label="Old Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q9288" start="6679" end="6685" title="Hebrew language" label="Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q241790" start="6718" end="6722" title="Kingdom of Kush" label="Kush"/>
<link wikidata="Q18813" start="6740" end="6753" title="New Testament" label="New Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q615170" start="6821" end="6828" title="Kandake" label="Kandake"/>
<link wikidata="Q734352" start="6902" end="6923" title="Monumentum Adulitanum" label="Monumentum Adulitanum"/>
<link wikidata="Q139377" start="6968" end="6983" title="Kingdom of Aksum" label="Aksumite Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q379898" start="7122" end="7127" title="Ezana of Axum" label="Ezana"/>
<link wikidata="Q35667" start="7289" end="7299" title="Geʽez" label="Ge&amp;#x27;ez"/>
<link wikidata="Q217438" start="7500" end="7507" title="demonym" label="demonym"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070391" start="7571" end="7577" title="Sabaean language" label="Sabaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="7608" end="7614" title="Arabic" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9237" start="7710" end="7715" title="Malay language" label="Malay"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205" start="8048" end="8061" title="Paleontology" label="palaeontology"/>
<link wikidata="Q635162" start="8074" end="8081" title="Hominidae" label="hominid"/>
<link wikidata="Q106565" start="8147" end="8167" title="Ardipithecus" label="Ardipithecus ramidus"/>
<link wikidata="Q433259" start="8175" end="8179" title="Ardi" label="Ardi"/>
<link wikidata="Q955500" start="8190" end="8202" title="Tim D. White" label="Tim D. White"/>
<link wikidata="Q107685" start="8259" end="8285" title="Australopithecus afarensis" label="Australopithecus afarensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q245388" start="8293" end="8297" title="Lucy (Australopithecus)" label="Lucy"/>
<link wikidata="Q782845" start="8370" end="8382" title="Awash Valley" label="Awash Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q193494" start="8386" end="8397" title="Afar Region" label="Afar Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q503293" start="8409" end="8424" title="Donald Johanson" label="Donald Johanson"/>
<link wikidata="Q103237" start="8483" end="8500" title="Australopithecus" label="Australopithecine"/>
<link wikidata="Q115690473" start="8741" end="8767" title="Early modern human" label="anatomically modern humans"/>
<link wikidata="Q5" start="8775" end="8787" title="Human" label="Homo sapiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1627142" start="8839" end="8850" title="Omo remains" label="Omo remains"/>
<link wikidata="Q3882284" start="8887" end="8897" title="Omo Kibish Formation" label="Omo Kibish"/>
<link wikidata="Q626270" start="8930" end="8948" title="Middle Paleolithic" label="Middle Paleolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q131686" start="9009" end="9028" title="Herto Man" label="Homo sapiens idaltu"/>
<link wikidata="Q499030" start="9063" end="9075" title="Middle Awash" label="Middle Awash"/>
<link wikidata="Q846913" start="9312" end="9324" title="Jebel Irhoud" label="Jebel Irhoud"/>
<link wikidata="Q25268" start="9605" end="9616" title="Afroasiatic languages" label="Afroasiatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q36422" start="9679" end="9688" title="Neolithic" label="Neolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4690235" start="9725" end="9733" title="Afroasiatic homeland" label="urheimat"/>
<link wikidata="Q3392" start="9773" end="9784" title="Nile" label="Nile Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q48214" start="9793" end="9802" title="Near East" label="Near East"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931902" start="10053" end="10069" title="Middle Stone Age" label="Middle Stone Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q106349772" start="10090" end="10103" title="Fincha Habera, Ethiopia" label="Fincha Habera"/>
<link wikidata="Q2554147" start="10112" end="10126" title="Bale Mountains" label="Bale Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10217" end="10224" title="Hypoxemia#Environmental oxygen" label="hypoxia"/>
<link wikidata="Q192864" start="10301" end="10308" title="Science (journal)" label="Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q557935" start="10544" end="10552" title="Spalacidae" label="mole rat"/>
<link wikidata="Q16891476" start="10776" end="10785" title="Gademotta" label="Gademotta"/>
<link wikidata="Q139315" start="11053" end="11057" title="Dʿmt" label="Dʿmt"/>
<link wikidata="Q986" start="11089" end="11096" title="Eritrea" label="Eritrea"/>
<link wikidata="Q282350" start="11205" end="11209" title="Land of Punt" label="Punt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1081229" start="11253" end="11257" title="Yeha" label="Yeha"/>
<link wikidata="Q216068" start="11420" end="11427" title="Sabaeans" label="Sabaean"/>
<link wikidata="Q23406" start="11484" end="11491" title="Red Sea" label="Red Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q56394" start="11631" end="11642" title="Agaw people" label="Agaw people"/>
<link wikidata="Q35667" start="11688" end="11698" title="Geʽez" label="Ge&amp;#x27;ez"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070391" start="11794" end="11810" title="Sabaean language" label="Sabaean language"/>
<link wikidata="Q139377" start="12338" end="12354" title="Kingdom of Aksum" label="Kingdom of Aksum"/>
<link wikidata="Q4942993" start="12437" end="12449" title="Book of Axum" label="Book of Axum"/>
<link wikidata="Q203922" start="12644" end="12648" title="Mani (prophet)" label="Mani"/>
<link wikidata="Q159888" start="12920" end="12934" title="Queen of Sheba" label="Queen of Sheba"/>
<link wikidata="Q251060" start="12981" end="12991" title="Frumentius" label="Frumentius"/>
<link wikidata="Q82070" start="13021" end="13025" title="Tyre, Lebanon" label="Tyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q17090025" start="13212" end="13218" title="Slavery in Ethiopia" label="slaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q60140" start="13763" end="13782" title="Indian subcontinent" label="Indian subcontinent"/>
<link wikidata="Q36288" start="13812" end="13821" title="Silk Road" label="Silk Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q3820248" start="13843" end="13848" title="Ivory trade" label="ivory"/>
<link wikidata="Q379898" start="14066" end="14071" title="Ezana of Axum" label="Ezana"/>
<link wikidata="Q241790" start="14114" end="14129" title="Kingdom of Kush" label="Kingdom of Kush"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="14310" end="14316" title="Jews" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q878766" start="14317" end="14326" title="Dhu Nuwas" label="Dhu Nuwas"/>
<link wikidata="Q289577" start="14334" end="14351" title="Himyarite Kingdom" label="Himyarite Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q15211574" start="14360" end="14381" title="Aksumite–Persian wars" label="Aksumite–Persian wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q16840744" start="14405" end="14436" title="Sasanian reconquest of Yemen" label="besieged and retook Sana&amp;#x27;a"/>
<link wikidata="Q252170" start="14481" end="14499" title="Sayf ibn Dhi Yazan" label="Sayf ibn Dhī Yazan"/>
<link wikidata="Q12490507" start="14529" end="14547" title="Rashidun Caliphate" label="Rashidun Caliphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q378940" start="14577" end="14583" title="Adulis" label="Adulis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3497778" start="14657" end="14673" title="land degradation" label="land degradation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5133621" start="14683" end="14697" title="climate change (general concept)" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q1270024" start="14881" end="14892" title="Gudit" label="Queen Gudit"/>
<link wikidata="Q140446" start="15030" end="15043" title="Zagwe dynasty" label="Zagwe dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q207590" start="15069" end="15077" title="Lalibela" label="Lalibela"/>
<link wikidata="Q464237" start="15111" end="15117" title="Amhara people" label="Amhara"/>
<link wikidata="Q888003" start="15128" end="15140" title="Yekuno Amlak" label="Yekuno Amlak"/>
<link wikidata="Q342847" start="15163" end="15171" title="Yetbarak" label="Yetbarak"/>
<link wikidata="Q207521" start="15192" end="15208" title="Ethiopian Empire" label="Ethiopian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q460342" start="15328" end="15340" title="Amda Seyon I" label="Amda Seyon I"/>
<link wikidata="Q40556" start="15615" end="15629" title="Horn of Africa" label="Horn of Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1533914" start="15697" end="15703" title="Gojjam" label="Gojjam"/>
<link wikidata="Q157800" start="15727" end="15732" title="Zeila" label="Zelia"/>
<link wikidata="Q157727" start="15770" end="15787" title="Sultanate of Ifat" label="Sultanate of Ifat"/>
<link wikidata="Q147677" start="15817" end="15827" title="Zara Yaqob" label="Zara Yaqob"/>
<link wikidata="Q2365048" start="16158" end="16172" title="Adal Sultanate" label="Adal Sultanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915203" start="16211" end="16229" title="Ethiopian–Adal War" label="Ethiopian–Adal War"/>
<link wikidata="Q957263" start="16271" end="16291" title="Battle of Wayna Daga" label="Battle of Wayna Daga"/>
<link wikidata="Q318674" start="16348" end="16353" title="Oromo people" label="Oromo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5617057" start="16451" end="16455" title="Guji Zone" label="Guji"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109855" start="16460" end="16471" title="Borena Zone" label="Borena Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2820219" start="16700" end="16711" title="Bahrey" label="Abba Bahrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q558437" start="16759" end="16767" title="Dawit II" label="Dawit II"/>
<link wikidata="Q16254632" start="16769" end="16792" title="Luba Melbah" label="&amp;quot;luba&amp;quot; Melbah"/>
<link wikidata="Q804884" start="16819" end="16823" title="Bale Province, Ethiopia" label="Bale"/>
<link wikidata="Q708822" start="17171" end="17181" title="Pedro Páez" label="Pedro Paez"/>
<link wikidata="Q738321" start="17197" end="17207" title="Susenyos I" label="Susenyos I"/>
<link wikidata="Q642265" start="17401" end="17410" title="Fasilides" label="Fasilides"/>
<link wikidata="Q7104499" start="17465" end="17482" title="Orthodox Tewahedo" label="Orthodox Tewahedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q218861" start="17581" end="17587" title="Gondar" label="Gondar"/>
<link wikidata="Q112649079" start="17632" end="17648" title="Gondarine period" label="Gondarine period"/>
<link wikidata="Q641180" start="17716" end="17723" title="Fremona" label="Fremona"/>
<link wikidata="Q464695" start="17791" end="17803" title="Fasil Ghebbi" label="Fasil Ghebbi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2688661" start="17844" end="17857" title="Ethiopian art" label="Ethiopian art"/>
<link wikidata="Q882739" start="17922" end="17937" title="Blue Nile River" label="Blue Nile River"/>
<link wikidata="Q888011" start="17988" end="17995" title="Iyasu I" label="Iyasu I"/>
<link wikidata="Q735638" start="18015" end="18023" title="Iyasu II" label="Iyasu II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920073" start="18054" end="18062" title="Mentewab" label="Mentewab"/>
<link wikidata="Q2131805" start="18084" end="18087" title="Ras (title)" label="Ras"/>
<link wikidata="Q720057" start="18258" end="18270" title="Mikael Sehul" label="Mikael Sehul"/>
<link wikidata="Q1974228" start="18284" end="18299" title="Tigray Province" label="Tigray Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q343708" start="18334" end="18341" title="Iyoas I" label="Iyoas I"/>
<link wikidata="Q881197" start="18399" end="18410" title="Yohannes II" label="Yohannes II"/>
<link wikidata="Q189297" start="18459" end="18474" title="Zemene Mesafint" label="Zemene Mesafint"/>
<link wikidata="Q8029735" start="18639" end="18653" title="Wolde Selassie" label="Wolde Selassie"/>
<link wikidata="Q106091122" start="18676" end="18681" title="Yejju" label="Yejju"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18703" end="18712" title="Zemene Mesafint#Wara Sheh rulers (Yejju) (1784–1855)" label="Wara Sheh"/>
<link wikidata="Q5615283" start="18728" end="18742" title="Gugsa of Yejju" label="Gugsa of Yejju"/>
<link wikidata="Q1533914" start="19113" end="19119" title="Gojjam" label="Gojjam"/>
<link wikidata="Q971375" start="19125" end="19130" title="Shewa" label="Shewa"/>
<link wikidata="Q262589" start="19224" end="19235" title="Tewodros II" label="Tewodros II"/>
<link wikidata="Q5403659" start="19727" end="19744" title="Egyptian–Ethiopian War" label="invaded Abyssinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q315659" start="19799" end="19810" title="Yohannes IV" label="Yohannes IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q31944" start="19833" end="19844" title="Mahdist War" label="Mahdist War"/>
<link wikidata="Q244748" start="19927" end="19937" title="Menelik II" label="Menelik II"/>
<link wikidata="Q971375" start="19947" end="19952" title="Shewa" label="Shewa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5372551" start="19966" end="19982" title="Emirate of Harar" label="Emirate of Harar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2888306" start="20008" end="20026" title="Battle of Chelenqo" label="Battle of Chelenqo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785947" start="20146" end="20164" title="Battle of Gallabat" label="Battle of Gallabat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192069" start="20440" end="20446" title="Sidama people" label="Sidama"/>
<link wikidata="Q954810" start="20456" end="20463" title="Welayta people" label="Welayta"/>
<link wikidata="Q3109605" start="20534" end="20547" title="Gobana Dacche" label="Gobana Dacche"/>
<link wikidata="Q335728" start="20627" end="20653" title="Ahmad ibn Ibrahim al-Ghazi" label="Ahmad ibn Ibrahim al-Ghazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2707120" start="20876" end="20893" title="Treaty of Wuchale" label="Treaty of Wuchale"/>
<link wikidata="Q989115" start="21294" end="21319" title="First Italo–Ethiopian War" label="First Italo–Ethiopian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q302519" start="21338" end="21352" title="Battle of Adwa" label="Battle of Adwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3066282" start="21503" end="21525" title="Famines in Ethiopia" label="Great Ethiopian Famine"/>
<link wikidata="Q97163433" start="21550" end="21560" title="1890s African rinderpest epizootic" label="rinderpest"/>
<link wikidata="Q426325" start="21663" end="21694" title="Pan-African colours" label="colours of the pan-African flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q282739" start="21751" end="21765" title="pan-Africanist" label="pan-Africanist"/>
<link wikidata="Q41178" start="21875" end="21889" title="Haile Selassie" label="Haile Selassie"/>
<link wikidata="Q379889" start="21939" end="21948" title="Lij Iyasu" label="Lij Iyasu"/>
<link wikidata="Q6889140" start="21976" end="22011" title="Modernization under Haile Selassie" label="a nationwide modernization campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q19643" start="22099" end="22114" title="Queen regnant" label="Empress Regnant"/>
<link wikidata="Q148524" start="22115" end="22122" title="Zewditu" label="Zewditu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2515418" start="22333" end="22345" title="1931 Constitution of Ethiopia" label="Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q122804" start="22384" end="22401" title="Meiji Constitution" label="1890 Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q94916" start="22455" end="22481" title="Second Italo-Ethiopian War" label="Second Italo-Ethiopian War"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22516" end="22529" title="Kingdom of Italy#Fascist regime (1922–1943)" label="Fascist Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q21235114" start="22741" end="22750" title="Arbegnoch" label="Arbegnoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1014" start="22783" end="22790" title="Liberia" label="Liberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="22876" end="22888" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="22890" end="22904" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q21235114" start="22937" end="22946" title="Arbegnoch" label="Arbegnoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052120" start="22994" end="23015" title="East African campaign (World War II)" label="East African campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q65080864" start="23054" end="23085" title="Occupied Enemy Territory Administration (Ethiopia)" label="British military administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q42008" start="23117" end="23128" title="sovereignty" label="sovereignty"/>
<link wikidata="Q4763617" start="23166" end="23191" title="Anglo-Ethiopian Agreement" label="Anglo-Ethiopian Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="23272" end="23286" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q2603305" start="23327" end="23350" title="Federation of Ethiopia and Eritrea" label="federation with Eritrea"/>
<link wikidata="Q194465" start="23382" end="23387" title="Annexation" label="annex"/>
<link wikidata="Q607257" start="23416" end="23444" title="Eritrean War of Independence" label="Eritrean War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q191703" start="23512" end="23541" title="Organisation of African Unity" label="Organisation of African Unity"/>
<link wikidata="Q316817" start="23627" end="23642" title="1973 oil crisis" label="1973 oil crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q420192" start="23792" end="23809" title="Aklilu Habte-Wold" label="Aklilu Habte-Wold"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340346" start="23860" end="23880" title="Endelkachew Makonnen" label="Endelkachew Makonnen"/>
<link wikidata="Q114345062" start="24004" end="24011" title="1974 Ethiopian coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="deposed"/>
<link wikidata="Q828005" start="24019" end="24023" title="Derg" label="Derg"/>
<link wikidata="Q17108094" start="24101" end="24144" title="Massacre of the Sixty" label="60 former government and military officials"/>
<link wikidata="Q828005" start="24154" end="24197" title="Provisional Military Administrative Council" label="Provisional Military Administrative Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q849866" start="24265" end="24287" title="Marxist-Leninist state" label="Marxist-Leninist state"/>
<link wikidata="Q37739" start="24306" end="24315" title="feudalism" label="feudalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q8236" start="24327" end="24335" title="literacy" label="literacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q178564" start="24337" end="24352" title="nationalization" label="nationalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q208128" start="24367" end="24378" title="land reform" label="land reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q12406473" start="24393" end="24423" title="Resettlement and villagization in Ethiopia" label="resettlement and villagization"/>
<link wikidata="Q319288" start="24433" end="24452" title="Ethiopian Highlands" label="Ethiopian Highlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q192512" start="24505" end="24526" title="Mengistu Haile Mariam" label="Mengistu Halie Mariam"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="24652" end="24656" title="USSR" label="USSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q318250" start="24682" end="24692" title="Ogaden War" label="Ogaden War"/>
<link wikidata="Q137555" start="24716" end="24722" title="Ogaden" label="Ogaden"/>
<link wikidata="Q132959" start="24917" end="24935" title="sub-Saharan Africa" label="sub-Saharan Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4114411" start="24961" end="24970" title="Ethiopian Air Force" label="air force"/>
<link wikidata="Q2610662" start="25039" end="25049" title="Red Terror (Ethiopia)" label="Red Terror"/>
<link wikidata="Q1899269" start="25061" end="25081" title="political repression" label="political repression"/>
<link wikidata="Q940821" start="25193" end="25238" title="People&amp;#x27;s Democratic Republic of Ethiopia" label="People&amp;#x27;s Democratic Republic of Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1528624" start="25271" end="25300" title="1987 Constitution of Ethiopia" label="1987 Constitution of Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637896" start="25304" end="25318" title="1983–1985 famine in Ethiopia" label="1983–85 famine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6229" start="25404" end="25417" title="Authoritarianism" label="authoritarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1699287" start="25498" end="25535" title="Tigray People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Front" label="Tigray People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145280" start="25620" end="25674" title="Ethiopian People&amp;#x27;s Revolutionary Democratic Front" label="Ethiopian People&amp;#x27;s Revolutionary Democratic Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q211930" start="25701" end="25717" title="Marxism–Leninism" label="Marxism–Leninism"/>
<link wikidata="Q382861" start="25729" end="25748" title="revolutions of 1989" label="revolutions of 1989"/>
<link wikidata="Q332071" start="26065" end="26100" title="Transitional Government of Ethiopia" label="Transitional Government of Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q986" start="26384" end="26391" title="Eritrea" label="Eritrea"/>
<link wikidata="Q5389607" start="26434" end="26453" title="1993 Eritrean independence referendum" label="national referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q832273" start="26509" end="26531" title="Eritrean–Ethiopian War" label="Eritrean–Ethiopian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q27230922" start="26678" end="26693" title="Eritrean–Ethiopian border conflict" label="border conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q55437375" start="26735" end="26745" title="2018 Eritrea–Ethiopia summit" label="until 2018"/>
<link wikidata="Q106959326" start="26767" end="26788" title="Ethiopian civil conflict (2018–present)" label="civil war in Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26847" end="26867" title="Human rights in Ethiopia#Ethnic violence" label="Ethnic violence rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q65057098" start="27062" end="27081" title="2021 Ethiopian general election" label="rescheduled to 2021"/>
<link wikidata="Q87665038" start="27137" end="27145" title="COVID-19 pandemic in Ethiopia" label="COVID-19"/>
<link wikidata="Q200127" start="27151" end="27164" title="Tigray Region" label="Tigray Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q104192382" start="27195" end="27222" title="2020 Tigray regional election" label="proceeded to hold elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q104217298" start="27408" end="27439" title="Northern Command attacks (Ethiopia)" label="attacks on army units stationed"/>
<link wikidata="Q101231200" start="27476" end="27486" title="Tigray war" label="Tigray war"/>
<link wikidata="Q105638985" start="27553" end="27561" title="War crimes in the Tigray war" label="violence"/>
<link wikidata="Q105434352" start="27566" end="27572" title="Famine in northern Ethiopia (2020–present)" label="famine"/>
<link wikidata="Q105602842" start="27592" end="27621" title="Tigrayan peace process" label="peace and mediation proposals"/>
<link wikidata="Q115124248" start="27699" end="27742" title="Ethiopia–Tigray peace agreement" label="cessation of hostilities on 2 November 2022"/>
<link wikidata="Q109592085" start="27757" end="27771" title="OLA insurgency" label="OLA insurgency"/>
<link wikidata="Q121160319" start="27926" end="27950" title="War in Amhara" label="war in the Amhara Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q104161859" start="27990" end="28023" title="Ethiopian Human Rights Commission" label="Ethiopian Human Rights Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q124726546" start="28201" end="28216" title="Merawi massacre" label="Merawi massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q20982437" start="28273" end="28279" title="Merawi, Ethiopia" label="Merawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q750" start="28389" end="28396" title="Bolivia" label="Bolivia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186278" start="28418" end="28436" title="3rd parallel north" label="3rd parallel north"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255490" start="28445" end="28464" title="15th parallel north" label="15th parallel north"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186520" start="28480" end="28498" title="33rd meridian east" label="33rd meridian east"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186481" start="28503" end="28521" title="48th meridian east" label="48th meridian east"/>
<link wikidata="Q40556" start="28566" end="28580" title="Horn of Africa" label="Horn of Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3739944" start="28898" end="28915" title="Great Rift Valley, Ethiopia" label="Great Rift Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q123991" start="28992" end="28998" title="steppe" label="steppe"/>
<link wikidata="Q388515" start="29285" end="29296" title="Afromontane" label="Afromontane"/>
<link wikidata="Q116685" start="29337" end="29346" title="Lake Tana" label="Lake Tana"/>
<link wikidata="Q882739" start="29381" end="29390" title="Blue Nile" label="Blue Nile"/>
<link wikidata="Q123452" start="29409" end="29416" title="endemism" label="endemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q194080" start="29438" end="29444" title="gelada" label="gelada"/>
<link wikidata="Q257838" start="29450" end="29460" title="walia ibex" label="walia ibex"/>
<link wikidata="Q188957" start="29469" end="29483" title="Ethiopian wolf" label="Ethiopian wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q2600517" start="29857" end="29863" title="Dallol, Ethiopia" label="Dallol"/>
<link wikidata="Q319288" start="29882" end="29901" title="Ethiopian Highlands" label="Ethiopian Highlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q3444339" start="29964" end="29978" title="Sof Omar Caves" label="Sof Omar Caves"/>
<link wikidata="Q189624" start="30070" end="30097" title="List of World Heritage Sites in Africa" label="UNESCO World Heritage Sites"/>
<link wikidata="Q319288" start="30219" end="30238" title="Ethiopian Highlands" label="Ethiopian Highlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q2671162" start="30590" end="30602" title="Mount Entoto" label="Mount Entoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q2151727" start="31510" end="31551" title="Ethiopian xeric grasslands and shrublands" label="Ethiopian xeric grasslands and shrublands"/>
<link wikidata="Q2600517" start="31628" end="31634" title="Dallol, Ethiopia" label="Dallol"/>
<link wikidata="Q14213070" start="31643" end="31661" title="Danakil Depression" label="Danakil Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430548" start="31783" end="31808" title="effects of climate change" label="effects of climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="31879" end="31893" title="Climate change" label="Climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q64017679" start="32163" end="32181" title="Beautifying Sheger" label="Beautifying Sheger"/>
<link wikidata="Q19692715" start="32621" end="32645" title="Belt and Road Initiative" label="Belt and Road Initiative"/>
<link wikidata="Q28318785" start="33027" end="33043" title="Bicyclus anynana" label="Bicyclus anynana"/>
<link wikidata="Q167336" start="33628" end="33642" title="greenhouse gas" label="greenhouse gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q123452" start="33810" end="33817" title="endemic" label="endemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q48268" start="34019" end="34023" title="IUCN" label="IUCN"/>
<link wikidata="Q219127" start="34034" end="34055" title="critically endangered" label="critically endangered"/>
<link wikidata="Q11394" start="34057" end="34067" title="endangered species" label="endangered"/>
<link wikidata="Q278113" start="34073" end="34083" title="vulnerable species" label="vulnerable"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502751" start="34143" end="34160" title="centres of origin" label="centres of origin"/>
<link wikidata="Q169940" start="34206" end="34219" title="deforestation" label="deforestation"/>
<link wikidata="Q104520600" start="34625" end="34657" title="Forest Landscape Integrity Index" label="Forest Landscape Integrity Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q204886" start="35521" end="35528" title="Federalism" label="federal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4198907" start="35529" end="35551" title="parliamentary republic" label="parliamentary republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788970" start="35565" end="35579" title="Prime Minister of Ethiopia" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285706" start="35587" end="35605" title="head of government" label="head of government"/>
<link wikidata="Q3409186" start="35615" end="35624" title="President of Ethiopia" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q48352" start="35632" end="35645" title="head of state" label="head of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q35798" start="35682" end="35697" title="Executive power" label="Executive power"/>
<link wikidata="Q11204" start="35741" end="35758" title="legislative power" label="legislative power"/>
<link wikidata="Q967407" start="35829" end="35848" title="House of Federation" label="House of Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133185" start="35944" end="35982" title="House of Peoples&amp;#x27; Representatives" label="House of Peoples&amp;#x27; Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q113012898" start="36222" end="36231" title="Judiciary of Ethiopia" label="judiciary"/>
<link wikidata="Q60794508" start="36376" end="36397" title="Federal Supreme Court of Ethiopia" label="Federal Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q3732574" start="36522" end="36535" title="Error (law)" label="errors of law"/>
<link wikidata="Q6311907" start="36580" end="36596" title="circuit court" label="circuit hearings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135135" start="36946" end="36958" title="1995 Constitution of Ethiopia" label="Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006612" start="36960" end="36971" title="federal law" label="federal law"/>
<link wikidata="Q131569" start="36977" end="36999" title="international treaties" label="international treaties"/>
<link wikidata="Q113484946" start="37456" end="37495" title="Federal Judicial Administration Council" label="Federal Judicial Administration Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q242424" start="38008" end="38021" title="Freedom House" label="Freedom House"/>
<link wikidata="Q191675" start="38183" end="38188" title="Mixed economy" label="mixed"/>
<link wikidata="Q179522" start="38190" end="38205" title="market economy" label="market-oriented"/>
<link wikidata="Q937547" start="38341" end="38366" title="1995 Ethiopian general election" label="first multiparty election"/>
<link wikidata="Q161184" start="38478" end="38490" title="Meles Zenawi" label="Meles Zenawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788970" start="38509" end="38523" title="Prime Minister of Ethiopia" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q356741" start="38576" end="38590" title="Negasso Gidada" label="Negasso Gidada"/>
<link wikidata="Q381071" start="38912" end="38932" title="Hailemariam Desalegn" label="Hailemariam Desalegn"/>
<link wikidata="Q19428828" start="38981" end="38995" title="Ethiopian general election, 2015" label="2015 elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q114397589" start="39112" end="39120" title="Resignation of Hailemariam Desalegn" label="resigned"/>
<link wikidata="Q26237347" start="39150" end="39167" title="2014–2016 Oromo protests" label="years of protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q28419212" start="39174" end="39192" title="2016–2018 Ethiopian state of emergency" label="state of emergency"/>
<link wikidata="Q50365049" start="39194" end="39204" title="Abiy Ahmed" label="Abiy Ahmed"/>
<link wikidata="Q35637" start="39390" end="39407" title="Nobel Peace Prize" label="Nobel Peace Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q326174" start="39435" end="39450" title="Democracy Index" label="Democracy Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063288" start="39489" end="39516" title="Economist Intelligence Unit" label="Economist Intelligence Unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q549392" start="39832" end="39859" title="Ethiopian general election, 2010" label="2010 parliamentary election"/>
<link wikidata="Q2439061" start="39905" end="39941" title="Dominant-party system" label="&amp;quot;de facto&amp;quot; one-party state"/>
<link wikidata="Q105123798" start="39969" end="40025" title="Ethnic discrimination in Ethiopia" label="internal and intercommunal conflicts in the 21st century"/>
<link wikidata="Q242424" start="40127" end="40140" title="Freedom House" label="Freedom House"/>
<link wikidata="Q3237872" start="40252" end="40270" title="fundamental rights" label="fundamental rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145280" start="40320" end="40325" title="Ethiopian People&amp;#x27;s Revolutionary Democratic Front" label="EPRDF"/>
<link wikidata="Q78108696" start="40330" end="40346" title="Prosperity Party" label="Prosperity Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q113214072" start="40399" end="40421" title="Democratic backsliding in Ethiopia" label="democratic backsliding"/>
<link wikidata="Q106959326" start="40463" end="40480" title="Ethiopian civil conflict (2018–present)" label="internal conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q56061" start="40584" end="40608" title="Administrative division" label="administratively divided"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057504" start="40627" end="40634" title="Regions of Ethiopia" label="regions"/>
<link wikidata="Q219875" start="40636" end="40641" title="List of zones of Ethiopia" label="zones"/>
<link wikidata="Q690840" start="40649" end="40656" title="Districts of Ethiopia" label="woredas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374845" start="40685" end="40691" title="Wards of Ethiopia" label="kebele"/>
<link wikidata="Q7832242" start="40985" end="40999" title="trading nation" label="trading nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q897" start="41028" end="41032" title="gold" label="gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q82001" start="41034" end="41039" title="ivory" label="ivory"/>
<link wikidata="Q273131" start="41061" end="41068" title="incense" label="incense"/>
<link wikidata="Q262589" start="41117" end="41136" title="Tewodros II" label="Emperor Tewodros II"/>
<link wikidata="Q743652" start="41234" end="41260" title="1868 Expedition to Abyssinia" label="British expedition of 1868"/>
<link wikidata="Q899" start="41342" end="41352" title="Suez Canal" label="Suez Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q31944" start="41376" end="41387" title="Mahdist War" label="Mahdist War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5100212" start="41438" end="41443" title="China–Ethiopia relations" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q5403675" start="41445" end="41451" title="Ethiopia–Israel relations" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q20646469" start="41453" end="41459" title="Ethiopia–Mexico relations" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q5403686" start="41461" end="41467" title="Ethiopia–Turkey relations" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q6019192" start="41472" end="41477" title="Ethiopia–India relations" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q185729" start="41554" end="41570" title="War on Terrorism" label="War on Terrorism"/>
<link wikidata="Q770371" start="41575" end="41609" title="African Growth and Opportunity Act" label="African Growth and Opportunity Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="41629" end="41643" title="U.S. President" label="U.S. President"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="41644" end="41656" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q7159" start="41750" end="41763" title="African Union" label="African Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918061" start="41822" end="41846" title="Emigration from Ethiopia" label="Emigration from Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q48806895" start="41895" end="41900" title="Ethiopians in Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5403657" start="41906" end="41920" title="Ethiopians in the United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q48728918" start="41925" end="41931" title="Ethiopians in Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q16821119" start="41944" end="41950" title="Ethiopian Canadians" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q5403535" start="41955" end="41964" title="Ethiopian Australians" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="41990" end="42001" title="Middle East" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q851" start="42018" end="42030" title="Saudi Arabia" label="Saudi Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="42035" end="42041" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1589222" start="42078" end="42089" title="Group of 24" label="Group of 24"/>
<link wikidata="Q83201" start="42102" end="42122" title="Non-Aligned Movement" label="Non-Aligned Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q477328" start="42131" end="42134" title="Group of 77" label="G77"/>
<link wikidata="Q191703" start="42149" end="42178" title="Organization of African Unity" label="Organization of African Unity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2362881" start="42314" end="42338" title="African Union Commission" label="African Union Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q7129539" start="42386" end="42430" title="Pan African Chamber of Commerce and Industry" label="Pan African Chamber of Commerce and Industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144508" start="42436" end="42481" title="United Nations Economic Commission for Africa" label="United Nations Economic Commission for Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4689918" start="42487" end="42508" title="African Standby Force" label="African Standby Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q79913" start="42528" end="42531" title="NGO" label="NGO"/>
<link wikidata="Q20982448" start="42598" end="42603" title="Ethiopia–Sudan relations" label="Sudan"/>
<link wikidata="Q12190385" start="42608" end="42613" title="Egypt–Ethiopia relations" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542454" start="42660" end="42691" title="Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam" label="Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q565520" start="42744" end="42756" title="Water resources law" label="water rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q114" start="42814" end="42819" title="Kenya" label="Kenya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036" start="42821" end="42827" title="Uganda" label="Uganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1037" start="42829" end="42835" title="Rwanda" label="Rwanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q967" start="42837" end="42844" title="Burundi" label="Burundi"/>
<link wikidata="Q924" start="42850" end="42858" title="Tanzania" label="Tanzania"/>
<link wikidata="Q2887548" start="42999" end="43009" title="Nile Basin" label="Nile Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7973730" start="43074" end="43086" title="water rights" label="water rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q38130" start="43329" end="43346" title="League of Nations" label="League of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="43388" end="43402" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144508" start="43548" end="43593" title="United Nations Economic Commission for Africa" label="United Nations Economic Commission for Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q131201" start="43636" end="43659" title="sustainable development" label="sustainable development"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774427" start="43730" end="43751" title="climate change policy" label="climate change policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q273595" start="43945" end="43964" title="history of Ethiopia" label="history of Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="44153" end="44167" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q275635" start="44216" end="44223" title="Massawa" label="Massawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7109948" start="44235" end="44261" title="Ottoman conquest of Habesh" label="Ottoman conquest of Habesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q4794341" start="44280" end="44308" title="Army of the Ethiopian Empire" label="Army of the Ethiopian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2888711" start="44358" end="44362" title="Battle of Gura" label="Gura"/>
<link wikidata="Q315659" start="44389" end="44400" title="Yohannes IV" label="Yohannes IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q107463484" start="44470" end="44474" title="Ethiopian Ground Forces" label="Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q4114411" start="44476" end="44484" title="Ethiopian Air Force" label="Airforce"/>
<link wikidata="Q5403575" start="44492" end="44496" title="Ethiopian Navy" label="Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q113071239" start="44774" end="44798" title="Ethiopian Federal Police" label="Ethiopian Federal Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q109313036" start="44808" end="44846" title="National Intelligence and Security Service" label="National Intelligence Security Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q109313036" start="44852" end="44856" title="National Intelligence and Security Service" label="NISS"/>
<link wikidata="Q258307" start="45034" end="45051" title="national security" label="national security"/>
<link wikidata="Q113071239" start="45174" end="45177" title="Ethiopian Federal Police" label="EFP"/>
<link wikidata="Q109313036" start="45260" end="45298" title="National Intelligence and Security Service" label="National Intelligence Security Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q191600" start="45492" end="45504" title="Civil and political rights" label="civil rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q7240398" start="45814" end="45848" title="Premiership of Meles Zenawi" label="Meles Zenawi&amp;#x27;s administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="45867" end="45870" title="IMF" label="IMF"/>
<link wikidata="Q35865" start="46364" end="46373" title="inflation" label="inflation"/>
<link wikidata="Q140845" start="46390" end="46409" title="balance of payments" label="balance of payments"/>
<link wikidata="Q178476" start="46477" end="46492" title="monetary policy" label="monetary policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11771944" start="46500" end="46513" title="civil service" label="civil service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952348" start="46800" end="46824" title="Multidimensional Poverty Index" label="multidimensional poverty"/>
<link wikidata="Q882739" start="48850" end="48859" title="Blue Nile" label="Blue Nile"/>
<link wikidata="Q821911" start="48861" end="48872" title="Sobat River" label="Sobat River"/>
<link wikidata="Q753906" start="48877" end="48883" title="Atbara" label="Atbara"/>
<link wikidata="Q2822832" start="48941" end="48967" title="Water politics in the Nile Basin" label="1959 Nile Waters Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542454" start="49474" end="49505" title="Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam" label="Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136922" start="49577" end="49585" title="Gilgel Gibe III Dam" label="Gibe III"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="49903" end="49906" title="gross domestic product" label="GDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q156354" start="50220" end="50226" title="coffea" label="coffee"/>
<link wikidata="Q145909" start="50228" end="50234" title="legume" label="legume"/>
<link wikidata="Q177932" start="50237" end="50245" title="rapeseed" label="oilseeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q12117" start="50247" end="50253" title="cereal" label="cereal"/>
<link wikidata="Q36940" start="50266" end="50275" title="sugarcane" label="sugarcane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502751" start="50312" end="50319" title="Center of origin" label="Vavilov"/>
<link wikidata="Q199075" start="50374" end="50379" title="Ensete ventricosum" label="enset"/>
<link wikidata="Q153697" start="50381" end="50387" title="Coffee bean" label="coffee"/>
<link wikidata="Q843942" start="50397" end="50401" title="teff" label="teff"/>
<link wikidata="Q897" start="50480" end="50484" title="gold" label="gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q11575" start="50587" end="50592" title="maize" label="maize"/>
<link wikidata="Q8486" start="50748" end="50754" title="coffee" label="coffee"/>
<link wikidata="Q85742564" start="51324" end="51330" title="Arado cattle" label="cattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q207642" start="51366" end="51370" title="khat" label="khat"/>
<link wikidata="Q199169" start="51436" end="51448" title="floriculture" label="floriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q27407" start="51645" end="51656" title="East Africa" label="East Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045" start="51805" end="51812" title="Somalia" label="Somalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q977" start="51814" end="51822" title="Djibouti" label="Djibouti"/>
<link wikidata="Q114" start="51828" end="51833" title="Kenya" label="Kenya"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="52444" end="52451" title="Fashion in Ethiopia" label="fashion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507197" start="53085" end="53108" title="Cairo-Cape Town Highway" label="Cairo-Cape Town Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q750351" start="53117" end="53148" title="N&amp;#x27;Djamena-Djibouti Highway" label="N&amp;#x27;Djamena-Djibouti Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999572" start="53185" end="53199" title="standard gauge" label="standard gauge"/>
<link wikidata="Q20982403" start="53225" end="53253" title="Addis Ababa–Djibouti Railway" label="Addis Ababa–Djibouti Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231129" start="53282" end="53298" title="Port of Djibouti" label="Port of Djibouti"/>
<link wikidata="Q791636" start="53304" end="53309" title="Awash, Ethiopia" label="Awash"/>
<link wikidata="Q39057133" start="53330" end="53355" title="Awash–Hara Gebeya Railway" label="Awash–Hara Gebeya Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q244793" start="53384" end="53395" title="twin cities" label="twin cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q755752" start="53399" end="53405" title="Dessie" label="Dessie"/>
<link wikidata="Q222420" start="53406" end="53415" title="Kombolcha" label="Kombolcha"/>
<link wikidata="Q44923" start="53471" end="53497" title="Bole International Airport" label="Bole International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q2507539" start="53521" end="53568" title="Aba Tenna Dejazmach Yilma International Airport" label="Aba Tenna Dejazmach Yilma International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q2112179" start="53809" end="53832" title="competitive programming" label="competitive programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q53564732" start="53921" end="53959" title="Ethiopian Space Science and Technology Institute" label="Ethiopian Space Science and Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q106190169" start="55009" end="55020" title="Kitaw Ejigu" label="Kitaw Ejigu"/>
<link wikidata="Q11167994" start="55022" end="55037" title="Mulugeta Bekele" label="Mulugeta Bekele"/>
<link wikidata="Q2829099" start="55039" end="55051" title="Aklilu Lemma" label="Aklilu Lemma"/>
<link wikidata="Q153540" start="55053" end="55065" title="Gebisa Ejeta" label="Gebisa Ejeta"/>
<link wikidata="Q970392" start="55070" end="55083" title="Melaku Worede" label="Melaku Worede"/>
<link wikidata="Q59753117" start="55104" end="55116" title="Timnit Gebru" label="Timnit Gebru"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="55131" end="55142" title="Time (magazine)" label="Time&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q771035" start="55228" end="55248" title="traditional medicine" label="traditional medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4196458" start="55744" end="55767" title="Global Innovation Index" label="Global Innovation Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q318674" start="56232" end="56237" title="Oromo people" label="Oromo"/>
<link wikidata="Q464237" start="56239" end="56245" title="Amhara people" label="Amhara"/>
<link wikidata="Q241696" start="56247" end="56253" title="Somalis" label="Somali"/>
<link wikidata="Q427036" start="56258" end="56267" title="Tigrayans" label="Tigrayans"/>
<link wikidata="Q318674" start="56325" end="56330" title="Oromo people" label="Oromo"/>
<link wikidata="Q464237" start="56419" end="56425" title="Amhara people" label="Amhara"/>
<link wikidata="Q241696" start="56483" end="56490" title="Somalis" label="Somalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q427036" start="56495" end="56504" title="Tigrayans" label="Tigrayans"/>
<link wikidata="Q25268" start="56562" end="56582" title="Afroasiatic languages" label="Afroasiatic-speaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566832" start="56711" end="56725" title="Habesha people" label="Habesha people"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="56731" end="56737" title="Arabic" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="59207" end="59232" title="World Health Organization" label="World Health Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q3497778" start="59863" end="59879" title="land degradation" label="land degradation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2836970" start="60396" end="60411" title="Water supply and sanitation in Ethiopia" label="poor sanitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1238770" start="61433" end="61443" title="Addis Ababa University" label="university"/>
<link wikidata="Q17165062" start="61765" end="61774" title="Glottolog" label="Glottolog"/>
<link wikidata="Q14790" start="61832" end="61842" title="Ethnologue" label="Ethnologue"/>
<link wikidata="Q25268" start="61935" end="61956" title="Afroasiatic languages" label="Afroasiatic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q33248" start="61964" end="61972" title="Cushitic languages" label="Cushitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q34049" start="61976" end="61983" title="Semitic languages" label="Semitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q33864" start="62018" end="62032" title="Oromo language" label="Oromo language"/>
<link wikidata="Q318674" start="62048" end="62053" title="Oromo people" label="Oromo"/>
<link wikidata="Q13275" start="62059" end="62065" title="Somali language" label="Somali"/>
<link wikidata="Q241696" start="62081" end="62088" title="Somalis" label="Somalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q28244" start="62110" end="62117" title="Amharic" label="Amharic"/>
<link wikidata="Q464237" start="62133" end="62139" title="Amhara people" label="Amhara"/>
<link wikidata="Q34124" start="62145" end="62153" title="Tigrinya language" label="Tigrinya"/>
<link wikidata="Q427036" start="62169" end="62178" title="Tigrayans" label="Tigrayans"/>
<link wikidata="Q33786" start="62355" end="62361" title="Sidamo language" label="Sidamo"/>
<link wikidata="Q27811" start="62363" end="62367" title="Afar language" label="Afar"/>
<link wikidata="Q56613" start="62369" end="62376" title="Hadiyya language" label="Hadiyya"/>
<link wikidata="Q56569" start="62381" end="62395" title="Agaw languages" label="Agaw languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q844307" start="62420" end="62436" title="Gurage languages" label="Gurage languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q33626" start="62438" end="62444" title="Harari language" label="Harari"/>
<link wikidata="Q33880" start="62446" end="62457" title="Silt&amp;#x27;e language" label="Silt&amp;#x27;e"/>
<link wikidata="Q29292" start="62463" end="62470" title="Argobba language" label="Argobba"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="62482" end="62488" title="Arabic" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q104524159" start="62756" end="62778" title="Federal Negarit Gazeta" label="Federal Negarit Gazeta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135135" start="63013" end="63042" title="1995 Constitution of Ethiopia" label="1995 Constitution of Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q257634" start="63105" end="63122" title="Ge&amp;#x27;ez script" label="Ge&amp;#x27;ez script"/>
<link wikidata="Q335806" start="63139" end="63146" title="abugida" label="abugida"/>
<link wikidata="Q185087" start="63255" end="63260" title="abjad" label="abjad"/>
<link wikidata="Q35667" start="63287" end="63306" title="Ge&amp;#x27;ez language" label="Ge&amp;#x27;ez language"/>
<link wikidata="Q179829" start="63369" end="63396" title="Ethiopian Orthodox Tewahedo Church" label="Ethiopian Orthodox Tewahedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q844083" start="63401" end="63427" title="Eritrean Orthodox Tewahedo Church" label="Eritrean Orthodox Tewahedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q8819" start="63525" end="63532" title="Unicode" label="Unicode"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425321" start="63555" end="63572" title="Ethiopic Extended" label="Ethiopic Extended"/>
<link wikidata="Q2494200" start="63574" end="63593" title="Ethiopic Supplement" label="Ethiopic Supplement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2494205" start="63598" end="63617" title="Ethiopic Extended-A" label="Ethiopic Extended-A"/>
<link wikidata="Q8192" start="63626" end="63640" title="writing system" label="writing system"/>
<link wikidata="Q4076053" start="63732" end="63744" title="Bakri Sapalo" label="Bakri Sapalo"/>
<link wikidata="Q33864" start="63763" end="63768" title="Oromo language" label="Oromo"/>
<link wikidata="Q15731064" start="64143" end="64168" title="non-denominational Muslim" label="non-denominational Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q9585" start="64217" end="64225" title="Shia Islam" label="the Shia"/>
<link wikidata="Q82245" start="64261" end="64273" title="Shafi&amp;#x27;i" label="Shafi&amp;#x27;i"/>
<link wikidata="Q191057" start="64278" end="64285" title="Salafi movement" label="Salafis"/>
<link wikidata="Q9603" start="64307" end="64312" title="Sufism" label="Sufis"/>
<link wikidata="Q47280" start="64397" end="64416" title="Abrahamic religions" label="Abrahamic religions"/>
<link wikidata="Q170531" start="64587" end="64607" title="Council of Chalcedon" label="Council of Chalcedon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1764554" start="64620" end="64631" title="miaphysitism" label="Miaphysites"/>
<link wikidata="Q183091" start="64719" end="64732" title="monophysitism" label="monophysitism"/>
<link wikidata="Q198998" start="64785" end="64804" title="Coptic Orthodox Church of Alexandria" label="Coptic Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q49377" start="64810" end="64828" title="Oriental Orthodoxy" label="Oriental Orthodoxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q179829" start="64836" end="64870" title="Ethiopian Orthodox Tewahedo Church" label="Ethiopian Orthodox Tewahedo Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q49377" start="64882" end="64900" title="Oriental Orthodoxy" label="Oriental Orthodoxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7116867" start="64972" end="64990" title="P&amp;#x27;ent&amp;#x27;ay" label="P&amp;#x27;ent&amp;#x27;ay"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="64992" end="65002" title="Protestantism" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q64849" start="65073" end="65098" title="Ethiopian Catholic Church" label="Ethiopian Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q649499" start="65114" end="65128" title="full communion" label="full communion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2855987" start="65204" end="65221" title="Islam in Ethiopia" label="Islam in Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q9458" start="65315" end="65323" title="Muhammad" label="Muhammad"/>
<link wikidata="Q5806" start="65349" end="65354" title="Mecca" label="Mecca"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402073" start="65383" end="65404" title="migrated to Abyssinia" label="migrated to Abyssinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q676801" start="65460" end="65476" title="Ashama ibn-Abjar" label="Ashama ibn-Abjar"/>
<link wikidata="Q203516" start="65928" end="65938" title="Birth rate" label="Birth rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q835884" start="65941" end="65962" title="infant mortality rate" label="infant mortality rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q58702" start="65969" end="65979" title="death rate" label="death rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q161718" start="66299" end="66303" title="UNDP" label="UNDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q12167" start="66565" end="66577" title="malnutrition" label="malnutrition"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="66781" end="66806" title="World Health Organization" label="World Health Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q55623264" start="68394" end="68415" title="Ministry of Education (Ethiopia)" label="Ministry of Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q113554972" start="68658" end="68710" title="National Educational Assessment and Examination Agency" label="National Education Assessment and Examination Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q113554920" start="68766" end="68827" title="Ethiopian General Secondary Education Certificate Examination" label="Ethiopian General Secondary Education Certificate Examination"/>
<link wikidata="Q161718" start="69841" end="69845" title="UNDP" label="UNDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q188958" start="70722" end="70736" title="egalitarianism" label="egalitarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q114658295" start="71005" end="71024" title="Ethiopian Christmas" label="Ethiopian Christmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133754" start="71051" end="71059" title="Timkat" label="Epiphany"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="71157" end="71169" title="Jesus" label="Jesus Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q40662" start="71173" end="71189" title="John the Baptist" label="John the Baptist"/>
<link wikidata="Q4435332" start="71261" end="71295" title="UNESCO Intangible Cultural Heritage Lists" label="Intangible Cultural Heritage Lists"/>
<link wikidata="Q41662" start="71402" end="71409" title="Ramadan" label="Ramadan"/>
<link wikidata="Q40317" start="71411" end="71422" title="Good Friday" label="Good Friday"/>
<link wikidata="Q21196" start="71427" end="71433" title="Easter" label="Easter"/>
<link wikidata="Q193027" start="71521" end="71527" title="Mawlid" label="Mawlid"/>
<link wikidata="Q464458" start="71833" end="71844" title="Eid al-Fitr" label="Eid al-Fitr"/>
<link wikidata="Q514400" start="71849" end="71860" title="Eid al-Adha" label="Eid al-Adha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642232" start="71961" end="71967" title="Meskel" label="Meskel"/>
<link wikidata="Q113499494" start="72034" end="72050" title="Adwa Victory Day" label="Adwa Victory Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q244748" start="72077" end="72095" title="Menelik II" label="Emperor Menelik II"/>
<link wikidata="Q47499" start="72215" end="72246" title="International Workers&amp;#x27; Day" label="International Workers&amp;#x27; Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q113499420" start="72270" end="72306" title="Ethiopian Patriots&amp;#x27; Victory Day" label="Ethiopian Patriots&amp;#x27; Victory Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q113499373" start="72442" end="72462" title="Downfall of the Derg (holiday)" label="Downfall of the Derg"/>
<link wikidata="Q3054544" start="72610" end="72620" title="Enkutatash" label="Enkutatash"/>
<link wikidata="Q3054544" start="72659" end="72677" title="Enkutatash" label="Ethiopian new year"/>
<link wikidata="Q124408550" start="72867" end="72878" title="Defense Day (Ethiopia)" label="Defense Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q6073581" start="73119" end="73126" title="Irreechaa" label="Irrecha"/>
<link wikidata="Q318674" start="73145" end="73160" title="Oromo people" label="Oromo community"/>
<link wikidata="Q2688661" start="73192" end="73208" title="Ethiopian art" label="Arts of Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q48498" start="73308" end="73331" title="illuminated manuscripts" label="illuminated manuscripts"/>
<link wikidata="Q11629" start="73333" end="73341" title="painting" label="painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q3003694" start="73343" end="73350" title="Ethiopian cross" label="crosses"/>
<link wikidata="Q132137" start="73352" end="73356" title="icon" label="icon"/>
<link wikidata="Q953045" start="73368" end="73377" title="metalwork" label="metalwork"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="73727" end="73740" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine art"/>
<link wikidata="Q2365048" start="73836" end="73850" title="Adal Sultanate" label="Adal Sultanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q319288" start="73858" end="73877" title="Ethiopian Highlands" label="Ethiopian Highlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q16243117" start="73924" end="73931" title="Western art" label="Western"/>
<link wikidata="Q382165" start="74097" end="74110" title="Afewerk Tekle" label="Afewerk Tekle"/>
<link wikidata="Q100992239" start="74112" end="74122" title="Lemma Guya" label="Lemma Guya"/>
<link wikidata="Q27832588" start="74124" end="74137" title="Martha Nasibù" label="Martha Nasibù"/>
<link wikidata="Q5545936" start="74139" end="74155" title="Ale Felege Selam" label="Ale Felege Selam"/>
<link wikidata="Q207590" start="74296" end="74304" title="Lalibela" label="Lalibela"/>
<link wikidata="Q471332" start="74325" end="74335" title="Lalibela (Emperor of Ethiopia)" label="Lalibela I"/>
<link wikidata="Q471332" start="74337" end="74355" title="Gebre Meskel Lalibela" label="Emperor Lalibela I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122603" start="74749" end="74763" title="Ashlar masonry" label="Ashlar masonry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429935" start="74784" end="74796" title="South Arabia" label="South Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q207590" start="75073" end="75081" title="Lalibela" label="Lalibela"/>
<link wikidata="Q464695" start="75441" end="75453" title="Fasil Ghebbi" label="Fasil Ghebbi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7886014" start="75598" end="75618" title="Ethiopian literature" label="Ethiopian literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q257634" start="75738" end="75748" title="Geʽez script" label="Ge&amp;#x27;ez"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="75753" end="75758" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="76149" end="76160" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q305763" start="76179" end="76193" title="Abba Gorgoryos" label="Abba Gorgoryos"/>
<link wikidata="Q16262951" start="76198" end="76215" title="Giyorgis of Segla" label="Giyorgis of Segla"/>
<link wikidata="Q28244" start="76301" end="76308" title="Amharic" label="Amharic"/>
<link wikidata="Q213924" start="76539" end="76544" title="codex" label="codex"/>
<link wikidata="Q720106" start="77043" end="77049" title="scroll" label="scroll"/>
<link wikidata="Q796790" start="77227" end="77234" title="debtera" label="debtera"/>
<link wikidata="Q172663" start="77275" end="77283" title="exorcism" label="exorcism"/>
<link wikidata="Q13144160" start="77874" end="77885" title="Baalu Girma" label="Baalu Girma"/>
<link wikidata="Q982661" start="77890" end="77906" title="Haddis Alemayehu" label="Haddis Alemayehu"/>
<link wikidata="Q471183" start="78132" end="78139" title="Realism (international relations)" label="realism"/>
<link wikidata="Q858330" start="78146" end="78153" title="Romance novel" label="romance"/>
<link wikidata="Q482" start="78289" end="78295" title="poetry" label="poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3412459" start="78371" end="78375" title="Qene" label="Qene"/>
<link wikidata="Q335732" start="78793" end="78813" title="Tsegaye Gabre-Medhin" label="Tsegaye Gebre-Medhin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3194578" start="78815" end="78829" title="Kebede Michael" label="Kebede Michael"/>
<link wikidata="Q3305845" start="78834" end="78848" title="Mengistu Lemma" label="Mengistu Lemma"/>
<link wikidata="Q999259" start="78952" end="78957" title="Ancient Greek philosophy" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q189380" start="78962" end="78971" title="Patristic" label="Patristic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2896591" start="79068" end="79078" title="Zera Yacob (philosopher)" label="Zera Yacob"/>
<link wikidata="Q7961364" start="79107" end="79119" title="Walda Heywat" label="Walda Heywat"/>
<link wikidata="Q3378120" start="79137" end="79143" title="Hatata" label="Hatata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1699404" start="79203" end="79219" title="existence of God" label="existence of God"/>
<link wikidata="Q2917508" start="79239" end="79256" title="music of Ethiopia" label="music of Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q731978" start="79397" end="79409" title="Musical mode" label="modal system"/>
<link wikidata="Q191345" start="79418" end="79428" title="Pentatonic scale" label="pentatonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q179465" start="79724" end="79733" title="polyphony" label="polyphony"/>
<link wikidata="Q630161" start="79735" end="79746" title="heterophony" label="heterophony"/>
<link wikidata="Q893474" start="79748" end="79753" title="drone (music)" label="drone"/>
<link wikidata="Q186393" start="79770" end="79782" title="counterpoint" label="counterpoint"/>
<link wikidata="Q7810544" start="79967" end="79973" title="tizita" label="tizita"/>
<link wikidata="Q2894973" start="79988" end="79993" title="Yared" label="Yared"/>
<link wikidata="Q844083" start="80158" end="80191" title="Eritrean Orthodox Tewahedo Church" label="Eritrean Orthodox Tewahedo Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q2616672" start="80295" end="80306" title="Arba Lijoch" label="Arba Lijoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218" start="80320" end="80329" title="Jerusalem" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q113114991" start="80627" end="80637" title="Ethiopian Golden Age of music" label="Golden Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q335753" start="80710" end="80726" title="Tilahun Gessesse" label="Tilahun Gessesse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2840713" start="80728" end="80744" title="Alemayehu Eshete" label="Alemayehu Eshete"/>
<link wikidata="Q879274" start="80746" end="80761" title="Bizunesh Bekele" label="Bizunesh Bekele"/>
<link wikidata="Q6935215" start="80763" end="80778" title="Muluken Melesse" label="Muluken Melesse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915163" start="80783" end="80796" title="Mahmoud Ahmed" label="Mahmoud Ahmed"/>
<link wikidata="Q7961924" start="81057" end="81068" title="Walias Band" label="Walias Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q20607362" start="81101" end="81113" title="Neway Debebe" label="Neway Debebe"/>
<link wikidata="Q469834" start="81260" end="81271" title="Aster Aweke" label="Aster Aweke"/>
<link wikidata="Q465211" start="81273" end="81277" title="Gigi (singer)" label="Gigi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1853381" start="81282" end="81292" title="Teddy Afro" label="Teddy Afro"/>
<link wikidata="Q65975360" start="81396" end="81403" title="Rophnan" label="Rophnan"/>
<link wikidata="Q215271" start="81583" end="81601" title="Ethiopian calendar" label="Ethiopian calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q257634" start="81671" end="81688" title="Ge&amp;#x27;ez script" label="Ge&amp;#x27;ez script"/>
<link wikidata="Q750430" start="81785" end="81800" title="Coptic calendar" label="Coptic calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q254101" start="81833" end="81850" title="Egyptian calendar" label="Egyptian calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1610070" start="81960" end="81970" title="epagomenal" label="epagomenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q11184" start="82130" end="82145" title="Julian calendar" label="Julian calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q19828" start="82194" end="82202" title="leap day" label="leap day"/>
<link wikidata="Q12138" start="82447" end="82456" title="Gregorian calendar" label="Gregorian"/>
<link wikidata="Q154326" start="82672" end="82684" title="Annunciation" label="Annunciation"/>
<link wikidata="Q318674" start="82758" end="82770" title="Oromo people" label="Oromo people"/>
<link wikidata="Q834680" start="82803" end="82817" title="Oromo calendar" label="Oromo calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276270" start="83420" end="83454" title="Ethiopian Broadcasting Corporation" label="Ethiopian Broadcasting Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2324556" start="83492" end="83503" title="state media" label="state media"/>
<link wikidata="Q28126879" start="83738" end="83745" title="Kana TV" label="Kana TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q187657" start="83813" end="83820" title="Dubbing (filmmaking)" label="dubbing"/>
<link wikidata="Q28244" start="83842" end="83849" title="Amharic" label="Amharic"/>
<link wikidata="Q39074649" start="83959" end="83965" title="EBS TV (Ethiopia)" label="EBS TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q48732172" start="84168" end="84175" title="Fana TV" label="Fana TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q2824150" start="84289" end="84302" title="Addis Fortune" label="Addis Fortune"/>
<link wikidata="Q2937392" start="84304" end="84320" title="Capital Ethiopia" label="Capital Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3059295" start="84322" end="84340" title="Ethiopian Reporter" label="Ethiopian Reporter"/>
<link wikidata="Q27719029" start="84380" end="84396" title="Ethiopian Herald" label="Ethiopian Herald"/>
<link wikidata="Q5403583" start="84474" end="84487" title="Ethio telecom" label="Ethio telecom"/>
<link wikidata="Q148524" start="85851" end="85858" title="Zewditu" label="Zewditu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2274006" start="86015" end="86027" title="Haile Gerima" label="Haile Gerima"/>
<link wikidata="Q27805320" start="86029" end="86042" title="Salem Mekuria" label="Salem Mekuria"/>
<link wikidata="Q7705493" start="86065" end="86080" title="Teshome Gabriel" label="Teshome Gabriel"/>
<link wikidata="Q28244" start="86134" end="86141" title="Amharic" label="Amharic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7447474" start="86201" end="86209" title="Selanchi" label="Selanchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q16991774" start="86223" end="86229" title="Difret" label="Difret"/>
<link wikidata="Q19954562" start="86243" end="86247" title="Lamb (2015 Ethiopian film)" label="Lamb"/>
<link wikidata="Q3832179" start="86261" end="86275" title="Prince of Love" label="Prince of Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q24807087" start="86292" end="86301" title="Lambadina" label="Lambadina"/>
<link wikidata="Q56850059" start="86365" end="86378" title="Selam Tesfaye" label="Selam Tesfaye"/>
<link wikidata="Q47066606" start="86380" end="86392" title="Fryat Yemane" label="Fryat Yemane"/>
<link wikidata="Q38022453" start="86394" end="86405" title="Hanan Tarik" label="Hanan Tarik"/>
<link wikidata="Q19938355" start="86407" end="86420" title="Mahder Assefa" label="Mahder Assefa"/>
<link wikidata="Q38459393" start="86422" end="86436" title="Amleset Muchie" label="Amleset Muchie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3453629" start="86441" end="86451" title="Ruth Negga" label="Ruth Negga"/>
<link wikidata="Q113349549" start="86496" end="86513" title="Gumma Film Awards" label="Gumma Film Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q113549279" start="86640" end="86673" title="Addis International Film Festival" label="Addis International Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q113549092" start="86682" end="86719" title="Ethiopian International Film Festival" label="Ethiopian International Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q257508" start="86890" end="86907" title="Ethiopian cuisine" label="Ethiopian cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920963" start="86948" end="86952" title="stew" label="stew"/>
<link wikidata="Q1301968" start="86970" end="86973" title="wat (food)" label="wat"/>
<link wikidata="Q935807" start="87045" end="87051" title="injera" label="injera"/>
<link wikidata="Q3360560" start="87061" end="87070" title="sourdough" label="sourdough"/>
<link wikidata="Q666242" start="87071" end="87080" title="flatbread" label="flatbread"/>
<link wikidata="Q843942" start="87089" end="87093" title="teff" label="teff"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="87431" end="87437" title="Ethiopian cuisine#Gursha" label="gursha"/>
<link wikidata="Q191768" start="87486" end="87490" title="pork" label="pork"/>
<link wikidata="Q179829" start="87514" end="87532" title="Ethiopian Orthodox" label="Ethiopian Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="87678" end="87687" title="Fit-fit#Kitcha fit-fit" label="Chechebsa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="87689" end="87694" title="Marqa" label="Marqa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="87696" end="87702" title="Chukko" label="Chukko"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="87704" end="87712" title="Michirra" label="Michirra"/>
<link wikidata="Q27957487" start="87717" end="87723" title="Dhanga" label="Dhanga"/>
<link wikidata="Q318674" start="87761" end="87766" title="Oromo people" label="Oromo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2671154" start="87768" end="87773" title="Kitfo" label="Kitfo"/>
<link wikidata="Q844307" start="87802" end="87808" title="Gurage people" label="Gurage"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="87883" end="87891" title="Doro Wot" label="Doro Wot"/>
<link wikidata="Q28244" start="87908" end="87915" title="Amharic" label="Amharic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="87921" end="87934" title="Tsebehi Derho" label="Tsebehi Derho"/>
<link wikidata="Q34124" start="87947" end="87955" title="Tigrinya language" label="Tigrinya"/>
<link wikidata="Q56278726" start="88024" end="88029" title="Tihlo" label="Tihlo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1854639" start="88055" end="88063" title="dumpling" label="dumpling"/>
<link wikidata="Q200127" start="88124" end="88137" title="Tigray Region" label="Tigray Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q203009" start="88168" end="88174" title="Amhara Region" label="Amhara"/>
<link wikidata="Q3312129" start="88249" end="88264" title="track and field" label="track and field"/>
<link wikidata="Q917206" start="88279" end="88300" title="long distance running" label="long distance running"/>
<link wikidata="Q5389" start="88349" end="88356" title="Olympic Games" label="Olympic"/>
<link wikidata="Q52596" start="88428" end="88440" title="Abebe Bikila" label="Abebe Bikila"/>
<link wikidata="Q132959" start="88473" end="88484" title="Sub-Saharan Africa" label="Sub-Saharan"/>
<link wikidata="Q40244" start="88538" end="88546" title="Marathon" label="Marathon"/>
<link wikidata="Q257411" start="88618" end="88649" title="Ethiopia national football team" label="Ethiopia national football team"/>
<link wikidata="Q168360" start="88690" end="88723" title="Confederation of African Football" label="Confederation of African Football"/>
<link wikidata="Q83145" start="88736" end="88757" title="Africa Cup of Nations" label="Africa Cup of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q729693" start="88761" end="88765" title="1962 African Cup of Nations" label="1962"/>
<link wikidata="Q3873731" start="88855" end="88879" title="Ethiopia national basketball team" label="national basketball team"/>
<link wikidata="Q5972578" start="88905" end="88939" title="Index of Ethiopia-related articles" label="Index of Ethiopia-related articles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112260" start="88943" end="88962" title="Outline of Ethiopia" label="Outline of Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2114480" start="90077" end="90091" title="Dervla Murphy" label="Murphy, Dervla"/>
<link wikidata="Q112316979" start="90106" end="90129" title="In Ethiopia with a Mule" label="In Ethiopia with a Mule"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143409" start="90325" end="90349" title="Encyclopaedia Aethiopica" label="Encyclopaedia Aethiopica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143409" start="90719" end="90743" title="Encyclopaedia Aethiopica" label="Encyclopaedia Aethiopica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143409" start="90859" end="90883" title="Encyclopaedia Aethiopica" label="Encyclopaedia Aethiopica"/>
<link wikidata="Q11191" start="91043" end="91061" title="The World Factbook" label="The World Factbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="91069" end="91096" title="Central Intelligence Agency" label="Central Intelligence Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q6050701" start="91214" end="91235" title="International Futures" label="International Futures"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="187750" wikidata="Q1816844" url="?curid=187750" title="Large numbers">
<text>Large numbers, far beyond those encountered in everyday life—such as simple counting or financial transactions—play a crucial role in various domains. These expansive quantities appear prominently in mathematics, cosmology, cryptography, and statistical mechanics. While they often manifest as large positive integers, they can also take other forms in different contexts (such as P-adic number). Googology delves into the naming conventions and properties of these immense numerical entities.

Since the customary, traditional (non-technical) decimal format of large numbers can be lengthy, other systems have been devised that allows for shorter representation. For example, a billion is represented as 13 characters (1,000,000,000) in decimal format, but is only 3 characters (109) when expressed in exponential format. A trillion is 17 characters in decimal, but only 4 (1012) in exponential. Values that vary dramatically can be represented and compared graphically via logarithmic scale.

==Natural language numbering==
A natural language numbering system allows for representing large numbers using names that more clearly distinguish numeric scale than a series of digits. For example &quot;billion&quot; may be easier to comprehend for some readers than &quot;1,000,000,000&quot;. But, as names, a numeric value can be lengthy. For example, &quot;2,345,789&quot; is &quot;two million, three hundred forty five thousand, seven hundred and eighty nine&quot;.

==Standard notation==
Standard notation is a variation of English&#x27;s natural language numbering, where it is shortened into a suffix. Examples are 2,343,678,900 = 2.34 B (B = billion).

==Scientific notation==
Scientific notation was devised to represent the vast range of values encountered in scientific research in a format that is more compact than traditional formats yet allows for high precision when called for. A value is represented as a decimal fraction times a multiple power of 10. The factor is intended to make reading comprehension easier than a lengthy series of zeros. For example, 1.0 expresses one billion—1 followed by nine zeros. The reciprocal, one billionth, is 1.0.

==Examples==

Examples of large numbers describing real-world things:

* The number of cells in the human body (estimated at 3.72), or 37.2 trillion/37.2 T
* The number of bits on a computer hard disk (, typically about 1013, 1–2 TB), or 10 trillion/10T
* The number of neuronal connections in the human brain (estimated at 1014), or 100 trillion/100 T
* The Avogadro constant is the number of &quot;elementary entities&quot; (usually atoms or molecules) in one mole; the number of atoms in 12 grams of carbon-12 approximately , or 602.2 sextillion/60.2Sx.
* The total number of DNA base pairs within the entire biomass on Earth, as a possible approximation of global biodiversity, is estimated at , or 53±36 undecillion/17 - 89 UDc
* The mass of Earth consists of about 4 × 1051, or 4 sexdecillion/4 SxDc, nucleons
* The estimated number of atoms in the observable universe (1080), or 100 quinvigintillion/100 QiVg
* The lower bound on the game-tree complexity of chess, also known as the &quot;Shannon number&quot; (estimated at around 10120), or 1 novemtrigintillion/1 NTg Note that this value of the Shannon number is for Standard Chess. It has even larger values for larger-board chess variants such as Grant Acedrex, Tai Shogi, and Taikyoku Shogi.

== Astronomical ==
In the vast expanse of astronomy and cosmology, we encounter staggering numbers related to length and time. For instance, according to the prevailing Big Bang model, our universe is approximately 13.8 billion years old (equivalent to seconds). The observable universe spans an incredible 93 billion light years (approximately meters) and hosts around stars, organized into roughly 125 billion galaxies (as observed by the Hubble Space Telescope). As a rough estimate, there are about atoms within the observable universe.

According to Don Page, physicist at the University of Alberta, Canada, the longest finite time that has so far been explicitly calculated by any physicist is

::::formula_1

which corresponds to the scale of an estimated Poincaré recurrence time for the quantum state of a hypothetical box containing a black hole with the estimated mass of the entire universe, observable or not, assuming a certain inflationary model with an inflaton whose mass is 10−6 Planck masses. This time assumes a statistical model subject to Poincaré recurrence. A much simplified way of thinking about this time is in a model where the universe&#x27;s history repeats itself arbitrarily many times due to properties of statistical mechanics; this is the time scale when it will first be somewhat similar (for a reasonable choice of &quot;similar&quot;) to its current state again.

Combinatorial processes give rise to astonishingly large numbers. The factorial function, which quantifies permutations of a fixed set of objects, grows exponentially as the number of objects increases. Stirling&#x27;s formula provides a precise asymptotic expression for this rapid growth.

In statistical mechanics, combinatorial numbers reach such immense magnitudes that they are often expressed using logarithms.

Gödel numbers, along with similar representations of bit-strings in algorithmic information theory, are vast—even for mathematical statements of moderate length. Remarkably, certain pathological numbers surpass even the Gödel numbers associated with typical mathematical propositions.

Logician Harvey Friedman has made significant contributions to the study of very large numbers, including work related to Kruskal&#x27;s tree theorem and the Robertson–Seymour theorem.

===&quot;Billions and billions&quot;===
To help viewers of &quot;&quot; distinguish between &quot;millions&quot; and &quot;billions&quot;, astronomer Carl Sagan stressed the &quot;b&quot;. Sagan never did, however, say &quot;billions and billions&quot;. The public&#x27;s association of the phrase and Sagan came from a &quot;Tonight Show&quot; skit. Parodying Sagan&#x27;s effect, Johnny Carson quipped &quot;billions and billions&quot;. The phrase has, however, now become a humorous fictitious number—the Sagan. &quot;Cf.&quot;, Sagan Unit.

== Examples ==
*googol = formula_2/10 DTg
*centillion = formula_3/1Ce or formula_4, depending on number naming system
*millinillion = formula_5/1MI or formula_6, depending on number naming system
*The largest known Smith number = (101031−1) × (104594 + 3 + 1)1476 
*The largest known Mersenne prime = formula_7
*googolplex = formula_8
*Skewes&#x27;s numbers: the first is approximately formula_9, the second formula_10
*Graham&#x27;s number, larger than what can be represented even using power towers (tetration). However, it can be represented using layers of Knuth&#x27;s up-arrow notation.
*Kruskal&#x27;s tree theorem is a sequence relating to graphs. TREE(3) is larger than Graham&#x27;s number.
*Rayo&#x27;s number is a large number named after Agustín Rayo which has been claimed to be the largest named number. It was originally defined in a &quot;big number duel&quot; at MIT on 26 January 2007.

== Standardized system of writing ==

A standardized way of writing very large numbers allows them to be easily sorted in increasing order, and one can get a good idea of how much larger a number is than another one.

To compare numbers in scientific notation, say 5×104 and 2×105, compare the exponents first, in this case 5 &gt; 4, so 2×105 &gt; 5×104. If the exponents are equal, the mantissa (or coefficient) should be compared, thus 5×104 &gt; 2×104 because 5 &gt; 2.

Tetration with base 10 gives the sequence formula_11, the power towers of numbers 10, where formula_12 denotes a functional power of the function formula_13 (the function also expressed by the suffix &quot;-plex&quot; as in googolplex, see the googol family).

These are very round numbers, each representing an order of magnitude in a generalized sense. A crude way of specifying how large a number is, is specifying between which two numbers in this sequence it is.

More precisely, numbers in between can be expressed in the form formula_14, i.e., with a power tower of 10s, and a number at the top, possibly in scientific notation, e.g. formula_15, a number between formula_16 and formula_17 (note that formula_18 if formula_19). (See also extension of tetration to real heights.)

Thus googolplex is formula_20.

Another example:
:formula_21 (between formula_22 and formula_23)

Thus the &quot;order of magnitude&quot; of a number (on a larger scale than usually meant), can be characterized by the number of times (&quot;n&quot;) one has to take the formula_24 to get a number between 1 and 10. Thus, the number is between formula_25 and formula_26. As explained, a more precise description of a number also specifies the value of this number between 1 and 10, or the previous number (taking the logarithm one time less) between 10 and 1010, or the next, between 0 and 1.

Note that
:formula_27
I.e., if a number &quot;x&quot; is too large for a representation formula_28 the power tower can be made one higher, replacing &quot;x&quot; by log10&quot;x&quot;, or find &quot;x&quot; from the lower-tower representation of the log10 of the whole number. If the power tower would contain one or more numbers different from 10, the two approaches would lead to different results, corresponding to the fact that extending the power tower with a 10 at the bottom is then not the same as extending it with a 10 at the top (but, of course, similar remarks apply if the whole power tower consists of copies of the same number, different from 10).

If the height of the tower is large, the various representations for large numbers can be applied to the height itself. If the height is given only approximately, giving a value at the top does not make sense, so the double-arrow notation (e.g. formula_29) can be used. If the value after the double arrow is a very large number itself, the above can recursively be applied to that value.

Examples:
:formula_30 (between formula_31 and formula_32)
:formula_33 (between formula_34 and formula_35)

Similarly to the above, if the exponent of formula_36 is not exactly given then giving a value at the right does not make sense, and instead of using the power notation of formula_36, it is possible to add formula_38 to the exponent of formula_39, to obtain e.g. formula_40.

If the exponent of formula_41 is large, the various representations for large numbers can be applied to this exponent itself. If this exponent is not exactly given then, again, giving a value at the right does not make sense, and instead of using the power notation of formula_41 it is possible use the triple arrow operator, e.g. formula_43.

If the right-hand argument of the triple arrow operator is large the above applies to it, obtaining e.g. formula_44 (between formula_45 and formula_46). This can be done recursively, so it is possible to have a power of the triple arrow operator.

Then it is possible to proceed with operators with higher numbers of arrows, written formula_47.

Compare this notation with the hyper operator and the Conway chained arrow notation:
:formula_48 = ( &quot;a&quot; → &quot;b&quot; → &quot;n&quot; ) = hyper(&quot;a&quot;, &quot;n&quot; + 2, &quot;b&quot;)
An advantage of the first is that when considered as function of &quot;b&quot;, there is a natural notation for powers of this function (just like when writing out the &quot;n&quot; arrows): formula_49. For example:

:formula_50 = ( 10 → ( 10 → ( 10 → &quot;b&quot; → 2 ) → 2 ) → 2 )
and only in special cases the long nested chain notation is reduced; for formula_51 obtains:
:formula_52 = ( 10 → 3 → 3 )

Since the &quot;b&quot; can also be very large, in general it can be written instead a number with a sequence of powers formula_53 with decreasing values of &quot;n&quot; (with exactly given integer exponents formula_54) with at the end a number in ordinary scientific notation. Whenever a formula_54 is too large to be given exactly, the value of formula_56 is increased by 1 and everything to the right of formula_57 is rewritten.

For describing numbers approximately, deviations from the decreasing order of values of &quot;n&quot; are not needed. For example, formula_58, and formula_59. Thus is obtained the somewhat counterintuitive result that a number &quot;x&quot; can be so large that, in a way, &quot;x&quot; and 10x are &quot;almost equal&quot; (for arithmetic of large numbers see also below).

If the superscript of the upward arrow is large, the various representations for large numbers can be applied to this superscript itself. If this superscript is not exactly given then there is no point in raising the operator to a particular power or to adjust the value on which it act, instead it is possible to simply use a standard value at the right, say 10, and the expression reduces to formula_60 with an approximate &quot;n&quot;. For such numbers the advantage of using the upward arrow notation no longer applies, so the chain notation can be used instead.

The above can be applied recursively for this &quot;n&quot;, so the notation formula_47 is obtained in the superscript of the first arrow, etc., or a nested chain notation, e.g.:

:(10 → 10 → (10 → 10 → formula_62) ) = formula_63

If the number of levels gets too large to be convenient, a notation is used where this number of levels is written down as a number (like using the superscript of the arrow instead of writing many arrows). Introducing a function formula_64 = (10 → 10 → &quot;n&quot;), these levels become functional powers of &quot;f&quot;, allowing us to write a number in the form formula_65 where &quot;m&quot; is given exactly and n is an integer which may or may not be given exactly (for example: formula_66). If &quot;n&quot; is large, any of the above can be used for expressing it. The &quot;roundest&quot; of these numbers are those of the form &quot;f&quot;&quot;m&quot;(1) = (10→10→&quot;m&quot;→2). For example, formula_67

Compare the definition of Graham&#x27;s number: it uses numbers 3 instead of 10 and has 64 arrow levels and the number 4 at the top; thus formula_68, but also formula_69.

If &quot;m&quot; in formula_65 is too large to give exactly, it is possible to use a fixed &quot;n&quot;, e.g. &quot;n&quot; = 1, and apply the above recursively to &quot;m&quot;, i.e., the number of levels of upward arrows is itself represented in the superscripted upward-arrow notation, etc. Using the functional power notation of &quot;f&quot; this gives multiple levels of &quot;f&quot;. Introducing a function formula_71 these levels become functional powers of &quot;g&quot;, allowing us to write a number in the form formula_72 where &quot;m&quot; is given exactly and n is an integer which may or may not be given exactly. For example, if (10→10→&quot;m&quot;→3) = &quot;g&quot;&quot;m&quot;(1). If &quot;n&quot; is large any of the above can be used for expressing it. Similarly a function &quot;h&quot;, etc. can be introduced. If many such functions are required, they can be numbered instead of using a new letter every time, e.g. as a subscript, such that there are numbers of the form formula_73 where &quot;k&quot; and &quot;m&quot; are given exactly and n is an integer which may or may not be given exactly. Using &quot;k&quot;=1 for the &quot;f&quot; above, &quot;k&quot;=2 for &quot;g&quot;, etc., obtains (10→10→&quot;n&quot;→&quot;k&quot;) = formula_74. If &quot;n&quot; is large any of the above can be used to express it. Thus is obtained a nesting of forms formula_75 where going inward the &quot;k&quot; decreases, and with as inner argument a sequence of powers formula_76 with decreasing values of &quot;n&quot; (where all these numbers are exactly given integers) with at the end a number in ordinary scientific notation.

When &quot;k&quot; is too large to be given exactly, the number concerned can be expressed as formula_77=(10→10→10→&quot;n&quot;) with an approximate &quot;n&quot;. Note that the process of going from the sequence formula_78=(10→&quot;n&quot;) to the sequence formula_79=(10→10→&quot;n&quot;) is very similar to going from the latter to the sequence formula_77=(10→10→10→&quot;n&quot;): it is the general process of adding an element 10 to the chain in the chain notation; this process can be repeated again (see also the previous section). Numbering the subsequent versions of this function a number can be described using functions formula_81, nested in lexicographical order with &quot;q&quot; the most significant number, but with decreasing order for &quot;q&quot; and for &quot;k&quot;; as inner argument yields a sequence of powers formula_76 with decreasing values of &quot;n&quot; (where all these numbers are exactly given integers) with at the end a number in ordinary scientific notation.

For a number too large to write down in the Conway chained arrow notation it size can be described by the length of that chain, for example only using elements 10 in the chain; in other words, one could specify its position in the sequence 10, 10→10, 10→10→10, .. If even the position in the sequence is a large number same techniques can be applied again.

===Examples===
Numbers expressible in decimal notation:
*22 = 4
*222 = 2 ↑↑ 3 = 16
*33 = 27
*44 = 256
*55 = 3,125
*66 = 46,656
*formula_83 = 2 ↑↑ 4 = 2↑↑↑3 = 65,536
*77 = 823,543
*106 = 1,000,000 = 1 million
*88 = 16,777,216
*99 = 387,420,489
*109 = 1,000,000,000 = 1 billion
*1010 = 10,000,000,000
*1012 = 1,000,000,000,000 = 1 trillion
*333 = 3 ↑↑ 3 = 7,625,597,484,987 ≈ 7.63 × 1012
*1015 = 1,000,000,000,000,000 = 1 million billion = 1 quadrillion
*1018 = 1,000,000,000,000,000,000 = 1 billion billion = 1 quintilion
Numbers expressible in scientific notation:
*Approximate number of atoms in the observable universe = 1080 = 100,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000
*googol = 10100 = 10,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000
*444 = 4 ↑↑ 3 = 2512 ≈ 1.34 × 10154 ≈ (10 ↑)2 2.2
*Approximate number of Planck volumes composing the volume of the observable universe = 8.5 × 10184
*555 = 5 ↑↑ 3 = 53125 ≈ 1.91 × 102184 ≈ (10 ↑)2 3.3
*formula_84
*666 = 6 ↑↑ 3 ≈ 2.66 × 1036,305 ≈ (10 ↑)2 4.6
*777 = 7 ↑↑ 3 ≈ 3.76 × 10695,974 ≈ (10 ↑)2 5.8
*888 = 8 ↑↑ 3 ≈ 6.01 × 1015,151,335 ≈ (10 ↑)2 7.2
*formula_85, the 52nd and the largest known Mersenne prime.
*999 = 9 ↑↑ 3 ≈ 4.28 × 10369,693,099 ≈ (10 ↑)2 8.6
*101010 =10 ↑↑ 3 = 1010,000,000,000 = (10 ↑)3 1
*formula_86

Numbers expressible in (10 ↑)&quot;n&quot; &quot;k&quot; notation:
*googolplex = formula_87
*formula_88
*formula_89
*formula_90
*formula_91
*10 ↑↑ 5 = (10 ↑)5 1
*3 ↑↑ 6 ≈ (10 ↑)5 1.10
*2 ↑↑ 8 ≈ (10 ↑)5 4.3
*10 ↑↑ 6 = (10 ↑)6 1
*10 ↑↑↑ 2 = 10 ↑↑ 10 = (10 ↑)10 1
*2 ↑↑↑↑ 3 = 2 ↑↑↑ 4 = 2 ↑↑ 65,536 ≈ (10 ↑)65,533 4.3 is between 10 ↑↑ 65,533 and 10 ↑↑ 65,534

Bigger numbers:
*3 ↑↑↑ 3 = 3 ↑↑ (3 ↑↑ 3) ≈ 3 ↑↑ 7.6 × 1012 ≈ 10 ↑↑ 7.6 × 1012 is between (10 ↑↑)2 2 and (10 ↑↑)2 3
*formula_92 = ( 10 → 3 → 3 )
*formula_93
*formula_94
*formula_95 = ( 10 → 4 → 3 )
*formula_96
*formula_97 = ( 10 → 5 → 3 )
*formula_98 = ( 10 → 6 → 3 )
*formula_99 = ( 10 → 7 → 3 )
*formula_100 = ( 10 → 8 → 3 )
*formula_101 = ( 10 → 9 → 3 )
*formula_102 = ( 10 → 2 → 4 ) = ( 10 → 10 → 3 )
*The first term in the definition of Graham&#x27;s number, &quot;g&quot;1 = 3 ↑↑↑↑ 3 = 3 ↑↑↑ (3 ↑↑↑ 3) ≈ 3 ↑↑↑ (10 ↑↑ 7.6 × 1012) ≈ 10 ↑↑↑ (10 ↑↑ 7.6 × 1012) is between (10 ↑↑↑)2 2 and (10 ↑↑↑)2 3 (See Graham&#x27;s number#Magnitude)
*formula_103 = (10 → 3 → 4)
*formula_104 = ( 4 → 4 → 4 ) formula_105
*formula_106 = ( 10 → 4 → 4 )
*formula_107 = ( 10 → 5 → 4 )
*formula_108 = ( 10 → 6 → 4 )
*formula_109 = ( 10 → 7 → 4 )
*formula_110 = ( 10 → 8 → 4 )
*formula_111 = ( 10 → 9 → 4 )
*formula_112 = ( 10 → 2 → 5 ) = ( 10 → 10 → 4 )
*( 2 → 3 → 2 → 2 ) = ( 2 → 3 → 8 )
*( 3 → 2 → 2 → 2 ) = ( 3 → 2 → 9 ) = ( 3 → 3 → 8 )
*( 10 → 10 → 10 ) = ( 10 → 2 → 11 )
*( 10 → 2 → 2 → 2 ) = ( 10 → 2 → 100 )
*( 10 → 10 → 2 → 2 ) = ( 10 → 2 → formula_113 ) = formula_114
*The second term in the definition of Graham&#x27;s number, &quot;g&quot;2 = 3 ↑&quot;g&quot;1 3 &gt; 10 ↑&quot;g&quot;1 – 1 10.
*( 10 → 10 → 3 → 2 ) = (10 → 10 → (10 → 10 → formula_113) ) = formula_116
*&quot;g&quot;3 = (3 → 3 → &quot;g&quot;2) &gt; (10 → 10 → &quot;g&quot;2 – 1) &gt; (10 → 10 → 3 → 2)
*&quot;g&quot;4 = (3 → 3 → &quot;g&quot;3) &gt; (10 → 10 → &quot;g&quot;3 – 1) &gt; (10 → 10 → 4 → 2)
*&quot;g&quot;9 = (3 → 3 → &quot;g&quot;8) is between (10 → 10 → 9 → 2) and (10 → 10 → 10 → 2)
*( 10 → 10 → 10 → 2 )
*&quot;g&quot;10 = (3 → 3 → &quot;g&quot;9) is between (10 → 10 → 10 → 2) and (10 → 10 → 11 → 2)
*&quot;g&quot;63 = (3 → 3 → &quot;g&quot;62) is between (10 → 10 → 63 → 2) and (10 → 10 → 64 → 2)
*( 10 → 10 → 64 → 2 )
*Graham&#x27;s number, &quot;g&quot;64
*( 10 → 10 → 65 → 2 )
*( 10 → 10 → 10 → 3 )
*( 10 → 10 → 10 → 4 )
*( 10 → 10 → 10 → 10 )
*( 10 → 10 → 10 → 10 → 10 )
*( 10 → 10 → 10 → 10 → 10 → 10 )
*( 10 → 10 → 10 → 10 → 10 → 10 → 10 → ... → 10 → 10 → 10 → 10 → 10 → 10 → 10 → 10 ) where there are ( 10 → 10 → 10 ) &quot;10&quot;s

=== Other notations ===
Some notations for extremely large numbers:
*Knuth&#x27;s up-arrow notation/hyperoperators/Ackermann function, including tetration
*Conway chained arrow notation
*Steinhaus-Moser notation; apart from the method of construction of large numbers, this also involves a graphical notation with polygons. Alternative notations, like a more conventional function notation, can also be used with the same functions.
*Fast-growing hierarchy

These notations are essentially functions of integer variables, which increase very rapidly with those integers. Ever-faster-increasing functions can easily be constructed recursively by applying these functions with large integers as argument.

A function with a vertical asymptote is not helpful in defining a very large number, although the function increases very rapidly: one has to define an argument very close to the asymptote, i.e. use a very small number, and constructing that is equivalent to constructing a very large number, e.g. the reciprocal.

== Comparison of base values ==
The following illustrates the effect of a base different from 10, base 100. It also illustrates representations of numbers and the arithmetic.

formula_117, with base 10 the exponent is doubled.

formula_118, ditto.

formula_119, the highest exponent is very little more than doubled (increased by log102).

*formula_120
*formula_121

*formula_122
*formula_123 (thus if &quot;n&quot; is large it seems fair to say that formula_124 is &quot;approximately equal to&quot; formula_25)
*formula_126
*formula_127
*formula_128 (compare formula_129; thus if &quot;n&quot; is large it seems fair to say that formula_130 is &quot;approximately equal to&quot; formula_131)
*formula_132 (compare formula_133)
*formula_134 (compare formula_135)
*formula_136 (compare formula_137; if &quot;n&quot; is large this is &quot;approximately&quot; equal)

== Accuracy ==

For a number formula_138, one unit change in &quot;n&quot; changes the result by a factor 10. In a number like formula_139, with the 6.2 the result of proper rounding using significant figures, the true value of the exponent may be 50 less or 50 more. Hence the result may be a factor formula_140 too large or too small. This seems like extremely poor accuracy, but for such a large number it may be considered fair (a large error in a large number may be &quot;relatively small&quot; and therefore acceptable).

=== For very large numbers ===

In the case of an approximation of an extremely large number, the relative error may be large, yet there may still be a sense in which one wants to consider the numbers as &quot;close in magnitude&quot;. For example, consider

:formula_113 and formula_142

The relative error is

:formula_143

a large relative error. However, one can also consider the relative error in the logarithms; in this case, the logarithms (to base 10) are 10 and 9, so the relative error in the logarithms is only 10%.

The point is that exponential functions magnify relative errors greatly – if &quot;a&quot; and &quot;b&quot; have a small relative error,

:formula_144 and formula_145

the relative error is larger, and

:formula_146 and formula_147

will have an even larger relative error. The question then becomes: on which level of iterated logarithms to compare two numbers? There is a sense in which one may want to consider

:formula_148 and formula_149

to be &quot;close in magnitude&quot;. The relative error between these two numbers is large, and the relative error between their logarithms is still large; however, the relative error in their second-iterated logarithms is small:

:formula_150 and formula_151

Such comparisons of iterated logarithms are common, e.g., in analytic number theory.

=== Classes ===
One solution to the problem of comparing large numbers is to define classes of numbers, such as the system devised by Robert Munafo, which is based on different &quot;levels&quot; of perception of an average person. Class 0 – numbers between zero and six – is defined to contain numbers that are easily subitized, that is, numbers that show up very frequently in daily life and are almost instantly comparable. Class 1 – numbers between six and 1,000,000=10 – is defined to contain numbers whose decimal expressions are easily subitized, that is, numbers who are easily comparable not by cardinality, but &quot;at a glance&quot; given the decimal expansion.

Each class after these are defined in terms of iterating this base-10 exponentiation, to simulate the effect of another &quot;iteration&quot; of human indistinguishibility. For example, class 5 is defined to include numbers between 10 and 10, which are numbers where becomes humanly indistinguishable from (taking iterated logarithms of such yields indistinguishibility firstly between log() and 2log(), secondly between log(log()) and 1+log(log()), and finally an extremely long decimal expansion whose length can&#x27;t be subitized).

===Approximate arithmetic===

There are some general rules relating to the usual arithmetic operations performed on very large numbers:

*The sum and the product of two very large numbers are both &quot;approximately&quot; equal to the larger one.
*formula_152
Hence:
*A very large number raised to a very large power is &quot;approximately&quot; equal to the larger of the following two values: the first value and 10 to the power the second. For example, for very large formula_153 there is formula_154 (see e.g. the computation of mega) and also formula_155. Thus formula_156, see table.

==Systematically creating ever-faster-increasing sequences==

Given a strictly increasing integer sequence/function formula_157 (&quot;n&quot;≥1), it is possible to produce a faster-growing sequence formula_158 (where the superscript &quot;n&quot; denotes the &quot;n&quot;th functional power). This can be repeated any number of times by letting formula_159, each sequence growing much faster than the one before it. Thus it is possible to define formula_160, which grows much faster than any formula_161 for finite &quot;k&quot; (here ω is the first infinite ordinal number, representing the limit of all finite numbers k). This is the basis for the fast-growing hierarchy of functions, in which the indexing subscript is extended to ever-larger ordinals.

For example, starting with &quot;f&quot;0(&quot;n&quot;) = &quot;n&quot; + 1:

* &quot;f&quot;1(&quot;n&quot;) = &quot;f&quot;0&quot;n&quot;(&quot;n&quot;) = &quot;n&quot; + &quot;n&quot; = 2&quot;n&quot;
* &quot;f&quot;2(&quot;n&quot;) = &quot;f&quot;1&quot;n&quot;(&quot;n&quot;) = 2&quot;n&quot;&quot;n&quot; &gt; (2 ↑) &quot;n&quot; for n ≥ 2 (using Knuth up-arrow notation)
* &quot;f&quot;3(&quot;n&quot;) = &quot;f&quot;2&quot;n&quot;(&quot;n&quot;) &gt; (2 ↑)&quot;n&quot; &quot;n&quot; ≥ 2 ↑2 &quot;n&quot; for &quot;n&quot; ≥ 2
* &quot;f&quot;&quot;k&quot;+1(&quot;n&quot;) &gt; 2 ↑&quot;k&quot; &quot;n&quot; for &quot;n&quot; ≥ 2, &quot;k&quot; &lt; ω
* &quot;f&quot;ω(&quot;n&quot;) = &quot;f&quot;&quot;n&quot;(&quot;n&quot;) &gt; 2 ↑&quot;n&quot; – 1 &quot;n&quot; &gt; 2 ↑&quot;n&quot; − 2 (&quot;n&quot; + 3) − 3 = &quot;A&quot;(&quot;n&quot;, &quot;n&quot;) for &quot;n&quot; ≥ 2, where &quot;A&quot; is the Ackermann function (of which &quot;f&quot;ω is a unary version)
* &quot;f&quot;ω+1(64) &gt; &quot;f&quot;ω64(6) &gt; Graham&#x27;s number (= &quot;g&quot;64 in the sequence defined by &quot;g&quot;0 = 4, &quot;g&quot;&quot;k&quot;+1 = 3 ↑&quot;g&quot;&quot;k&quot; 3)
**This follows by noting &quot;f&quot;ω(&quot;n&quot;) &gt; 2 ↑&quot;n&quot; – 1 &quot;n&quot; &gt; 3 ↑&quot;n&quot; – 2 3 + 2, and hence &quot;f&quot;ω(&quot;g&quot;&quot;k&quot; + 2) &gt; &quot;g&quot;&quot;k&quot;+1 + 2
* &quot;f&quot;ω(&quot;n&quot;) &gt; 2 ↑&quot;n&quot; – 1 &quot;n&quot; = (2 → &quot;n&quot; → &quot;n&quot;-1) = (2 → &quot;n&quot; → &quot;n&quot;-1 → 1) (using Conway chained arrow notation)
* &quot;f&quot;ω+1(&quot;n&quot;) = &quot;f&quot;ω&quot;n&quot;(&quot;n&quot;) &gt; (2 → &quot;n&quot; → &quot;n&quot;-1 → 2) (because if &quot;g&quot;&quot;k&quot;(&quot;n&quot;) = X → &quot;n&quot; → &quot;k&quot; then X → &quot;n&quot; → &quot;k&quot;+1 = &quot;g&quot;&quot;k&quot;&quot;n&quot;(1))
* &quot;f&quot;ω+&quot;k&quot;(&quot;n&quot;) &gt; (2 → &quot;n&quot; → &quot;n&quot;-1 → &quot;k&quot;+1) &gt; (&quot;n&quot; → &quot;n&quot; → &quot;k&quot;)
* &quot;f&quot;ω2(&quot;n&quot;) = &quot;f&quot;ω+&quot;n&quot;(&quot;n&quot;) &gt; (&quot;n&quot; → &quot;n&quot; → &quot;n&quot;) = (&quot;n&quot; → &quot;n&quot; → &quot;n&quot;→ 1)
* &quot;f&quot;ω2+&quot;k&quot;(&quot;n&quot;) &gt; (&quot;n&quot; → &quot;n&quot; → &quot;n&quot; → &quot;k&quot;)
* &quot;f&quot;ω3(&quot;n&quot;) &gt; (&quot;n&quot; → &quot;n&quot; → &quot;n&quot; → &quot;n&quot;)
* &quot;f&quot;ω&quot;k&quot;(&quot;n&quot;) &gt; (&quot;n&quot; → &quot;n&quot; → ... → &quot;n&quot; → &quot;n&quot;) (Chain of &quot;k&quot;+1 &quot;n&quot;&#x27;s)
* &quot;f&quot;ω2(&quot;n&quot;) = &quot;f&quot;ω&quot;n&quot;(&quot;n&quot;) &gt; (&quot;n&quot; → &quot;n&quot; → ... → &quot;n&quot; → &quot;n&quot;) (Chain of &quot;n&quot;+1 &quot;n&quot;&#x27;s)
== In some noncomputable sequences ==

The busy beaver function Σ is an example of a function which grows faster than any computable function. Its value for even relatively small input is huge. The values of Σ(&quot;n&quot;) for &quot;n&quot; = 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 are 1, 4, 6, 13, 4098 . Σ(6) is not known but is at least 10↑↑15.

== Infinite numbers ==
Although all the numbers discussed above are very large, they are all still decidedly finite. Certain fields of mathematics define infinite and transfinite numbers. For example, aleph-null is the cardinality of the infinite set of natural numbers, and aleph-one is the next greatest cardinal number. formula_162 is the cardinality of the reals. The proposition that formula_163 is known as the continuum hypothesis.

== See also ==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1816844" start="0" end="13" title="Large numbers" label="Large numbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="200" end="211" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q18346" start="213" end="222" title="physical cosmology" label="cosmology"/>
<link wikidata="Q8789" start="224" end="236" title="cryptography" label="cryptography"/>
<link wikidata="Q188715" start="242" end="263" title="statistical mechanics" label="statistical mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q12503" start="309" end="317" title="Integer" label="integers"/>
<link wikidata="Q311627" start="381" end="394" title="P-adic number" label="P-adic number"/>
<link wikidata="Q1816844" start="397" end="406" title="Large numbers" label="Googology"/>
<link wikidata="Q81365" start="544" end="551" title="decimal" label="decimal"/>
<link wikidata="Q12535449" start="679" end="686" title="billion" label="billion"/>
<link wikidata="Q33456" start="803" end="821" title="exponentiation" label="exponential format"/>
<link wikidata="Q41650357" start="825" end="833" title="trillion" label="trillion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027879" start="959" end="970" title="graphics" label="graphically"/>
<link wikidata="Q937378" start="975" end="992" title="logarithmic scale" label="logarithmic scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q33742" start="1028" end="1044" title="natural language" label="natural language"/>
<link wikidata="Q219142" start="1681" end="1700" title="Scientific notation" label="Scientific notation"/>
<link wikidata="Q46857" start="1766" end="1785" title="scientific research" label="scientific research"/>
<link wikidata="Q81365" start="1919" end="1935" title="decimal fraction" label="decimal fraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q40276" start="1936" end="1941" title="multiplication" label="times"/>
<link wikidata="Q184611" start="1953" end="1964" title="power of 10" label="power of 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q216906" start="2127" end="2137" title="Multiplicative inverse" label="reciprocal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868" start="2250" end="2255" title="Cell (biology)" label="cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q8805" start="2335" end="2338" title="bit" label="bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q4439" start="2354" end="2363" title="hard disk" label="hard disk"/>
<link wikidata="Q8799" start="2393" end="2395" title="Terabyte" label="TB"/>
<link wikidata="Q43054" start="2433" end="2453" title="Neuron" label="neuronal connections"/>
<link wikidata="Q6203" start="2522" end="2539" title="Avogadro constant" label="Avogadro constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q41509" start="2625" end="2629" title="Mole (unit)" label="mole"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058364" start="2666" end="2675" title="carbon-12" label="carbon-12"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430" start="2742" end="2745" title="DNA" label="DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q145911" start="2746" end="2755" title="base pair" label="base pair"/>
<link wikidata="Q2945560" start="2775" end="2782" title="Biomass (ecology)" label="biomass"/>
<link wikidata="Q47041" start="2831" end="2843" title="biodiversity" label="biodiversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q102165" start="2970" end="2977" title="nucleon" label="nucleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q9121" start="3005" end="3009" title="atom" label="atom"/>
<link wikidata="Q221392" start="3018" end="3037" title="observable universe" label="observable universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q718" start="3128" end="3133" title="chess" label="chess"/>
<link wikidata="Q1953800" start="3159" end="3173" title="Shannon number" label="Shannon number"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542934" start="3371" end="3384" title="Grant Acedrex" label="Grant Acedrex"/>
<link wikidata="Q850680" start="3386" end="3395" title="Tai Shogi" label="Tai Shogi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7676055" start="3401" end="3415" title="Taikyoku Shogi" label="Taikyoku Shogi"/>
<link wikidata="Q333" start="3460" end="3469" title="astronomy" label="astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q338" start="3474" end="3483" title="cosmology" label="cosmology"/>
<link wikidata="Q323" start="3587" end="3601" title="Big Bang model" label="Big Bang model"/>
<link wikidata="Q221392" start="3685" end="3704" title="observable universe" label="observable universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q531" start="3736" end="3747" title="Light-year" label="light years"/>
<link wikidata="Q3035873" start="3973" end="3981" title="Don Page (physicist)" label="Don Page"/>
<link wikidata="Q226014" start="4181" end="4205" title="Poincaré recurrence theorem" label="Poincaré recurrence time"/>
<link wikidata="Q273508" start="4360" end="4372" title="inflation (cosmology)" label="inflationary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2576923" start="4387" end="4395" title="inflaton" label="inflaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q468999" start="4415" end="4426" title="Planck mass" label="Planck mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q3895095" start="4598" end="4612" title="Loschmidt&amp;#x27;s paradox" label="repeats itself"/>
<link wikidata="Q174196" start="4643" end="4678" title="Ergodic hypothesis" label="properties of statistical mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q76592" start="4820" end="4833" title="Combinatorial" label="Combinatorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q120976" start="4890" end="4899" title="factorial" label="factorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q161519" start="4927" end="4938" title="permutation" label="permutation"/>
<link wikidata="Q470877" start="5023" end="5046" title="Stirling&amp;#x27;s formula" label="Stirling&amp;#x27;s formula"/>
<link wikidata="Q11197" start="5226" end="5236" title="Logarithm" label="logarithms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1451046" start="5239" end="5252" title="Gödel numbers" label="Gödel numbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757543" start="5307" end="5337" title="algorithmic information theory" label="algorithmic information theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456138" start="5421" end="5433" title="Pathological (mathematics)" label="pathological"/>
<link wikidata="Q951297" start="5534" end="5549" title="Harvey Friedman (mathematician)" label="Harvey Friedman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3527100" start="5647" end="5674" title="Kruskal&amp;#x27;s tree theorem" label="Kruskal&amp;#x27;s tree theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q3527155" start="5683" end="5708" title="Robertson–Seymour theorem" label="Robertson–Seymour theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q410" start="5861" end="5871" title="Carl Sagan" label="Carl Sagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152287" start="5936" end="5957" title="billions and billions" label="billions and billions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338655" start="6037" end="6049" title="The Tonight Show" label="Tonight Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q310819" start="6093" end="6106" title="Johnny Carson" label="Johnny Carson"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6219" end="6224" title="Indefinite and fictitious numbers#Sagan&amp;#x27;s number" label="Sagan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6243" end="6253" title="Carl Sagan#Sagan units" label="Sagan Unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q507" start="6272" end="6278" title="googol" label="googol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151232" start="6299" end="6309" title="centillion" label="centillion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151232" start="6375" end="6387" title="millinillion" label="millinillion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418132" start="6471" end="6483" title="Smith number" label="Smith number"/>
<link wikidata="Q186875" start="6540" end="6554" title="Mersenne prime" label="Mersenne prime"/>
<link wikidata="Q508" start="6568" end="6578" title="googolplex" label="googolplex"/>
<link wikidata="Q477645" start="6592" end="6612" title="Skewes&amp;#x27;s number" label="Skewes&amp;#x27;s number"/>
<link wikidata="Q733169" start="6676" end="6696" title="Graham&amp;#x27;s number" label="Graham&amp;#x27;s number"/>
<link wikidata="Q194324" start="6759" end="6768" title="tetration" label="tetration"/>
<link wikidata="Q3527100" start="6851" end="6878" title="Kruskal&amp;#x27;s tree theorem" label="Kruskal&amp;#x27;s tree theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q733169" start="6936" end="6956" title="Graham&amp;#x27;s number" label="Graham&amp;#x27;s number"/>
<link wikidata="Q17140053" start="6959" end="6977" title="Rayo&amp;#x27;s number" label="Rayo&amp;#x27;s number"/>
<link wikidata="Q49108" start="7138" end="7141" title="Massachusetts Institute of Technology" label="MIT"/>
<link wikidata="Q244761" start="7750" end="7766" title="functional power" label="functional power"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7877" end="7894" title="Names of large numbers#The googol family" label="the googol family"/>
<link wikidata="Q518730" start="7949" end="7967" title="order of magnitude" label="order of magnitude"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8381" end="8419" title="Tetration#Extension to real heights" label="extension of tetration to real heights"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569997" start="11175" end="11189" title="hyper operator" label="hyper operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q180168" start="11198" end="11227" title="Conway chained arrow notation" label="Conway chained arrow notation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144915" start="16567" end="16588" title="lexicographical order" label="lexicographical order"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17849" end="17891" title="Observable universe#Matter content—number of atoms" label="number of atoms in the observable universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q468999" start="18235" end="18249" title="Planck length" label="Planck volumes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1" start="18289" end="18297" title="universe" label="universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q186875" start="18563" end="18577" title="Mersenne prime" label="Mersenne prime"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19653" end="19683" title="Graham&amp;#x27;s number#Magnitude" label="Graham&amp;#x27;s number#Magnitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q908427" start="21338" end="21368" title="Knuth&amp;#x27;s up-arrow notation" label="Knuth&amp;#x27;s up-arrow notation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569997" start="21369" end="21382" title="hyperoperator" label="hyperoperator"/>
<link wikidata="Q341835" start="21384" end="21402" title="Ackermann function" label="Ackermann function"/>
<link wikidata="Q180168" start="21425" end="21454" title="Conway chained arrow notation" label="Conway chained arrow notation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092313" start="21456" end="21480" title="Steinhaus-Moser notation" label="Steinhaus-Moser notation"/>
<link wikidata="Q37555" start="21583" end="21590" title="polygon" label="polygon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3138738" start="21703" end="21725" title="Fast-growing hierarchy" label="Fast-growing hierarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q865920" start="23782" end="23796" title="relative error" label="relative error"/>
<link wikidata="Q168698" start="24231" end="24251" title="exponential function" label="exponential function"/>
<link wikidata="Q10843274" start="24982" end="25004" title="analytic number theory" label="analytic number theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q487375" start="25326" end="25335" title="Subitizing" label="subitized"/>
<link wikidata="Q4049983" start="25611" end="25622" title="cardinality" label="cardinality"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26735" end="26758" title="Steinhaus-Moser notation#Mega" label="the computation of mega"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26804" end="26809" title="Knuth&amp;#x27;s up-arrow notation#Tables of values" label="table"/>
<link wikidata="Q244761" start="27088" end="27104" title="functional power" label="functional power"/>
<link wikidata="Q191780" start="27373" end="27387" title="ordinal number" label="ordinal number"/>
<link wikidata="Q908427" start="27925" end="27948" title="Knuth up-arrow notation" label="Knuth up-arrow notation"/>
<link wikidata="Q341835" start="28496" end="28514" title="Ackermann function" label="Ackermann function"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28613" end="28633" title="Graham&amp;#x27;s number#Definition" label="Graham&amp;#x27;s number"/>
<link wikidata="Q180168" start="29150" end="29179" title="Conway chained arrow notation" label="Conway chained arrow notation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427965" start="30459" end="30470" title="busy beaver" label="busy beaver"/>
<link wikidata="Q818930" start="30538" end="30548" title="Computability theory (computer science)" label="computable"/>
<link wikidata="Q272404" start="30851" end="30857" title="finite set" label="finite"/>
<link wikidata="Q205" start="30896" end="30904" title="Infinity" label="infinite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069891" start="30909" end="30927" title="transfinite number" label="transfinite number"/>
<link wikidata="Q908627" start="30943" end="30953" title="aleph-null" label="aleph-null"/>
<link wikidata="Q4049983" start="30961" end="30972" title="cardinality" label="cardinality"/>
<link wikidata="Q205140" start="30980" end="30992" title="infinite set" label="infinite set"/>
<link wikidata="Q21199" start="30996" end="31010" title="natural number" label="natural number"/>
<link wikidata="Q908627" start="31017" end="31026" title="aleph-one" label="aleph-one"/>
<link wikidata="Q22952648" start="31084" end="31108" title="cardinality of the continuum" label="cardinality of the reals"/>
<link wikidata="Q208416" start="31159" end="31179" title="continuum hypothesis" label="continuum hypothesis"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="187752" wikidata="Q16782317" url="?curid=187752" title="Feature">
<text>Feature may refer to:
== Computing ==
* Feature recognition, could be a hole, pocket, or notch
* Feature (computer vision), could be an edge, corner or blob
* Feature (machine learning), in statistics: individual measurable properties of the phenomena being observed
* Software feature, a distinguishing characteristic of a software program

==Science and analysis==
* Feature data, in geographic information systems, comprise information about an entity with a geographic location
* Features, in audio signal processing, an aim to capture specific aspects of audio signals in a numeric way
* Feature (archaeology), any dug, built, or dumped evidence of human activity

== Media ==
* Feature film, a film with a running time long enough to be considered the principal or sole film to fill a program
** Feature length, the standardized length of such films
* Feature story, a piece of non-fiction writing about news
* Radio documentary (feature), a radio program devoted to covering a particular topic in some depth, usually with a mixture of commentary and sound pictures
* A feature as a guest appearance

==Music==
*&quot;Feature&quot; (band), a British punk trio.
*&quot;The Features&quot;, an American rock band

== Linguistics ==
* Feature (linguistics), a property of a class of linguistic items which describes individual members of that class
* Distinctive feature, the most basic unit of structure that can be analyzed by phonetics and phonology

== Other uses ==
*&quot;The Feature&quot;, a film collaboration between filmmakers Michel Auder and Andrew Neel
*&quot;The Feature&quot; (originally named &quot;Give Me Something to Read&quot;), a standalone website that features a few high-quality, long-form, nonfiction articles every day from Instapaper&#x27;s most frequently saved articles

==See also==
* 
* Featurette</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q16782317" start="0" end="7" title="Feature" label="Feature"/>
<link wikidata="Q5439687" start="40" end="59" title="Feature recognition" label="Feature recognition"/>
<link wikidata="Q93586" start="97" end="122" title="Feature (computer vision)" label="Feature (computer vision)"/>
<link wikidata="Q42139305" start="159" end="185" title="Feature (machine learning)" label="Feature (machine learning)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4485156" start="269" end="285" title="Software feature" label="Software feature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1921825" start="369" end="381" title="Feature data" label="Feature data"/>
<link wikidata="Q2719318" start="497" end="520" title="audio signal processing" label="audio signal processing"/>
<link wikidata="Q814254" start="593" end="614" title="Feature (archaeology)" label="Feature (archaeology)"/>
<link wikidata="Q24869" start="684" end="696" title="Feature film" label="Feature film"/>
<link wikidata="Q24869" start="802" end="816" title="Feature length" label="Feature length"/>
<link wikidata="Q2144639" start="858" end="871" title="Feature story" label="Feature story"/>
<link wikidata="Q2125867" start="917" end="934" title="Radio documentary" label="Radio documentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q28228" start="1089" end="1105" title="guest appearance" label="guest appearance"/>
<link wikidata="Q55611526" start="1118" end="1144" title="Feature (band)" label="&amp;quot;Feature&amp;quot; (band)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7733612" start="1174" end="1186" title="The Features" label="The Features"/>
<link wikidata="Q12050496" start="1237" end="1258" title="Feature (linguistics)" label="Feature (linguistics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152224" start="1353" end="1372" title="Distinctive feature" label="Distinctive feature"/>
<link wikidata="Q16250725" start="1480" end="1491" title="The Feature" label="The Feature"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1569" end="1592" title="Instapaper#The_Feature" label="&amp;quot;The Feature&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q122813195" start="1820" end="1830" title="Featurette" label="Featurette"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="187753" wikidata="Q299179" url="?curid=187753" title="Emperor Kōmei">
<text>Osahito (22 July 1831 – 30 January 1867), posthumously honored as Emperor Kōmei, was the 121st emperor of Japan, according to the traditional order of succession. Kōmei&#x27;s reign spanned the years from 1846 through 1867, corresponding to the final years of the Edo period.

During his reign there was much internal turmoil as a result of Japan&#x27;s first major contact with the United States, which occurred under Commodore Perry in 1853 and 1854, and the subsequent forced re-opening of Japan to Western nations, ending a 220-year period of national seclusion. Emperor Kōmei did not care much for anything foreign, and he opposed opening Japan to Western powers. His reign would continue to be dominated by insurrection and partisan conflicts, eventually culminating in the collapse of the Tokugawa shogunate shortly after his death and the Meiji Restoration in the beginning of the reign of his son and successor Emperor Meiji.

==Early life==

Before Kōmei&#x27;s accession to the Chrysanthemum Throne, his personal name (&quot;imina&quot;) was and his title was . Osahito was born on 22 July 1831 and was the fourth son of Emperor Ninkō and his consort Ōgimachi Naoko (正親町雅子). Osahito&#x27;s Imperial Family lived with him in the Dairi of the Heian Palace.

==Reign==

Prince Osahito was enthroned as Emperor on 10 March 1846 upon the death of his father. The succession was considered to have been received by the new monarch; and shortly thereafter, Emperor Kōmei is said to have acceded the throne. The years of Kōmei&#x27;s reign correspond with a period in which Tokugawa Ieyoshi, Tokugawa Iesada, Tokugawa Iemochi, and Tokugawa Yoshinobu were leaders at the pinnacle of the Tokugawa shogunate. On 8 July 1853 US Commodore Matthew Perry arrived with his &quot;Black Ships&quot; to force trade with Japan. The Tokugawa shogunate, which had controlled military and civil affairs in Japan&#x27;s feudal provinces for some three centuries, proved unable to meet the new challenge of open trade with the West. At the time, Emperor Kōmei still retained only symbolic power at his court in Kyoto. As the shogunate, divided by internal disputes, gradually surrendered sovereignty to the foreign powers under threat of military force, Emperor Kōmei began to assert himself and regain many of the powers his ancestors had conceded to the Tokugawa clan at the close of the Sengoku (&quot;warring states&quot;) period. The Emperor&#x27;s younger sister, Imperial princess , was married to the Tokugawa &quot;shōgun&quot; Tokugawa Iemochi as part of the Movement to Unite Court and Bakufu. Both the Emperor and his sister were against the marriage, even though he realized the gains to be had from such familial connections with the true ruler of Japan. Emperor Kōmei did not care much for anything foreign, and he opposed opening Japan to Western powers, even as the shogun continued to accept foreign demands.

===Consultation with the shogunate===
On 22 January 1858, &quot;Daigaku-no-kami&quot; Hayashi Akira headed the bakufu delegation which sought advice from Emperor Kōmei in deciding how to deal with newly assertive foreign powers. This would have been the first time the Emperor&#x27;s counsel was actively sought since the establishment of the Tokugawa shogunate. The most easily identified consequence of this transitional overture would be the increased numbers of messengers streaming back and forth between Edo and Kyoto during the next decade. Concerning these difficult Imperial audiences in Kyoto, it is somewhat remarkable that the shogun and his bakufu were represented by Hayashi Akira, a 19th-century neo-Confucian scholar/bureaucrat who might have been somewhat surprised to find himself at a crucial nexus of managing political change—moving arguably &quot;by the book&quot; through uncharted waters with well-settled theories and history as the only reliable guide. Hayashi Akira was dispatched from Edo to Kyoto in October 1858 to explain the terms of the , also known as the &quot;Harris Treaty&quot;. Hayashi&#x27;s twofold task was to both explain the terms to a sceptical Emperor and gain the sovereign&#x27;s assent to it. Kōmei did ultimately acquiesce in February 1859 when he came to understand that there was no alternative.

The pilgrimage of the 14th shogun Tokugawa Iemochi to Kyoto in 1863 was a defining moment not only in 19th century relations between the military bakufu and the Imperial Court, but also in what history would come to call the Meiji Restoration. The reception by Emperor Kōmei of the shogun in the Kyoto palace can be seen as a moment at which the political realm was thoroughly redefined, becoming a transitional imperial realm. This impression was enforced by the ensuing pilgrimage by Emperor Kōmei to the Kamo shrine, with the shogun in tow. This public demonstration showed that a new order had now emerged in the realm.

After reluctantly accepting the Harris Treaty, Japan quickly signed similar treaties, called the Ansei Treaties (also known as the Ansei Five-Power Treaties, with Russia, France, Great Britain, and the Netherlands). The treaties stipulated that the citizens of those foreign nations would be allowed to reside and trade at will in the cities of Edo, Nagasaki, Niigata, Kobe and Yokohama. Those five cities were to be opened to foreign trade with the four Western nations in the treaties. In addition, the treaties stipulated that a system of extraterritoriality would provide for the subjugation of foreign residents to the laws of their own consular courts instead of the Japanese legal system.

===The &quot;Order to Expel Barbarians&quot;===
Emperor Kōmei was infuriated with nearly every development during his reign as Emperor, and during his lifetime he never saw any foreigners nor did he know much about them. Unequal trade treaties with the Western powers, such as the Treaty of Kanagawa and the Harris Treaty were signed without Imperial sanction and in spite of the Emperor&#x27;s refusal to approve them. He twice expressed his will to resign from his position in protest. During his reign he started to gain more power as the Tokugawa shogunate declined, though this was limited to consultation and other forms of deference according to protocol. Emperor Kōmei generally agreed with anti-Western sentiments, and, breaking with centuries of imperial tradition, began to take an active role in matters of state. As opportunities arose, he fulminated against the treaties and attempted to interfere in the shogunal succession. His efforts culminated in 1863 with his &quot;Order to expel barbarians&quot;. Although the Shogunate had no intention of enforcing the order, it nevertheless inspired attacks against the Shogunate itself and against foreigners in Japan: the most famous incident was the killing of British trader Charles Lennox Richardson, for which the Tokugawa government paid an indemnity of 100,000 pound sterling. Other incidents included the bombardments of Shimonoseki and Kagoshima, and the destruction of Japanese warships, coastal guns, and assorted military infrastructure throughout the country. These incidents showed that Japan could not match the military might of the Western powers at the time, and that military confrontation could not prove to be a diplomatic solution.

===Illness and death===
In January 1867, the Emperor was diagnosed with smallpox, which caused surprise because Kōmei had allegedly never been ill before. On 30 January 1867, he suffered a fatal violent bout of vomiting and diarrhea, and had purple spots on his face. Emperor Kōmei&#x27;s death was distinctly convenient for the anti-bakufu forces whom Kōmei had consistently opposed. It was rumored at the time that he was assassinated either by radicals from Choshu, or radical officials in the court. British diplomat Sir Ernest Satow wrote, &quot;it is impossible to deny that [the Emperor Kōmei&#x27;s] disappearance from the political scene, leaving as his successor a boy of fifteen or sixteen [actually fourteen], was most opportune&quot;. However, there is no evidence of this and it is generally believed that he was simply one more victim of what was a worldwide pandemic at the time. Nevertheless, by the time of Emperor Kōmei&#x27;s death the government was faced with bankruptcy and near collapse. Japan was also surrounded by colonial powers, who stood poised to gain considerable influence with substantial investments in Japanese trade. Kōmei&#x27;s son, Imperial Prince Mutsuhito, was crowned as Emperor Meiji on 12 September 1868 and these issues were put to rest under the Meiji Restoration.

After Kōmei&#x27;s death in 1867, his &quot;kami&quot; was enshrined in the Imperial mausoleum, , which is at Sennyū-ji in Higashiyama-ku, Kyoto. Also enshrined in this mausoleum complex are Kōmei&#x27;s immediate predecessors since Emperor Go-Mizunoo: Meishō, Go-Kōmyō, Go-Sai, Reigen, Higashiyama, Nakamikado, Sakuramachi, Momozono, Go-Sakuramachi, Go-Momozono, Kōkaku and Ninkō. Empress Dowager Eishō is also entombed at this Imperial mausoleum complex.

Emperor Kōmei was the last Emperor to be given a posthumous name chosen after his death. Beginning with the reign of his son, Emperor Meiji, posthumous names were chosen in advance, being the same as their reign names.

==Kugyō==
 is a collective term for the very few most powerful men attached to the court of the Emperor of Japan in pre-Meiji eras. Even during those years in which the court&#x27;s actual influence outside the palace walls was minimal, the hierarchic organization persisted.

In general, this elite group included only three to four men at a time. These were hereditary courtiers whose experience and background would have brought them to the pinnacle of a life&#x27;s career. During Kōmei&#x27;s reign, this apex of the &quot;Daijō-kan&quot; included:
* &quot;Kampaku&quot;, Takatsukasa Masamichi, 1823–1856
* &quot;Kampaku&quot;, Kujō Hisatada, 1856–1862
* &quot;Kampaku&quot;, Konoe Tadahiro, 1862–1863
* &quot;Kampaku&quot;, Takatsukasa Sukehiro, 1863
* &quot;Kampaku&quot;, Nijō Nariyuki, 1863–1866
* &quot;Sadaijin&quot;
* &quot;Udaijin&quot;
* &quot;Naidaijin&quot;
* &quot;Dainagon&quot;

==Eras of Kōmei&#x27;s reign==
Emperor Kōmei was the last Japanese Emperor who had more than one era name (&quot;nengō&quot;) during a single ruling term. Beginning with his successor, Emperor Meiji, a single era name (identical to the Emperor&#x27;s eventual posthumous name) was selected and did not change until his death. There were seven &quot;nengō&quot; during Kōmei&#x27;s reign.

* &quot;Kōka&quot; (1844–1848)
* &quot;Kaei&quot; (1848–1854)
* &quot;Ansei&quot; (1854–1860)
* &quot;Man&#x27;en&quot; (1860–1861)
* &quot;Bunkyū&quot; (1861–1864)
* &quot;Genji&quot; (1864–1865)
* &quot;Keiō&quot; (1865–1868)

==Genealogy==

The family included six children, four daughters and two sons; but the future Emperor Meiji was the only one to survive to adulthood. Kōmei&#x27;s principal consort was . After Kōmei&#x27;s death in 1867, Asako was given the title by Emperor Meiji.

===Spouse===
===Concubines===
===Issue===

==Notes==
==References==
* Cullen, Louis M. (2003). &quot;A History of Japan, 1582–1941: Internal and External Worlds.&quot; Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ; OCLC 50694793
* Jansen, Marius B. (2002). &quot;The Making of Modern Japan.&quot; Cambridge: Harvard University Press. ; OCLC 52086912
* Meyer, Eva-Maria. (1999). &quot;Japans Kaiserhof in der Edo-Zeit: unter besonderer Berücksichtigung der Jahre 1846 bis 1867.&quot; Münster: LIT Verlag. ; OCLC 42041594
* Nussbaum, Louis Frédéric and Käthe Roth. (2005). &quot;Japan Encyclopedia.&quot; Cambridge: Harvard University Press. ; OCLC 48943301
* Ponsonby-Fane, Richard Arthur Brabazon. (1959). &quot;The Imperial House of Japan.&quot; Kyoto: Ponsonby Memorial Society. OCLC 194887
* __________. (1956). &quot;Kyoto: the Old Capital, 794–1869.&quot; Kyoto: Ponsonby Memorial Society. OCLC 36644

==See also==

* Emperor of Japan
* List of Emperors of Japan
* Imperial cult
* Heian Shrine
* Tsuki no wa no misasagi

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q299179" start="0" end="7" title="Emperor Kōmei" label="Osahito"/>
<link wikidata="Q299179" start="66" end="79" title="Emperor Kōmei" label="Emperor Kōmei"/>
<link wikidata="Q208233" start="95" end="111" title="emperor of Japan" label="emperor of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q188210" start="142" end="161" title="List of Emperors of Japan" label="order of succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q804558" start="245" end="256" title="Bakumatsu" label="final years"/>
<link wikidata="Q184963" start="264" end="274" title="Edo period" label="Edo period"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="341" end="346" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7169780" start="354" end="373" title="Perry Expedition" label="first major contact"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="383" end="396" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q61855" start="419" end="434" title="Matthew C. Perry" label="Commodore Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q771451" start="479" end="489" title="Convention of Kanagawa" label="re-opening"/>
<link wikidata="Q332075" start="537" end="565" title="Sakoku" label="period of national seclusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q309184" start="780" end="788" title="Boshin War" label="collapse"/>
<link wikidata="Q205662" start="796" end="814" title="Tokugawa shogunate" label="Tokugawa shogunate"/>
<link wikidata="Q8707" start="847" end="864" title="Meiji Restoration" label="Meiji Restoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q3125096" start="889" end="894" title="Meiji period" label="reign"/>
<link wikidata="Q174231" start="920" end="933" title="Emperor Meiji" label="Emperor Meiji"/>
<link wikidata="Q1981690" start="989" end="1009" title="Chrysanthemum Throne" label="Chrysanthemum Throne"/>
<link wikidata="Q877834" start="1036" end="1041" title="imina" label="imina"/>
<link wikidata="Q312351" start="1132" end="1145" title="Emperor Ninkō" label="Emperor Ninkō"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1239" end="1244" title="Heian Palace#Inner Palace (Dairi)" label="Dairi"/>
<link wikidata="Q304501" start="1252" end="1264" title="Heian Palace" label="Heian Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q439675" start="1577" end="1593" title="Tokugawa Ieyoshi" label="Tokugawa Ieyoshi"/>
<link wikidata="Q336383" start="1595" end="1610" title="Tokugawa Iesada" label="Tokugawa Iesada"/>
<link wikidata="Q348466" start="1612" end="1628" title="Tokugawa Iemochi" label="Tokugawa Iemochi"/>
<link wikidata="Q287657" start="1634" end="1652" title="Tokugawa Yoshinobu" label="Tokugawa Yoshinobu"/>
<link wikidata="Q205662" start="1689" end="1707" title="Tokugawa shogunate" label="Tokugawa shogunate"/>
<link wikidata="Q61855" start="1737" end="1750" title="Matthew C. Perry" label="Matthew Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136943" start="1774" end="1785" title="Black Ships" label="Black Ships"/>
<link wikidata="Q34600" start="2097" end="2102" title="Kyoto" label="Kyoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412769" start="2342" end="2355" title="Tokugawa clan" label="Tokugawa clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q204023" start="2376" end="2383" title="Sengoku period" label="Sengoku"/>
<link wikidata="Q205662" start="2495" end="2503" title="Tokugawa shogunate" label="Tokugawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q131767" start="2510" end="2516" title="shōgun" label="shōgun"/>
<link wikidata="Q348466" start="2523" end="2539" title="Tokugawa Iemochi" label="Tokugawa Iemochi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189374" start="2555" end="2589" title="Kōbu gattai" label="Movement to Unite Court and Bakufu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3012043" start="2978" end="2993" title="Daigaku-no-kami" label="Daigaku-no-kami"/>
<link wikidata="Q3128810" start="3000" end="3013" title="Hayashi Akira" label="Hayashi Akira"/>
<link wikidata="Q215646" start="3424" end="3427" title="Edo" label="Edo"/>
<link wikidata="Q825754" start="3625" end="3638" title="neo-Confucian" label="neo-Confucian"/>
<link wikidata="Q215646" start="3927" end="3930" title="Edo" label="Edo"/>
<link wikidata="Q348466" start="4297" end="4313" title="Tokugawa Iemochi" label="Tokugawa Iemochi"/>
<link wikidata="Q8707" start="4488" end="4505" title="Meiji Restoration" label="Meiji Restoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202239" start="4559" end="4571" title="Kyoto Imperial Palace" label="Kyoto palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1306606" start="4770" end="4781" title="Kamo shrines" label="Kamo shrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152499" start="4985" end="4999" title="Ansei Treaties" label="Ansei Treaties"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="5051" end="5057" title="Russian Empire" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q71092" start="5059" end="5065" title="Second French Empire" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q174193" start="5067" end="5080" title="United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="5090" end="5101" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q38234" start="5238" end="5246" title="Nagasaki" label="Nagasaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q179691" start="5248" end="5255" title="Niigata (city)" label="Niigata"/>
<link wikidata="Q48320" start="5257" end="5261" title="Kobe" label="Kobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q38283" start="5266" end="5274" title="Yokohama" label="Yokohama"/>
<link wikidata="Q843915" start="5430" end="5449" title="extraterritoriality" label="extraterritoriality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135274" start="5530" end="5544" title="consular court" label="consular court"/>
<link wikidata="Q771451" start="5866" end="5884" title="Treaty of Kanagawa" label="Treaty of Kanagawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194699" start="5893" end="5906" title="Harris Treaty" label="Harris Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6284" end="6296" title="Anti-Western sentiment#Japan" label="anti-Western"/>
<link wikidata="Q3355504" start="6571" end="6596" title="Order to expel barbarians" label="Order to expel barbarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q546075" start="6792" end="6803" title="Namamugi Incident" label="the killing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2959647" start="6822" end="6847" title="Charles Lennox Richardson" label="Charles Lennox Richardson"/>
<link wikidata="Q25224" start="6912" end="6926" title="pound sterling" label="pound sterling"/>
<link wikidata="Q203308" start="6973" end="6984" title="Shimonoseki" label="Shimonoseki"/>
<link wikidata="Q15674" start="6989" end="6998" title="Kagoshima" label="Kagoshima"/>
<link wikidata="Q12214" start="7371" end="7379" title="smallpox" label="smallpox"/>
<link wikidata="Q166598" start="7820" end="7836" title="Ernest Satow" label="Sir Ernest Satow"/>
<link wikidata="Q174231" start="8513" end="8526" title="Emperor Meiji" label="Emperor Meiji"/>
<link wikidata="Q8707" start="8592" end="8609" title="Meiji Restoration" label="Meiji Restoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060966" start="8722" end="8731" title="Sennyū-ji" label="Sennyū-ji"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203862" start="8735" end="8756" title="Higashiyama-ku, Kyoto" label="Higashiyama-ku, Kyoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q320229" start="8845" end="8863" title="Emperor Go-Mizunoo" label="Emperor Go-Mizunoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q120564" start="8865" end="8871" title="Empress Meishō" label="Meishō"/>
<link wikidata="Q329765" start="8873" end="8881" title="Emperor Go-Kōmyō" label="Go-Kōmyō"/>
<link wikidata="Q349414" start="8883" end="8889" title="Emperor Go-Sai" label="Go-Sai"/>
<link wikidata="Q313808" start="8891" end="8897" title="Emperor Reigen" label="Reigen"/>
<link wikidata="Q313801" start="8899" end="8910" title="Emperor Higashiyama" label="Higashiyama"/>
<link wikidata="Q314817" start="8912" end="8922" title="Emperor Nakamikado" label="Nakamikado"/>
<link wikidata="Q313870" start="8924" end="8935" title="Emperor Sakuramachi" label="Sakuramachi"/>
<link wikidata="Q313864" start="8937" end="8945" title="Emperor Momozono" label="Momozono"/>
<link wikidata="Q230525" start="8947" end="8961" title="Empress Go-Sakuramachi" label="Go-Sakuramachi"/>
<link wikidata="Q314063" start="8963" end="8974" title="Emperor Go-Momozono" label="Go-Momozono"/>
<link wikidata="Q313806" start="8976" end="8982" title="Emperor Kōkaku" label="Kōkaku"/>
<link wikidata="Q312351" start="8987" end="8992" title="Emperor Ninkō" label="Ninkō"/>
<link wikidata="Q7409248" start="8994" end="9009" title="Empress Dowager" label="Empress Dowager"/>
<link wikidata="Q862582" start="9010" end="9015" title="Empress Eishō" label="Eishō"/>
<link wikidata="Q696100" start="9119" end="9134" title="posthumous name" label="posthumous name"/>
<link wikidata="Q174231" start="9196" end="9209" title="Emperor Meiji" label="Emperor Meiji"/>
<link wikidata="Q3125096" start="9410" end="9415" title="Meiji period" label="Meiji"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192939" start="9818" end="9827" title="Daijō-kan" label="Daijō-kan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346974" start="9852" end="9859" title="Kampaku" label="Kampaku"/>
<link wikidata="Q594626" start="9867" end="9888" title="Takatsukasa Masamichi" label="Takatsukasa Masamichi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3135384" start="9923" end="9936" title="Kujō Hisatada" label="Kujō Hisatada"/>
<link wikidata="Q909042" start="9971" end="9985" title="Konoe Tadahiro" label="Konoe Tadahiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q924973" start="10020" end="10040" title="Takatsukasa Sukehiro" label="Takatsukasa Sukehiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q3073063" start="10070" end="10083" title="Nijō Nariyuki" label="Nijō Nariyuki"/>
<link wikidata="Q949008" start="10103" end="10111" title="Sadaijin" label="Sadaijin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351174" start="10126" end="10133" title="Udaijin" label="Udaijin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185338" start="10148" end="10157" title="Naidaijin" label="Naidaijin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354706" start="10172" end="10180" title="Dainagon" label="Dainagon"/>
<link wikidata="Q24706" start="10285" end="10293" title="Japanese era names" label="era name"/>
<link wikidata="Q174231" start="10373" end="10386" title="Emperor Meiji" label="Emperor Meiji"/>
<link wikidata="Q696100" start="10448" end="10463" title="posthumous name" label="posthumous name"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325317" start="10585" end="10589" title="Kōka" label="Kōka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146125" start="10616" end="10620" title="Kaei" label="Kaei"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327259" start="10647" end="10652" title="Ansei" label="Ansei"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193862" start="10679" end="10690" title="Man&amp;#x27;en" label="Man&amp;#x27;en"/>
<link wikidata="Q730266" start="10717" end="10723" title="Bunkyu" label="Bunkyū"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325419" start="10750" end="10755" title="Genji (era)" label="Genji"/>
<link wikidata="Q776775" start="10782" end="10786" title="Keiō" label="Keiō"/>
<link wikidata="Q174231" start="10899" end="10912" title="Emperor Meiji" label="Emperor Meiji"/>
<link wikidata="Q174231" start="11055" end="11068" title="Emperor Meiji" label="Emperor Meiji"/>
<link wikidata="Q40959" start="11141" end="11157" title="Louis Cullen" label="Cullen, Louis M."/>
<link wikidata="Q912887" start="11250" end="11276" title="Cambridge University Press" label="Cambridge University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q610960" start="11296" end="11313" title="Marius Jansen" label="Jansen, Marius B."/>
<link wikidata="Q1587900" start="11373" end="11397" title="Harvard University Press" label="Harvard University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587900" start="11679" end="11703" title="Harvard University Press" label="Harvard University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246771" start="11723" end="11761" title="Richard Ponsonby-Fane" label="Ponsonby-Fane, Richard Arthur Brabazon"/>
<link wikidata="Q208233" start="11988" end="12004" title="Emperor of Japan" label="Emperor of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q188210" start="12007" end="12032" title="List of Emperors of Japan" label="List of Emperors of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3271557" start="12035" end="12048" title="Imperial cult" label="Imperial cult"/>
<link wikidata="Q385141" start="12051" end="12063" title="Heian Shrine" label="Heian Shrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3541649" start="12066" end="12089" title="Tsuki no wa no misasagi" label="Tsuki no wa no misasagi"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="187755" wikidata="Q58056" url="?curid=187755" title="Christopher of Bavaria">
<text>Christopher of Bavaria (Danish and Norwegian: &quot;Christoffer&quot;; Swedish: &quot;Kristofer&quot;; 26 February 1416 – 5/6 January 1448) was King of Denmark (1440–48, as Christopher III), Sweden (1441–48) and Norway (1442–48) during the era of the Kalmar Union.

==Biography==

===Coming to power===
He was the son of John, Count Palatine of Neumarkt (1383–1443) and Catherine of Pomerania (c. 1390–1426). Catherine was the daughter of Wartislaw VII, Duke of Pomerania in Pomerania-Stolp, and sister of the Scandinavian king, Erik of Pomerania. Count Palatine John was a son of King Rupert of Germany (1352–1410). Christopher was probably born at Neumarkt in der Oberpfalz in Upper Palatinate, in Bavaria, Germany. In 1445, Christopher married Dorothea of Brandenburg (1430 – 25 November 1495) in Copenhagen.

Erik of Pomerania was deposed as king of Denmark and Sweden in 1439. Erik&#x27;s nephew, Christopher, who was rather unfamiliar with Scandinavian conditions, was elected by the Danish State Council as the successor to his uncle, first as regent from 1439, and then proclaimed King of Denmark at the Viborg Assembly (Danish &quot;landsting&quot;) on 9 April 1440. He was meant to be a puppet, as evidenced by the saying: &quot;Had the Council demanded the stars of heaven from him, he would have ordered it.&quot; However he succeeded in maintaining some personal control. As a whole his rule, according to the politics of the nobility and his succession, might be called the start of the long period of balance between royal power and nobility which lasted until 1660. He was later elected king of Sweden in 1441, and Norway in June 1442.

For himself Christopher used the otherwise unknown title of &quot;arch king&quot; (&quot;archirex)&quot;, because in his opinion he ruled an empire, not simply three different countries, and thus ranked immediately under the European emperor.&quot;

===Peasant rebellions===
At the start of his reign, he put down peasant rebellions in Funen and Jutland. Once the rebellion on Funen was suppressed, he turned his attention the uprising in Jutland. North Jutland, especially Vendsyssel, was so restive that a peasant army of 25,000 led by Henrik Tagesen Reventlow (executed 1441) posed a serious threat to Christopher&#x27;s continued reign. Before the king could act, Jutland&#x27;s noble families raised their own army and marched west of Aalborg to meet Reventlow&#x27;s forces.

The peasants had created a gigantic wagon fortress three layers deep to protect themselves from the mounted knights they knew would come against them. They also placed tree branches across the bog in front of the camp and then cast earth on top to make it look like solid ground. The overconfident army of nobles led by Eske Jensen Brock appeared at St Jorgen&#x27;s Hill (&quot;St. Jørgensbjerg&quot;) on 3 May 1441. The knights charged the camp, and were quickly mired down in the bog. The peasants moved in for the kill. Brock was killed in the Battle of St Jorgen&#x27;s Hill (&quot;Slaget ved Skt. Jørgensbjerg&quot;) and dismembered and the pieces sent to the towns in the area as a warning. The peasants then raided Aalborghus (the area&#x27;s most important manor) forcing the noble Niels Guldenstierne to flee.

The treatment of the captives after the battle strengthened Christopher&#x27;s determination to put down the peasants. With his own army Christopher rode north to the rebel camp at Husby Hole near St Jorgen&#x27;s Hill in northern Jutland. Because the rebels outnumbered his troops, Christopher sent word that anyone who left the camp and went home would not be punished for rebellion. The men from the island of Mors and Thisted left, for which they were called cowards and traitors ever after. Christopher ordered the attack on the rebel camp on 8 June 1441 and despite fighting ferociously the rebels could not overcome the heavily armed knights. Thousands of rebels were killed, those who survived were fined heavily. The more severe consequence was that rebels lost their free status and became serfs on the farms where they worked. The king made it a capital crime for peasants to carry weapons longer than a short knife. The subjugation of Denmark&#x27;s once free peasants was complete.

===Coronation, relations with Swedes===
In May 1442 Christopher traveled to Lödöse to meet with the nobles from all three kingdoms. He was elected King of Norway there and then went to Oslo where he was crowned on 2 July 1442. The next year he was proclaimed King of Denmark at the Urnehoved Assembly near Ribe. When his residence at Roskilde burned down, Christopher moved to Copenhagen and made it the capital of Denmark.

The Swedish nobles were not happy to relinquish any power and thus didn&#x27;t like him, claiming he was too German for them and that he allowed his uncle (ex-King Erik) to plunder shipping from his castle on Gotland without any attempt to stop him. They blamed a series of bad harvests on him. People were so hungry they mixed ground tree bark with the little flour they could find. Christopher was contemptuously nicknamed the &quot;Bark King&quot; in Sweden. On the other hand, he tried to support the cities and their merchants as far as the limits of nobility and Hanseatic cities allowed. During his reign Copenhagen was made permanently the capital of Denmark (municipal charter of 1443).

He carried on an ineffective policy of war and negotiations against Erik in Gotland which did little to help the dissatisfaction within both Sweden and the Hanseatic League. The Kalmar Union Treaty was changed so that the aristocracy had most of the policy-making powers, and the king lost many of the powers monarchs had acquired since Viking times. The results of this policy of balance were still not reached when he suddenly died as the last descendant of Valdemar IV of Denmark.

===Death===
In 1448, Christopher died suddenly at Helsingborg at age 31. King Christopher was buried in Roskilde Cathedral. His widow, Queen Dorothea, married the new king of Denmark, Christian I.
==References==
==Other sources==
*&quot;Dansk Biografisk Leksikon&quot;, vol. 7, Copenhagen 1980.
*&quot;Politikens Danmarkshistorie&quot;, vol. 4 by Erik Kjersgaard, Copenhagen 1962.
*&quot;Politikens bog om Danske Monarker&quot; by Benito Scocozza, Copenhagen 1998.


|-
|-</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q58056" start="0" end="22" title="Christopher of Bavaria" label="Christopher of Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q9035" start="24" end="30" title="Danish language" label="Danish"/>
<link wikidata="Q9043" start="35" end="44" title="Norwegian language" label="Norwegian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9027" start="71" end="78" title="Swedish language" label="Swedish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273134" start="144" end="159" title="King of Denmark" label="King of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q58056" start="173" end="188" title="Christopher of Bavaria" label="Christopher III"/>
<link wikidata="Q26796319" start="191" end="197" title="King of Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294765" start="212" end="218" title="King of Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q62623" start="251" end="263" title="Kalmar Union" label="Kalmar Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q65946" start="321" end="353" title="John, Count Palatine of Neumarkt" label="John, Count Palatine of Neumarkt"/>
<link wikidata="Q462536" start="370" end="392" title="Catherine of Pomerania, Countess Palatine of Neumarkt" label="Catherine of Pomerania"/>
<link wikidata="Q677904" start="439" end="452" title="Wartislaw VII, Duke of Pomerania" label="Wartislaw VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q370303" start="454" end="471" title="Duke of Pomerania" label="Duke of Pomerania"/>
<link wikidata="Q7227264" start="475" end="490" title="Pomerania-Stolp" label="Pomerania-Stolp"/>
<link wikidata="Q161958" start="529" end="546" title="Erik of Pomerania" label="Erik of Pomerania"/>
<link wikidata="Q57326" start="586" end="603" title="Rupert of Germany" label="Rupert of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q14887" start="650" end="675" title="Neumarkt in der Oberpfalz" label="Neumarkt in der Oberpfalz"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="709" end="716" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q61873" start="747" end="770" title="Dorothea of Brandenburg" label="Dorothea of Brandenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748" start="800" end="810" title="Copenhagen" label="Copenhagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q161958" start="813" end="830" title="Erik of Pomerania" label="Erik of Pomerania"/>
<link wikidata="Q15055408" start="997" end="1010" title="rigsraadet" label="State Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q477406" start="1051" end="1057" title="regent" label="regent"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="1878" end="1894" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="European emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q13427119" start="1967" end="1984" title="peasant rebellion" label="peasant rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q26503" start="1989" end="1994" title="Funen" label="Funen"/>
<link wikidata="Q25389" start="1999" end="2006" title="Jutland" label="Jutland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968873" start="2127" end="2137" title="Vendsyssel" label="Vendsyssel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6202943" start="2191" end="2215" title="Henrik Reventlow" label="Henrik Tagesen Reventlow"/>
<link wikidata="Q25410" start="2393" end="2400" title="Aalborg" label="Aalborg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165691" start="3158" end="3168" title="Aalborghus" label="Aalborghus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1798335" start="3226" end="3245" title="Gyldenstierne (noble family)" label="Niels Guldenstierne"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3437" end="3447" title="Husby Hole" label="Husby Hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q920763" start="3669" end="3673" title="Mors (island)" label="Mors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1008152" start="3678" end="3685" title="Thisted" label="Thisted"/>
<link wikidata="Q103350" start="4056" end="4060" title="serf" label="serf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639127" start="4328" end="4334" title="Lödöse" label="Lödöse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294765" start="4399" end="4413" title="King of Norway" label="King of Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q585" start="4437" end="4441" title="Oslo" label="Oslo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273134" start="4511" end="4526" title="King of Denmark" label="King of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4534" end="4543" title="Urnehoved" label="Urnehoved"/>
<link wikidata="Q322361" start="4558" end="4562" title="Ribe" label="Ribe"/>
<link wikidata="Q26563" start="4586" end="4594" title="Roskilde" label="Roskilde"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748" start="4629" end="4639" title="Copenhagen" label="Copenhagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027830" start="4886" end="4893" title="Gotland" label="Gotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q42908" start="5246" end="5251" title="Hanse" label="Hanse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748" start="5289" end="5299" title="Copenhagen" label="Copenhagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2940451" start="5345" end="5362" title="municipal charter" label="municipal charter"/>
<link wikidata="Q42908" start="5530" end="5546" title="Hanseatic League" label="Hanseatic League"/>
<link wikidata="Q62623" start="5552" end="5564" title="Kalmar Union" label="Kalmar Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q216630" start="5834" end="5845" title="Valdemar IV" label="Valdemar IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q25411" start="5909" end="5920" title="Helsingborg" label="Helsingborg"/>
<link wikidata="Q209705" start="5963" end="5981" title="Roskilde Cathedral" label="Roskilde Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q61873" start="5994" end="6008" title="Dorothea of Brandenburg" label="Queen Dorothea"/>
<link wikidata="Q153940" start="6043" end="6054" title="Christian I of Denmark" label="Christian I"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="187765" wikidata="Q193112" url="?curid=187765" title="Louis III of France">
<text>Louis III (863/65 – 5 August 882) was King of West Francia from 879 until his death in 882. Despite questions of his legitimacy and challenges against his ascendance to the monarchy, Louis would prove to be an effective leader during his reign, notable for the defeat of Viking invaders at the Battle of Saucourt-en-Vimeu in August 881 that would later be immortalized in the poem &quot;Ludwigslied&quot;. He also led a less successful military campaign against Boso of Provence with help from Charles the Fat.

The eldest son of Louis the Stammerer and Ansgarde of Burgundy, it was unclear during his early life if the young Louis had a claim on the throne of West Francia. Upon the death of his grandfather and father in 877 and 879 respectively, he ascended to the monarchy, but endured questions of his legitimacy; many refused to recognize him as the &quot;true&quot; King of West Francia and, as a result, he was forced to rule alongside his brother, Carloman II, following a deal in 880 at Amiens to split the throne between Neustria and Aquitania. 

During his brief tenure as King, he was challenged by Duke Boso, who had ascended to King of Provence. After his victories in Mâcon and northern Provence, he unsuccessfully besieged Vienne alongside his cousin, Charles the Fat. Invasions from West Frankish rebels and Louis the Younger were peacefully decided after the cession of Western Lotharingia in 880. In August 881, Viking raiders came into Saucourt following defeats in East Francia and the sacking of several cities in West Francia. At the Battle of Saucourt-en-Vimeu, Louis and his brother were able to repel the offensive, killing roughly 9,000 of the invaders. However, the victory proved inconsequential, as Louis died nearly a year later in an accident and was succeeded by his brother. Contemporaries state that Louis was a popular King during his short reign, and describe him as &quot;able and energetic&quot;.

==Early life==
Louis was born in either 863 or 865 at St Denis and was the eldest son of Louis the Stammerer, King of Aquitaine, and his first wife, Ansgarde of Burgundy. Due to the fact that his parents had married secretly and Ansgarde was later repudiated at Charles&#x27; insistence, Louis&#x27; legitimacy was largely questioned during his early life.

When Charles the Bald died in 877, followed by Louis the Stammerer on 10 April 879, Louis became King of West Francia. Some Frankish nobles advocated keeping Louis as the sole king, but another party favoured each brother ruling a separate part of the kingdom. In September 879, Louis was crowned at Ferrières Abbey.

== Reign ==
=== Splitting the kingdom ===
When Louis III was crowned King of West Francia in September 879, approval was split between allowing Louis to rule alone or have the Kingdom be split. Ultimately, Carloman II and Louis made an agreement in March 880 at Amiens, dividing their father&#x27;s kingdom, with Louis receiving Neustria and Carloman receiving Aquitania. As a result of this split, Boso, one of Charles the Bald&#x27;s most trusted lieutenants and the Count of Vienne, renounced his allegiance to both brothers and appropriated the title of King of Provence.

=== Early reign; wars against Louis the Younger and Boso (879–880) ===
Invasions began nearly as soon as Louis III was crowned in 879, with dissident nobles and magnates from West Francia led by Louis the Younger, King of East Francia, continuing a campaign that had raged since 877. Louis and Carloman made a treaty at Ribemont in 880, giving East Francia the western part of Lotharingia and placating the parties.

In the summer of 880, Louis and Carloman went to war against Boso. The campaign started well at first, as the brothers captured Mâcon and the northern part of Provence within the first few months of the war. They proceeded to unite their forces with those of their cousin, Charles the Fat, who brought armies from Italy, East Francia, and Alemannia into the war. Despite the added manpower, The siege of Vienne from August to November 880 proved unsuccessful and resulted in too many casualties for the war to continue, and the war ended in Louis&#x27; defeat.

=== Military success against the Vikings (881) ===
The Viking raids against the Frankish kingdoms increased sharply around the middle of 880 and quickly turned into a large challenge. After the Viking defeat at Thimeon in the east, the raiders turned to the west and took Kortrijk, Arras, Cambrai, Amiens and Corbie between November 880 and July 881.

Louis and his brother intercepted the Vikings at Saucourt-en-Vimeu on 3 August 881, catching them by surprise. In an extremely violent and bloody attack, according to the Annales Fuldenses, the West Frankish forces slaughtered as many as 9,000 raiders and won an important, decisive victory. 

Louis, at a mere 16 years of age, was widely celebrated by the people of both Frankish kingdoms. In East Francia, the Old High German poem &quot;Ludwigslied&quot; celebrated Louis&#x27; heroism, piety and poise in the battle, while in West Francia, a chanson de geste titled &quot;Gormond et Isembart&quot; was inspired by the battle and written a few hundred years later.

== Death and legacy ==
Louis III died suddenly on 5 August 882, aged around 17, at Saint-Denis. According to legend, he was chasing after a girl who was retreating to her father&#x27;s house on horseback and hit his head on the lintel of a low door, taking a bad fall and breaking his skull. Because Louis III had no children, his brother Carloman II became the sole king of West Francia, and the young king was buried in the royal mausoleum of the Basilica of Saint-Denis.

Louis&#x27; death was incredibly damaging to the West Frankish war against the Vikings, and despite his massive victory at Saucourt, his brother and successor could not match his level of success and died in 884. However, his death united the kingdom of West Francia under one ruler and his reign set the stage for later Frankish unity.

==See also==
* Charles VIII of France, another French king who died after hitting his head on a lintel.
* Carloman II, the successor of Louis III.

==References==
==Sources==
*
* 
*
*Green, Dennis H. &quot;The &quot;Ludwigslied&quot; and the Battle of Saucourt&quot;, in Judith Jesch (ed.), &quot;The Scandinavians from the Vendel Period to the Tenth Century&quot; (Oxford: Boydell Press, 2002), 281–302.
*Fouracre, Paul. &quot;The Context of the Old High German Ludwigslied&quot;, &quot;Medium Aevum&quot;, 46 (1985), 87–103.
*MacLean, Simon. &quot;Kingship and Politics in the Late Ninth Century: Charles the Fat and the end of the Carolingian Empire&quot;. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2003.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q193112" start="0" end="9" title="Louis III of France" label="Louis III"/>
<link wikidata="Q46370" start="46" end="58" title="West Francia" label="West Francia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2445761" start="294" end="321" title="Battle of Saucourt-en-Vimeu" label="Battle of Saucourt-en-Vimeu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751798" start="387" end="398" title="Ludwigslied" label="Ludwigslied"/>
<link wikidata="Q73806" start="462" end="478" title="Boso of Provence" label="Boso of Provence"/>
<link wikidata="Q150712" start="494" end="509" title="Charles the Fat" label="Charles the Fat"/>
<link wikidata="Q182840" start="530" end="549" title="Louis the Stammerer" label="Louis the Stammerer"/>
<link wikidata="Q267113" start="554" end="574" title="Ansgarde of Burgundy" label="Ansgarde of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q192846" start="957" end="968" title="Carloman II" label="Carloman II"/>
<link wikidata="Q174247" start="1184" end="1189" title="Mâcon" label="Mâcon"/>
<link wikidata="Q26849" start="1240" end="1246" title="Vienne, Isère" label="Vienne"/>
<link wikidata="Q150712" start="1269" end="1284" title="Charles the Fat" label="Charles the Fat"/>
<link wikidata="Q160190" start="1326" end="1343" title="Louis the Younger" label="Louis the Younger"/>
<link wikidata="Q2445761" start="1558" end="1585" title="Battle of Saucourt-en-Vimeu" label="Battle of Saucourt-en-Vimeu"/>
<link wikidata="Q131575588" start="1992" end="2000" title="Saint-Denis, Seine-Saint-Denis" label="St Denis"/>
<link wikidata="Q182840" start="2027" end="2046" title="Louis the Stammerer" label="Louis the Stammerer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7703611" start="2048" end="2065" title="King of Aquitaine" label="King of Aquitaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q267113" start="2087" end="2107" title="Ansgarde of Burgundy" label="Ansgarde of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q71231" start="2301" end="2317" title="Charles the Bald" label="Charles the Bald"/>
<link wikidata="Q2820586" start="2596" end="2611" title="Ferrières Abbey" label="Ferrières Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q41604" start="2876" end="2882" title="Amiens" label="Amiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q73806" start="3013" end="3017" title="Boso of Provence" label="Boso"/>
<link wikidata="Q889901" start="3172" end="3188" title="King of Burgundy" label="King of Provence"/>
<link wikidata="Q160190" start="3386" end="3403" title="Louis the Younger" label="Louis the Younger"/>
<link wikidata="Q708468" start="3511" end="3519" title="Treaty of Ribemont" label="Ribemont"/>
<link wikidata="Q174247" start="3736" end="3741" title="Mâcon" label="Mâcon"/>
<link wikidata="Q150712" start="3881" end="3896" title="Charles the Fat" label="Charles the Fat"/>
<link wikidata="Q26849" start="4012" end="4018" title="Vienne, Isère" label="Vienne"/>
<link wikidata="Q4872545" start="4381" end="4388" title="Battle of Thimeon" label="Thimeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q564374" start="4693" end="4710" title="Annales Fuldenses" label="Annales Fuldenses"/>
<link wikidata="Q35218" start="4934" end="4949" title="Old High German" label="Old High German"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751798" start="4961" end="4972" title="Ludwigslied" label="Ludwigslied"/>
<link wikidata="Q651019" start="5067" end="5083" title="chanson de geste" label="chanson de geste"/>
<link wikidata="Q951506" start="5097" end="5116" title="Gormond et Isembart" label="Gormond et Isembart"/>
<link wikidata="Q131575588" start="5273" end="5284" title="Saint-Denis, Seine-Saint-Denis" label="Saint-Denis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370517" start="5418" end="5424" title="lintel" label="lintel"/>
<link wikidata="Q46370" start="5565" end="5577" title="West Francia" label="West Francia"/>
<link wikidata="Q184407" start="5639" end="5662" title="Basilica of St Denis" label="Basilica of Saint-Denis"/>
<link wikidata="Q134452" start="6018" end="6040" title="Charles VIII of France" label="Charles VIII of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q192846" start="6109" end="6120" title="Carloman II" label="Carloman II"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="187766" wikidata="Q341063" url="?curid=187766" title="Louis III">
<text>Louis III may refer to:

* Louis the Younger, sometimes III of Germany (835–882)
* Louis III of France (865–882)
* Louis the Blind, Louis III, Holy Roman Emperor, (c. 880–928)
* Louis the Child, sometimes III of Germany (893–911)
* Louis III, Count of Chiny (died 1189)
* Ludwig III of Thuringia (ruled 1172–1190), see Hermann I, Landgrave of Thuringia
* Louis III of Châtillon (died 1391)
* Louis III of Naples (1403–1434)
* Louis III, Elector Palatine (ruled 1410–1436)
* Louis III, Landgrave of Hesse, nicknamed &quot;the Frank&quot; (1438–1471)
* Louis III, Count of Löwenstein (1530–1611)
* Louis III, Duke of Württemberg (1554–1593)
* Louis III, Cardinal of Guise (1575–1621)
* Louis III, Prince of Condé (1668–1710)
* Ludwig III, Grand Duke of Hesse and by Rhine (1806–1877)
* Ludwig III of Bavaria (1845–1921)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q160190" start="27" end="44" title="Louis the Younger" label="Louis the Younger"/>
<link wikidata="Q193112" start="83" end="102" title="Louis III of France" label="Louis III of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q310435" start="115" end="130" title="Louis the Blind" label="Louis the Blind"/>
<link wikidata="Q157099" start="178" end="193" title="Louis the Child" label="Louis the Child"/>
<link wikidata="Q23615837" start="232" end="257" title="Louis III, Count of Chiny" label="Louis III, Count of Chiny"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="272" end="295" title="Ludwig III of Thuringia" label="Ludwig III of Thuringia"/>
<link wikidata="Q61776" start="319" end="352" title="Hermann I, Landgrave of Thuringia" label="Hermann I, Landgrave of Thuringia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1871748" start="355" end="377" title="Louis III of Châtillon" label="Louis III of Châtillon"/>
<link wikidata="Q447535" start="392" end="411" title="Louis III of Naples" label="Louis III of Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q64515" start="426" end="453" title="Louis III, Elector Palatine" label="Louis III, Elector Palatine"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="474" end="503" title="Louis III, Landgrave of Hesse" label="Louis III, Landgrave of Hesse"/>
<link wikidata="Q110860" start="551" end="581" title="Louis III, Count of Löwenstein" label="Louis III, Count of Löwenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q678605" start="596" end="626" title="Louis III, Duke of Württemberg" label="Louis III, Duke of Württemberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q284941" start="641" end="669" title="Louis III, Cardinal of Guise" label="Louis III, Cardinal of Guise"/>
<link wikidata="Q447520" start="684" end="710" title="Louis III, Prince of Condé" label="Louis III, Prince of Condé"/>
<link wikidata="Q57508" start="725" end="769" title="Ludwig III, Grand Duke of Hesse and by Rhine" label="Ludwig III, Grand Duke of Hesse and by Rhine"/>
<link wikidata="Q44393" start="784" end="805" title="Ludwig III of Bavaria" label="Ludwig III of Bavaria"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="187769" wikidata="Q19119" url="?curid=187769" title="Pseudoscorpion">
<text>Pseudoscorpions, also known as false scorpions or book scorpions, are small, scorpion-like arachnids belonging to the order Pseudoscorpiones, also known as Pseudoscorpionida or Chelonethida.

Pseudoscorpions are generally beneficial to humans because they prey on clothes moth larvae, carpet beetle larvae, booklice, ants, mites, and small flies. They are common in many environments, but they are rarely noticed due to their small size. When people see pseudoscorpions, especially indoors, they often mistake them for ticks or small spiders. Pseudoscorpions often carry out phoresis, a form of commensalism in which one organism uses another for the purpose of transport.

== Characteristics ==
Pseudoscorpions belong to the class Arachnida. They are small arachnids with a flat, pear-shaped body, and pincer-like pedipalps that resemble those of scorpions. They usually range from in length. The largest known species is &quot;Garypus titanius&quot; of Ascension Island at up to . Range is generally smaller at an average of .

A pseudoscorpion has eight legs with five to seven segments each; the number of fused segments is used to distinguish families and genera. They have two very long pedipalps with palpal chelae (pincers), which strongly resemble the pincers found on a scorpion.

The pedipalps generally consist of an immobile &quot;hand&quot; and mobile &quot;finger&quot;, the latter controlled by an adductor muscle. Members of the clade Iocheirata, which contains the majority of pseudoscorpions, are venomous, with a venom gland and duct usually located in the mobile finger; the venom is used to immobilize the pseudoscorpion&#x27;s prey. During digestion, pseudoscorpions exude a mildly corrosive fluid over the prey, then ingest the liquefied remains.

The abdomen, referred to as the opisthosoma, is made up of twelve segments, each protected by sclerotized plates (called tergites above and sternites below). The abdomen is short and rounded at the rear, rather than extending into a segmented tail and stinger like true scorpions. The color of the body can be yellowish-tan to dark-brown, with the paired claws often a contrasting color. They may have two, four or no eyes.

Pseudoscorpions spin silk from a gland in their jaws to make disk-shaped cocoons for mating, molting, or waiting out cold weather, but they do not have book lungs like true scorpions and the Tetrapulmonata. Instead, they breathe exclusively through tracheae, which open laterally through two pairs of spiracles on the posterior margins of the sternites of abdominal segments 3 and 4.

== Behavior ==
The male produces a spermatophore which is attached to the substrate and is picked up by the female. Members of the Cheliferoidea (Atemnidae, Cheliferidae, Chernetidae and Withiidae) have an elaborate mating dance, which ends with the male navigating the female over his spermatophore. In Cheliferidae, the male also uses his forelegs to open the female genital operculum, and after she has mounted the packet of sperm, assisting the spermatophore&#x27;s entry by pushing it into her genital opening. Females in species that possess a spermatheca (sperm storing organ) can store the sperm for a longer period of time before fertilizing the eggs, but species without the organ fertilize the eggs shortly after mating. The female carries the fertilized eggs in a brood pouch attached to her abdomen.

Between 2 and 50 young are hatched in a single brood, with more than one brood per year possible. The young go through three molts called the protonymph, deutonymph and tritonymph. The developing embryo and the protonymph, which remain attached to the mother, is nourished by a ‘milk’ produced by her ovary. Many species molt in a small, silken igloo that protects them from enemies during this vulnerable period.

After reaching adulthood they no longer molt, and will live for 2–3 years. They are active in the warm months of the year, overwintering in silken cocoons when the weather grows cold. Smaller species live in debris and humus. Some species are arboreal, while others are phagophiles, eating parasites in an example of cleaning symbiosis. Some species are phoretic, others may sometimes be found feeding on mites under the wing covers of certain beetles.

== Distribution ==
More than 3,300 species of pseudoscorpions are recorded in more than 430 genera, with more being discovered on a regular basis. They range worldwide, even in temperate to cold regions such as Northern Ontario and above the timberline in Wyoming&#x27;s Rocky Mountains in the United States and the Jenolan Caves of Australia, but have their most dense and diverse populations in the tropics and subtropics, where they spread even to island territories such as the Canary Islands, where around 25 endemic species have been found. There are also two endemic species on the Maltese Islands. Species have been found under tree bark, in leaf and pine litter, in soil, in tree hollows, under stones, in caves such as the Movile Cave, at the seashore in the intertidal zone, and within fractured rocks.

&quot;Chelifer cancroides&quot; is the species most commonly found in homes, where it is often observed in rooms with dusty books. There, the tiny animals () can find their food such as booklice and house dust mites. They enter homes by riding insects (phoresy) larger than themselves, or are brought in with firewood.

== Evolution ==

The oldest known fossil pseudoscorpion, &quot;Dracochela deprehendor&quot; is known from cuticle fragments of nymphs found in the Panther Mountain Formation near Gilboa in New York, dating to the mid-Devonian, around 383 million years ago. It has all of the traits of a modern pseudoscorpion, indicating that the order evolved very early in the history of land animals. Its morphology suggests that it is more primitive than any living pseudoscorpion. As with most other arachnid orders, the pseudoscorpions have changed very little since they first appeared, retaining almost all the features of their original form. After the Devonian fossils, almost no other fossils of pseudoscorpions are known for over 250 million years until Cretaceous fossils in amber, all belonging to modern families, suggesting that the major diversification of pseudoscorpions had already taken place by this time. The only fossil from this time gap is &quot;Archaeofeaella&quot; from the Triassic of Ukraine, approximately 227 million years ago, which is suggested to be an early relative of the family Feaellidae.

== Historical references ==
Pseudoscorpions were first described by Aristotle, who probably found them among scrolls in a library where they would have been feeding on booklice. Robert Hooke referred to a &quot;Land-Crab&quot; in his 1665 work &quot;Micrographia&quot;. Another reference in the 1780s, when George Adams wrote of &quot;a lobster-insect, spied by some labouring men who were drinking their porter, and borne away by an ingenious gentleman, who brought it to my lodging.&quot;

== Classification ==
The following taxon numbers are calculated as of the end of 2023.

*Atemnidae (21 genera, 194 species)
*Bochicidae (12 genera, 44 species)
*Cheiridiidae (9 genera, 81 species)
*Cheliferidae (64 genera, 312 species)
*Chernetidae (120 genera, 728 species)
*Chthoniidae (54 genera, 909 species)
*Feaellidae (8 genus, 37 species)
*Garypidae (11 genera, 110 species)
*Garypinidae (21 genera, 94 species)
*Geogarypidae (2 genera, 81 species)
*Gymnobisiidae (4 genera, 17 species)
*Hyidae (2 genera, 41 species)
*Ideoroncidae (15 genera, 86 species)
*Larcidae (1 genus, 15 species)
*Menthidae (5 genera, 12 species)
*Neobisiidae (34 genera, 748 species)
*Olpiidae (24 genera, 211 species)
*Parahyidae (1 genus, 1 species)
*Pseudochiridiidae (2 genera, 13 species)
*Pseudogarypidae (2 genera, 12 species)
*Pseudotyrannochthoniidae (6 genera, 80 species)
*Sternophoridae (3 genera, 21 species)
*Syarinidae (18 genera, 125 species)
*Withiidae (37 genera, 170 species)
*†Dracochelidae (1 genus, 1 species)

=== Cladogram ===
After Benavides et al., 2019, with historic taxonomic groups from Harvey (1992).

== References ==
== Further reading ==
* Mark Harvey (2011). Pseudoscorpions of the World
* Joseph C. Chamberlin (1931): &quot;The Arachnid Order Chelonethida&quot;. Stanford University Publications in Biological Science. 7(1): 1–284.
* Clarence Clayton Hoff (1958): List of the Pseudoscorpions of North America North of Mexico. &quot;American Museum Novitates&quot;. 1875. PDF
* Max Beier (1967): Pseudoscorpione vom kontinentalen Südost-Asien. &quot;Pacific Insects&quot; 9(2): 341–369. PDF
* P. D. Gabbutt (1970): Validity of Life History Analyses of Pseudoscorpions. &quot;Journal of Natural History&quot; 4: 1–15.
* W. B. Muchmore (1982): &quot;Pseudoscorpionida&quot;. In &quot;Synopsis and Classification of Living Organisms.&quot; Vol. 2. Parker, S.P.
* J. A. Coddington, S. F. Larcher &amp; J. C. Cokendolpher (1990): &quot;The Systematic Status of Arachnida, Exclusive of Acari, in North America North of Mexico.&quot; In &quot;Systematics of the North American Insects and Arachnids: Status and Needs.&quot; National Biological Survey 3. &quot;Virginia Agricultural Experiment Station, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University&quot;.
* Mark S. Harvey (1991): &quot;Catalogue of the Pseudoscorpionida.&quot; (edited by V . Mahnert). Manchester University Press, Manchester.

== External links ==
* 
* Video of Pseudoscorpions in Ireland</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q19119" start="0" end="15" title="Pseudoscorpion" label="Pseudoscorpions"/>
<link wikidata="Q19119" start="31" end="46" title="Pseudoscorpion" label="false scorpions"/>
<link wikidata="Q19119" start="50" end="64" title="Pseudoscorpion" label="book scorpions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358" start="91" end="99" title="arachnid" label="arachnid"/>
<link wikidata="Q19119" start="124" end="140" title="Pseudoscorpion" label="Pseudoscorpiones"/>
<link wikidata="Q19119" start="156" end="173" title="Pseudoscorpion" label="Pseudoscorpionida"/>
<link wikidata="Q19119" start="177" end="189" title="Pseudoscorpion" label="Chelonethida"/>
<link wikidata="Q1945889" start="264" end="276" title="Tineola bisselliella" label="clothes moth"/>
<link wikidata="Q220932" start="285" end="298" title="Dermestidae" label="carpet beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q271623" start="307" end="315" title="Psocoptera" label="booklice"/>
<link wikidata="Q7386" start="317" end="320" title="ant" label="ant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2441993" start="323" end="327" title="mite" label="mite"/>
<link wikidata="Q25312" start="340" end="345" title="Diptera" label="flies"/>
<link wikidata="Q10304508" start="519" end="523" title="tick" label="tick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357" start="534" end="540" title="spider" label="spider"/>
<link wikidata="Q4892641" start="575" end="583" title="phoresis" label="phoresis"/>
<link wikidata="Q191934" start="595" end="607" title="commensalism" label="commensalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358" start="732" end="741" title="Arachnida" label="Arachnida"/>
<link wikidata="Q932179" start="815" end="823" title="pedipalp" label="pedipalp"/>
<link wikidata="Q19125" start="848" end="856" title="scorpion" label="scorpion"/>
<link wikidata="Q941194" start="929" end="945" title="Garypus titanius" label="Garypus titanius"/>
<link wikidata="Q46197" start="955" end="971" title="Ascension Island" label="Ascension Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q932179" start="1193" end="1201" title="pedipalp" label="pedipalp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069045" start="1215" end="1221" title="chela (organ)" label="chelae"/>
<link wikidata="Q264251" start="1414" end="1429" title="adduction" label="adductor muscle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3386847" start="1516" end="1521" title="venom" label="venom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2307449" start="1804" end="1815" title="opisthosoma" label="opisthosoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q2292753" start="1866" end="1877" title="sclerotin" label="sclerotized"/>
<link wikidata="Q652546" start="1893" end="1900" title="tergite" label="tergite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777684" start="1912" end="1920" title="sternite" label="sternite"/>
<link wikidata="Q19125" start="2037" end="2051" title="Scorpion" label="true scorpions"/>
<link wikidata="Q37681" start="2218" end="2222" title="silk" label="silk"/>
<link wikidata="Q170595" start="2270" end="2276" title="Cocoon (silk)" label="cocoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q998676" start="2349" end="2359" title="book lungs" label="book lungs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3821682" start="2388" end="2402" title="Tetrapulmonata" label="Tetrapulmonata"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2446" end="2453" title="Trachea#Invertebrates" label="trachea"/>
<link wikidata="Q31060267" start="2498" end="2507" title="Spiracle (arthropods)" label="spiracles"/>
<link wikidata="Q901728" start="2617" end="2630" title="spermatophore" label="spermatophore"/>
<link wikidata="Q10968643" start="2798" end="2810" title="mating dance" label="mating dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2135237" start="3132" end="3143" title="spermatheca" label="spermatheca"/>
<link wikidata="Q9597" start="3386" end="3393" title="abdomen" label="abdomen"/>
<link wikidata="Q239526" start="3443" end="3448" title="offspring" label="brood"/>
<link wikidata="Q13389887" start="3521" end="3526" title="ecdysis" label="molts"/>
<link wikidata="Q172645" start="4030" end="4035" title="humus" label="humus"/>
<link wikidata="Q767024" start="4054" end="4062" title="Arboreal locomotion" label="arboreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7180168" start="4081" end="4091" title="phagophile" label="phagophile"/>
<link wikidata="Q5130575" start="4128" end="4146" title="cleaning symbiosis" label="cleaning symbiosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4892641" start="4165" end="4173" title="phoretic" label="phoretic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2066392" start="4476" end="4492" title="Northern Ontario" label="Northern Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q1670250" start="4581" end="4594" title="Jenolan Caves" label="Jenolan Caves"/>
<link wikidata="Q42530" start="4666" end="4673" title="tropical" label="tropics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5813" start="4747" end="4761" title="Canary Islands" label="Canary Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q123452" start="4779" end="4786" title="endemic" label="endemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1763897" start="4854" end="4869" title="Maltese Islands" label="Maltese Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q492760" start="4998" end="5009" title="Movile Cave" label="Movile Cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q937723" start="5086" end="5105" title="Chelifer cancroides" label="Chelifer cancroides"/>
<link wikidata="Q29938" start="5279" end="5295" title="house dust mites" label="house dust mites"/>
<link wikidata="Q4892641" start="5333" end="5340" title="phoresy" label="phoresy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3018967" start="5463" end="5485" title="Dracochela" label="Dracochela deprehendor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4797676" start="5506" end="5513" title="Arthropod cuticle" label="cuticle"/>
<link wikidata="Q18158362" start="5547" end="5573" title="Panther Mountain Formation" label="Panther Mountain Formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3708388" start="5579" end="5585" title="Gilboa, New York" label="Gilboa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="5589" end="5597" title="New York (state)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q65955" start="5617" end="5625" title="Devonian" label="Devonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q44626" start="6149" end="6159" title="Cretaceous" label="Cretaceous"/>
<link wikidata="Q25381" start="6171" end="6176" title="amber" label="amber"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6355" end="6369" title="Archaeofeaella" label="Archaeofeaella"/>
<link wikidata="Q47158" start="6385" end="6393" title="Triassic" label="Triassic"/>
<link wikidata="Q18540762" start="6500" end="6510" title="Feaellidae" label="Feaellidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q868" start="6581" end="6590" title="Aristotle" label="Aristotle"/>
<link wikidata="Q271623" start="6681" end="6689" title="Psocoptera" label="booklice"/>
<link wikidata="Q46830" start="6691" end="6703" title="Robert Hooke" label="Robert Hooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q2469465" start="6763" end="6775" title="Micrographia" label="Micrographia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506819" start="6820" end="6832" title="George Adams (scientist, died 1795)" label="George Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q954166" start="6918" end="6924" title="Porter (beer)" label="porter"/>
<link wikidata="Q10421222" start="7094" end="7103" title="Atemnidae" label="Atemnidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1939462" start="7130" end="7140" title="Bochicidae" label="Bochicidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q10477901" start="7166" end="7178" title="Cheiridiidae" label="Cheiridiidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q10706902" start="7203" end="7215" title="Cheliferidae" label="Cheliferidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q926856" start="7242" end="7253" title="Chernetidae" label="Chernetidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q2967501" start="7281" end="7292" title="Chthoniidae" label="Chthoniidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q18540762" start="7319" end="7329" title="Feaellidae" label="Feaellidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q10502586" start="7353" end="7362" title="Garypidae" label="Garypidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q10503193" start="7389" end="7400" title="Garypinidae" label="Garypinidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q10503987" start="7426" end="7438" title="Geogarypidae" label="Geogarypidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q3122663" start="7463" end="7476" title="Gymnobisiidae" label="Gymnobisiidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q3143863" start="7501" end="7507" title="Hyidae" label="Hyidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q3147849" start="7532" end="7544" title="Ideoroncidae" label="Ideoroncidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q10554326" start="7570" end="7578" title="Larcidae" label="Larcidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q3306083" start="7602" end="7611" title="Menthidae" label="Menthidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q2392387" start="7636" end="7647" title="Neobisiidae" label="Neobisiidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q3351556" start="7674" end="7682" title="Olpiidae" label="Olpiidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q3363456" start="7709" end="7719" title="Parahyidae" label="Parahyidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q10642574" start="7742" end="7759" title="Pseudochiridiidae" label="Pseudochiridiidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q3409734" start="7784" end="7799" title="Pseudogarypidae" label="Pseudogarypidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q21044770" start="7824" end="7848" title="Pseudotyrannochthoniidae" label="Pseudotyrannochthoniidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q3498799" start="7873" end="7887" title="Sternophoridae" label="Sternophoridae"/>
<link wikidata="Q3506744" start="7912" end="7922" title="Syarinidae" label="Syarinidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q10720342" start="7949" end="7958" title="Withiidae" label="Withiidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q3018967" start="7986" end="7999" title="Dracochelidae" label="Dracochelidae"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="187774" wikidata="Q1937700" url="?curid=187774" title="Mustard seed">
<text>Mustard seeds are the small round seeds of various mustard plants. The seeds are usually about in diameter and may be colored from yellowish white to black. They are an important spice in many regional foods and may come from one of three different plants: black mustard (&quot;Brassica nigra&quot;), brown mustard (&quot;B. juncea&quot;), or white mustard (&quot;Sinapis alba&quot;).

Grinding and mixing the seeds with water, vinegar or other liquids creates the yellow condiment known as mustard.

==Cultivation==
Mustard seeds generally take eight to ten days to germinate if placed under the proper conditions, which include a cold atmosphere and relatively moist soil. Mature mustard plants grow into shrubs.

Yellow mustard has a plant maturity of 85 to 90 days; whereas, brown and oriental mustard have a plant maturity of 90 to 95 days. If the temperature conditions are conducive to growth, a mustard plant will begin to bud five weeks after the seedlings have appeared. The plant will reach full bloom 7 to 10 days later. Black, brown or oriental varieties of mustard tend to have higher yields compared to yellow mustard. Seed yield is also related to the bloom period. In other words, the longer the bloom period, the greater the seed yield.

Mustard grows well in temperate regions. Major producers of mustard seeds include India, Pakistan, Canada, Nepal, Hungary, Great Britain and the United States.

In Pakistan, rapeseed-mustard is the second most important source of oil, after cotton. It is cultivated over an area of 307,000 hectares (1190 sq. mi.) with an annual production of 233,000 tonnes and contributes about 17% to the domestic production of edible oil.

Mustard seeds are a rich source of oil and protein. The seed has oil as high as 46-48%, and the whole seed meal has 43.6% protein.

=== Production ===
In 2021, Nepal ranked the highest in mustard seed production, followed by Russia and Canada.
In North America, mustard is produced as a specialty crop. The majority of production is found in the upper Midwest United States and Canada. In 2020, the total production of mustard in the United States was .

=== Diseases ===
Mustard seeds carry seed-borne pathogens which affect germination rate, as any other seed. Latif &quot;et al.&quot;, 2006 isolate &quot;Alternaria&quot;, &quot;Aspergillus&quot;, &quot;Chaetomium&quot;, &quot;Curvularia&quot;, &quot;Fusarium&quot;, &quot;Penicillium&quot;, and &quot;Rhizopus&quot; in Bangladesh.

== Uses ==
Grinding and mixing the seeds with water, vinegar or other liquids creates the yellow condiment known as prepared mustard.

Mustard seeds are used as a spice in South Asia. The seeds are usually fried until they pop. The leaves are also stir-fried and eaten as a vegetable. Mustard oil is used for body massage during extreme winters, as it is thought to keep the body warm. In South Asian cuisine mustard oil or &quot;shorsher tel&quot; is the predominant cooking medium. Mustard seeds are also essential ingredients in spicy fish dishes like &quot;jhaal&quot; and &quot;paturi&quot;. A variety of pickles consisting mainly of mangoes, red chili powder, and powdered mustard seed preserved in mustard oil are popular.

In North America, mustard seeds are used in spices and condiments. Yellow mustard is popular in the United States and is often used as a condiment in sandwiches and other dishes. Mustard seeds are first ground into a powder and then mixed with other ingredients to create this condiment. Roughly 1,000 seeds are used in the preparation of 8 ounces of mustard.

=== Other uses ===
Ground mustard seed meal is used as a natural soil amendment for soil-borne disease management in other crops.

==In culture==

The mustard seed is frequently referenced in world literature, including in religious texts, as a metaphor for something small or insignificant.

In the Bible, Jesus tells the Parable of the Mustard Seed referring to faith and the Kingdom of God. There, Jesus says, “The kingdom of heaven is like to a grain of mustard seed, which is the smallest of all seeds on earth. Yet when planted, it grows and becomes the largest of all garden plants, with such big branches that the birds can perch in its shade&quot;.&quot;

There are references to mustard seeds in India from a story of Gautama Buddha in the fifth century BC. Gautama Buddha told the story of the grieving mother (Kisa Gotami) and the mustard seed. When a mother loses her only son, she takes his body to the Buddha to find a cure. The Buddha asks her to bring a handful of mustard seeds from a family that has never lost a child, husband, parent, or friend. When the mother is unable to find such a house in her village, she realizes death is common to all, and she cannot be selfish in her grief.

Jewish texts compare the knowable universe to the size of a mustard seed to demonstrate the world&#x27;s insignificance and to teach humility.

The mustard seed is mentioned in the Quran: &quot;And We place the scales of justice for the Day of Resurrection, so no soul will be treated unjustly at all. And if there is [even] the weight of a mustard seed, We will bring it forth. And sufficient are We as accountant (21:47)&quot;, and according to the Hadith, Muhammad said that he who has in his heart the weight of a mustard seed of pride would not enter Paradise.

==See also==

* List of mustard brands

==References==
==External links==

* The Spruce Eats &quot;The History of Mustard as Food&quot;
* McCormick.com.au &quot;A Keen Mustard History&quot;
* Secret Indian Recipe &quot;About mustard seed&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1937700" start="0" end="13" title="Mustard seed" label="Mustard seeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q40763" start="34" end="38" title="seed" label="seed"/>
<link wikidata="Q30076" start="51" end="64" title="mustard plant" label="mustard plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q42527" start="179" end="184" title="spice" label="spice"/>
<link wikidata="Q119850797" start="278" end="292" title="Brassica nigra" label="Brassica nigra"/>
<link wikidata="Q504781" start="322" end="331" title="Brassica juncea" label="B. juncea"/>
<link wikidata="Q146202" start="364" end="376" title="Sinapis alba" label="Sinapis alba"/>
<link wikidata="Q283" start="421" end="426" title="water" label="water"/>
<link wikidata="Q41354" start="428" end="435" title="vinegar" label="vinegar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2596997" start="472" end="481" title="condiment" label="condiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q131748" start="491" end="498" title="Mustard (condiment)" label="mustard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3589140" start="2175" end="2194" title="seed-borne pathogen" label="seed-borne pathogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q193838" start="2209" end="2225" title="germination rate" label="germination rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q133266" start="2291" end="2301" title="Alternaria" label="Alternaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q335130" start="2315" end="2326" title="Aspergillus" label="Aspergillus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3665729" start="2340" end="2350" title="Chaetomium" label="Chaetomium"/>
<link wikidata="Q5196111" start="2364" end="2374" title="Curvularia" label="Curvularia"/>
<link wikidata="Q131672" start="2388" end="2396" title="Fusarium" label="Fusarium"/>
<link wikidata="Q843136" start="2410" end="2421" title="Penicillium" label="Penicillium"/>
<link wikidata="Q134258" start="2439" end="2447" title="Rhizopus" label="Rhizopus"/>
<link wikidata="Q902" start="2457" end="2467" title="Bangladesh" label="Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q283" start="2516" end="2521" title="water" label="water"/>
<link wikidata="Q41354" start="2523" end="2530" title="vinegar" label="vinegar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2596997" start="2567" end="2576" title="condiment" label="condiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q131748" start="2586" end="2602" title="prepared mustard" label="prepared mustard"/>
<link wikidata="Q771405" start="2642" end="2652" title="South Asia" label="South Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q910958" start="2755" end="2766" title="Mustard oil" label="Mustard oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q7566053" start="2859" end="2878" title="South Asian cuisine" label="South Asian cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503967" start="3080" end="3086" title="pickling" label="pickle"/>
<link wikidata="Q169" start="3109" end="3116" title="mangoes" label="mangoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842710" start="3627" end="3641" title="soil amendment" label="soil amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q105721151" start="3646" end="3664" title="soil borne disease" label="soil-borne disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q235352" start="3685" end="3689" title="crop" label="crop"/>
<link wikidata="Q18534" start="3807" end="3815" title="metaphor" label="metaphor"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="3869" end="3874" title="Jesus" label="Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259342" start="3885" end="3912" title="Parable of the Mustard Seed" label="Parable of the Mustard Seed"/>
<link wikidata="Q9441" start="4290" end="4304" title="Gautama Buddha" label="Gautama Buddha"/>
<link wikidata="Q132126685" start="4384" end="4395" title="Kisa Gotami" label="Kisa Gotami"/>
<link wikidata="Q428" start="4951" end="4956" title="Quran" label="Quran"/>
<link wikidata="Q234343" start="5221" end="5227" title="Hadith" label="Hadith"/>
<link wikidata="Q9458" start="5229" end="5237" title="Muhammad" label="Muhammad"/>
<link wikidata="Q17051420" start="5353" end="5375" title="List of mustard brands" label="List of mustard brands"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="187776" wikidata="Q244436" url="?curid=187776" title="571 BC">
<text>The year 571 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. In the Roman Empire, it was known as year 183 &quot;[[Ab urbe condita]]&quot;. The denomination 571 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.

==Events==
* November 25—Servius Tullius, king of Rome, celebrates his victory over the Etruscans with a Roman triumph.
* Zhou Ling Wang replaces King Jian of Zhou as king of the Chinese Zhou Dynasty.

==Births==

==Deaths==

* Ezekiel, prophet in the Old Testament after whom the Book of Ezekiel is named.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q244436" start="9" end="15" title="571 BC" label="571 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q200966" start="34" end="59" title="Roman calendar" label="pre-Julian Roman calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="68" end="80" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q244436" start="98" end="132" title="571 BC" label="year 183 &amp;quot;[[Ab urbe condita]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q159791" start="234" end="245" title="Anno Domini" label="Anno Domini"/>
<link wikidata="Q4375074" start="246" end="258" title="calendar era" label="calendar era"/>
<link wikidata="Q3020" start="329" end="340" title="November 25" label="November 25"/>
<link wikidata="Q192998" start="341" end="356" title="Servius Tullius" label="Servius Tullius"/>
<link wikidata="Q887580" start="438" end="452" title="King Ling of Zhou" label="Zhou Ling Wang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1157071" start="462" end="479" title="King Jian of Zhou" label="King Jian of Zhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q194064" start="544" end="551" title="Ezekiel" label="Ezekiel"/>
<link wikidata="Q19786" start="568" end="581" title="Old Testament" label="Old Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q178390" start="597" end="612" title="Book of Ezekiel" label="Book of Ezekiel"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="187777" wikidata="Q244469" url="?curid=187777" title="572 BC">
<text>The year 572 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. In the Roman Empire, it was known as year 182 &quot;[[Ab urbe condita]]&quot;. The denomination 572 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.

==Events==

==Births==

==Deaths==
* Jian, Chinese king of the Zhou Dynasty

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q244469" start="9" end="15" title="572 BC" label="572 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q200966" start="34" end="59" title="Roman calendar" label="pre-Julian Roman calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="68" end="80" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q244469" start="98" end="132" title="572 BC" label="year 182 &amp;quot;[[Ab urbe condita]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q159791" start="234" end="245" title="Anno Domini" label="Anno Domini"/>
<link wikidata="Q4375074" start="246" end="258" title="calendar era" label="calendar era"/>
<link wikidata="Q1157071" start="353" end="357" title="King Jian of Zhou" label="Jian"/>
<link wikidata="Q35216" start="379" end="391" title="Zhou dynasty" label="Zhou Dynasty"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="187779" wikidata="Q8777539" url="?curid=187779" title="Human scale">
<text>Human scale is the set of physical qualities, and quantities of information, characterizing the human body, its motor, sensory, or mental capabilities, and human social institutions.

== Science vs. human scale ==

Many of the objects of scientific interest in the universe are much larger than human scale (stars, galaxies) or much smaller than human scale (molecules, atoms, subatomic particles).

Similarly, many time periods studied in science involve time scales much greater than human timescales (geological and cosmological time scales) or much shorter than human timescales (atomic and subatomic events).

Mathematicians and scientists use very large and small numbers to describe physical quantities, and have created even larger and smaller numbers for theoretical purposes.

Human scale measurements, however, are more in the order of:

* Distance: one to two metres (3 to 6 ft – human arm&#x27;s reach, stride, height)
* Attention span: seconds to hours
* Life span: 75 years (mean life expectancy at birth)
* Mass: kilograms – most typically, for newborns from about for a human adult their weight range is about 
* Force: newtons (e.g. the weight of a human on Earth, on the order of several hundred newtons, or about 100–200 lbf)
* Pressure: one standard atmosphere (average pressure on Earth at sea level, approximately )
* Temperature: around (room temperature); (normal range of temperatures in most inhabited regions of Earth)
* Energy: typical adult human energy intake is around per day

== Human scale in architecture ==

Humans interact with their environments based on their physical dimensions, capabilities and limits. The field of anthropometrics (human measurement) has unanswered questions, but it&#x27;s still true that human physical characteristics are fairly predictable and objectively measurable. Buildings scaled to human physical capabilities have steps, doorways, railings, work surfaces, seating, shelves, fixtures, walking distances, and other features that fit well to the average person.

Humans also interact with their environments based on their sensory capabilities. The fields of human perception systems, like perceptual psychology and cognitive psychology, are not exact sciences, because human information processing is not a purely physical act, and because perception is affected by cultural factors, personal preferences, experiences, and expectations. So human scale in architecture can also describe buildings with sightlines, acoustic properties, task lighting, ambient lighting, and spatial grammar that fit well with human senses. However, one important caveat is that human perceptions are always going to be less predictable and less measurable than physical dimensions.

Human scale in architecture is deliberately violated:

* for monumental effect. Buildings, statues, and memorials are constructed in a scale larger than life as a social/cultural signal that the subject matter is also larger than life. One example is the Rodina (Motherland) statue in Volgograd.
* for aesthetic effect. Many architects, particularly in the Modernist movement, design buildings that prioritize structural purity and clarity of form over concessions to human scale. This became the dominant American architectural style for decades. Some notable examples among many are Henry Cobb&#x27;s John Hancock Tower in Boston, much of I. M. Pei&#x27;s work including the Dallas City Hall, and Mies van der Rohe&#x27;s Neue Nationalgalerie in Berlin.
* to serve automotive scale. Commercial buildings that are designed to be legible from roadways assume a radically different shape. The human eye can distinguish about 3 objects or features per second. A pedestrian steadily walking along a length of department store can perceive about 68 features; a driver passing the same frontage at can perceive about six or seven features. Auto-scale buildings tend to be smooth and shallow, readable at a glance, simplified, presented outward, and with signage with bigger letters and fewer words. This urban form is traceable back to the innovations of developer A. W. Ross along Wilshire Boulevard in Los Angeles in 1920.

== Common sense and human scale ==

&quot;Common sense&quot; ideas tend to relate to events within human experience, and thus commensurate with these scales. There is thus no commonsense intuition of, for example, interstellar distances or speeds approaching the speed of light.

Weights and measures tend to reflect human scale, and many older systems of measurement featured units based directly on the dimensions of the body, such as the foot and the cubit. The metric system, which is based on precisely reproducible and measurable physical quantities such as the speed of light, still attempts to keep its base units within the range of human experience. Systems of natural units (such as Planck units) are useful in theoretical physics, but are not suitable for everyday purposes; because the SI units are defined in terms of constants of nature they can be thought of as natural units rescaled to human proportions.

==See also==

* Anthropic principle
* Anthropic units
* Anthropometrics
* Ergonomics
* Leopold Kohr
* List of human-based units of measure
* Scales of measurement
* Small Is Beautiful
* Standard temperature and pressure
* Urban vitality
* Walkability
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q8777539" start="0" end="11" title="Human scale" label="Human scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q5" start="96" end="101" title="human" label="human"/>
<link wikidata="Q43521" start="504" end="514" title="geologic timescale" label="geological"/>
<link wikidata="Q136407" start="519" end="542" title="cosmological time scale" label="cosmological time scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1816844" start="654" end="659" title="large number" label="large"/>
<link wikidata="Q126017" start="851" end="859" title="Distance" label="Distance"/>
<link wikidata="Q855630" start="861" end="878" title="1 E0 m" label="one to two metres"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115119" start="934" end="948" title="Attention span" label="Attention span"/>
<link wikidata="Q188419" start="969" end="978" title="Life expectancy" label="Life span"/>
<link wikidata="Q11423" start="1023" end="1027" title="Mass" label="Mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q846759" start="1029" end="1038" title="1 E0 kg" label="kilograms"/>
<link wikidata="Q11402" start="1130" end="1135" title="Force" label="Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q12438" start="1137" end="1143" title="Newton (unit)" label="newton"/>
<link wikidata="Q39552" start="1248" end="1256" title="Pressure" label="Pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q177974" start="1262" end="1281" title="Atmosphere (unit)" label="standard atmosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q11466" start="1341" end="1352" title="Temperature" label="Temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q11379" start="1449" end="1455" title="Energy" label="Energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6656244" start="1659" end="1674" title="anthropometrics" label="anthropometrics"/>
<link wikidata="Q362682" start="2159" end="2180" title="perceptual psychology" label="perceptual psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q23373" start="2185" end="2205" title="cognitive psychology" label="cognitive psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1601986" start="2988" end="3014" title="The Motherland Calls" label="Rodina (Motherland) statue"/>
<link wikidata="Q914" start="3018" end="3027" title="Volgograd" label="Volgograd"/>
<link wikidata="Q878985" start="3090" end="3099" title="Modernist" label="Modernist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5726216" start="3318" end="3328" title="Henry N. Cobb" label="Henry Cobb"/>
<link wikidata="Q798416" start="3336" end="3354" title="200 Clarendon Street" label="John Hancock Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="3358" end="3364" title="Boston, Massachusetts" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q46868" start="3374" end="3383" title="I. M. Pei" label="I. M. Pei"/>
<link wikidata="Q1157989" start="3410" end="3426" title="Dallas City Hall" label="Dallas City Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q41508" start="3432" end="3449" title="Mies van der Rohe" label="Mies van der Rohe"/>
<link wikidata="Q32659772" start="3457" end="3477" title="Neue Nationalgalerie" label="Neue Nationalgalerie"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="3481" end="3487" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3315812" start="4110" end="4128" title="Miracle Mile, Los Angeles, California" label="Wilshire Boulevard"/>
<link wikidata="Q332880" start="4196" end="4208" title="Common sense" label="Common sense"/>
<link wikidata="Q47574" start="4434" end="4454" title="Weights and measures" label="Weights and measures"/>
<link wikidata="Q3710" start="4595" end="4599" title="foot (unit)" label="foot"/>
<link wikidata="Q6502030" start="4608" end="4613" title="cubit" label="cubit"/>
<link wikidata="Q232405" start="4619" end="4632" title="metric system" label="metric system"/>
<link wikidata="Q468999" start="4848" end="4860" title="Planck units" label="Planck units"/>
<link wikidata="Q12457" start="4953" end="4955" title="SI" label="SI"/>
<link wikidata="Q240581" start="5094" end="5113" title="Anthropic principle" label="Anthropic principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4773881" start="5116" end="5131" title="Anthropic units" label="Anthropic units"/>
<link wikidata="Q6656244" start="5134" end="5149" title="Anthropometrics" label="Anthropometrics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750812" start="5152" end="5162" title="Ergonomics" label="Ergonomics"/>
<link wikidata="Q113659" start="5165" end="5177" title="Leopold Kohr" label="Leopold Kohr"/>
<link wikidata="Q6623788" start="5180" end="5216" title="List of human-based units of measure" label="List of human-based units of measure"/>
<link wikidata="Q951437" start="5219" end="5240" title="Scales of measurement" label="Scales of measurement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316014" start="5243" end="5261" title="Small Is Beautiful" label="Small Is Beautiful"/>
<link wikidata="Q102145" start="5264" end="5297" title="Standard temperature and pressure" label="Standard temperature and pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q110608929" start="5300" end="5314" title="Urban vitality" label="Urban vitality"/>
<link wikidata="Q2822691" start="5317" end="5328" title="Walkability" label="Walkability"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="187781" wikidata="Q201219" url="?curid=187781" title="Egyptian Museum">
<text>The Museum of Egyptian Antiquities, commonly known as the Egyptian Museum (, ) (also called the Cairo Museum), located in Cairo, Egypt, houses the largest collection of Egyptian antiquities in the world. It houses over 120,000 items, with a representative amount on display. Located in Tahrir Square in a building built in 1901, it is the largest museum in Africa. Among its masterpieces are Pharaoh Tutankhamun&#x27;s treasure, including its iconic gold burial mask, widely considered one of the best-known works of art in the world and a prominent symbol of ancient Egypt.

==History==
The Egyptian Museum of Antiquities contains many important pieces of ancient Egyptian history. It houses the world&#x27;s largest collection of Pharaonic antiquities. The Egyptian government established the museum built in 1835 near the Ezbekieh Garden and later moved to the Cairo Citadel. In 1855, Archduke Maximilian of Austria was given all of the artifacts by the Egyptian government; these are now in the Kunsthistorisches Museum, Vienna.

A new museum was established at Boulaq in 1858 in a former warehouse, following the foundation of the new Antiquities Department under the direction of Auguste Mariette. The building lay on the bank of the Nile River, and in 1878 it suffered significant damage owing to the flooding of the Nile River. In 1891, the collections were moved to a former royal palace, in the Giza district of Cairo. They remained there until 1902 when they were moved again to the current museum in Tahrir Square, built by the Italian company of Giuseppe Garozzo and Francesco Zaffrani to a design by the French architect Marcel Dourgnon.

The bigger part of the museum&#x27;s garden that stretched until the Nile was taken away in 1954 to build the Cairo Municipality Building.

In 2004, the museum appointed Wafaa El Saddik as the first female director general.

During the Egyptian Revolution of 2011, the museum was broken into, and two mummies were destroyed. Several artifacts were also shown to have been damaged and around 50 objects were stolen. Since then, 25 objects have been found. Those that were restored were put on display in September 2013 in an exhibition entitled &quot;Damaged and Restored&quot;. Among the displayed artifacts were two statues of King Tutankhamun made of cedar wood and covered with gold, a statue of King Akhenaten, ushabti statues that belonged to the Nubian kings, a mummy of a child, and a small polychrome glass vase.

The museum was reportedly used as a torture site during the 2011 Revolution, with protestors forcibly and unlawfully detained and allegedly abused, according to reports, videos and eyewitness accounts. Activists state that &quot;men were being tortured with electric shocks, whips and wires,&quot; and &quot;women were tied to fences and trees.&quot; Prominent singer and activist Ramy Essam was among those detained and tortured at the museum.

Youssef Diaa Effendi, the Director of the Antiquities Department, began inspecting the antiquities of Middle Egypt shortly after assuming his position, focusing on those discovered by farmers. In 1848, Muhammad Ali Pasha assigned Linan Bek, the Minister of Education, to compile a comprehensive report on archaeological sites and send artifacts to the Egyptian Museum. However, this effort was not successful due to the death of Muhammad Ali Pasha in 1849, followed by a period of instability. The trade in antiquities resurfaced, and the collection housed in the museum established in Azbakeya began to shrink until it was transferred to a single hall in the Citadel of Saladin. The situation worsened when Khedive Abbas I donated the entire contents of this hall to Duke Maximilian of Austria during his visit to the citadel.

Mariette considered the Boulaq Museum a temporary location, and after the flood incident, he saw an opportunity to advocate for the establishment of a permanent museum with greater capacity to accommodate a larger collection of artifacts, while also being situated away from the flood path. After Mariette&#x27;s death, he was succeeded by Gaston Maspero, who attempted to move the museum from Boulaq but was unsuccessful. By 1889, the building housing the collections reached its peak of overcrowding, with no available rooms for more artifacts, either in the exhibition halls or storage areas. Artifacts discovered during excavations were often left for long periods in boats in Upper Egypt. This dire situation led Khedive Ismail to offer one of his palaces in Giza, the location of the present-day zoo, to serve as the new museum. Between the summer and the end of 1889, all the artifacts were moved from the Boulaq Museum to Giza, and the artifacts were reorganized in the new museum by the scholar De Morgan, who served as the museum&#x27;s director. From 1897 to 1899, Loret succeeded De Morgan, but Maspero returned to manage the museum from 1899 to 1914.

=== The current Egyptian Museum ===
The architectural design of the museum was created by the French architect Marcel Dournon in 1897, to be located in the northern area of Tahrir Square (formerly Ismailia Square), along the British Army barracks in Cairo near Qasr El-Nil. The foundation stone was laid on April 1, 1897, in the presence of Khedive Abbas Hilmi II, the Prime Minister, and all his cabinet members. The project was completed by the German architect Hermann Grabe. In November 1903, the Antiquities Department appointed the Italian architect Alessandro Parazenti, who had received the keys to the museum on March 9, 1902, and began the process of transferring the archaeological collections from Khedive Ismail&#x27;s palace in Giza to the new museum. This operation involved the use of five thousand wooden carts, while large artifacts were transported by two trains, making about nineteen round trips between Giza and Qasr El-Nil. The first shipment carried approximately forty-eight stone coffins, weighing over a thousand tons in total. However, the transportation process was chaotic at times. The transfer was completed by July 13, 1902, and Mariette&#x27;s tomb was moved to the museum garden in accordance with his wish to be buried among the artifacts he had spent much of his life collecting.

The Egyptian Museum was officially opened on November 15, 1902. The new museum adopted an exhibition style based on a gradual arrangement of halls, without allocating rooms for periods of turmoil, as they were considered historically insignificant. The artifacts in the museum were categorized by their themes, though for architectural reasons, large statues were placed on the ground floor, while funerary items were displayed on the first floor in chronological order. Each day, new artifacts were arranged and displayed according to their themes in various rooms. The museum became the only one in the world so filled with artifacts that it resembled a storage facility. When asked about this, Maspero replied that the Egyptian Museum was a reflection of a pharaonic tomb or temple, where every part of the space was used to display paintings or hieroglyphic inscriptions. Even the modern Egyptian home of that time used every part of the walls for paintings and images, making the museum a representation of both ancient and modern Egypt.

== Museum development ==

In 1983, the museum building was registered as a heritage site due to its unique architectural value. In August 2006, the largest development operation was carried out on the museum, aiming to make it a scientific and cultural destination. This included the establishment of a cultural center and an administrative-commercial annex on the western side of the museum, where informal settlements were removed. Due to various architectural distortions the building had suffered over the years, which hid much of its original aesthetic charm due to external factors like pollution and heavy traffic, the Ministry of Antiquities launched an initiative in May 2012 to create a comprehensive rehabilitation plan for the museum. The German Foreign Ministry funded the necessary studies and scientific research, and the International Environmental Quality Association participated in the implementation of the initiative to restore the museum to its original condition. The project included architectural and engineering restoration work, as well as the development of the surrounding area of Tahrir Square. The project was completed by 2016, after restoring the eastern and northern wings, addressing lighting issues, and reorganizing the display of valuable artifacts.

The first phase of the initiative involved sampling the original color of the museum building and restoring the walls to their original color. It also included wall surface restoration, the restoration of decorations on the walls and columns, the replacement of window glass with UV-protective glass to safeguard the artifacts, and the restoration of the original ventilation system after thorough cleaning. Restoration work relied on 257 preserved panels within the museum&#x27;s library, which displayed the building&#x27;s original designs.

In July 2016, the Ministry of Tourism and Antiquities (Egypt) upgraded the museum’s internal and external lighting systems, allowing the museum to be open for nighttime visits. In November 2018, the final phase of the museum’s development was inaugurated, which included a new exhibition scenario, the display of the collections of Yuya and Thuya on the upper floor, as well as the display of King Tutankhamun’s artifacts, until the rest of his collection is moved to the Grand Egyptian Museum. The works also involved repainting the walls, upgrading the outlets, updating the lighting system, and restoring the display cases. These tasks were overseen by a committee that included directors of the world’s largest museums, who contributed to the scientific perspective on redistributing the artifacts after the transfer of the items related to the Grand Egyptian Museum and the Museum of Civilization. The committee included directors from the museums of Turin, the Louvre, United Museums, and Berlin.

== Museum library ==

The museum library was established at the time of the museum&#x27;s opening, with funds allocated since 1899 for the purchase of books. The Egyptologist Maspero advocated for a permanent budget for acquiring books and appointed Dacros as the first librarian from 1903 to 1906. He was succeeded by several librarians, including Monier, who compiled a comprehensive catalog of the library’s holdings until 1926. A significant turning point for the library occurred when Abdel Mohsen El-Khashab assumed its management. He was assisted by Diaa El-Din Abu Ghazi, who later became the head librarian in 1950. Abu Ghazi played a crucial role in preparing catalogues, increasing international exchanges, and expanding the library, which eventually grew to its current two-story size with two reading rooms and a storage area for publications.

The library houses over 50,000 books and volumes, including rare works on ancient Egyptian, Greek, Roman, and Near Eastern archaeology, along with other specialized fields. Some of its most significant books include Description de l&#x27;Égypte, Antiquités de l&#x27;Égypte et de la Nubie, and Lepsius&#x27; works. The library also contains a rare collection of maps, paintings, and photographs.
== Museum collections ==
* Prehistoric Period: This collection includes various types of pottery, jewelry, hunting tools, and everyday life items that represent the products of the ancient Egyptians before the advent of writing. These artifacts reflect the life of early Egyptians who settled in various regions of Egypt, including the north, central, and southern parts of the country.
* The Early Dynastic Period: This collection includes artifacts from the First and Second Dynasties, such as the Narmer Palette, the statue of Khasekhemwy, and various vessels and tools.
* Old Kingdom Period: This collection includes a range of significant artifacts, such as the statues of Djoser, Khafre, Menkaure, Sheikh El-Balad, the dwarf Seneb, King Pepi I, his son Merenre, as well as numerous coffins, statues of individuals, wall paintings, and the collection of Queen Hetepheres.
* Middle Kingdom Period: This collection includes many significant artifacts, such as the statue of King Montuhotep II, a series of statues of several rulers from the 12th Dynasty, including Senusret I and Amenemhat III, among others. It also features numerous statues of individuals, coffins, jewelry, daily life tools, and fragments of pyramids from the Faiyum region.
* New Kingdom Period: This is the most famous collection in the museum, highlighted by the treasures of the young pharaoh Tutankhamun, along with statues of Hatshepsut, Thutmose III, and Ramses II. It also includes chariots, papyri, jewelry, Akhenaten’s collection, the Israel Stele, statues of Amenhotep III and his wife Ti, a variety of amulets, writing tools, and agricultural instruments. Additionally, the Royal Mummy Collection, displayed in a dedicated hall opened in 1994, was a significant feature until the royal mummies were transferred to the National Museum of Egyptian Civilization in Fustat during the Royal Mummy Parade in 2021.
* Late Period: This collection features a variety of artifacts, including the treasures of Tanis made from gold, silver, and precious stones, discovered in the tombs of some kings and queens of the 21st and 22nd dynasties at Tanis. It also includes important statues such as the statue of Amun, the statue of Mentuhotep, and the statue of the goddess Tauret, as well as the Canopus Jar Lid (Abu Qir), the stela of Baiankh, and a selection of Nubian artifacts, some of which have been transferred to the Nubian Museum in Aswan.

== Theft of museum collectibles ==
In August 2004, it was announced that 38 artifacts had disappeared from the museum and could not be located. The incident was referred to the public prosecution for investigation.

During the security turmoil following the January 25 Revolution, the museum was stormed on January 28, 2011, by unidentified individuals, and 54 artifacts were stolen. Zahi Hawass, the then director of the Supreme Council of Antiquities, stated &quot;My heart is broken and my blood is boiling&quot;. Hawass later told &quot;The New York Times&quot; that thieves looking for gold broke 70 objects, including two sculptures of the pharaoh Tutankhamun and took two skulls from a research lab, before being stopped as they left the museum.

In response, the military forces cordoned off the museum to protect and secure it against looting and theft.

== Pharaohs&#x27; Golden Parade ==
On April 3, 2021, the Egyptian Museum witnessed the Pharaohs&#x27; Golden Parade, during which 22 royal mummies (18 kings and 4 queens) were transferred from the Egyptian Museum to the National Museum of Egyptian Civilization in Fustat. The mummies are now displayed in state-of-the-art display cases designed to better control temperature and humidity, offering enhanced preservation compared to their previous display in the Egyptian Museum.

== Access to the museum and entry ==
The museum is located in the heart of Cairo, on the northern side of Tahrir Square (Downtown). It is accessible by public transportation, private cars with parking available at the multi-story Tahrir parking lot, or the easier option of using the metro, exiting at Sadat Station, which directly overlooks Tahrir Square. The museum is open daily from 9:00 AM to 7:00 PM, with special hours on Fridays from 9:00 AM to 11:00 AM and from 1:30 PM to 7:00 PM. Photography is not allowed inside the museum due to the negative effects of camera flashes on the small artifacts&#x27; colors. However, personal photography is permitted for a fee of 50 EGP for both Egyptians and foreigners, except in the Hall of the Golden Mask and the Royal Mummy Halls. Occasionally, free photography is allowed on specific days to encourage tourism and increase visitors to the museum. Visitors can also rent an audio guide inside the museum for 25 EGP, providing detailed information about the displayed artifacts.

=== Sale room for antiquities ===
The Department of Antiquities (Service d&#x27;Antiquités Egyptien) operated a sale room (Salle de ventes) in the Egyptian Museum in Cairo from 1902 in room 56 on the ground floor, where original ancient Egyptian artworks and other original artefacts were sold. In addition, until the 1970s, dealers or collectors could bring antiquities to the Cairo Museum for inspection on Thursdays, and if museum officials had no objections, they could pack them in ready-made boxes, have them sealed and cleared for export. Many objects now held in private collections or public museums originated here. After years of debate about the strategy for selling the antiquities, the sale room was closed in November 1979.

=== Ticket prices ===
The value is in Egyptian pounds.

240 EGP is a combined morning ticket for foreigners at a discounted rate for the museum and the Mummies Hall.

== Management ==
The museum is overseen by the Museums Sector of the Supreme Council of Antiquities, which is part of the Ministry of Tourism and Antiquities (Egypt). The management of the museum is entrusted to the position of museum director, a role held by several prominent figures in the field of Egyptology, including:

* Ali Abdelhalim Ali (2023 - present)
* Sabah Abdel Razek (September 2016-2023).
* Somaya Abdel Samia (March 2016 - September 2016).
* Khaled al-Anani (2015-2016).
* Mahmoud Halougi (2014-2015).
* Sayed Amer (2013-2014).
* Salwa Abdel Rahman (2012-2013).
* Sayed Hassan (2012-2012).
* Tarek al-Awadi (2011-2012).
* Wafaa al-Siddiq (2004-2011).
* Mamdouh Eldamaty (2001-2004).
* Ali Hassan.
* Muhammad Saleh.
* Muhammad Mohsen.
* Diaa al-Din Abu Ghazi.
* Henry Riad.
* Mahmoud Hamza.
* Étienne Drioton (1936-1952).
* Pierre Lacau (1914-1936).
* Gaston Maspero (1899-1914).
* Victor Loret (1897-1899).
* Jacques de Morgan (1892-1897).
* Eugene Grippo (1886-1892).
* Gaston Maspero (1881-1886)
* Auguste Mariette (1858-1881).
==Interior design and collections==

There are two main floors in the museum, the ground floor and the first floor. On the ground floor is an extensive collection of large-scale works in stone including statues, reliefs and architectural elements. These are arranged chronologically in clockwise fashion, from the pre-dynastic to the Greco-Roman period. The first floor is dedicated to smaller works, including papyri, coins, textiles, and an enormous collection of wooden sarcophagi. 

The numerous pieces of papyrus are generally small fragments, owing to their decay over the past two millennia. Several languages are found on these pieces, including Greek, Latin, Arabic, and ancient Egyptian. The coins found on this floor are made of many different metals, including gold, silver, and bronze. The coins are not only Egyptian, but also Greek, Roman, and Islamic. This has helped historians research the history of Ancient Egyptian trade.

Also on the ground floor are artifacts from the New Kingdom, the time period between 1550 and 1069 BC. These artifacts are generally larger than items created in earlier centuries. Those items include statues, tables, and coffins (sarcophagi). It contains 42 rooms; with many items on view from sarcophagi and boats to enormous statues.

On the first floor are artifacts from the final two dynasties of Egypt, including items from the tombs of the Pharaohs Thutmosis III, Thutmosis IV, Amenophis II, Hatshepsut, and the courtier Maiherpri, as well as many artifacts from the Valley of the Kings, in particular the material from the intact tombs of Tutankhamun and Psusennes I. 

Until 2021, two rooms contained a number of mummies of kings and other royal family members of the New Kingdom. On April 3, 2021, twenty-two of these mummies were transferred to the National Museum of Egyptian Civilization in Fustat in a grand parade dubbed &quot;The Pharaohs&#x27; Golden Parade&quot;.

Collections are also being transferred to the not-yet-open Grand Egyptian Museum in Giza, including all the artifacts found inside Tutankhamun&#x27;s tomb. &quot;Among the reasons that the GEM itself was conceived, the Egyptian Museum in Tahrir has been criticized for being overcrowded, displaying pieces in a way that is said to make the experience cumbersome for visitors.&quot;
== Memorial to famous Egyptologists ==

In the garden adjacent to the building of the museum, is a memorial to famous egyptologists of the world. It features a monument to Auguste Mariette, surrounded by 24 busts of the following egyptologists: François Chabas, Johannes Dümichen, Conradus Leemans, Charles Wycliffe Goodwin, Emmanuel de Rougé, Samuel Birch, Edward Hincks, Luigi Vassalli, Émile Brugsch, Karl Richard Lepsius, Théodule Devéria, Vladimir Golenishchev, Ippolito Rosellini, Labib Habachi, Sami Gabra, Selim Hassan, Ahmed Kamal, Zakaria Goneim, Jean-François Champollion, Amedeo Peyron, Willem Pleyte, Gaston Maspero, Peter le Page Renouf and Kazimierz Michałowski.

==Gallery==
==See also==
* Egyptian Museum of Turin
* Egyptian Museum of Berlin
* National Museum of Egyptian Civilization
* Grand Egyptian Museum
* List of largest art museums
* List of museums with major collections of Egyptian antiquities

==References==
===Sources===

==Further reading==
* Brier, Bob (1999). &quot;The Murder of Tutankhamen: A True Story&quot;. .
* Montet, Pierre (1968). &quot;Lives of the Pharaohs&quot;. World Publishing Company.
* Wafaa El-Saddik. &quot;The Egyptian Museum&quot;. Museum International. (Vol. 57, No.1–2, 2005).
*Also published, with variant titles, in Italy and the UK. Reviews US ed.

==External links==

* Egyptian Museum official website
* Egyptian Museum Unofficial
* Gallery of Items in the Egyptian Museum</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q201219" start="4" end="34" title="Egyptian Museum" label="Museum of Egyptian Antiquities"/>
<link wikidata="Q201219" start="58" end="73" title="Egyptian Museum" label="Egyptian Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q85" start="122" end="127" title="Cairo" label="Cairo"/>
<link wikidata="Q11768" start="169" end="177" title="Ancient Egypt" label="Egyptian"/>
<link wikidata="Q12061" start="286" end="299" title="Tahrir Square" label="Tahrir Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q25036694" start="339" end="353" title="list of largest art museums" label="largest museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q37110" start="392" end="399" title="Pharaoh" label="Pharaoh"/>
<link wikidata="Q12154" start="400" end="411" title="Tutankhamun" label="Tutankhamun"/>
<link wikidata="Q9048095" start="450" end="466" title="Mask of Tutankhamun" label="gold burial mask"/>
<link wikidata="Q11768" start="560" end="573" title="ancient Egypt" label="ancient Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2063168" start="825" end="840" title="Azbakeya" label="Ezbekieh Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1988240" start="864" end="877" title="Cairo Citadel" label="Cairo Citadel"/>
<link wikidata="Q84192" start="888" end="918" title="Maximilian I of Mexico" label="Archduke Maximilian of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q95569" start="999" end="1023" title="Kunsthistorisches Museum" label="Kunsthistorisches Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003523" start="1066" end="1072" title="Boulaq" label="Boulaq"/>
<link wikidata="Q311850" start="1186" end="1202" title="Auguste Mariette" label="Auguste Mariette"/>
<link wikidata="Q3392" start="1240" end="1250" title="Nile River" label="Nile River"/>
<link wikidata="Q3392" start="1324" end="1334" title="Nile River" label="Nile River"/>
<link wikidata="Q81788" start="1405" end="1409" title="Giza" label="Giza"/>
<link wikidata="Q12061" start="1512" end="1525" title="Tahrir Square" label="Tahrir Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="1540" end="1547" title="Italy" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="1618" end="1624" title="France" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q15446086" start="1823" end="1838" title="Wafaa El Saddik" label="Wafaa El Saddik"/>
<link wikidata="Q29198" start="1889" end="1916" title="2011 Egyptian revolution" label="Egyptian Revolution of 2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q12154" start="2286" end="2297" title="Tutankhamun" label="Tutankhamun"/>
<link wikidata="Q81794" start="2357" end="2366" title="Akhenaten" label="Akhenaten"/>
<link wikidata="Q726826" start="2368" end="2375" title="ushabti" label="ushabti"/>
<link wikidata="Q29198" start="2535" end="2550" title="2011 Egyptian revolution" label="2011 Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2130454" start="2856" end="2866" title="Ramy Essam" label="Ramy Essam"/>
<link wikidata="Q28838784" start="2963" end="2985" title="Department of Antiquities" label="Antiquities Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="3030" end="3035" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q182781" start="3123" end="3141" title="Muhammad Ali of Egypt" label="Muhammad Ali Pasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q2063168" start="3507" end="3515" title="Azbakeya" label="Azbakeya"/>
<link wikidata="Q305882" start="3629" end="3644" title="Abbas I of Egypt" label="Khedive Abbas I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124860" start="3645" end="3652" title="Donation" label="donated"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="3708" end="3715" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q311816" start="4090" end="4104" title="Gaston Maspero" label="Gaston Maspero"/>
<link wikidata="Q33506" start="4132" end="4138" title="museum" label="museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003523" start="4144" end="4150" title="Boulaq" label="Boulaq"/>
<link wikidata="Q159378" start="4468" end="4482" title="Isma&amp;#x27;il Pasha of Egypt" label="Khedive Ismail"/>
<link wikidata="Q81788" start="4514" end="4518" title="Giza" label="Giza"/>
<link wikidata="Q12061" start="5088" end="5101" title="Tahrir Square" label="Tahrir Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973889" start="5176" end="5188" title="Qasr El Nil Bridge" label="Qasr El-Nil."/>
<link wikidata="Q157159" start="5256" end="5278" title="Abbas II of Egypt" label="Khedive Abbas Hilmi II"/>
<link wikidata="Q159378" start="5625" end="5639" title="Isma&amp;#x27;il Pasha of Egypt" label="Khedive Ismail"/>
<link wikidata="Q12061" start="8387" end="8400" title="Tahrir Square" label="Tahrir Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q4116921" start="9129" end="9172" title="Ministry of Tourism and Antiquities (Egypt)" label="Ministry of Tourism and Antiquities (Egypt)"/>
<link wikidata="Q12154" start="9509" end="9520" title="Tutankhamun" label="Tutankhamun"/>
<link wikidata="Q2583681" start="9583" end="9604" title="Grand Egyptian Museum" label="Grand Egyptian Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200564" start="11189" end="11217" title="Description de l&amp;#x27;Égypte" label="Description de l&amp;#x27;Égypte"/>
<link wikidata="Q839456" start="13216" end="13222" title="Fustat" label="Fustat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145180" start="13636" end="13643" title="Canopus, Egypt" label="Canopus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2354677" start="13765" end="13778" title="Nubian Museum" label="Nubian Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q29888" start="13782" end="13787" title="Aswan" label="Aswan"/>
<link wikidata="Q29198" start="14097" end="14113" title="2011 Egyptian revolution" label="January 28, 2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q140575" start="14174" end="14185" title="Zahi Hawass" label="Zahi Hawass"/>
<link wikidata="Q4116921" start="14212" end="14242" title="Ministry of State of Antiquities" label="Supreme Council of Antiquities"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="14331" end="14349" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q12154" start="14444" end="14455" title="Tutankhamun" label="Tutankhamun"/>
<link wikidata="Q106353524" start="14741" end="14769" title="Pharaohs&amp;#x27; Golden Parade" label="Pharaohs&amp;#x27; Golden Parade"/>
<link wikidata="Q29017001" start="14874" end="14914" title="National Museum of Egyptian Civilization" label="National Museum of Egyptian Civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q839456" start="14918" end="14924" title="Fustat" label="Fustat"/>
<link wikidata="Q40535" start="16202" end="16264" title="Supreme Council of Antiquities" label="Department of Antiquities (Service d&amp;#x27;Antiquités Egyptien)"/>
<link wikidata="Q40535" start="17140" end="17170" title="Supreme Council of Antiquities" label="Supreme Council of Antiquities"/>
<link wikidata="Q4116921" start="17193" end="17236" title="Ministry of Tourism and Antiquities (Egypt)" label="Ministry of Tourism and Antiquities (Egypt)"/>
<link wikidata="Q28715049" start="17532" end="17547" title="Khaled al-Anani" label="Khaled al-Anani"/>
<link wikidata="Q3284951" start="17743" end="17759" title="Mamdouh Eldamaty" label="Mamdouh Eldamaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041754" start="17882" end="17897" title="Étienne Drioton" label="Étienne Drioton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3297026" start="17913" end="17925" title="Pierre Lacau" label="Pierre Lacau"/>
<link wikidata="Q311816" start="17941" end="17955" title="Gaston Maspero" label="Gaston Maspero"/>
<link wikidata="Q552436" start="17971" end="17983" title="Victor Loret" label="Victor Loret"/>
<link wikidata="Q311816" start="18061" end="18075" title="Gaston Maspero" label="Gaston Maspero"/>
<link wikidata="Q311850" start="18090" end="18106" title="Auguste Mariette" label="Auguste Mariette"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="18781" end="18786" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q50868" start="18800" end="18816" title="Egyptian language" label="ancient Egyptian"/>
<link wikidata="Q157899" start="19521" end="19534" title="Thutmosis III" label="Thutmosis III"/>
<link wikidata="Q157985" start="19536" end="19548" title="Thutmosis IV" label="Thutmosis IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q158052" start="19550" end="19562" title="Amenophis II" label="Amenophis II"/>
<link wikidata="Q129234" start="19564" end="19574" title="Hatshepsut" label="Hatshepsut"/>
<link wikidata="Q849795" start="19593" end="19602" title="Maiherpri" label="Maiherpri"/>
<link wikidata="Q133423" start="19639" end="19658" title="Valley of the Kings" label="Valley of the Kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q12154" start="19712" end="19723" title="Tutankhamun" label="Tutankhamun"/>
<link wikidata="Q380676" start="19728" end="19739" title="Psusennes I" label="Psusennes I"/>
<link wikidata="Q43616" start="19787" end="19794" title="Mummy" label="mummies"/>
<link wikidata="Q180568" start="19842" end="19853" title="New Kingdom of Egypt" label="New Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q29017001" start="19925" end="19965" title="National Museum of Egyptian Civilization" label="National Museum of Egyptian Civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q839456" start="19969" end="19975" title="Fustat" label="Fustat"/>
<link wikidata="Q106353524" start="20011" end="20039" title="Pharaohs&amp;#x27; Golden Parade" label="Pharaohs&amp;#x27; Golden Parade"/>
<link wikidata="Q2583681" start="20107" end="20128" title="Grand Egyptian Museum" label="Grand Egyptian Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q311850" start="20602" end="20618" title="Auguste Mariette" label="Auguste Mariette"/>
<link wikidata="Q558406" start="20675" end="20690" title="François Chabas" label="François Chabas"/>
<link wikidata="Q72177" start="20692" end="20709" title="Johannes Dümichen" label="Johannes Dümichen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5943756" start="20711" end="20727" title="Conradus Leemans" label="Conradus Leemans"/>
<link wikidata="Q5083738" start="20729" end="20753" title="Charles Wycliffe Goodwin" label="Charles Wycliffe Goodwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2087467" start="20755" end="20772" title="Emmanuel de Rougé" label="Emmanuel de Rougé"/>
<link wikidata="Q2742058" start="20774" end="20786" title="Samuel Birch (Egyptologist)" label="Samuel Birch"/>
<link wikidata="Q454770" start="20788" end="20801" title="Edward Hincks" label="Edward Hincks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393092" start="20803" end="20817" title="Luigi Vassalli" label="Luigi Vassalli"/>
<link wikidata="Q73057" start="20819" end="20832" title="Émile Brugsch" label="Émile Brugsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q77231" start="20834" end="20854" title="Karl Richard Lepsius" label="Karl Richard Lepsius"/>
<link wikidata="Q406953" start="20856" end="20872" title="Théodule Devéria" label="Théodule Devéria"/>
<link wikidata="Q545046" start="20874" end="20895" title="Vladimir Golenishchev" label="Vladimir Golenishchev"/>
<link wikidata="Q512183" start="20897" end="20915" title="Ippolito Rosellini" label="Ippolito Rosellini"/>
<link wikidata="Q699342" start="20917" end="20930" title="Labib Habachi" label="Labib Habachi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2217095" start="20932" end="20942" title="Sami Gabra" label="Sami Gabra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391130" start="20944" end="20956" title="Selim Hassan" label="Selim Hassan"/>
<link wikidata="Q329705" start="20958" end="20969" title="Ahmed Kamal (Egyptologist)" label="Ahmed Kamal"/>
<link wikidata="Q144601" start="20971" end="20985" title="Zakaria Goneim" label="Zakaria Goneim"/>
<link wikidata="Q260" start="20987" end="21012" title="Jean-François Champollion" label="Jean-François Champollion"/>
<link wikidata="" start="21014" end="21027" title=":it:Amedeo Peyron (filologo)" label="Amedeo Peyron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1962883" start="21029" end="21042" title="Willem Pleyte" label="Willem Pleyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q311816" start="21044" end="21058" title="Gaston Maspero" label="Gaston Maspero"/>
<link wikidata="Q706076" start="21060" end="21080" title="Peter le Page Renouf" label="Peter le Page Renouf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399403" start="21085" end="21106" title="Kazimierz Michałowski" label="Kazimierz Michałowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q19877" start="21136" end="21160" title="Museo Egizio" label="Egyptian Museum of Turin"/>
<link wikidata="Q254156" start="21163" end="21188" title="Egyptian Museum of Berlin" label="Egyptian Museum of Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q29017001" start="21191" end="21231" title="National Museum of Egyptian Civilization" label="National Museum of Egyptian Civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q2583681" start="21234" end="21255" title="Grand Egyptian Museum" label="Grand Egyptian Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q25036694" start="21258" end="21285" title="List of largest art museums" label="List of largest art museums"/>
<link wikidata="Q4111655" start="21288" end="21350" title="List of museums with major collections of Egyptian antiquities" label="List of museums with major collections of Egyptian antiquities"/>
<link wikidata="Q887826" start="21404" end="21414" title="Bob Brier" label="Brier, Bob"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="187783" wikidata="Q247615" url="?curid=187783" title="607 BC">
<text>The year 607 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. In the Roman Empire, it was known as year 147 &quot;[[Ab urbe condita]]&quot;. The denomination 607 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.

==Events==
*Halley&#x27;s Comet was visible from March 15 through March 26 and passed within 13.5 million kilometers from Earth.

==Births==
*Sudharmaswami, fifth ganadhara of Mahavira (died 507 BC)
*Pisistratus tyrant of Athens.

==Deaths==
*King Kuang of Zhou, king of the Zhou dynasty of China
*Duke Ling of Jin, ruler of the Chinese state of Jin

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q247615" start="9" end="15" title="607 BC" label="607 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q200966" start="34" end="59" title="Roman calendar" label="pre-Julian Roman calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="68" end="80" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q247615" start="98" end="132" title="607 BC" label="year 147 &amp;quot;[[Ab urbe condita]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q159791" start="234" end="245" title="Anno Domini" label="Anno Domini"/>
<link wikidata="Q4375074" start="246" end="258" title="calendar era" label="calendar era"/>
<link wikidata="Q23054" start="328" end="347" title="Halley&amp;#x27;s Comet" label="Halley&amp;#x27;s Comet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7633775" start="458" end="471" title="Sudharmaswami" label="Sudharmaswami"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778571" start="479" end="488" title="ganadhara" label="ganadhara"/>
<link wikidata="Q9422" start="492" end="500" title="Mahavira" label="Mahavira"/>
<link wikidata="Q241171" start="507" end="513" title="507 BC" label="507 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q242172" start="516" end="527" title="Pisistratus" label="Pisistratus"/>
<link wikidata="Q180095" start="528" end="534" title="tyrant" label="tyrant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1157087" start="559" end="577" title="King Kuang of Zhou" label="King Kuang of Zhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q35216" start="591" end="603" title="Zhou dynasty" label="Zhou dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="607" end="612" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052924" start="614" end="630" title="Duke Ling of Jin" label="Duke Ling of Jin"/>
<link wikidata="Q912043" start="662" end="665" title="Jin (Chinese state)" label="Jin"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="187784" wikidata="Q248600" url="?curid=187784" title="613 BC">
<text>The year 613 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. In the Roman Empire, it was known as year 141 &quot;[[Ab urbe condita]]&quot;. The denomination 613 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.

==Events==
* King Zhuang of Chu becomes king of Chu in China.

==Births==

==Deaths==
* She (Qi), temporary ruler of the state of Qi
* King Qing of Zhou, king of the Chinese Zhou dynasty
* Duke Zhao of Qi, ruler of Qi

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q248600" start="9" end="15" title="613 BC" label="613 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q200966" start="34" end="59" title="Roman calendar" label="pre-Julian Roman calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="68" end="80" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q248600" start="98" end="138" title="613 BC" label="year 141 &amp;quot;[[Ab urbe condita]]&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q159791" start="234" end="245" title="Anno Domini" label="Anno Domini"/>
<link wikidata="Q4375074" start="246" end="258" title="calendar era" label="calendar era"/>
<link wikidata="Q198154" start="329" end="347" title="King Zhuang of Chu" label="King Zhuang of Chu"/>
<link wikidata="Q504759" start="364" end="367" title="Chu (state)" label="Chu"/>
<link wikidata="Q700257" start="404" end="412" title="She (Qi)" label="She (Qi)"/>
<link wikidata="Q837855" start="437" end="448" title="Qi (state)" label="state of Qi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1157084" start="451" end="468" title="King Qing of Zhou" label="King Qing of Zhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="482" end="489" title="China" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q35216" start="490" end="502" title="Zhou dynasty" label="Zhou dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q700221" start="505" end="520" title="Duke Zhao of Qi" label="Duke Zhao of Qi"/>
<link wikidata="Q837855" start="531" end="533" title="Qi (state)" label="Qi"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="187787" wikidata="Q1172097" url="?curid=187787" title="Albert of Mecklenburg">
<text>Albert of Mecklenburg may refer to:

* Albert I, Duke of Mecklenburg-Stargard (bef. 1377–1397)
* Albert II, Duke of Mecklenburg (1318–1379)
* Albert III, Duke of Mecklenburg, better known as Albert, King of Sweden (1338–1412)
* Albert IV, Duke of Mecklenburg (bef. 1363–1388)
* Albert V, Duke of Mecklenburg (1397–1423) 
* Albert VI, Duke of Mecklenburg (1438–bef.1483)
* Albrecht VII, Duke of Mecklenburg (1486–1547)
* Albert VIII, Duke of Mecklenburg, better known as Albrecht von Wallenstein (1583–1634)
* John Albert I, Duke of Mecklenburg (1525–1576)
* John Albert II, Duke of Mecklenburg (1590–1636)
* Duke John Albert of Mecklenburg (1857–1920)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q321964" start="39" end="77" title="Albert I, Duke of Mecklenburg-Stargard" label="Albert I, Duke of Mecklenburg-Stargard"/>
<link wikidata="Q64251" start="97" end="127" title="Albert II, Duke of Mecklenburg" label="Albert II, Duke of Mecklenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q167250" start="191" end="213" title="Albert, King of Sweden" label="Albert, King of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q77699" start="228" end="258" title="Albert IV, Duke of Mecklenburg" label="Albert IV, Duke of Mecklenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q67059" start="278" end="307" title="Albert V, Duke of Mecklenburg" label="Albert V, Duke of Mecklenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q70358" start="323" end="353" title="Albert VI, Duke of Mecklenburg" label="Albert VI, Duke of Mecklenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q684224" start="372" end="405" title="Albrecht VII, Duke of Mecklenburg" label="Albrecht VII, Duke of Mecklenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q153545" start="470" end="494" title="Albrecht von Wallenstein" label="Albrecht von Wallenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q668049" start="509" end="543" title="John Albert I, Duke of Mecklenburg" label="John Albert I, Duke of Mecklenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q571404" start="558" end="593" title="John Albert II, Duke of Mecklenburg" label="John Albert II, Duke of Mecklenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q61464" start="608" end="639" title="Duke John Albert of Mecklenburg" label="Duke John Albert of Mecklenburg"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="187792" wikidata="Q7627660" url="?curid=187792" title="Student Conservation Association">
<text>The Student Conservation Association (SCA) is a non-profit group in the United States whose mission is to build the next generation of conservation leaders and inspire lifelong stewardship of the environment and communities by engaging young people in hands-on service to the land through service opportunities, outdoor skills, and leadership training.

==History==

In 1955, Elizabeth Titus Putnam, a student at Vassar College, wrote her senior thesis, &quot;A Proposed Student Conservation Corps&quot;. The idea, modeled after the federal Civilian Conservation Corps program (1933–42), was to take the burden of labor-intensive jobs such as entrance fee collecting or trail work from the National Park Service and shift to the SCC. Putnum worked with Martha Hayne Talbot to advocate for the proposal to the superintendents of Olympic, Grand Teton, Mount Rainier and Yellowstone National Parks. In 1957, the Student Conservation Program (forerunner to SCA) had two separate programs in Grand Teton National Park and Olympic National Park. In 1964, the Student Conservation Program incorporated as the Student Conservation Association. Since then, the organization has grown significantly and currently places more than 4,000 volunteers annually in public lands and urban green spaces.

== Work programs ==
The SCA&#x27;s 4,000 volunteers annually provide more than 2 million hours of conservation service, including trail construction, wildlife research, habitat restoration and GIS mapping; in parks, forests, refuges and urban green spaces in all 50 states. SCA members annually serve more than 500 natural and cultural sites in all 50 states. More than 20 million people directly benefit from SCA conservation services each year. Since 1957, SCA&#x27;s 50,000+ members around the world have provided service valued at over half a billion dollars. SCA members build or maintain more than 2,500 miles of trail per year. 70% of SCA alumni remain active in conservation in their careers or communities.

===Conservation crews===

Every summer, the SCA places over 600 young people aged 15+ into crews of six or eight in national parks, national wilderness areas, national monuments, Bureau of Land Management-controlled lands, military ranges, and other federally controlled lands throughout the United States. The crews are divided into frontcountry and backcountry crews, with frontcountry crews being based within one mile of a road and most likely having easier access to showers, stores, and park rangers. Backcountry crews are usually more isolated.
The projects performed by the crews vary. The Conservation Crews typically do trail work, usually trail construction or erosion control, depending on the needs of the park. Other projects may include restoration of tourist-impacted areas and invasive species removal. The projects last from 21–30 days with a 4–5 day recreational trip at the end.

The program had been free to students except for the cost of transportation to the prearranged meeting location, usually a nearby airport. As of Spring 2016, students are charged a flat $500 fee, though financial aid may be available. Also, students provide most of their own necessary outdoor gear. Expenses are shared between the SCA, agency partners, and individual donors. Financial assistance is available to cover transportation costs, and SCA can provide gear to those needing it.

Once at their worksite, the students work eight hours a day, six days a week. The crews are led usually by two trained, experienced crew leaders, men and women over the age of 21. Most crew leaders are college students or teachers, though there are leaders in their 60s. The sponsoring organization such as the Park Service or Bureau of Land Management provides instruction and tools, but the crews are responsible for completing their job without supervision. On days off, they may undertake an ambitious hike or just relax around camp. At the end of their conservation project, all crews take a short recreation trip to enjoy the area, often a backpacking trip.

The SCA lists a catalog of conservation crew work sites on their website. For conservation crews, SCA begins reviewing applications in January and offers of placement are sent out beginning in April.

===Conservation interns===

Through partnerships with agencies such as the National Park Service, the SCA places people 18 and over into internship positions. There are two different types: short and long term internships. The short term internships last under three months, while long term internships can last from 6 to 12 months. The jobs performed by the interns varies. They can include backcountry patrol, working with visitors, and conducting ecological surveys. The interns are provided with a stipend, housing (in most cases), and an AmeriCorps Stipend. The admissions process for each internship is on a rolling basis, with each internship position having a closing date. Students can apply for as many positions as they wish.

Many short-term Conservation Internship Positions involve work such as soil and water monitoring, GIS work, naturalist work, interpretation, visitor assistance, and more. The majority of short-term conservation internship positions are during the summer season, but positions are also offered all year long.

Interns often work either on a one-to-one basis with state or federal professionals, or in groups as part of the Conservation Corps.

===Community programs===

The SCA offers community programs in the following cities: Houston, Stamford, Seattle, Edmonds, Oakland, Washington, D.C., Baltimore, Chicago, Detroit, Manchester, Milwaukee, New Jersey, Philadelphia, Camden, New Jersey, Anchorage, Alaska, New York City, New York, Seattle, and Pittsburgh.

The Conservation Leadership Corps (CLC) program takes place year-round in regional offices. The format of the CLC program varies from region to region. All students successfully completing the CLC program will have the opportunity to participate in a summer Conservation Crew and will have their airfare covered by their regional office. As part of the CLC, members volunteer on weekends throughout the school year in their home city, build trails, restore river and lakefront environments, conserve habitats, learn about the environment through field trips, go on weekend camping excursions, and give back to the community through service projects.

The Summer Community Crews are six to seven week crews over the summer in which students complete trail maintenance and site restoration projects in public parks, learn about the local environment through field trips led by the Crew Leader, visit local parks, learn outdoor skills, and go on a recreational camping trip.

===Conservation Corps===

At the Conservation Corps sites, members learn conservation skills. Corps are teams with members living and working with others who share a connection to the land and the people who live there.

Corps members spend 3–10 months of their time devoted to critical environmental issues such as wildfire management and education, trail restoration and maintenance, environmental education, and invasive species eradication.

==Environmental education==

The SCA emphasizes environmental education in their programming. The organization encourages students and members to engage with the natural environment with the goal that the students will become attached to the natural world, and then more likely to preserve and protect it.

==Wilderness Risk Management Conference==
Additionally, the SCA along with Outward Bound and NOLS, sponsor the Wilderness Risk Management Conference.

== Gallery of the Student Conservation Association at work ==
==References==
== External links ==
* Student Conservation Association website
* Vassar College tribute to Putnam, which includes a copy of her Original Thesis (PDF)
* Student Conservation Association&#x27;s CLC program</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7627660" start="4" end="36" title="Student Conservation Association" label="Student Conservation Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088777" start="135" end="147" title="Conservation movement" label="conservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5381363" start="177" end="188" title="Environmental stewardship" label="stewardship"/>
<link wikidata="Q190007" start="236" end="248" title="young people" label="young people"/>
<link wikidata="Q2043121" start="289" end="310" title="Community service" label="service opportunities"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508666" start="312" end="326" title="Outdoor education" label="outdoor skills"/>
<link wikidata="Q1481075" start="332" end="351" title="Leadership development" label="leadership training"/>
<link wikidata="Q5362651" start="376" end="398" title="Elizabeth Titus Putnam" label="Elizabeth Titus Putnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2093794" start="413" end="427" title="Vassar College" label="Vassar College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266946" start="439" end="452" title="senior thesis" label="senior thesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094508" start="541" end="568" title="Civilian Conservation Corps" label="Civilian Conservation Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q308439" start="690" end="711" title="National Park Service" label="National Park Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q115329395" start="753" end="772" title="Martha Hayne Talbot" label="Martha Hayne Talbot"/>
<link wikidata="Q222695" start="987" end="1012" title="Grand Teton National Park" label="Grand Teton National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q372093" start="1017" end="1038" title="Olympic National Park" label="Olympic National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q3034648" start="1249" end="1260" title="public land" label="public land"/>
<link wikidata="Q22652" start="1266" end="1283" title="urban green space" label="urban green space"/>
<link wikidata="Q46169" start="2120" end="2133" title="national park" label="national park"/>
<link wikidata="Q587409" start="2136" end="2161" title="National Wilderness Preservation System" label="national wilderness areas"/>
<link wikidata="Q893775" start="2163" end="2181" title="US National Monument" label="national monuments"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010556" start="2183" end="2208" title="Bureau of Land Management" label="Bureau of Land Management"/>
<link wikidata="Q511243" start="4802" end="4812" title="AmeriCorps" label="AmeriCorps"/>
<link wikidata="Q483130" start="5095" end="5098" title="GIS" label="GIS"/>
<link wikidata="Q16555" start="5525" end="5532" title="Houston, Texas" label="Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q49169" start="5534" end="5542" title="Stamford, Connecticut" label="Stamford"/>
<link wikidata="Q5083" start="5544" end="5551" title="Seattle, Washington" label="Seattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055845" start="5553" end="5560" title="Edmonds, Washington" label="Edmonds"/>
<link wikidata="Q17042" start="5562" end="5569" title="Oakland, California" label="Oakland"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="5571" end="5587" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q5092" start="5589" end="5598" title="Baltimore, Maryland" label="Baltimore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="5600" end="5607" title="Chicago, Illinois" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q12439" start="5609" end="5616" title="Detroit, Michigan" label="Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q48370" start="5618" end="5628" title="Manchester, New Hampshire" label="Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q37836" start="5630" end="5639" title="Milwaukee" label="Milwaukee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="5641" end="5651" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="5653" end="5665" title="Philadelphia, Pennsylvania" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5083" start="5731" end="5738" title="Seattle, Washington" label="Seattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342" start="5744" end="5754" title="Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania" label="Pittsburgh"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7046" end="7065" title="wildfire management" label="wildfire management"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7081" end="7098" title="trail restoration" label="trail restoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q948732" start="7116" end="7139" title="environmental education" label="environmental education"/>
<link wikidata="Q17053565" start="7594" end="7631" title="Wilderness Risk Management Conference" label="Wilderness Risk Management Conference"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="187794" wikidata="Q1350541" url="?curid=187794" title="Steven Bochco">
<text>Steven Ronald Bochco (December 16, 1943 – April 1, 2018) was an American television writer and producer. He developed a number of television series, mostly crime dramas, including &quot;Hill Street Blues&quot;; &quot;L.A. Law&quot;; &quot;Doogie Howser, M.D.&quot;; &quot;Cop Rock&quot;; and &quot;NYPD Blue&quot;.

==Early life==
Bochco was born to a Jewish family in New York City, the son of Mimi, a painter, and Rudolph Bochco, a concert violinist and Polish immigrant. He was educated in Manhattan at the High School of Music and Art. His elder sister is actress Joanna Frank.

In 1961, he enrolled at Carnegie Institute of Technology (now known as Carnegie Mellon University after merging with the Mellon Institute in 1967) in Pittsburgh to study playwriting and theater. He graduated with a Bachelor of Fine Arts (BFA) in Theater in 1966, having also had an MCA Writing Fellowship.

==Career==
Bochco went to work for Universal Pictures&#x27; television division as a writer and then story editor on &quot;Ironside&quot;, &quot;Columbo&quot;, &quot;McMillan &amp; Wife&quot;, and the short-lived Lorne Greene and Ben Murphy series, &quot;Griff&quot;, as well as &quot;Delvecchio&quot; and &quot;The Invisible Man&quot;.

He wrote the story and teleplay for the &quot;Columbo&quot; episode &quot;Murder by the Book&quot; (1971), and the teleplays for several other episodes. He wrote the screenplay for the 1968 film &quot;The Counterfeit Killer&quot; and worked on &quot;Silent Running&quot; (1972) and &quot;Double Indemnity&quot; (1973). He left Universal in 1978 to go to MTM Enterprises where he had greater scope for producing. His first effort there was the short-lived CBS police drama &quot;Paris&quot;, notable as the first series on which James Earl Jones played a lead role.

He achieved major success for NBC with the police drama &quot;Hill Street Blues&quot;. It ran from 1981 to 1987 and Bochco was credited as co-creator along with Michael Kozoll, also writing and producing. The series also garnered considerable critical acclaim and many awards, and was nominated for a total of 98 Emmy Awards throughout its run. Bochco was fired from MTM in 1985 following the failure of &quot;Bay City Blues&quot; (1983).

Bochco moved to 20th Century Fox where he co-created and produced &quot;L.A. Law&quot; (1986–94) which aired on NBC. This series was also widely acclaimed and a regular award winner. In 1987, Bochco co-created the half-hour dramedy &quot;Hooperman&quot; which starred John Ritter but was canceled after two seasons, despite Bochco offering to take over direct day-to-day control of a third season. &quot;Hooperman&quot; was part of a lucrative deal with ABC in 1987 to create and produce ten new television series, which prompted Bochco to form Steven Bochco Productions. That year, Bochco was in final talks with an exclusive agreement with CBS or ABC, and ABC reportedly being the winning bid. From this deal came &quot;Doogie Howser, M.D.&quot; (1989–93) and &quot;Cop Rock&quot; (1990). The latter combined straight police drama with live-action Broadway singing and dancing, and was one of his highest-profile failures. In 1992, Bochco created an animated television series, &quot;Capitol Critters&quot;, along with Nat Mauldin and Michael Wagner.

After a lull, Bochco co-created &quot;NYPD Blue&quot; (1993–2005) with David Milch. Initially controversial at the time, the series was created with the express intention of changing the nature of network one-hour drama to compete with the more adult fare broadcast on cable networks. The spring 1994 television schedule on ABC presented the only run of a television series executive produced by Bochco, &quot;The Byrds of Paradise&quot;. The series showcased a plot structure that was an early forerunner in presenting a more realistic, and not idealized, representation of character development in the prime time television format, but it aired for only one season, and has yet to be re-aired on television. Although &quot;The Byrds of Paradise&quot; achieved significant critical acclaim during its initial run, and helped launch the careers of actors Seth Green and Jennifer Love Hewitt, the show has never received an official release on any home video format or streaming media platform. Other projects in this period that failed to take off include &quot;Murder One&quot; (1995–97), &quot;Brooklyn South&quot; (1997), &quot;City of Angels&quot; (2000), &quot;Philly&quot; (2001), and &quot;Over There&quot; (2005). All five shows failed to match Bochco&#x27;s earlier success though &quot;Murder One&quot; and &quot;Over There&quot; garnered critical praise. In 1995, he had a contract with CBS to air the network&#x27;s future programs, and had to distribute the shows worldwide. In 1999, he moved to Paramount Television where he remained until 2005. Shortly afterwards, he was moved to ABC&#x27;s corporate subsidiary Touchstone Television later in 2005.

In 2005, Bochco took charge of &quot;Commander in Chief&quot; (2005–06), created by Rod Lurie, and brought in a new writing team. However, in spring 2006, he left the show because of conflicts with ABC, and shortly afterward the program was canceled. Bochco described his experience on the show as &quot;horrible&quot;. In 2006 Bochco produced a pilot for an ABC show, &quot;Hollis &amp; Rae&quot;, and was reported at the same time to be developing a baseball drama and another legal drama for ABC in partnership with Chris Gerolmo.

It was announced in March 2007 that Bochco had taken his first steps into internet TV with the 44-episode &quot;Cafe Confidential&quot;, each episode being 60-seconds of unscripted &quot;confessions&quot; by members of the public. Yet another legal drama titled &quot;Raising the Bar&quot; was produced for TNT, this time in partnership with David Feige, although it was cancelled in December 2009 during the second season.

According to an interview with Bochco published in September 2007, he was winding down his involvement with network television, feeling that his tastes and current fashions in TV drama no longer coincide. &quot;The network executives stay the same age and I keep getting older and it creates a different kind of relationship. When I was doing my stuff at NBC with Brandon [Tartikoff] and &quot;Hill Street&quot;, we were contemporaries,&quot; says Bochco. &quot;When I sit down [now], they&#x27;re sitting in a room with someone who&#x27;s old enough to be their father and I&#x27;m not sure they want to sit in a room with their fathers.&quot;

In 2008, Bochco argued that the new home for quality prime time drama is cable, where &quot;the atmosphere is far friendlier and the creative environment more conducive to doing original work&quot;, and that &quot;most of what&#x27;s passing for primetime drama these days isn&#x27;t very good&quot;.

Prior to &quot;Hill Street Blues&quot; it was rare for American straight drama series to have story arcs, i.e. several stories running over many episodes (with the exception of prime time soap operas such as &quot;Dallas&quot;). It was also rare to have a large regular cast. The structure of the modern &quot;ensemble&quot; television drama can be traced to Bochco, who many regard as having changed the &quot;language&quot; of television drama.

From 2014 to its cancellation in 2016, he wrote and executive produced &quot;Murder in the First&quot;, a series drama which he co-created with Eric Lodal.

==Personal life==
Bochco was married three times: to Gabrielle Levin from 1964 to their divorce in 1969, to actress Barbara Bosson from 1970 to their divorce in 1997, and to television producer and executive Dayna Kalins from 2000 until his death. Bochco had three children. His son, Jesse Bochco, with Bosson, is a producer/director who directed several episodes of his father&#x27;s shows, including &quot;NYPD Blue&quot;, &quot;Philly&quot;, and &quot;Over There&quot;. As a child, son Jesse played the son of his real mother&#x27;s character on one episode of &quot;Hill Street Blues&quot;. 

At the time of his death, Bochco lived in the Pacific Palisades neighborhood of Los Angeles.

===Health and death===
Bochco was diagnosed with leukemia in 2014, requiring a bone marrow transplant later that year. He died from the disease at his home on April 1, 2018, at age 74.

==Filmography==
==Awards==
===Emmy Awards===
34 nominations, with 10 wins:
*1981 Outstanding Drama Series, for &quot;Hill Street Blues&quot;
*1981 Outstanding Writing in a Drama Series, for &quot;Hill Street Blues&quot;, &quot;Hill Street Station&quot; (premiere episode)
*1982 Outstanding Drama Series, for &quot;Hill Street Blues&quot;
*1982 Outstanding Writing in a Drama Series, for &quot;Hill Street Blues&quot;, &quot;Freedom&#x27;s Last Stand&quot;
*1983 Outstanding Drama Series, for &quot;Hill Street Blues&quot;
*1984 Outstanding Drama Series, for &quot;Hill Street Blues&quot;
*1987 Outstanding Drama Series, for &quot;L.A. Law&quot;
*1987 Outstanding Writing in a Drama Series, for &quot;L.A. Law&quot;, &quot;The Venus Butterfly&quot;
*1989 Outstanding Drama Series, for &quot;L.A. Law&quot;
*1995 Outstanding Drama Series, for &quot;NYPD Blue&quot;

===Humanitas Prize===
Four nominations, with two wins:

*1981 60-Minute Category, for &quot;Hill Street Blues&quot;
*1999 90-Minute Category, for &quot;NYPD Blue&quot;

===Edgar Awards===
Seven nominations, with two wins:

*1982 Best Episode in a TV Series Teleplay, for &quot;Hill Street Blues&quot;, &quot;Hill Street Station&quot;
*1995 Best Episode in a TV Series Teleplay, for &quot;NYPD Blue&quot;, &quot;Simone Says&quot;

===Directors Guild of America===
*1999 Diversity Award

===Producers Guild of America Awards===
One nomination/win:

*1994 Outstanding Producer of Television, for &quot;NYPD Blue&quot;
In addition:
*1999 Lifetime Achievement Award

===Writers Guild of America===
Thirteen nominations, with two wins:

*1982 Best Writing for an Episodic Drama, for &quot;Hill Street Blues&quot;, &quot;Hill Street Station&quot;
*1985 Best Writing in for Episodic Drama, for &quot;Hill Street Blues&quot;, &quot;Grace Under Pressure&quot;
In addition:
*1994 Laurel Award for TV Writing Achievement

===Peabody Awards===
*1981 for &quot;Hill Street Blues&quot;
*1987 for &quot;L.A. Law&quot;
*1996 for &quot;NYPD Blue&quot;
*1998 for &quot;NYPD Blue&quot;, the episode &quot;Raging Bulls&quot;

In addition to these awards, Bochco was inducted into the Television Hall of Fame in 1996.

== Books ==
* &quot;Death by Hollywood: A Novel&quot; (2003). New York: Random House. .
* &quot;Truth is a Total Defense: My Fifty Years in Television&quot; (2016). CreateSpace Independent Publishing Platform. .

== Explanatory notes ==
== References ==
==External links==
*Biography at Museum TV </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1350541" start="0" end="20" title="Steven Bochco" label="Steven Ronald Bochco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247241" start="186" end="203" title="Hill Street Blues" label="Hill Street Blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247212" start="217" end="225" title="L.A. Law" label="L.A. Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q937913" start="239" end="258" title="Doogie Howser, M.D." label="Doogie Howser, M.D."/>
<link wikidata="Q2996695" start="272" end="280" title="Cop Rock" label="Cop Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q609274" start="298" end="307" title="NYPD Blue" label="NYPD Blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q678551" start="352" end="358" title="American Jews" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q11299" start="493" end="502" title="Manhattan" label="Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7739610" start="510" end="538" title="The High School of Music and Art" label="High School of Music and Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q6205830" start="568" end="580" title="Joanna Frank" label="Joanna Frank"/>
<link wikidata="Q190080" start="607" end="639" title="Carnegie Tech" label="Carnegie Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q190080" start="654" end="680" title="Carnegie Mellon University" label="Carnegie Mellon University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3854267" start="704" end="720" title="Mellon Institute" label="Mellon Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342" start="733" end="743" title="Pittsburgh" label="Pittsburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2878277" start="798" end="819" title="Bachelor of Fine Arts" label="Bachelor of Fine Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q168383" start="925" end="943" title="Universal Pictures" label="Universal Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337530" start="950" end="969" title="Universal Television" label="television division"/>
<link wikidata="Q892438" start="1013" end="1021" title="Ironside (TV series)" label="Ironside"/>
<link wikidata="Q371207" start="1035" end="1042" title="Columbo" label="Columbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247499" start="1056" end="1075" title="McMillan &amp;amp; Wife" label="McMillan &amp;amp; Wife"/>
<link wikidata="Q550784" start="1103" end="1115" title="Lorne Greene" label="Lorne Greene"/>
<link wikidata="Q4886202" start="1120" end="1130" title="Ben Murphy" label="Ben Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3776720" start="1145" end="1150" title="Griff (TV series)" label="Griff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185057" start="1175" end="1185" title="Delvecchio (TV series)" label="Delvecchio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197705" start="1202" end="1219" title="The Invisible Man (1975 TV series)" label="The Invisible Man"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1274" end="1281" title="List of Columbo episodes#Season 1" label="Columbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q21869258" start="1429" end="1451" title="The Counterfeit Killer" label="The Counterfeit Killer"/>
<link wikidata="Q770904" start="1478" end="1492" title="Silent Running" label="Silent Running"/>
<link wikidata="Q478209" start="1516" end="1532" title="Double Indemnity" label="Double Indemnity"/>
<link wikidata="Q4043490" start="1582" end="1597" title="MTM Enterprises" label="MTM Enterprises"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="1683" end="1686" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q930765" start="1706" end="1711" title="Paris (1979 TV series)" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q203960" start="1756" end="1772" title="James Earl Jones" label="James Earl Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="1824" end="1827" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247241" start="1856" end="1873" title="Hill Street Blues" label="Hill Street Blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q3018219" start="1955" end="1969" title="Michael Kozoll" label="Michael Kozoll"/>
<link wikidata="Q123737" start="2107" end="2117" title="Emmy Award" label="Emmy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q4873957" start="2204" end="2218" title="Bay City Blues" label="Bay City Blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q434841" start="2250" end="2266" title="20th Century Fox" label="20th Century Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247212" start="2306" end="2314" title="L.A. Law" label="L.A. Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q859369" start="2458" end="2465" title="dramedy" label="dramedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1664630" start="2472" end="2481" title="Hooperman" label="Hooperman"/>
<link wikidata="Q314812" start="2502" end="2513" title="John Ritter" label="John Ritter"/>
<link wikidata="Q169889" start="2688" end="2691" title="American Broadcasting Company" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="2876" end="2879" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q937913" start="2956" end="2975" title="Doogie Howser, M.D." label="Doogie Howser, M.D."/>
<link wikidata="Q2996695" start="3002" end="3010" title="Cop Rock" label="Cop Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q794258" start="3220" end="3236" title="Capitol Critters" label="Capitol Critters"/>
<link wikidata="Q609274" start="3326" end="3335" title="NYPD Blue" label="NYPD Blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1175673" start="3359" end="3370" title="David Milch" label="David Milch"/>
<link wikidata="Q3986163" start="3698" end="3719" title="The Byrds of Paradise" label="The Byrds of Paradise"/>
<link wikidata="Q745818" start="3892" end="3902" title="prime time" label="prime time"/>
<link wikidata="Q186757" start="4143" end="4153" title="Seth Green" label="Seth Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q175104" start="4158" end="4178" title="Jennifer Love Hewitt" label="Jennifer Love Hewitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2561317" start="4235" end="4245" title="home video" label="home video"/>
<link wikidata="Q220499" start="4256" end="4271" title="streaming media" label="streaming media"/>
<link wikidata="Q9384627" start="4350" end="4360" title="Murder One (TV series)" label="Murder One"/>
<link wikidata="Q2702538" start="4384" end="4398" title="Brooklyn South" label="Brooklyn South"/>
<link wikidata="Q5123562" start="4419" end="4433" title="City of Angels (2000 TV series)" label="City of Angels"/>
<link wikidata="Q2072942" start="4454" end="4460" title="Philly (TV series)" label="Philly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1858443" start="4485" end="4495" title="Over There (American TV series)" label="Over There"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="4686" end="4689" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q65081856" start="4797" end="4817" title="Paramount Television" label="Paramount Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q287218" start="4916" end="4937" title="ABC Signature" label="Touchstone Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q697031" start="4991" end="5009" title="Commander in Chief (TV series)" label="Commander in Chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q432655" start="5038" end="5047" title="Rod Lurie" label="Rod Lurie"/>
<link wikidata="Q737289" start="5473" end="5486" title="Chris Gerolmo" label="Chris Gerolmo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1763875" start="5757" end="5772" title="Raising the Bar (2008 TV series)" label="Raising the Bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q688333" start="5796" end="5799" title="Turner Network Television" label="TNT"/>
<link wikidata="Q5233591" start="5831" end="5842" title="David Feige" label="David Feige"/>
<link wikidata="Q2620972" start="6956" end="6965" title="story arc" label="story arc"/>
<link wikidata="Q168708" start="7076" end="7082" title="Dallas (1978 TV series)" label="Dallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q14931565" start="7387" end="7406" title="Murder in the First (TV series)" label="Murder in the First"/>
<link wikidata="Q16215896" start="7454" end="7464" title="Eric Lodal" label="Eric Lodal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1816361" start="7583" end="7597" title="Barbara Bosson" label="Barbara Bosson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186160" start="7751" end="7763" title="Jesse Bochco" label="Jesse Bochco"/>
<link wikidata="Q609274" start="7875" end="7884" title="NYPD Blue" label="NYPD Blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q2072942" start="7898" end="7904" title="Philly (TV series)" label="Philly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1858443" start="7922" end="7932" title="Over There (American TV series)" label="Over There"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247241" start="8037" end="8054" title="Hill Street Blues" label="Hill Street Blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370207" start="8110" end="8127" title="Pacific Palisades, Los Angeles" label="Pacific Palisades"/>
<link wikidata="Q29496" start="8207" end="8215" title="leukemia" label="leukemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q989438" start="8425" end="8449" title="Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Drama Series" label="Outstanding Drama Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696954" start="10471" end="10494" title="Television Hall of Fame" label="Television Hall of Fame"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="187797" wikidata="Q1535312" url="?curid=187797" title="Stola">
<text>The stola () (pl. stolae) was the traditional garment of Roman women, corresponding to the toga that was worn by men. It was also called &quot;vestis longa&quot; in Latin literary sources, pointing to its length.

==History==
The &quot;stola&quot; was a staple of fashion in ancient Rome spanning from the early Roman Republic until the beginning of the 2nd century CE. The garment was first identified on statues by Margarete Bieber. The first evidence of the &quot;stola&quot;/&quot;vestis longa&quot; dates to the 3rd century BCE, but the form of the garment is common in the Mediterranean world and so it must be much older. In Republican times, it was simply part of Roman female dress practice. In Augustan times, when it was used much less, the &quot;stola&quot; was taken up by Imperial cultural policy and was turned – like the &quot;vitta&quot; (plaited headband) – into a dress insigne of married Roman women. It may even have been a legal privilege. By this time, it was worn only by women of the social elite. At the beginning of the 2nd century CE, the &quot;stola&quot; fell completely out of use. However, the term &quot;matrona stolata&quot;, referring to married women of equestrian rank, remained a technical term in inscriptions. 

A well-known image of the stola is the one worn by the Statue of Liberty in New York City.

=== Social conventions ===
It has long been believed that Roman women originally did not wear &quot;stolae&quot; and that they instead wore togas like the men. However, this goes back to a scholarly lore invented in Late Antiquity. For the most part, the &quot;toga&quot; was worn exclusively by men, and Roman wives (&quot;matronae&quot;) traditionally wore the &quot;stola&quot;. In Latin literature, wearing the male &quot;toga&quot; was associated with prostitution and adultery. In Roman life, the only Roman women who wore a &quot;toga&quot; were unfree prostitutes (referred to as &quot;meretrices&quot; or &quot;ancillae&quot;) who worked in the streets and in brothels. A Roman matron convicted of adultery (&quot;moecha damnata&quot;) did not actually have to wear a &quot;toga&quot; in public from then on. She was only symbolically called a &quot;togata&quot; (a woman in &quot;toga&quot;) since she was unfit to be a matron (as epitomized by the &quot;stola&quot;). Female and male citizen children could wear a &quot;toga&quot; &quot;praetexta&quot; (a toga with purple border), but this usage should be kept apart from wearing the toga as an adult.

== Description ==
The &quot;stola&quot; was a long, pleated, sleeveless robe that could be worn by Roman wives (&quot;matronae&quot;). It was worn as a symbol and represented a woman&#x27;s marital status, and it was also worn by the Roman Vestal priestesses. There are no physical remains of any &quot;stola&quot;. The matron’s &quot;stola&quot; usually served as an intermediate garment and was worn over the undertunic (&quot;subucula&quot;) and under the cloak (&quot;pallium&quot;). It looked like a ‘&quot;peplos&quot;’ and had longitudinal folds (&quot;rugae)&quot;. There are no explicit literary sources as to its upper opening, but there is archaeological evidence. This shows that, in Augustan times, the sleeveless garment was fastened by significant shoulder straps (&quot;analeptrides&quot;). It also had a visible lower border, called &quot;instita&quot; (or in non-technical language a &quot;limbus&quot;). The fabrics used for &quot;stolae&quot; were presumably linen or wool, but a wealthy woman might have also used silk. 

=== Varieties ===
The matronal &quot;stola&quot; had no fixed colour. The &quot;stola&quot; of the Vestal virgins was presumably white. The border (&quot;instita&quot;) was probably usually in purple colour (similar to the purple border on an expensive toga).

==See also==
*Clothing in ancient Rome
*Olicula
*Palla (garment)
*Stole (vestment)

==References==
== Sources ==
* 
* 

== External links ==
*Stola (article in Smith&#x27;s Dictionary of Greek and Roman Antiquities)
*How to make a stola </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1535312" start="4" end="9" title="Stola" label="stola"/>
<link wikidata="Q82821" start="34" end="45" title="Tradition" label="traditional"/>
<link wikidata="Q11460" start="46" end="53" title="Clothing" label="garment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="57" end="62" title="Ancient Rome" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q467" start="63" end="68" title="Woman" label="women"/>
<link wikidata="Q183171" start="91" end="95" title="toga" label="toga"/>
<link wikidata="Q8441" start="113" end="116" title="Man" label="men"/>
<link wikidata="Q17167" start="312" end="326" title="Roman Republic" label="Roman Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216276" start="843" end="848" title="vitta (clothing)" label="vitta"/>
<link wikidata="Q934849" start="864" end="872" title="headband" label="headband"/>
<link wikidata="Q9202" start="1307" end="1324" title="Statue of Liberty" label="Statue of Liberty"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="1328" end="1341" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q183171" start="1484" end="1489" title="Toga" label="togas"/>
<link wikidata="Q36633" start="1801" end="1813" title="prostitution" label="prostitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q234213" start="1818" end="1826" title="adultery" label="adultery"/>
<link wikidata="Q11774442" start="1938" end="1948" title="Prostitution in ancient Rome" label="meretrices"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2369" end="2407" title="Toga#Varieties" label="&amp;quot;toga&amp;quot; &amp;quot;praetexta&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q11920938" start="2699" end="2713" title="marital status" label="marital status"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110234" start="2938" end="2946" title="Tunica interior" label="subucula"/>
<link wikidata="Q3063290" start="2981" end="2988" title="Pallium (Roman cloak)" label="pallium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044413" start="3021" end="3027" title="peplos" label="peplos"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3805" end="3809" title="Toga#Varieties" label="toga"/>
<link wikidata="Q2457980" start="3827" end="3851" title="Clothing in ancient Rome" label="Clothing in ancient Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q25052711" start="3853" end="3860" title="Olicula" label="Olicula"/>
<link wikidata="Q952310" start="3862" end="3877" title="Palla (garment)" label="Palla (garment)"/>
<link wikidata="Q732034" start="3879" end="3895" title="Stole (vestment)" label="Stole (vestment)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="187801" wikidata="Q796894" url="?curid=187801" title="Shopping cart">
<text>A shopping cart (American English), trolley (British English, Australian English), or buggy (Southern American English, Appalachian English), also known by a variety of other names, is a wheeled cart supplied by a shop or store, especially supermarkets, for use by customers inside the premises for transport of merchandise as they move around the premises, while shopping, prior to heading to the checkout counter, cashiers or tills. Increasing the amount of goods a shopper can collect increases the quantities they are likely to purchase in a single trip, boosting store profitability.

In many cases, customers can then also use the cart to transport their purchased goods to their vehicles. However, some carts are designed to prevent them from leaving either the store or the designated parking area by magnetically locking the wheels. In many places in the United States, Canada and the United Kingdom, customers are encouraged to leave the carts in designated areas within the parking lot, and store employees will return the carts to the entrances. In some areas, carts are connected by locking mechanisms that require the insertion of a coin or token to release an individual cart. Returning the cart to its designated area releases the coin to the customer.

==Design==
Most modern shopping carts are made of metal or a combination of metal and plastic and have been designed to nest within each other in a line to facilitate collecting and moving many at one time and also to save on storage space. The carts can come in many sizes, with larger ones able to carry a child. There are also specialized carts designed for two children, and electric mobility scooters with baskets designed for individuals with disabilities.

As of 2006, approximately 24,000 children are injured in the United States each year in shopping carts. Some stores both in the U.S. and internationally have child carrying carts that look like a car or van with a seat where a child can sit equipped with a steering wheel and sometimes a horn. Such &quot;Car-Carts&quot; may offer protection and convenience by keeping the child restrained, lower to the ground, protected from falling items, and amused.

Shopping carts are usually fitted with four wheels, however if any one wheel jams the cart can become difficult to handle. Most carts in the United States have swivel wheels at the front, while the rear wheels are fixed in orientation, while in Europe it is more common to have four swivel wheels. This difference in design correlates with smaller retail premises in Europe. The front part of the cart is often sectioned off in order to place household goods such as bleach, cleaning products etc. so that they do not mix with edible products.

An alternative to the shopping cart is a small hand-held shopping basket. A customer may prefer a basket for a small amount of merchandise. Small shops, where carts would be impractical, often supply only baskets, or may offer a small cart which uses an inserted shopping basket within the frame of the cart to provide either choice to a customer.

==History==

=== Development of first shopping cart by Sylvan Goldman ===
One of the first shopping carts was introduced on June 4, 1937, the invention of Sylvan Goldman, owner of the Humpty Dumpty supermarket chain in Oklahoma. One night, in 1936, Goldman sat in his office wondering how customers might move more groceries. He found a wooden folding chair and put a basket on the seat and wheels on the legs. Goldman and one of his employees, a mechanic named Fred Young, began tinkering. Their first shopping cart was a metal frame that held two wire baskets. Since they were inspired by the folding chair, Goldman called his carts &quot;folding basket carriers&quot;. Another mechanic, Arthur Kosted, developed a method to mass-produce the carts by inventing an assembly line capable of forming and welding the wire. The cart was awarded patent number 2,196,914 on April 9, 1940 (Filing date: March 14, 1938), titled, &quot;Folding Basket Carriage for Self-Service Stores&quot;. They advertised the invention as part of a new &quot;No Basket Carrying Plan&quot;. Goldman had already pioneered self-serve stores and carts were part of the self-serve retail concept.

The invention did not catch on immediately. Men found them effeminate; women found them suggestive of a baby carriage. &quot;I&#x27;ve pushed my last baby,&quot; an offended woman informed Goldman. After Goldman hired several male and female models to push his new invention around his store and demonstrate their utility, as well as greeters to explain their use, shopping carts became extremely popular and Goldman became a multimillionaire. In urban areas like New York City, where transporting groceries home from the store&#x27;s parking lot is more likely to involve walking and/or a trip by public transportation than a car ride, privately owned carts resembling Goldman&#x27;s design are still popular. Instead of baskets, these carts are built to hold the paper bags dispensed by the grocery store.

Another shopping cart innovator was Orla Watson, who invented the swinging rear door to allow for &quot;nesting&quot; in 1946. Orla Watson continued to make modifications to his original design. Advice from his trusted business partners Fred Taylor, a grocery store owner in Kansas City, and George O&#x27;Donnell, a grocery store refrigeration salesman, and the incorporation of Watson&#x27;s swinging door yielded the familiar nesting cart that we see today using the &quot;double-decker&quot; approach. Goldman patented a similar version of the cart with only one basket rather than the double-decker feature, which he called the &quot;Nest-Kart&quot; in 1948, over one year after Watson filed for his patent. The Nest-Kart incorporated the same nesting mechanism present on the shopping carts designed by Watson, and an interference investigation was ordered by Telescope Carts, Inc. alleging infringement of the patent in 1948. After a protracted legal battle, Goldman ultimately recognized Watson&#x27;s invention and paid one dollar in damages for counterfeit, in exchange for which Watson granted Goldman an exclusive operating license (apart from the three licenses that had already been granted).

In 1909, Bessie DeCamp invented a seat belt for chairs, go-carts or carriages. This was well before shopping carts with child seating areas were invented. Goldman introduced a child seating area on shopping carts in 1947. For whatever reason, it wasn&#x27;t until 1967 that seat belts for shopping carts were introduced by David Allen. It was high tech for the time, because it was a retractable seat belt.

=== Development of nesting carts by Orla Watson ===

In 1946, Orla Watson devised a system for a telescoping (i.e., &quot;nesting&quot;) shopping cart which did not require assembly or disassembly of its parts before and after use like Goldman&#x27;s cart; Goldman&#x27;s design up until this point required that the cart be unfolded much like a folding chair. This cart could be fitted into another cart for compact storage via a swinging one-way rear door. The swinging rear door formed the basis of the patent claim, and was a major innovation in the evolution of the modern shopping cart. Watson applied for a patent on his shopping cart invention in 1946, but Goldman contested it and filed an application for a similar patent with the swinging door feature on a shopping cart with only one basket in 1948 which Goldman named the &quot;Nest-Kart&quot;. After considerable litigation and allegations of patent infringement, Goldman relinquished his rights to the patent in 1949 to Watson and his company, Telescope Carts, Inc. realizing that the swinging rear door feature was the key to Watson&#x27;s patent. Watson was awarded patent #2,479,530 on August 16, 1949. In exchange, Goldman was granted an exclusive licensing right in addition to the three other licenses previously granted; Telescope Carts, Inc. continued to receive royalties for each cart produced by Goldman&#x27;s company that incorporated the &quot;nesting&quot; design. This included any shopping cart utilizing his hinged rear door, including the familiar single basket &quot;nesting&quot; designs similar to those used in the present.

Owing to its overwhelming success, many different manufacturers desired to produce shopping carts with the rear swinging door feature but were denied due to the exclusive license issued to Goldman. The federal government filed a lawsuit against Telescope Carts, Inc. in 1950 alleging the exclusive license granted to Goldman was invalid, and a Consent Decree was entered into where Telescope Carts, Inc. agreed to offer the same license to any manufacturer. Orla Watson and Telescope Carts, Inc. licensed their telescoping shopping cart design to several manufacturers throughout the 1950s and 1960s until the patent expired.

=== New developments ===

In 2012, a driverless shopping cart was made by Chaotic Moon Labs. The device, called &quot;Project Sk8&quot; or &quot;Smarter Cart&quot; was basically a cart fitted with Windows Kinect (to detect obstacles), and an electric drivetrain, and used in conjunction with a Windows 8 tablet. For smaller stores, shopping baskets with wheels can be used either as a large basket or a small cart. These carts are designed for indoor use only.

In 2017, a mobile device shelf was added to shopping carts at Target stores to support the digital in-store shopping experience. The shelf was invented and designed by Nick Dyer, a former employee of Target.
The introduction of &quot;EASY Shopper&quot; in 2019 by Pentland Firth Software GmbH in partnership with the German retailer EDEKA represents another step in the evolution of shopping carts. Equipped with a tablet, barcode scanner, and cashierless checkout system, the smart shopping cart aims to provide customers with a more streamlined and convenient shopping experience. The system utilizes computer vision to accurately track items in the cart and allow customers to scan and pay for their purchases as they shop, reducing the need to stand in line and wait to pay for their items.

== Retail store acceptance ==

Past studies determined that retailers who did not offer shopping carts such as Sears suffered lower sales in comparison to retailers who did use shopping carts.
Subsequent to the introduction of shopping carts and centralized checkout lines at Sears stores, the company noticed a correlating increase in sales.

In 2004, British supermarket chain Tesco trialed shopping carts with user-adjustable wheel resistance, heart rate monitoring and calorie counting hardware in an effort to raise awareness of health issues. The cart&#x27;s introduction coincided with Tesco&#x27;s sponsorship of Cancer Research UK&#x27;s fundraising event Race for Life.

Also in 2004, shopping carts were identified as a source of pathogens and became a major public health concern. This was primarily due to the media spotlight on a Japanese research study revealing large amounts of bacteria on shopping carts. Those findings were later backed by a University of Arizona study in 2007.

In 2009, researchers developed prototypes of computerized context aware shopping carts by attaching tablet computers to ordinary carts. Initial field trials showed that the prototype&#x27;s context awareness provided an opportunity for enhancing and altering the shopping experience.

Some retailers, such as Target, have begun using carts fully made of recycled plastic with the only metal part being the wheel axles, drawing away from the established metal cart design. Target&#x27;s cart has won design awards for its improved casters, interchangeable plastic parts to simplify repairs, and handles that improve maneuverability. Other cart designs also incorporate additional features such as a cup holder for cold or hot drinks or a bouquet of flowers, along with other features such as a secure shelf for a tablet computer or mobile phone to allow the use of mobile coupons and circulars, or as seen in an all-plastic design created for the Wisconsin-based Festival Foods and also used by Whole Foods Market by Bemis Manufacturing Company, all of these features, along with extra rungs on the side rail designed to attach plastic bags or carry handles for beverages. Smaller half-sized carts for smaller shopping trips have also become common.

==Deposits==

In many countries, the customer has to make a small deposit by inserting a coin, token or card, which is returned if and when the customer returns the cart to a designated cart parking point. The system works through a lock mounted on the handle of the cart, connecting it to a chain mounted on the cart in front of it when nested together, or to a chain mounted on a cart collection corral. Inserting the token unlocks the chain, and reinserting the chain locks it in place and ejects the token for user to retrieve.

One motivation behind the deposit system is to reduce the expense of employees having to gather carts that are not returned, and to avoid damage done by runaway carts. Another benefit is that carts are less likely to be removed from the store premises and abandoned in the surrounding neighborhood. Carts that are not returned may be returned voluntarily by a pedestrian, with the deposit coin acting as a reward.

Although almost ubiquitous in continental Europe and the UK, the deposit system is less common in Canada and has not been widely adopted in the United States, with the exception of some chains like ALDI, which require a $0.25 deposit. One of the first store chains to use the $0.25 deposit system in the US was the Real Superstore (a subsidiary of National Supermarkets) in the early 1990s. Other stores such as Costco and ShopRite also use the coin deposit system, but it is not used at all of their locations.

In Australia, deposit systems are common in some local government areas, as they have been made compulsory by local law. Usually, all ALDI stores, and most Coles and Woolworths stores will have a lock mechanism on their carts that requires a $1 or $2 coin to unlock.

The deposit varies, but usually coins of higher value, such as €1, £1, or $1 are used. While the deposit systems usually are designed to accommodate a certain size of domestic coin, foreign coins, former currencies (like German D-Marks), or even appropriately folded pieces of cardboard can be used to unlock the carts as well. Cart collectors are also usually provided with a special key that they can use to unlock the carts from the cart bay and get the key back.

Some retailers sell &quot;tokens&quot; as an alternative to coins, often for charity. Merchandising companies also offer branded shopping tokens as a product.

==Theft prevention==

Shopping cart theft can be a costly problem with stores that use them. The carts, which typically cost between $75 and $150 each, with some models costing $300–400, are removed by people for various purposes. To prevent theft, estimated at $800 million worldwide per annum, stores use various security systems as discussed below.

===Cart retrieval service===

Most retailers in North America utilize a cart retrieval service, which collects carts found off the store&#x27;s premises and returns them to the store for a fee. The primary strength of this system is the ability of pedestrian customers to take purchases home and allow retailers to recapture abandoned carts in a timely manner at a fraction of the cost of a replacement cart. It also allows retailers to maintain their cart inventories without an expensive capital outlay. A drawback of this method is that it is reactive, instead of proactively preventing the carts from leaving the store premises.

===Electronic and magnetic===

Electronic systems are sometimes used by retailers. Each shopping cart is fitted with an electronic locking wheel clamp, or &quot;boot&quot;. A transmitter with a thin wire is placed around the perimeter of the parking lot, and the boot locks when the cart leaves the designated area. Store personnel must then deactivate the lock with a handheld remote control to return the cart to stock. Often, a line is painted in front of the broadcast range to warn customers that their cart will stop when rolled past the line. However, these systems are very expensive to install and although helpful, are not foolproof. The wheels can be lifted over the electronic barrier and/or pushed hard enough that the locks break. There are also safety concerns if the person pushing the trolley is running, and also if the trolley doesn&#x27;t lock and is taken onto a road, locking due to magnetic materials under the road. Some cities have required retailers to install locking wheel systems on their shopping carts. In some cases, electronic systems companies have encouraged passage of such laws to create a captive audience of potential customers.

===Physical===
A low-tech form of theft prevention utilizes a physical impediment, such as vertical posts at the store entrance to keep carts from being taken into the parking lot. This method also impedes physically disabled customers, which may be illegal in many jurisdictions. For example, in the United States it would be a violation of the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990.

Another method (used for example by UK supermarket Iceland) is to mount a pole taller than the entrance, onto the shopping cart, so that the pole will block exit of the cart. However, this method requires that the store aisles be higher than the pole, including lights, piping, any overhead signage and fixtures. It also prevents customers from carting their purchases to their cars in the store&#x27;s carts. Many customers learn to bring their own folding or otherwise collapsible cart with them, which they can usually hang on the store&#x27;s cart while shopping.

A further system is to use a cattle grid style system. All pedestrian exits have specially designed flooring tiles, which, along with specially designed wheels on the cart, will immobilize the cart as they roll onto them. Like the magnetic systems, this can easily be overcome by lifting the cart over the tiles.

==Name==

The names of shopping carts vary by region. The following names are region-specific names for shopping carts. Many of these names may be used alone or in descriptive phrases such as grocery ____, shopping ____, or supermarket ____ for disambiguation:
* cart or basket – the United States, Canada and the Philippines
* buggy – used by some in Southeast Michigan, Western Pennsylvania (where it is considered part of the region&#x27;s dialect), the Southern United States and certain parts of Canada
* trolley – the United Kingdom, Ireland, Australia, New Zealand, Malaysia, Trinidad and Tobago, South Africa and some regions of Canada. Was also formerly used in the Philippines
* carriage – used by some in the New England region of the United States
* barrae or coohudder – some places in Scotland
* bascart – various regions
* wagon – New York, Hawaii
* trundler – some places in New Zealand
* wheelbasket – some places in the Eastern United States, notably Western Massachusetts

==For disabled people==

Special electronic shopping carts are provided by many retailers for the elderly or disabled people. These are essentially electric wheelchairs with an attached basket. They allow customers to navigate around the store and collect items.

Manually powered carts are also available specifically designed for use by wheelchair users. A still-to-be-implemented aid for people with disabilities is the addition of a guide wheel at the center of rotation of a cart with four caster wheels. In order to allow the nesting of carts to be unhindered, this guide wheel is attached to the front of the cart with a piece of spring steel which bends under the cart&#x27;s weight.

Caroline&#x27;s Carts are designed for aiding non-ambulatory adults or larger children, but require an additional person to push.

== Conceptual detours of the shopping cart in art, design and consumerism ==

Shopping cart manufacturers such as Caddie, Wanzl, or Brüder Siegel maintained intensive direct and indirect mutual business relations with artists, graphic designers, industrial and furniture designers such as Charles Eames, Harry Bertoia, or Verner Panton since the market launch of the shopping cart - not only for new and further developments of their own shopping carts and wire basket goods, but also for advertising and PR purposes. Olivier Mourgue, Otl Aicher, &quot;&quot; as well as other artists and designers had wire furniture or artwork made by shopping cart manufacturers.

One of the most famous thematizations of a shopping cart in art is the 1970 sculpture &quot;Supermarket Lady&quot; by US pop artist Duane Hanson, which is critical of consumerism.

In 1983, the neoist &quot;one-man artist group&quot; &quot;Stiletto Studios&quot;, from Berlin converted a &#x27;stray&#x27; shopping cart into an &#x27;inverted&#x27; &quot;cantilever&quot;-wire chair on the principle of &quot;objet trouvé&quot;. As a design simulation critical of consumer culture, Stiletto&#x27;s ironically titled &quot;&quot;Consumer&#x27;s Rest&quot; Lounge Chair&quot; recurred to the fact that Eames&#x27; and Bertoia&#x27;s wire furniture were already over-aestheticized adaptations of the contemporary advent of shopping carts in the United States, and thus were themselves already recursions to the consumer revolutionary context of the &quot;International Style&quot; in architecture and design.

By far, most stolen shopping carts that are not returned and left outside their location, however, are misappropriated by occasional subsequent and secondary users without any artistic or cultural-critical readymade intentions as emergency solutions. Other uses of shopping carts include improvised pieces of furniture (for example, as laundry baskets), or universal &quot;nomadic furniture&quot; for the household goods of the homeless, or, ignoring the fact that the zinc and plastic coatings of the wire surfaces are harmful to health when heated, as ad hoc barbecue grills.

==See also==
* Motorized shopping cart
* Shopping cart theory
* Toy wagon
* Trolley (disambiguation)

==References==
==External links==
*Shopping Cart–Related Injuries to Children American Academy Of Pediatrics
*Paper on the history of the shopping cart
*The &quot;Telescopic Shopping Cart Collection&quot; at the National Museum of American History (Smithsonian Institution)
*Reversing the Operation of CAPS Shopping Cart Wheel Locks 
*DEFRA guidance on the security of shopping trolleys. 
*Guidance on Section 99 and Schedule 4 of the Environmental Protection Act 1990 as amended by the Clean Neighbourhoods and Environment Act 2005 . DEFRA 
*Daugherty, Julia Ann P. &quot;Encyclopedia of Oklahoma History and Culture.&quot; Oklahoma State University - Library - Home. Web. 11 Oct. 2010.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q796894" start="2" end="15" title="Shopping cart" label="shopping cart"/>
<link wikidata="Q7976" start="17" end="33" title="American English" label="American English"/>
<link wikidata="Q796894" start="36" end="43" title="Shopping cart" label="trolley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7979" start="45" end="60" title="British English" label="British English"/>
<link wikidata="Q44679" start="62" end="80" title="Australian English" label="Australian English"/>
<link wikidata="Q796894" start="86" end="91" title="Shopping cart" label="buggy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6144345" start="93" end="118" title="Southern American English" label="Southern American English"/>
<link wikidata="Q3802476" start="120" end="139" title="Appalachian English" label="Appalachian English"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="169" end="180" title="#Name" label="other names"/>
<link wikidata="Q234668" start="195" end="199" title="cart" label="cart"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="214" end="227" title="Retail#Types of retail outlets" label="shop or store"/>
<link wikidata="Q180846" start="240" end="251" title="supermarket" label="supermarket"/>
<link wikidata="Q852835" start="265" end="273" title="customer" label="customer"/>
<link wikidata="Q740777" start="312" end="323" title="merchandise" label="merchandise"/>
<link wikidata="Q830036" start="364" end="372" title="shopping" label="shopping"/>
<link wikidata="Q386147" start="398" end="433" title="checkout counter" label="checkout counter, cashiers or tills"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="864" end="877" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="879" end="885" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="894" end="908" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501349" start="985" end="996" title="parking lot" label="parking lot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051178" start="1658" end="1674" title="mobility scooter" label="mobility scooter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1534874" start="2349" end="2362" title="Caster" label="swivel wheels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1308084" start="2791" end="2806" title="shopping basket" label="shopping basket"/>
<link wikidata="Q713849" start="3238" end="3252" title="Sylvan Goldman" label="Sylvan Goldman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649" start="3302" end="3310" title="Oklahoma" label="Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="4717" end="4730" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q178512" start="4851" end="4872" title="public transportation" label="public transportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q379754" start="5018" end="5027" title="paper bag" label="paper bag"/>
<link wikidata="Q16010536" start="5098" end="5109" title="Orla watson" label="Orla Watson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1295201" start="5314" end="5327" title="grocery store" label="grocery store"/>
<link wikidata="Q16010536" start="6740" end="6751" title="Orla watson" label="Orla Watson"/>
<link wikidata="Q728265" start="8014" end="8023" title="royalties" label="royalties"/>
<link wikidata="Q5162854" start="8635" end="8649" title="Consent Decree" label="Consent Decree"/>
<link wikidata="Q16010536" start="8749" end="8760" title="Orla Watson" label="Orla Watson"/>
<link wikidata="Q253623" start="8901" end="8907" title="patent" label="patent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046951" start="9442" end="9448" title="Target Corporation" label="Target"/>
<link wikidata="Q701755" start="9713" end="9718" title="Edeka" label="EDEKA"/>
<link wikidata="Q6499202" start="10287" end="10292" title="Sears" label="Sears"/>
<link wikidata="Q487494" start="10555" end="10560" title="Tesco" label="Tesco"/>
<link wikidata="Q326079" start="10797" end="10815" title="Cancer Research UK" label="Cancer Research UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q7278950" start="10841" end="10854" title="Race for Life" label="Race for Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q170065" start="10917" end="10925" title="pathogen" label="pathogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q503419" start="11137" end="11158" title="University of Arizona" label="University of Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q501688" start="11233" end="11246" title="Context awareness" label="context aware"/>
<link wikidata="Q155972" start="11275" end="11290" title="tablet computer" label="tablet computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283519" start="11319" end="11331" title="Field experiment" label="field trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046951" start="11484" end="11490" title="Target Corporation" label="Target"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194111" start="11529" end="11545" title="Plastic recycling" label="recycled plastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3398862" start="11873" end="11883" title="cup holder" label="cup holder"/>
<link wikidata="Q155972" start="11987" end="12002" title="tablet computer" label="tablet computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q17517" start="12006" end="12018" title="mobile phone" label="mobile phone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537" start="12121" end="12130" title="Wisconsin" label="Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5445707" start="12137" end="12151" title="Festival Foods" label="Festival Foods"/>
<link wikidata="Q1809448" start="12169" end="12187" title="Whole Foods Market" label="Whole Foods Market"/>
<link wikidata="Q4885128" start="12191" end="12218" title="Bemis Manufacturing Company" label="Bemis Manufacturing Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q10948641" start="12491" end="12498" title="deposit account" label="deposit"/>
<link wikidata="Q41207" start="12514" end="12518" title="coin" label="coin"/>
<link wikidata="Q125054" start="13571" end="13575" title="Aldi" label="ALDI"/>
<link wikidata="Q715583" start="13785" end="13791" title="Costco" label="Costco"/>
<link wikidata="Q7501097" start="13796" end="13804" title="ShopRite (United States)" label="ShopRite"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916" start="14217" end="14218" title="Euro" label="€"/>
<link wikidata="Q25224" start="14221" end="14222" title="Pound Sterling" label="£"/>
<link wikidata="Q1104069" start="14228" end="14229" title="Canadian dollar" label="$"/>
<link wikidata="Q16068" start="14382" end="14389" title="Deutsche Mark" label="D-Marks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2830312" start="15908" end="15919" title="wheel clamp" label="wheel clamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="17239" end="17252" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1111004" start="17284" end="17323" title="Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990" label="Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990"/>
<link wikidata="Q721810" start="17377" end="17384" title="Iceland (supermarket)" label="Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164694" start="17924" end="17935" title="cattle grid" label="cattle grid"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="18493" end="18506" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="18508" end="18514" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="18523" end="18534" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q3502886" start="18561" end="18579" title="Southeast Michigan" label="Southeast Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988152" start="18581" end="18601" title="Western Pennsylvania" label="Western Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q5061640" start="18634" end="18659" title="Western Pennsylvania English" label="the region&amp;#x27;s dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q49042" start="18666" end="18688" title="Southern United States" label="Southern United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="18733" end="18747" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="18749" end="18756" title="Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="18758" end="18767" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="18769" end="18780" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q833" start="18782" end="18790" title="Malaysia" label="Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q754" start="18792" end="18811" title="Trinidad and Tobago" label="Trinidad and Tobago"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="18813" end="18825" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q18389" start="18929" end="18940" title="New England" label="New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="19008" end="19016" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="19055" end="19063" title="New York (state)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q782" start="19065" end="19071" title="Hawaii" label="Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189650" start="19147" end="19168" title="Eastern United States" label="Eastern United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q65122136" start="19178" end="19199" title="Western Massachusetts" label="Western Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q6918338" start="19349" end="19368" title="electric wheelchair" label="electric wheelchair"/>
<link wikidata="Q127039585" start="19894" end="19914" title="Caroline&amp;#x27;s Cart" label="Caroline&amp;#x27;s Cart"/>
<link wikidata="Q2548557" start="20147" end="20152" title="Wanzl (company)" label="Wanzl"/>
<link wikidata="Q170411" start="20314" end="20327" title="Charles Eames" label="Charles Eames"/>
<link wikidata="Q2551765" start="20329" end="20342" title="Harry Bertoia" label="Harry Bertoia"/>
<link wikidata="Q510955" start="20347" end="20360" title="Verner Panton" label="Verner Panton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3351241" start="20543" end="20558" title="Olivier Mourgue" label="Olivier Mourgue"/>
<link wikidata="Q61191" start="20560" end="20570" title="Otl Aicher" label="Otl Aicher"/>
<link wikidata="Q134147" start="20813" end="20820" title="pop art" label="pop art"/>
<link wikidata="Q706462" start="20824" end="20836" title="Duane Hanson" label="Duane Hanson"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20886" end="20892" title="Neoism#Influences on other artists and subcultures" label="neoist"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="20961" end="20967" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q964287" start="21047" end="21057" title="Cantilever chair" label="cantilever"/>
<link wikidata="Q572916" start="21101" end="21113" title="objet trouvé" label="objet trouvé"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059232" start="21247" end="21259" title="Lounge Chair" label="Lounge Chair"/>
<link wikidata="Q162324" start="21544" end="21563" title="International Style (architecture)" label="International Style"/>
<link wikidata="Q572916" start="21805" end="21814" title="readymade" label="readymade"/>
<link wikidata="Q17104316" start="22193" end="22216" title="Motorized shopping cart" label="Motorized shopping cart"/>
<link wikidata="Q126888551" start="22219" end="22239" title="Shopping cart theory" label="Shopping cart theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q53704360" start="22242" end="22251" title="Toy wagon" label="Toy wagon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1212838" start="22254" end="22278" title="Trolley (disambiguation)" label="Trolley (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q148584" start="22492" end="22527" title="National Museum of American History" label="National Museum of American History"/>
<link wikidata="Q131626" start="22529" end="22552" title="Smithsonian Institution" label="Smithsonian Institution"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="187802" wikidata="Q1132431" url="?curid=187802" title="Young MC">
<text>Marvin Young (born May 10, 1967), better known by his stage name Young M.C., is an American rapper, singer and actor. He is best known for his 1989 hit &quot;Bust a Move&quot;. His debut album &quot;Stone Cold Rhymin&#x27;&quot; found international acclaim. Young has also appeared in film in acting roles and cameo appearances and has appeared in several television programs.

==Life and career==
Young was born in Wimbledon, London, to Jamaican immigrant parents. He left the United Kingdom at the age of three and later moved to Queens, New York, when he was eight years old. Young attended Hunter College High School in the Upper East Side of Manhattan (he was honored at the school&#x27;s 2018 convocation). He went on to earn a degree in economics from the University of Southern California (USC). At USC, he met Michael Ross and Matt Dike from the record company Delicious Vinyl. Young rapped over the phone for Ross and Dike, who ended up delivering a record contract to his USC dorm room. In 1989, Young collaborated with Tone Lōc on the songs &quot;Wild Thing&quot; and &quot;Funky Cold Medina&quot;. Young gained fame with the release of his single &quot;Bust a Move&quot;, which reached No. 7 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100 and won a Grammy for Best Rap Performance. The single helped Young&#x27;s debut album, &quot;Stone Cold Rhymin&#x27;&quot;, to reach No. 9 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; 200 and attain platinum status in the United States. The follow-up single, &quot;Principal&#x27;s Office&quot;, was nominated for Best Rap Video at the 1990 MTV Video Music Awards.

Following Young&#x27;s success, he left Delicious Vinyl, citing restrictions on his work and unwanted changes to his album. The label sued him for breach of contract and the two parties eventually settled out of court. Young signed with Capitol Records and released his second album, &quot;Brainstorm&quot;, in 1991. It reached No. 66 on the Billboard 200. Despite the absence of any strong single, the album achieved gold status in the United States. However his third album, &quot;What&#x27;s the Flavor?&quot;, released in 1993, was a commercial failure, with both the album and its singles failing to chart. It was his second and final album on Capitol Records. In 1997, Young released his fourth album, &quot;Return of the 1 Hit Wonder&quot;, on the independent label Overall Records. The album produced two singles, &quot;Madame Buttafly&quot; and &quot;On &amp; Poppin&quot; which charted at No. 25 and No. 23 respectively on the Hot Rap Songs chart.

In 2000, Young released his fifth album, &quot;Ain&#x27;t Goin&#x27; Out Like That&quot;, on his own record label Young Man Moving Records. The album was Young&#x27;s first to chart since &quot;Brainstorm&quot;, peaking at No. 85 on the Top R&amp;B/Hip-Hop Albums chart.

In 2001, Young contributed a song &quot;Deck the Halls&quot; he co-wrote with Kevin Irving, to Disney&#x27;s TV movie, &quot;&#x27;Twas the Night&quot;. In 2002, he released his sixth album, &quot;Engage the Enzyme&quot;. Also in 2002, Young appeared as a contestant on &quot;Weakest Link – Rap Stars Edition&quot;. He was joined by Rev Run of Run-DMC, DJ Quik, Jermaine Dupri, Da Brat, B-Real of Cypress Hill, Xzibit, and Nate Dogg. Young went on to win the celebrity contest, beating Xzibit in the final round. All of the proceeds from his winnings were donated to the Humane Society.

In December 2004, Young travelled to Vancouver to film &quot;The Zero Sum&quot;. Young played Mr. Henderson, a publishing company executive. Film director Raphael Assaf and screenwriter Armen Evrensel asked Young to help create the film, for which he is a co-executive producer. Young also teamed up with Baltimore rapper KNOXX to record &quot;Brotherly Love&quot;, the theme song from the film.

In September 2005, Young was cast in the VH1 reality show &quot;Celebrity Fit Club 3&quot;. Joining Young was Kelly Le Brock, Bruce Vilanch, Tempestt Bledsoe, Countess Vaughn, Chaz Bono, Jeff Conaway, Gunnar Nelson, and Rapper Bizarre of D12. Young won the competition, losing more weight than anybody else.

Young also made an appearance in a special episode of &quot;The Best Damn Sports Show Period&quot; which featured the Top 50 Sports Moments of the 80&#x27;s. Young crafted lyrics and performed a sports-themed rap song alongside KRS-One and Kool Moe Dee.

After twenty years of living in Los Angeles, Young relocated to Scottsdale, Arizona in 2006. He spent 2007 creating his seventh album, &quot;Adrenaline Flow&quot;, which was released in 2008. Immediately following &quot;Adrenaline Flow&quot;, Young released an online-only album, &quot;B-Sides, Demos and Remixes&quot;, compiled from unreleased, remixed and re-recorded tracks.

In 2009, Young released his eighth album, &quot;Relentless&quot;. Later that year, Young also landed a cameo role in the Jason Reitman film &quot;Up in the Air&quot; starring George Clooney. Young played himself, performing at a software convention which was crashed by Clooney&#x27;s character and those of his two female co-stars, Anna Kendrick and Vera Farmiga.

On July 6, 2021, Young performed his signature hit song &quot;Bust a Move&quot; and other songs in the halftime show for Game 1 of the 2021 NBA Finals. 

==Discography==
===Albums===
===Singles===
==Filmography==
==References==
==External links==

*Young MC - official website
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1132431" start="0" end="12" title="Young MC" label="Marvin Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132431" start="65" end="75" title="Young MC" label="Young M.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q4206949" start="158" end="169" title="Bust a Move (song)" label="Bust a Move"/>
<link wikidata="Q3973825" start="199" end="222" title="Stone Cold Rhymin&amp;#x27;" label="Stone Cold Rhymin&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q736742" start="416" end="425" title="Wimbledon, London" label="Wimbledon"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="427" end="433" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q6127469" start="438" end="446" title="Jamaicans" label="Jamaican"/>
<link wikidata="Q18424" start="532" end="538" title="Queens" label="Queens"/>
<link wikidata="Q5944289" start="594" end="620" title="Hunter College High School" label="Hunter College High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q455587" start="628" end="643" title="Upper East Side" label="Upper East Side"/>
<link wikidata="Q11299" start="647" end="656" title="Manhattan" label="Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4614" start="763" end="796" title="University of Southern California" label="University of Southern California"/>
<link wikidata="Q108663916" start="836" end="845" title="Matt Dike" label="Matt Dike"/>
<link wikidata="Q518854" start="870" end="885" title="Delicious Vinyl" label="Delicious Vinyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1552233" start="1031" end="1039" title="Tone Lōc" label="Tone Lōc"/>
<link wikidata="Q1718375" start="1059" end="1069" title="Wild Thing (Tone Lōc song)" label="Wild Thing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5509288" start="1086" end="1103" title="Funky Cold Medina" label="Funky Cold Medina"/>
<link wikidata="Q180072" start="1212" end="1241" title="Billboard Hot 100" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q3973825" start="1335" end="1358" title="Stone Cold Rhymin&amp;#x27;" label="Stone Cold Rhymin&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q188819" start="1388" end="1413" title="Billboard 200" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q17038487" start="1491" end="1514" title="Principal&amp;#x27;s Office (song)" label="Principal&amp;#x27;s Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q636277" start="1562" end="1589" title="1990 MTV Video Music Awards" label="1990 MTV Video Music Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q193023" start="1829" end="1844" title="Capitol Records" label="Capitol Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q4955924" start="1882" end="1892" title="Brainstorm (album)" label="Brainstorm"/>
<link wikidata="Q7990895" start="2075" end="2098" title="What&amp;#x27;s the Flavor?" label="What&amp;#x27;s the Flavor?"/>
<link wikidata="Q7317199" start="2306" end="2332" title="Return of the 1 Hit Wonder" label="Return of the 1 Hit Wonder"/>
<link wikidata="Q2322696" start="2529" end="2542" title="Hot Rap Songs" label="Hot Rap Songs"/>
<link wikidata="Q4697211" start="2598" end="2633" title="Ain&amp;#x27;t Goin&amp;#x27; Out Like That" label="Ain&amp;#x27;t Goin&amp;#x27; Out Like That"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001897" start="2788" end="2814" title="Top R&amp;amp;B/Hip-Hop Albums" label="Top R&amp;amp;B/Hip-Hop Albums"/>
<link wikidata="Q5377400" start="3020" end="3037" title="Engage the Enzyme" label="Engage the Enzyme"/>
<link wikidata="Q7977972" start="3099" end="3111" title="Weakest Link (U.S. game show)" label="Weakest Link"/>
<link wikidata="Q159351" start="3167" end="3174" title="Run-DMC" label="Run-DMC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154246" start="3176" end="3183" title="DJ Quik" label="DJ Quik"/>
<link wikidata="Q349434" start="3185" end="3199" title="Jermaine Dupri" label="Jermaine Dupri"/>
<link wikidata="Q449634" start="3201" end="3208" title="Da Brat" label="Da Brat"/>
<link wikidata="Q352246" start="3210" end="3216" title="B-Real" label="B-Real"/>
<link wikidata="Q322196" start="3220" end="3232" title="Cypress Hill" label="Cypress Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q189078" start="3234" end="3240" title="Xzibit" label="Xzibit"/>
<link wikidata="Q47159" start="3246" end="3255" title="Nate Dogg" label="Nate Dogg"/>
<link wikidata="Q24639" start="3448" end="3457" title="Vancouver" label="Vancouver"/>
<link wikidata="Q203078" start="3849" end="3852" title="VH1" label="VH1"/>
<link wikidata="Q5057732" start="3872" end="3890" title="Celebrity Fit Club (U.S. TV series)" label="Celebrity Fit Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q242722" start="3918" end="3932" title="Kelly Le Brock" label="Kelly Le Brock"/>
<link wikidata="Q991864" start="3934" end="3947" title="Bruce Vilanch" label="Bruce Vilanch"/>
<link wikidata="Q541171" start="3949" end="3965" title="Tempestt Bledsoe" label="Tempestt Bledsoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137084" start="3967" end="3982" title="Countess Vaughn" label="Countess Vaughn"/>
<link wikidata="Q979387" start="3984" end="3993" title="Chaz Bono" label="Chaz Bono"/>
<link wikidata="Q342612" start="3995" end="4007" title="Jeff Conaway" label="Jeff Conaway"/>
<link wikidata="Q526174" start="4009" end="4022" title="Gunnar Nelson (musician)" label="Gunnar Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q364526" start="4035" end="4042" title="Bizarre (rapper)" label="Bizarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q154543" start="4046" end="4049" title="D12" label="D12"/>
<link wikidata="Q7716699" start="4177" end="4209" title="The Best Damn Sports Show Period" label="The Best Damn Sports Show Period"/>
<link wikidata="Q432552" start="4345" end="4352" title="KRS-One" label="KRS-One"/>
<link wikidata="Q2560145" start="4357" end="4369" title="Kool Moe Dee" label="Kool Moe Dee"/>
<link wikidata="Q314502" start="4872" end="4885" title="Jason Reitman" label="Jason Reitman"/>
<link wikidata="Q211429" start="4897" end="4910" title="Up in the Air (2009 film)" label="Up in the Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q23844" start="4926" end="4940" title="George Clooney" label="George Clooney"/>
<link wikidata="Q67701" start="5084" end="5097" title="Anna Kendrick" label="Anna Kendrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q264840" start="5102" end="5114" title="Vera Farmiga" label="Vera Farmiga"/>
<link wikidata="Q4206949" start="5179" end="5190" title="Bust a Move (song)" label="Bust a Move"/>
<link wikidata="Q107377340" start="5252" end="5267" title="2021 NBA Finals" label="2021 NBA Finals"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="187803" wikidata="Q886943" url="?curid=187803" title="List of governors of Missouri">
<text>The governor of Missouri is the head of government of the U.S. state of Missouri and the commander-in-chief of the Missouri National Guard. The governor has a duty to enforce state laws and the power to either approve or veto bills passed by the Missouri Legislature, to convene the legislature and grant pardons, except in cases of impeachment.

The current governor is Republican Mike Kehoe, who took office on January 13, 2025. 

==List of governors==
Louisiana was purchased from France in 1803, with it being proclaimed in St. Louis in Upper Louisiana on March 10, 1804, by Amos Stoddard, who remained as military commander of the region until October 1, 1804, when Orleans Territory was split from it. The remainder was designated the District of Louisiana and placed under the jurisdiction of Indiana Territory and its governor, William Henry Harrison.

===Louisiana Territory and Missouri Territory===
The District of Louisiana was organized as Louisiana Territory on July 4, 1805; it was renamed Missouri Territory on June 4, 1812, after the admission of the state of Louisiana. It had four governors appointed by the president of the United States, including both Meriwether Lewis and William Clark of the Lewis and Clark Expedition.

===State of Missouri===
Missouri was admitted to the union on August 10, 1821. 

The original constitution of 1820 created the offices of governor and lieutenant governor, to serve terms of four years without being able to succeed themselves. Terms were shortened to 2 years in 1865, with a limit of serving no more than four out of every six years. They were returned in 1875 to the four-year term and limit on succession of the 1820 constitution, and the term limit changed to two terms in 1965. Originally, the lieutenant governor would act as governor in the event of a vacancy; a 1968 amendment made it so that the lieutenant governor becomes governor in that situation.

A group including the governor, lieutenant governor, and members of the Missouri General Assembly, proclaimed Missouri&#x27;s secession from the Union on October 31, 1861, and it was admitted to the Confederate States of America on November 28, 1861. The Confederate government elected two governors, but only had any control in the south of the state, and was forced into exile in Marshall, Texas, after the Battle of Pea Ridge in March 1862.


==Confederate governors==
During the Civil War, after the capture of Jefferson City by the Union, a constitutional convention declared the office then held by Governor Claiborne Fox Jackson to be vacant. In October, Jackson, Lieutenant Governor Thomas Caute Reynolds, and some members of the General Assembly, organized at Neosho and passed an Ordinance of Secession. This Confederate government never displaced the government in Jefferson City, and Missouri remained in the Union through the entire war. Jackson continued on as governor until his death on December 6, 1862, at which time Reynolds took over, serving until he fled to Mexico in June 1865 after the end of the war.

== See also ==
*Gubernatorial lines of succession in the United States#Missouri
*List of Missouri General Assemblies

==Notes==
== References ==
;General
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


;Specific
==External links==

*Office of the Governor of Missouri</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q886943" start="4" end="24" title="List of governors of Missouri" label="governor of Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285706" start="32" end="50" title="head of government" label="head of government"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="58" end="68" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1581" start="72" end="80" title="Missouri" label="Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q380782" start="89" end="107" title="commander-in-chief" label="commander-in-chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q6879598" start="115" end="138" title="Missouri National Guard" label="Missouri National Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q889821" start="144" end="152" title="Governor (United States)" label="governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q178074" start="221" end="225" title="veto" label="veto"/>
<link wikidata="Q6879566" start="246" end="266" title="Missouri General Assembly" label="Missouri Legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q537151" start="305" end="311" title="pardon" label="pardon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6879610" start="371" end="381" title="Missouri Republican Party" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q6847475" start="382" end="392" title="Mike Kehoe" label="Mike Kehoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q658054" start="455" end="464" title="Louisiana (New France)" label="Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q193155" start="469" end="478" title="Louisiana Purchase" label="purchased"/>
<link wikidata="Q38022" start="528" end="537" title="St. Louis" label="St. Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2554770" start="541" end="556" title="Illinois Country" label="Upper Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q3765976" start="560" end="574" title="Three Flags Day" label="March 10, 1804"/>
<link wikidata="Q474313" start="579" end="592" title="Amos Stoddard" label="Amos Stoddard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518439" start="671" end="688" title="Orleans Territory" label="Orleans Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q4384581" start="741" end="762" title="District of Louisiana" label="District of Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q777763" start="800" end="817" title="Indiana Territory" label="Indiana Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q11869" start="836" end="858" title="William Henry Harrison" label="William Henry Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q4384581" start="914" end="935" title="District of Louisiana" label="District of Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500063" start="953" end="972" title="Louisiana Territory" label="Louisiana Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515638" start="1005" end="1023" title="Missouri Territory" label="Missouri Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588" start="1077" end="1086" title="Louisiana" label="Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="1127" end="1157" title="president of the United States" label="president of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q313492" start="1174" end="1190" title="Meriwether Lewis" label="Meriwether Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q355348" start="1195" end="1208" title="William Clark" label="William Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q505802" start="1216" end="1242" title="Lewis and Clark Expedition" label="Lewis and Clark Expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1581" start="1269" end="1277" title="Missouri" label="Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q18350273" start="1282" end="1303" title="admission to the union" label="admitted to the union"/>
<link wikidata="Q6879566" start="1994" end="2019" title="Missouri General Assembly" label="Missouri General Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q214102" start="2067" end="2072" title="Union (American Civil War)" label="Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q81931" start="2121" end="2150" title="Confederate States of America" label="Confederate States of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q52996" start="2304" end="2319" title="Marshall, Texas" label="Marshall, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q193993" start="2331" end="2350" title="Battle of Pea Ridge" label="Battle of Pea Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952344" start="2394" end="2414" title="Missouri in the American Civil War" label="During the Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q28180" start="2437" end="2451" title="Jefferson City, Missouri" label="Jefferson City"/>
<link wikidata="Q6879516" start="2468" end="2493" title="Missouri Constitutional Convention of 1861–1863" label="constitutional convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q373923" start="2536" end="2557" title="Claiborne Fox Jackson" label="Claiborne Fox Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7788284" start="2613" end="2634" title="Thomas Caute Reynolds" label="Thomas Caute Reynolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000065" start="2691" end="2697" title="Neosho, Missouri" label="Neosho"/>
<link wikidata="Q6879903" start="2702" end="2708" title="Missouri secession" label="passed"/>
<link wikidata="Q3042941" start="2712" end="2734" title="Ordinance of Secession" label="Ordinance of Secession"/>
<link wikidata="Q5159757" start="2741" end="2763" title="Confederate government of Missouri" label="Confederate government"/>
<link wikidata="Q28180" start="2798" end="2812" title="Jefferson City, Missouri" label="Jefferson City"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3065" end="3128" title="Gubernatorial lines of succession in the United States#Missouri" label="Gubernatorial lines of succession in the United States#Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q129176893" start="3130" end="3165" title="List of Missouri General Assemblies" label="List of Missouri General Assemblies"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="187805" wikidata="Q900918" url="?curid=187805" title="Percolation theory">
<text>In statistical physics and mathematics, percolation theory describes the behavior of a network when nodes or links are added. This is a geometric type of phase transition, since at a critical fraction of addition the network of small, disconnected clusters merge into significantly larger connected, so-called spanning clusters. The applications of percolation theory to materials science and in many other disciplines are discussed here and in the articles Network theory and Percolation (cognitive psychology).

==Introduction==

A representative question (and the source of the name) is as follows. Assume that some liquid is poured on top of some porous material. Will the liquid be able to make its way from hole to hole and reach the bottom? This physical question is modelled mathematically as a three-dimensional network of vertices, usually called &quot;sites&quot;, in which the edge or &quot;bonds&quot; between each two neighbors may be open (allowing the liquid through) with probability , or closed with probability , and they are assumed to be independent. Therefore, for a given , what is the probability that an open path (meaning a path, each of whose links is an &quot;open&quot; bond) exists from the top to the bottom? The behavior for large  is of primary interest. This problem, called now bond percolation, was introduced in the mathematics literature by , and has been studied intensively by mathematicians and physicists since then.

In a slightly different mathematical model for obtaining a random graph, a site is &quot;occupied&quot; with probability or &quot;empty&quot; (in which case its edges are removed) with probability ; the corresponding problem is called site percolation. The question is the same: for a given &quot;p&quot;, what is the probability that a path exists between top and bottom? Similarly, one can ask, given a connected graph at what fraction of failures the graph will become disconnected (no large component).

The same questions can be asked for any lattice dimension. As is quite typical, it is actually easier to examine infinite networks than just large ones. In this case the corresponding question is: does an infinite open cluster exist? That is, is there a path of connected points of infinite length &quot;through&quot; the network? By Kolmogorov&#x27;s zero–one law, for any given , the probability that an infinite cluster exists is either zero or one. Since this probability is an increasing function of (proof via coupling argument), there must be a critical (denoted by ) below which the probability is always 0 and above which the probability is always 1. In practice, this criticality is very easy to observe. Even for as small as 100, the probability of an open path from the top to the bottom increases sharply from very close to zero to very close to one in a short span of values of .

== History ==
The Flory–Stockmayer theory was the first theory investigating percolation processes.

The history of the percolation model as we know it has its root in the coal industry. Since the industrial revolution, the economical importance of this source of energy fostered many scientific studies to understand its composition and optimize its use. During the 1930s and 1940s, the qualitative analysis by organic chemistry left more and more room to more quantitative studies. 
In this context, the British Coal Utilisation Research Association (BCURA) was created in 1938. It was a research association funded by the coal mines owners. In 1942, Rosalind Franklin, who then recently graduated in chemistry from the university of Cambridge, joined the BCURA. She started research on the density and porosity of coal. During the Second World War, coal was an important strategic resource. It was used as a source of energy, but also was the main constituent of gas masks.

Coal is a porous medium. To measure its &#x27;real&#x27; density, one was to sink it in a liquid or a gas whose molecules are small enough to fill its microscopic pores. While trying to measure the density of coal using several gases (helium, methanol, hexane, benzene), and as she found different values depending on the gas used, Rosalind Franklin showed that the pores of coal are made of microstructures of various lengths that act as a microscopic sieve to discriminate the gases. She also discovered that the size of these structures depends on the temperature of carbonation during the coal production. With this research, she obtained a PhD degree and left the BCURA in 1946.
In the mid fifties, Simon Broadbent worked in the BCURA as a statistician. Among other interests, he studied the use of coal in gas masks. One question is to understand how a fluid can diffuse in the coal pores, modeled as a random maze of open or closed tunnels. In 1954, during a symposium on Monte Carlo methods, he asks questions to John Hammersley on the use of numerical methods to analyze this model.
Broadbent and Hammersley introduced in their article of 1957 a mathematical model to model this phenomenon, that is percolation.

== Computation of the critical parameter ==

For most infinite lattice graphs, cannot be calculated exactly, though in some cases there is an exact value. For example:

*for the square lattice in two dimensions, for bond percolation, a fact which was an open question for more than 20 years and was finally resolved by Harry Kesten in the early 1980s, see . For site percolation on the square lattice, the value of is not known from analytic derivation but only via simulations of large lattices which provide the estimate 0.59274621 ± 0.00000013.  
*A limit case for lattices in high dimensions is given by the Bethe lattice, whose threshold is at for a coordination number . In other words: for the regular tree of degree formula_1, formula_2 is equal to formula_3. 
* For a random tree-like network without degree-degree correlation, it can be shown that such network can have a giant component, and the percolation threshold (transmission probability) is given by formula_4, where formula_5 is the generating function corresponding to the excess degree distribution. So, for random Erdős–Rényi networks of average degree formula_6, .
* In networks with low clustering, formula_7, the critical point gets scaled by formula_8 such that:

formula_9 

This indicates that for a given degree distribution, the clustering leads to a larger percolation threshold, mainly because for a fixed number of links, the clustering structure reinforces the core of the network with the price of diluting the global connections. For networks with high clustering, strong clustering could induce the core–periphery structure, in which the core and periphery might percolate at different critical points, and the above approximate treatment is not applicable.

==Universality==
The universality principle states that the numerical value of is determined by the local structure of the graph, whereas the behavior near the critical threshold, , is characterized by universal critical exponents. For example the distribution of the size of clusters at criticality decays as a power law with the same exponent for all 2d lattices. This universality means that for a given dimension, the various critical exponents, the fractal dimension of the clusters at is independent of the lattice type and percolation type (e.g., bond or site). However, recently percolation has been performed on a weighted planar stochastic lattice (WPSL) and found that although the dimension of the WPSL coincides with the dimension of the space where it is embedded, its universality class is different from that of all the known planar lattices.

== Phases ==

===Subcritical and supercritical===

The main fact in the subcritical phase is &quot;exponential decay&quot;. That is, when , the probability that a specific point (for example, the origin) is contained in an open cluster (meaning a maximal connected set of &quot;open&quot; edges of the graph) of size decays to zero exponentially in . This was proved for percolation in three and more dimensions by and independently by . In two dimensions, it formed part of Kesten&#x27;s proof that .

The dual graph of the square lattice is also the square lattice. It follows that, in two dimensions, the supercritical phase is dual to a subcritical percolation process. This provides essentially full information about the supercritical model with . The main result for the supercritical phase in three and more dimensions is that, for sufficiently large , there is almost certainly an infinite open cluster in the two-dimensional slab . This was proved by .

In two dimensions with , there is with probability one a unique infinite closed cluster (a closed cluster is a maximal connected set of &quot;closed&quot; edges of the graph). Thus the subcritical phase may be described as finite open islands in an infinite closed ocean. When just the opposite occurs, with finite closed islands in an infinite open ocean. The picture is more complicated when since , and there is coexistence of infinite open and closed clusters for between and .

===Criticality===

Percolation has a singularity at the critical point and many properties behave as of a power-law with formula_10, near formula_2. Scaling theory predicts the existence of critical exponents, depending on the number &quot;d&quot; of dimensions, that determine the class of the singularity. When these predictions are backed up by arguments from conformal field theory and Schramm–Loewner evolution, and include predicted numerical values for the exponents. Most of these predictions are conjectural except when the number of dimensions satisfies either or . They include:

* There are no infinite clusters (open or closed)
* The probability that there is an open path from some fixed point (say the origin) to a distance of decreases &quot;polynomially&quot;, i.e. is on the order of for some 
** does not depend on the particular lattice chosen, or on other local parameters. It depends only on the dimension (this is an instance of the universality principle).
** decreases from until and then stays fixed.
** .
* The shape of a large cluster in two dimensions is conformally invariant.

See . In 11 or more dimensions, these facts are largely proved using a technique known as the lace expansion. It is believed that a version of the lace expansion should be valid for 7 or more dimensions, perhaps with implications also for the threshold case of 6 dimensions. The connection of percolation to the lace expansion is found in .

In two dimensions, the first fact (&quot;no percolation in the critical phase&quot;) is proved for many lattices, using duality. Substantial progress has been made on two-dimensional percolation through the conjecture of Oded Schramm that the scaling limit of a large cluster may be described in terms of a Schramm–Loewner evolution. This conjecture was proved by in the special case of site percolation on the triangular lattice.

==Different models==
*Directed percolation that models the effect of gravitational forces acting on the liquid was also introduced in , and has connections with the contact process.
*The first model studied was Bernoulli percolation. In this model all bonds are independent. This model is called bond percolation by physicists.
*A generalization was next introduced as the Fortuin–Kasteleyn random cluster model, which has many connections with the Ising model and other Potts models.
*Bernoulli (bond) percolation on complete graphs is an example of a random graph. The critical probability is , where is the number of vertices (sites) of the graph.
*Bootstrap percolation removes active cells from clusters when they have too few active neighbors, and looks at the connectivity of the remaining cells.
*First passage percolation.
*Invasion percolation.
== Applications ==

=== In biology, biochemistry, and physical virology ===
Percolation theory has been used to successfully predict the fragmentation of biological virus shells (capsids), with the fragmentation threshold of Hepatitis B virus capsid predicted and detected experimentally. When a critical number of subunits has been randomly removed from the nanoscopic shell, it fragments and this fragmentation may be detected using Charge Detection Mass Spectroscopy (CDMS) among other single-particle techniques. This is a molecular analog to the common board game Jenga, and has relevance to the broader study of virus disassembly. More stable viral particles (tilings with greater fragmentation thresholds) are found in greater abundance in nature.

=== In ecology ===
Percolation theory has been applied to studies of how environment fragmentation impacts animal habitats and models of how the plague bacterium &quot;Yersinia pestis&quot; spreads.

==See also==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


==References==
*

===Further reading===
*


==External links==
*PercoVIS: a macOS program to visualize percolation on networks in real time
*Interactive Percolation
*Nanohub online course on &quot;Percolation Theory&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q188715" start="3" end="22" title="statistical physics" label="statistical physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="27" end="38" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q900918" start="40" end="58" title="Percolation theory" label="percolation theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q185357" start="154" end="170" title="phase transition" label="phase transition"/>
<link wikidata="Q166507" start="289" end="298" title="Glossary of graph theory" label="connected"/>
<link wikidata="Q228736" start="371" end="388" title="materials science" label="materials science"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192971" start="458" end="472" title="Network theory" label="Network theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q17156484" start="477" end="511" title="Percolation (cognitive psychology)" label="Percolation (cognitive psychology)"/>
<link wikidata="Q35245" start="567" end="573" title="etymology" label="source"/>
<link wikidata="Q622669" start="651" end="657" title="porosity" label="porous"/>
<link wikidata="Q486902" start="774" end="782" title="mathematical model" label="modelled"/>
<link wikidata="Q6497118" start="803" end="828" title="Grid graph" label="three-dimensional network"/>
<link wikidata="Q141488" start="832" end="840" title="graph (discrete mathematics)" label="vertices"/>
<link wikidata="Q141488" start="889" end="893" title="graph (discrete mathematics)" label="edge"/>
<link wikidata="Q166507" start="2081" end="2089" title="Infinite graph" label="infinite"/>
<link wikidata="Q2004664" start="2302" end="2332" title="Kolmogorov&amp;#x27;s zero–one law" label="Kolmogorov&amp;#x27;s zero–one law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1784133" start="2484" end="2492" title="Coupling (probability)" label="coupling"/>
<link wikidata="Q25111200" start="2881" end="2904" title="Flory–Stockmayer theory" label="Flory–Stockmayer theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969653" start="3369" end="3414" title="British Coal Utilisation Research Association" label="British Coal Utilisation Research Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q7474" start="3516" end="3533" title="Rosalind Franklin" label="Rosalind Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q232207" start="4820" end="4839" title="Monte Carlo method" label="Monte Carlo methods"/>
<link wikidata="Q1382531" start="4862" end="4877" title="John Hammersley" label="John Hammersley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7582067" start="5241" end="5255" title="square lattice" label="square lattice"/>
<link wikidata="Q635373" start="5382" end="5394" title="Harry Kesten" label="Harry Kesten"/>
<link wikidata="Q794168" start="5675" end="5688" title="Bethe lattice" label="Bethe lattice"/>
<link wikidata="Q397226" start="5718" end="5737" title="coordination number" label="coordination number"/>
<link wikidata="Q272735" start="5772" end="5776" title="Tree (graph theory)" label="tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q272735" start="5847" end="5856" title="Tree (graph theory)" label="tree-like"/>
<link wikidata="Q4137985" start="5945" end="5960" title="giant component" label="giant component"/>
<link wikidata="Q7167170" start="5970" end="5991" title="percolation threshold" label="percolation threshold"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6065" end="6084" title="Degree distribution#Generating functions method" label="generating function"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6106" end="6132" title="Degree distribution#Generating functions method" label="excess degree distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q605807" start="6149" end="6169" title="Erdős–Rényi model" label="Erdős–Rényi networks"/>
<link wikidata="Q898680" start="6224" end="6234" title="Clustering coefficient" label="clustering"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495574" start="6830" end="6852" title="Universality (dynamical systems)" label="universality principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q901927" start="7021" end="7039" title="critical exponents" label="critical exponents"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412452" start="7263" end="7280" title="fractal dimension" label="fractal dimension"/>
<link wikidata="Q28405395" start="7432" end="7473" title="weighted planar stochastic lattice (WPSL)" label="weighted planar stochastic lattice (WPSL)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8001" end="8014" title="Big O notation#Orders of common functions" label="exponentially"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294516" start="8176" end="8186" title="dual graph" label="dual graph"/>
<link wikidata="Q863349" start="9153" end="9164" title="mathematical singularity" label="singularity"/>
<link wikidata="Q901927" start="9265" end="9279" title="Critical scaling" label="Scaling theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q901927" start="9306" end="9324" title="critical exponents" label="critical exponents"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191271" start="9479" end="9501" title="conformal field theory" label="conformal field theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432797" start="9506" end="9531" title="Schramm–Loewner evolution" label="Schramm–Loewner evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q269878" start="9902" end="9917" title="big O notation" label="on the order of"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495574" start="10072" end="10084" title="Universality (dynamical systems)" label="universality"/>
<link wikidata="Q850275" start="10200" end="10221" title="conformal map" label="conformally invariant"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10318" end="10332" title="lace expansion" label="lace expansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q923813" start="10787" end="10799" title="Oded Schramm" label="Oded Schramm"/>
<link wikidata="Q7429781" start="10809" end="10822" title="scaling limit" label="scaling limit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432797" start="10873" end="10898" title="Schramm–Loewner evolution" label="Schramm–Loewner evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q5280413" start="11020" end="11040" title="Directed percolation" label="Directed percolation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11412" start="11067" end="11108" title="gravity" label="gravitational forces acting on the liquid"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164846" start="11163" end="11178" title="contact process (mathematics)" label="contact process"/>
<link wikidata="Q65067094" start="11371" end="11409" title="random cluster model" label="Fortuin–Kasteleyn random cluster model"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076349" start="11447" end="11458" title="Ising model" label="Ising model"/>
<link wikidata="Q7235385" start="11469" end="11480" title="Potts model" label="Potts model"/>
<link wikidata="Q45715" start="11516" end="11530" title="complete graph" label="complete graph"/>
<link wikidata="Q910404" start="11551" end="11563" title="random graph" label="random graph"/>
<link wikidata="Q25305507" start="11650" end="11671" title="Bootstrap percolation" label="Bootstrap percolation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3375164" start="11803" end="11828" title="First passage percolation" label="First passage percolation"/>
<link wikidata="Q24902133" start="11831" end="11851" title="Invasion percolation" label="Invasion percolation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6853" start="12078" end="12089" title="Hepatitis B" label="Hepatitis B"/>
<link wikidata="Q830465" start="12096" end="12102" title="capsid" label="capsid"/>
<link wikidata="Q869870" start="12422" end="12427" title="Jenga" label="Jenga"/>
<link wikidata="Q153875" start="12777" end="12792" title="Yersinia pestis" label="Yersinia pestis"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="187806" wikidata="Q5375774" url="?curid=187806" title="End-to-end">
<text>End-to-end or End to End may refer to:

* End-to-end auditable voting systems, a voting system
* End-to-end delay, the time for a packet to be transmitted across a network from source to destination
* End-to-end encryption, a cryptographic paradigm involving uninterrupted protection of data traveling between two communicating parties
* End-to-end data integrity
* End-to-end principle, a principal design element of the Internet
* End-to-end reinforcement learning
* End-to-end vector, points from one end of a polymer to the other end
* Land&#x27;s End to John o&#x27; Groats, the journey from &quot;End to End&quot; across Great Britain
*End-to-end testing (see also: Verification and validation)

==See also==
* E2E (disambiguation)
* Point-to-point (telecommunications)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5375774" start="0" end="10" title="End-to-end" label="End-to-end"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375774" start="14" end="24" title="End-to-end" label="End to End"/>
<link wikidata="Q29535030" start="42" end="77" title="End-to-end auditable voting systems" label="End-to-end auditable voting systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375776" start="97" end="113" title="End-to-end delay" label="End-to-end delay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340257" start="201" end="222" title="End-to-end encryption" label="End-to-end encryption"/>
<link wikidata="Q3326322" start="338" end="363" title="End-to-end data integrity" label="End-to-end data integrity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2527392" start="366" end="386" title="End-to-end principle" label="End-to-end principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q65079156" start="433" end="466" title="End-to-end reinforcement learning" label="End-to-end reinforcement learning"/>
<link wikidata="Q3710392" start="469" end="486" title="End-to-end vector" label="End-to-end vector"/>
<link wikidata="Q6483818" start="540" end="578" title="Land&amp;#x27;s End to John o&amp;#x27; Groats" label="Land&amp;#x27;s End to John o&amp;#x27; Groats"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199682" start="642" end="660" title="End-to-end testing" label="End-to-end testing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919644" start="672" end="699" title="Verification and validation" label="Verification and validation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273673" start="717" end="737" title="E2E (disambiguation)" label="E2E (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q681349" start="740" end="775" title="Point-to-point (telecommunications)" label="Point-to-point (telecommunications)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="187807" wikidata="Q43044" url="?curid=187807" title="Demi Moore">
<text>Demi Gene Moore ( ; née Guynes; born November 11, 1962) is an American actress and producer. After rising to prominence in the early 1980s, Moore became the world&#x27;s highest-paid actress by 1995. She is recognized as a pioneer for equal salary for women in Hollywood. Her accolades include a Golden Globe Award, in addition to nominations for an Academy Award, a British Academy Film Award, and a Primetime Emmy Award.

Moore began her career as a model and joined the cast of the soap opera &quot;General Hospital&quot; in 1981. After departing the show in 1983, she rose to prominence as a member of the Brat Pack, with roles in the films &quot;Blame It on Rio&quot; (1984), &quot;St. Elmo&#x27;s Fire&quot; (1985), and &quot;About Last Night...&quot; (1986). She emerged a star with her portrayal of a grieving girlfriend in the romance film &quot;Ghost&quot; (1990), had further box office success in &quot;A Few Good Men&quot; (1992), &quot;Indecent Proposal&quot; (1993), and &quot;Disclosure&quot; (1994), and received a then-unprecedented to star in &quot;Striptease&quot; (1996). Her output decreased significantly after &quot;The Scarlet Letter&quot; (1995), &quot;The Juror&quot; (1996), and &quot;G.I. Jane&quot; (1997) fell below commercial expectations.

Moore has since held sporadic leading roles in arthouse films; supporting roles in &quot;Charlie&#x27;s Angels: Full Throttle&quot; (2003), &quot;Bobby&quot; (2006), &quot;Mr. Brooks&quot; (2007), and &quot;Margin Call&quot; (2011); as well as television credits in &quot;If These Walls Could Talk&quot; (1996), &quot;Empire&quot; (2017–2018), and &quot;&quot; (2024). She received renewed recognition for her performance as an aging celebrity in the body horror film &quot;The Substance&quot; (2024), winning the Golden Globe Award for Best Actress and a nomination for the Academy Award for Best Actress.

Moore has been married three times. From 1981 to 1985, she was married to musician Freddy Moore. From 1987 to 2000, she was married to Bruce Willis, with whom she has three daughters. She was married to Ashton Kutcher from 2005 to 2013. Her memoir, &quot;Inside Out&quot; (2019), became a &quot;New York Times&quot; Best Seller.

==Early life==
Demi Moore was born November 11, 1962, in Roswell, New Mexico. Her biological father, Air Force airman Charles Foster Harmon Sr., deserted her then-18-year-old mother, Virginia (née King), after a two-month marriage before Moore&#x27;s birth. Charles came from Lanett, Alabama, and Virginia was born in Richmond, California but had grown up in Roswell. Moore&#x27;s maternal grandmother was raised on a farm in Elida, New Mexico. Moore has deep roots in the South Central and Southern United States, particularly Oklahoma, Arkansas and Georgia. When Moore was three months old, her mother married Dan Guynes, a newspaper advertising salesman who frequently changed jobs; as a result, the family moved many times. In 1967 they had Moore&#x27;s half-brother Morgan. Moore said in 1991, &quot;My dad is Dan Guynes. He raised me. There is a man who would be considered my biological father who I don&#x27;t really have a relationship with.&quot; Moore has half-siblings from Charlie Harmon&#x27;s other marriages, but she does not keep in touch with them either.

Moore&#x27;s stepfather Dan Guynes married and divorced Virginia twice. On October 20, 1980, a year after their second divorce from each other, Guynes committed suicide. Her biological father Harmon died in 1997 from liver cancer in Brazoria, Texas. Moore&#x27;s mother had a long arrest record which included drunk driving and arson. Moore broke off contact with her mother in 1989, when she walked away halfway through a rehab stay Moore had financed at the Hazelden Foundation in Minnesota. Virginia Guynes posed nude for the magazine &quot;High Society&quot; in 1993, where she spoofed Moore&#x27;s &quot;Vanity Fair&quot; pregnancy and bodypaint covers and parodied her clay scene from &quot;Ghost&quot;. Moore and Guynes reconciled shortly before Guynes died of a brain tumor on July 2, 1998.

Moore spent her early childhood in Roswell, and later, Canonsburg, Pennsylvania. Bob Gardner, a photographer for the &quot;Monongahela Daily Herald&quot; when Dan Guynes was head of advertising, recalled that Moore &quot;looked malnourished and not so much abused as neglected. That haunting look as a child made me feel uneasy.&quot; She suffered from strabismus, which was corrected by two operations, as well as kidney dysfunction. Moore learned that Guynes was not her birth father at age 13, when she discovered a marriage certificate and inquired about the circumstances since she &quot;saw my parents were married in February 1963. I was born in &#x27;62.&quot;

At age 14, Moore returned to her hometown of Roswell and lived with her grandmother for six months before relocating to Washington state, where her recently separated mother was residing near Seattle. Several months later, the family moved again to West Hollywood, California, where Moore&#x27;s mother took a job working for a magazine distribution company. Moore attended Fairfax High School there. In 2019, she stated she was raped at 15 by landlord Basil Doumas, then 49. Doumas claimed he had paid Moore&#x27;s mother to get access to Moore to rape her, although Moore said it is unclear if this were true.

In November 1978, Moore moved in with 28-year-old guitarist Tom Dunston, quitting high school in her junior year to work as a receptionist at 20th Century Fox—a job she secured through Dunston&#x27;s mother, who was an executive assistant to producer Douglas S. Cramer. She signed with the Elite Modeling Agency, then enrolled in acting classes after being inspired by her next-door neighbor, 17-year-old German starlet Nastassja Kinski. Moore&#x27;s first and second roles as a professional actress were guest spots on the TV shows &quot;W.E.B.&quot; and &quot;Kaz&quot; (though neither is listed in her IMDb filmography). In August 1979, three months before her 17th birthday, Moore met married musician Freddy Moore, at the time leader of the band Boy, at the Los Angeles nightclub The Troubadour. He obtained a divorce in late 1980 and married Demi six weeks later.

==Career==
===Beginnings and breakthrough (1980–1989)===

Moore co-wrote three songs with Freddy Moore and appeared in the music video for their selection &quot;It&#x27;s Not a Rumor&quot;, performed by his band, the Nu-Kats. She continues to receive royalty checks from her songwriting work (1980–1981).

Moore appeared on the cover of the January 1981 issue of the adult magazine &quot;Oui,&quot; taken from a photo session in which she had posed nude. In a 1988 interview, Moore said she &quot;only posed for the cover of &quot;Oui&quot;—I was 16; I told them I was 18.&quot; Interviewer Alan Carter said, &quot;However, some peekaboo shots did appear inside. And later, nude shots of her turned up in &quot;Celebrity Sleuth&quot;—photos that she once said &#x27;were for a European fashion magazine&#x27;.&quot; In 1990, she told another interviewer, &quot;I was 17 years old. I was underage. It was just the cover.&quot;

Moore made her film debut as the protagonist&#x27;s girlfriend in &quot;Choices&quot; (1981), a sports drama directed by Silvio Narizzano. It did not garner much attention until after Moore became a household name, with home video releases heavily hyping up her appearance. Her second feature was the 3-D sci-fi horror &quot;Parasite&quot; (1982), for which director Charles Band had instructed casting director Johanna Ray to &quot;find me the next Karen Allen&quot;. It proved to be a minor hit on the drive-in circuit, ultimately grossing . Moore had already joined the cast of the ABC soap opera &quot;General Hospital&quot; several months before the film&#x27;s release, playing the role of investigative reporter Jackie Templeton through 1983. During her tenure on the series, she made an uncredited cameo appearance in the 1982 spoof &quot;Young Doctors in Love&quot;.

Moore&#x27;s film career took off in 1984 following her appearance in the sex comedy &quot;Blame It on Rio&quot;. In &quot;No Small Affair&quot; (1984), she played the love interest of an amateur photographer, opposite Jon Cryer. Her commercial breakthrough came with her role as an uninhibited banker in Joel Schumacher&#x27;s yuppie drama &quot;St. Elmo&#x27;s Fire&quot; (1985), which received negative reviews, but was a box office success and brought her widespread recognition. Because of her association with that film, she was often listed as part of the Brat Pack, a label she felt was &quot;demeaning.&quot;

Moore progressed to more serious material with the romantic dramedy &quot;About Last Night...&quot; (1986), in which she played one half of a Chicago couple, alongside Rob Lowe. It marked a positive turning point in her career, as Moore noted that, following its release, she began seeing better scripts. Film critic Roger Ebert gave the film four out of four stars and praised her performance, writing, &quot;There isn&#x27;t a romantic note she isn&#x27;t required to play in this movie, and she plays them all flawlessly.&quot; The success of &quot;About Last Night...&quot; was unrivaled by Moore&#x27;s other two 1986 releases, &quot;One Crazy Summer&quot; and &quot;Wisdom&quot;, the last youth-oriented films in which she would star.

Moore made her professional stage debut in an off-Broadway production of &quot;The Early Girl&quot;, which ran at the Circle Repertory Company in fall 1986. In 1988, Moore starred as a prophecy-bearing mother in the apocalyptic drama &quot;The Seventh Sign&quot;—her first outing as a solo film star— and in 1989, she played the quick-witted local laundress and part time prostitute in Neil Jordan&#x27;s Depression-era allegory &quot;We&#x27;re No Angels&quot;, opposite Robert De Niro.

===Established career (1990–1997)===

Moore&#x27;s most successful film to date is the supernatural romantic melodrama &quot;Ghost&quot;, which grossed over at the box office and was the highest-grossing film of 1990, as well as the most rented videocassette of 1991. She played a young woman in jeopardy to be protected by the ghost of her murdered boyfriend through the help of a reluctant psychic. The love scene between Moore and Patrick Swayze that starts in front of a potter&#x27;s wheel to the sound of &quot;Unchained Melody&quot; has become an iconic moment in cinema history. &quot;Ghost&quot; was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Picture, while Moore&#x27;s performance earned her a Golden Globe nomination and the Saturn Award for Best Actress. She started fashion trends with her uncharacteristically gamine look, and legions of women emulated the short haircut she sported throughout the film. At one point, &quot;Ghost&quot; and &quot;Die Hard 2&quot;, starring Moore&#x27;s then-husband Bruce Willis, would occupy the number one and number two spots at the box office, a feat that would not be accomplished again for a married Hollywood couple until 2024.

In 1991, Moore starred in the horror comedy &quot;Nothing but Trouble&quot;, the mystery thriller &quot;Mortal Thoughts&quot;, and the romantic comedy &quot;The Butcher&#x27;s Wife&quot;. She took on the role of a clairvoyant woman in the latter to increase her fee following the success of &quot;Ghost&quot;, but later regretted making the film. Roger Ebert&#x27;s review, nevertheless, described her portrayal as &quot;warm and cuddly.&quot; She maintained her A-list status with her leading roles as a lieutenant commander in Rob Reiner&#x27;s &quot;A Few Good Men&quot; (1992), a morally tested wife in Adrian Lyne&#x27;s &quot;Indecent Proposal&quot; (1993), and a sexually charged employer in Barry Levinson&#x27;s &quot;Disclosure&quot; (1994). The three aforementioned films opened atop the box office and were blockbuster hits. By 1995, Moore had become the world&#x27;s highest paid actress.

Moore&#x27;s next starring vehicles were released to fluctuated critical and commercial responses. She played an author with commitment issues in the coming-of-age drama &quot;Now and Then&quot; (1995), a film that found box office success and cult following despite a negative critical reception. Her portrayal of Hester Prynne in &quot;The Scarlet Letter&quot; (1995), a &quot;freely adapted&quot; version of the historical romance novel by Nathaniel Hawthorne, was met with harsh criticism. Moore was paid a record-breaking salary of to star as a FBI secretary-turned-stripper in &quot;Striptease&quot; (1996). The film was critically panned, but made a respectable worldwide. She starred as a single mother intimidated by a mobster in the thriller &quot;The Juror&quot; (1996), which made on a budget. For both &quot;Striptease&quot; and &quot;The Juror&quot;, she received the Golden Raspberry Award for Worst Actress.

Moore produced and starred in HBO&#x27;s &quot;If These Walls Could Talk&quot; (1996), a three-part anthology about abortion alongside Sissy Spacek and Cher. Its screenwriter, Nancy Savoca, directed two segments, including one in which Moore played a widowed nurse in the early 1950s seeking a back-alley abortion. For the film, Moore received Golden Globe nominations for Best Actress – Miniseries or Television Film and Best Miniseries or Motion Picture Made for Television. In 1996, she provided the voice of Esmeralda in &quot;The Hunchback of Notre Dame&quot;, and Dallas Grimes in &quot;Beavis and Butt-Head Do America&quot;, both of which were the highest-grossing animated films that year.

Moore shaved her head to play the first woman to undergo training in the Navy SEALs in Ridley Scott&#x27;s &quot;G.I. Jane&quot; (1997). Budgeted at , the film was a moderate commercial success, with a worldwide gross of . She took on the role of an ultrapious Jewish convert psychiatrist in Woody Allen&#x27;s &quot;Deconstructing Harry&quot;, also in 1997.

===Hiatus and sporadic roles (1998–2009)===
After &quot;G.I. Jane&quot;, Moore retreated from the spotlight and moved to Hailey, Idaho, on a full-time basis to devote herself to raising her three daughters. She was off screen for three years before re-emerging in the arthouse psychological drama &quot;Passion of Mind&quot; (2000), the first English-language film from Belgian director Alain Berliner. Her performance as a woman with dissociative identity disorder was well received, but the film itself garnered negative reviews and was deemed &quot;naggingly slow&quot; by some critics. Moore then resumed her self-imposed career hiatus and continued to turn down film offers. Producer Irwin Winkler said in 2001, &quot;I had a project about a year and a half ago, and we made an inquiry about her—a real good commercial picture. She wasn&#x27;t interested.&quot;

Moore returned to the screen playing a villain in the 2003 film &quot;Charlie&#x27;s Angels: Full Throttle&quot;, opposite Cameron Diaz, Drew Barrymore and Lucy Liu. A commercial success, the film made worldwide. On Moore&#x27;s role, Peter Travers of &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; remarked: &quot;It&#x27;s a relief when Demi Moore shows up as fallen angel [...] Moore, 40, looks great in a bikini and doesn&#x27;t even try to act. Her unsmiling sexiness cuts through the gigglefest as the angels fight, kick, dance and motocross like Indiana Jones clones on estrogen.&quot; &quot;Charlie&#x27;s Angels: Full Throttle&quot; was followed by yet another three-year absence. In the interim, Moore signed on as the face of the Versace fashion brand and the Helena Rubinstein brand of cosmetics.

In Emilio Estevez&#x27;s drama &quot;Bobby&quot; (2006), Moore portrayed an alcoholic singer whose career is on the downswing, as part of an ensemble cast, about the hours leading up to the Robert F. Kennedy assassination. As a member of the cast, she was nominated for the Screen Actors Guild Award for Best Cast in a Motion Picture. The film won the Hollywood Film Festival Award for Best Ensemble Cast. She played a grieving novelist in the mystery thriller &quot;Half Light&quot; (2006), and a driven police officer investigating a serial killer in the psychological thriller &quot;Mr. Brooks&quot; (2007). &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; felt that her role in the letter &quot;deserved better than being saddled with an absurd back story as an heiress with a fortune-hunting husband.&quot; &quot;Mr. Brooks&quot; grossed worldwide.

Moore reunited with &quot;Blame It on Rio&quot; co-star Michael Caine for the British crime drama film &quot;Flawless&quot; (2008), which saw her portray an American executive helping to steal a handful of diamonds from the London Diamond Corporation during the 1960s. Moore received positive reviews from critics; &quot;Miami Herald&quot; wrote: &quot;The inspired pairing of Demi Moore and Michael Caine as a pair of thieves in the diamond-heist semi-caper movie &quot;Flawless&quot; goes a long way toward overcoming the film&#x27;s slack, leisurely pacing.&quot;

===Independent films and television (2010–2023)===
In 2010, Moore played a daughter helping her father deal with age-related health problems in the dramedy &quot;Happy Tears,&quot; as well as the matriarch of a family moving into a suburban neighborhood in the comedy &quot;The Joneses&quot;. The latter film was largely highlighted upon its theatrical release, with critics concluding that it &quot;benefits from its timely satire of consumer culture—as well as a pair of strong performances&quot;. In &quot;Bunraku&quot; (2010), a film Moore described as a &quot;big action adventure,&quot; she starred as a courtesan and a femme fatale with a secret past.

Moore portrayed a chief risk management officer at a large Wall Street investment bank during the initial stages of the financial crisis of 2007–08 in the critically acclaimed corporate drama &quot;Margin Call&quot; (2011), where she was part of an ensemble cast that included Kevin Spacey, Simon Baker, and Paul Bettany. The cast garnered nominations for the &quot;Best Ensemble&quot; award from the Gotham Awards, the Phoenix Film Critics Society and the Central Ohio Film Critics Association. She received a Directors Guild of America Award nomination for Outstanding Directing – Miniseries or TV Film for her work as a director in a segment of the Lifetime anthology film &quot;Five&quot; (2011).

Moore played a &quot;brash and overtly sexual second wife&quot; in the black comedy &quot;Another Happy Day&quot; (2011), mothers in the coming-of-age films &quot;LOL&quot; (2012) and &quot;Very Good Girls&quot; (2013), an old flame of a quick-draw killer in the Western drama &quot;Forsaken&quot; (2015), the daughter of a retired high school teacher in the road comedy &quot;Wild Oats&quot; (2016), and the neglected wife of an indicted businessman in the drama &quot;Blind&quot; (2017).

Between 2017 and 2018, Moore had a recurring arc as a mysterious take-charge nurse on &quot;Empire&quot;. The comedy &quot;Rough Night&quot; (2017) featured Moore as one half of a nymphomaniac couple seducing a member of a bachelorette party. Despite a lukewarm response, the film was Moore&#x27;s only wide theatrical release of the decade. She played a social worker in the Hindi-language drama &quot;Love Sonia&quot; (2018), and a superficial CEO in the black comedy &quot;Corporate Animals&quot; (2019).

Moore&#x27;s memoir, &quot;Inside Out&quot;, was published in September 2019, by HarperCollins. The book reached number one on &quot;The New York Times&quot;″ Combined Print &amp; E-Book Nonfiction best-sellers list and the Hardcover Nonfiction best-sellers list.

In 2020, Moore starred as the protective matriarch of a family in the thriller &quot;Songbird&quot;, played the title role in the podcast &quot;Dirty Diana&quot;, and was among the celebrities who made cameo appearances modeling lingerie at Rihanna&#x27;s Savage x Fenty Vol. 2 fashion show. Her next film role was that of an eccentric neighbour in the musical drama &quot;Please Baby Please&quot; (2022), which Tara Bradly of &quot;Irish Times&quot; found her to be a &quot;marvel&quot; in. She had a cameo appearance as Nicolas Cage&#x27;s in-movie fictional ex-wife in &quot;The Unbearable Weight of Massive Talent&quot; (2022).

===Renewed critical success (2024–present)===

In 2024, Moore played socialite Ann Woodward in the Ryan Murphy anthology series &quot;&quot; on FX, and began starring as the wife of an oil tycoon in Taylor Sheridan&#x27;s drama series &quot;Landman&quot; on Paramount+.

In Coralie Fargeat&#x27;s body horror film &quot;The Substance&quot; (2024), Moore played an aging star who uses a black market drug to make herself younger. It premiered at the 2024 Cannes Film Festival, and Moore&#x27;s performance was praised by critics. Nicholas Barber of BBC called it &quot;her best big-screen role in decades&quot; and praised her for being &quot;fearless in parodying her public image.&quot; Phil de Semlyen of &quot;Time Out&quot; believed Moore &quot;glues it all together, going full Isabelle Adjani-in-&quot;Possession&quot; in a vanity-free performance full of bruised ego, dawning horror and vulnerability.&quot; She won the Golden Globe Award for Best Actress in a Motion Picture – Musical or Comedy, the Critics&#x27; Choice Movie Award for Best Actress, and the Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by a Female Actor in a Leading Role, and was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Actress and the British Academy Film Award for Best Actress in a Leading Role.

Moore will next star in Boots Riley&#x27;s film &quot;I Love Boosters&quot;.

== Public image ==
=== Status and persona ===

Moore is viewed as a pioneer for equal salary for women in Hollywood. She was paid for her role in &quot;Striptease&quot;, which was more money than any other woman in Hollywood had ever been offered at the time. Producers for &quot;Striptease&quot; and &quot;G.I. Jane&quot; got into a bidding war to see who could get Moore to film first. &quot;Striptease&quot; won and Moore became the highest-paid actress in Hollywood in 1995. In the late 1990s, however, she had also earned a reputation for &quot;being a diva&quot; after turning down the Sandra Bullock role in &quot;While You Were Sleeping&quot; because the studio refused to meet her salary demands, and for ordering studio chiefs to charter two planes for her entourage and her during the production of G.I. Jane. She was dubbed &quot;Gimme Moore&quot; by the media. Retrospectively, &quot;She became a pioneer for other actresses by being the first female lead to demand the same salary, benefits and billing as her male counterparts,&quot; &quot;Lifetime&quot; wrote. &quot;Her screen persona always has something indestructible about it. There&#x27;s a toughness, a strength, a determination,&quot; &quot;The Guardian&quot; described in 2007. She was the subject of an &quot;E! True Hollywood Story&quot; special in 2003 and of &quot;Celebrity Style Story&quot; special in 2012.

Moore has been included in magazine lists of the world&#x27;s most beautiful women. She was selected as one of &quot;People&quot; magazine&#x27;s 50 Most Beautiful People in the world in 1996. In 1999, Moore became a guest editor for the November issue of &quot;Marie Claire&quot;. In 1999, she was ranked eighth on &quot;Forbes&quot;&#x27; list of Top 20 Actresses, based on three separate lists of box office receipts. In 2004, &quot;People&quot; ranked her ninth on their list of All-Time Most Beautiful Women. She was voted seventh on &quot;Life &amp; Style&quot;&#x27;s Best Dressed Female poll in December 2006. On December 31, 2019, &quot;The Wall Street Journal&quot; listed a cover story about Moore as one of their most-read stories in 2019.

Moore has 4.5 million followers on Twitter as of January 2020. She uses Twitter as a platform to raise awareness of sexual trafficking and slavery. &quot;She is practicing what she preaches: More than half of her posts are on the subject, directing followers where to get involved,&quot; &quot;Harper&#x27;s Bazaar&quot; reported in August 2010. &quot;I like to connect to people in the virtual world.. exchanging thoughts and ideas, when in the physical world we might never have the opportunity to cross paths,&quot; Moore told &quot;Harper&#x27;s Bazaar&quot;. As of February 2024, Moore has 5 million Instagram followers.

Moore has graced the cover of numerous international fashion magazines, including France&#x27;s &quot;Elle&quot;; UK&#x27;s &quot;Grazia&quot;; US&#x27; &quot;W&quot;, &quot;Vanity Fair&quot;, &quot;Interview&quot;, &quot;Rolling Stone&quot;, &quot;Glamour&quot; and &quot;InStyle&quot;; Australia&#x27;s &quot;Harper&#x27;s Bazaar&quot; and Turkey&#x27;s &quot;Marie Claire&quot;. She has also appeared on the front cover of &quot;Vogue&quot; (Portugal, France and US). As of 2024, Moore has appeared on magazine covers every year since 1980. Moore has appeared in commercials and print ads throughout her career. She has appeared in television commercials for Keds, Oscar Mayer, Diet Coke, Lux, Jog Mate and Seibu Department Stores, and print ads for Versace and Ann Taylor.

===&quot;Vanity Fair&quot; controversies===

In August 1991, Moore appeared nude on the cover of &quot;Vanity Fair&quot; under the title &quot;More Demi Moore.&quot; Annie Leibovitz shot the picture while Moore was seven months pregnant with her second child, Scout LaRue Willis, intending to portray &quot;anti-Hollywood, anti-glitz&quot; attitude. The cover drew a lot of attention, being discussed on television, radio, and in newspaper articles. The frankness of Leibovitz&#x27;s portrayal of a pregnant sex symbol led to divided opinions, ranging from suggestions of sexual objectification to celebrations of the photograph as a symbol of empowerment.

The photograph was subject to numerous parodies, including the &quot;Spy&quot; Magazine version, which placed Moore&#x27;s then-husband Bruce Willis&#x27;s head on the body of a male model with a false belly. In &quot;Leibovitz v. Paramount Pictures Corp.,&quot; Leibovitz sued over one parody featuring Leslie Nielsen, made to promote the 1994 film &quot;Naked Gun : The Final Insult.&quot; In the parody, the model&#x27;s body was attached to what is described as &quot;the guilty and smirking face&quot; of Nielsen. The teaser said &quot;Due this March.&quot; The case was dismissed in 1996 because the parody relied &quot;for its comic effect on the contrast between the original.&quot; In November 2009, the Moroccan magazine &quot;Femmes du Maroc&quot; emulated the pose with Moroccan news reporter Nadia Larguet, causing controversy in the majority-Muslim nation.

In August 1992, Moore again appeared nude on the cover of &quot;Vanity Fair,&quot; this time modeling for body painting artist Joanne Gair in &quot;Demi&#x27;s Birthday Suit.&quot; In October 2019, she posed nude on the cover of &quot;Harper&#x27;s Bazaar&quot;.

==Personal life==
=== Marriages and relationships ===
On February 8, 1981, at the age of 18, Moore married singer Freddy Moore, then 30 and recently divorced from his first wife, Lucy. Before their marriage, Demi had already begun using Freddy&#x27;s surname as her stage name. The pair separated in 1983, after which Demi had a relationship with Timothy Hutton. She filed for divorce from Freddy in September 1984; it was finalized on August 7, 1985. Moore was then engaged to actor Emilio Estevez, with whom she co-starred in &quot;St. Elmo&#x27;s Fire&quot; and &quot;Wisdom,&quot; a crime drama he also wrote and directed. The pair planned to marry on December 6, 1986, but called off the engagement after a woman filed a paternity suit against Estevez.

==== Bruce Willis ====
On November 21, 1987, Moore married her second husband, actor Bruce Willis. She and Willis had three daughters: Rumer Glenn Willis (born 1988), Scout LaRue Willis (born 1991), and Tallulah Belle Willis (born 1994). They announced their separation on June 24, 1998, and divorced on October 18, 2000. Despite the divorce, Moore maintains a close friendship with Willis and his current spouse Emma Heming Willis, and has assisted her and their respective children with caretaking for Willis as his health has declined. Moore had a three-year romance with martial arts instructor Oliver Whitcomb, whom she dated from 1999 to 2002.

==== Ashton Kutcher ====
In 2003, Moore began dating actor Ashton Kutcher. Soon after they began dating, Moore became pregnant and she suffered a stillbirth six months into the pregnancy. They married on September 24, 2005. The wedding was attended by about 150 close friends and family of the couple, including Willis. In November 2011, after months of media speculation about the state of the couple&#x27;s marriage, Moore announced her decision to end her marriage to Kutcher. After over a year of separation, Kutcher filed for divorce from Moore on December 21, 2012, in Los Angeles Superior Court, citing irreconcilable differences. Moore filed her response papers in March 2013, requesting spousal support and payment of legal fees from Kutcher. On November 26, 2013, their divorce was finalized.

=== Health and beliefs ===
Moore claims that her good health is due to a raw vegan diet. Politically, Moore is a supporter of the Democratic Party.

Moore was at one point a follower of Philip Berg&#x27;s Kabbalah Centre religion, and initiated Kutcher into the faith, having said that she &quot;didn&#x27;t grow up Jewish, but [...] would say that [she has] been more exposed to the deeper meanings of particular rituals than any of [her] friends that did.&quot; She is no longer affiliated with Berg&#x27;s organization. According to &quot;The New York Times&quot;, Moore is &quot;the world&#x27;s most high-profile doll collector,&quot; and among her favorites is the Gene Marshall fashion doll. At one point, she kept a separate residence to house her 2,000 dolls.

==Activism and philanthropy==

Moore has supported numerous charities, including All Day Foundation, American Foundation for AIDS Research, Artists for Peace and Justice, Coalition to Abolish Slavery and Trafficking, Declare Yourself, Free The Slaves, Healthy Child Healthy World, Raising Malawi, The Art of Elysium and UNICEF. In 2010, Moore defeated Kevin Bacon to win in the Pepsi Refresh Celebrity Challenge. She chose to support the organization GEMS: Girls Educational &amp; Mentoring Services, a nonprofit group which aims to empower young women who have been the victims of commercial sexual exploitation and trafficking. She traveled to Haiti with the Artists for Peace and Justice following the earthquake of 2010. She has also supported Chrysalis, a non-profit organization which offers employment opportunities to the homeless.

Moore became a special contributor to the CNN Freedom Project and traveled to Nepal to meet with 2010 CNN Hero of the Year Anuradha Koirala and her organization, Maiti Nepal, which has rescued more than 12,000 stolen Nepalese children from sex trafficking since 1993. Moore was the narrator and anchor of CNN&#x27;s documentary on child trafficking, called &quot;Nepal&#x27;s Stolen Children,&quot; which aired on June 26, 2011. In the documentary, Moore talked to Nepal&#x27;s prime minister, Jhalanath Khanal, and young girls who were forced into prostitution before being saved by a Nepalese nonprofit. Moore appeared on PETA&#x27;s Worst-Dressed List in 2009 for wearing fur; two years later she supported the group&#x27;s efforts to ban circus workers&#x27; use of bullhooks on elephants.

In 2009, Moore and Kutcher launched DNA Foundation, a nonprofit, non-governmental organization directed towards fighting child sexual slavery. The foundation&#x27;s first campaign included several celebrities, including Justin Timberlake, Sean Penn, Bradley Cooper appearing in a series of viral videos proclaiming: &quot;Real Men Don&#x27;t Buy Girls.&quot; In November 2012, the foundation said it was renaming as Thorn: Digital Defenders of Children, which aimed &quot;to disrupt and deflate the predatory behavior of those who abuse and traffic children, solicit sex with children or create and share child pornography.&quot; Thorn: Digital Defenders of Children, assisted law enforcement in identifying 5,894 child sex trafficking victims and rescuing 103 children from &quot;situations where their sexual abuse was recorded and distributed&quot; in 2017, according to the organization&#x27;s 2017 impact report. In 2018, Los Angeles-based nonprofit organization, Visionary Women honored Moore with its inaugural Visionary Woman Award for her work to combat human trafficking. In 2022, Thorn found 824,466 child sexual abuse material files and identified 1,895 victims of child sexual abuse. Moore received the Courage Award at The Women’s Cancer Research Fund&#x27;s gala in April 2024.

== Acting credits and accolades ==
Moore is the recipient of numerous accolades, including a Golden Globe Award, a Critics&#x27; Choice Movie Award and a Screen Actors Guild Award, as well as nominations for an Academy Award, a British Academy Film Award, a Primetime Emmy Award, a Directors Guild of America Award, and two Independent Spirit Awards.

Her most positively reviewed films, according to the review-aggregation website Rotten Tomatoes, include:
* &quot;About Last Night...&quot; (1986)
* &quot;Ghost&quot; (1990)
* &quot;A Few Good Men&quot; (1992)
* &quot;If These Walls Could Talk&quot; (1996)
* &quot;The Hunchback of Notre Dame&quot; (1996)
* &quot;Beavis and Butt-Head Do America&quot; (1996)
* &quot;Deconstructing Harry&quot; (1997)
* &quot;The Joneses&quot; (2009)
* &quot;Margin Call&quot; (2011)
* &quot;The Unbearable Weight of Massive Talent&quot; (2022)
* &quot;The Substance&quot; (2024)
== Bibliography ==
* &quot;Inside Out: A Memoir&quot;; HarperCollins (2019), 

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==
* Demi Moore interview by KVUE in 1986 discussing About Last Night from Texas Archive of the Moving Image
* 
* Thorn (formerly the Demi and Ashton Foundation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q43044" start="0" end="15" title="Demi Moore" label="Demi Gene Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q43044" start="24" end="30" title="Demi Moore" label="Guynes"/>
<link wikidata="Q380675" start="261" end="270" title="Cinema of the United States" label="Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q24962040" start="272" end="285" title="List of awards and nominations received by Demi Moore" label="Her accolades"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011547" start="296" end="314" title="Golden Globe Award" label="Golden Globe Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="350" end="363" title="Academy Awards" label="Academy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q732997" start="367" end="393" title="British Academy Film Awards" label="British Academy Film Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044427" start="401" end="421" title="Primetime Emmy Award" label="Primetime Emmy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136370" start="502" end="518" title="General Hospital" label="General Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q639239" start="610" end="619" title="Brat Pack" label="Brat Pack"/>
<link wikidata="Q548593" start="651" end="666" title="Blame It on Rio" label="Blame It on Rio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406821" start="687" end="707" title="St. Elmo&amp;#x27;s Fire (film)" label="St. Elmo&amp;#x27;s Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1535888" start="732" end="751" title="About Last Night (1986 film)" label="About Last Night..."/>
<link wikidata="Q49003" start="855" end="860" title="Ghost (1990 film)" label="Ghost"/>
<link wikidata="Q108946" start="915" end="929" title="A Few Good Men" label="A Few Good Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q603448" start="950" end="967" title="Indecent Proposal" label="Indecent Proposal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330619" start="992" end="1002" title="Disclosure (1994 film)" label="Disclosure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141460" start="1068" end="1078" title="Striptease (film)" label="Striptease"/>
<link wikidata="Q617942" start="1140" end="1158" title="The Scarlet Letter (1995 film)" label="The Scarlet Letter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475275" start="1179" end="1188" title="The Juror" label="The Juror"/>
<link wikidata="Q526690" start="1213" end="1222" title="G.I. Jane" label="G.I. Jane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135802" start="1320" end="1328" title="arthouse" label="arthouse"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1362" end="1398" title="Charlie&amp;#x27;s Angels: Full Throttle" label="Charlie&amp;#x27;s Angels: Full Throttle"/>
<link wikidata="Q679657" start="1419" end="1424" title="Bobby (2006 film)" label="Bobby"/>
<link wikidata="Q548906" start="1445" end="1455" title="Mr. Brooks" label="Mr. Brooks"/>
<link wikidata="Q624614" start="1480" end="1491" title="Margin Call" label="Margin Call"/>
<link wikidata="Q1590893" start="1545" end="1570" title="If These Walls Could Talk" label="If These Walls Could Talk"/>
<link wikidata="Q16992512" start="1591" end="1597" title="Empire (2015 TV series)" label="Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q113380226" start="1747" end="1760" title="The Substance" label="The Substance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011564" start="1787" end="1822" title="Golden Globe Award for Best Actress in a Motion Picture – Musical or Comedy" label="Golden Globe Award for Best Actress"/>
<link wikidata="Q103618" start="1848" end="1878" title="Academy Award for Best Actress" label="Academy Award for Best Actress"/>
<link wikidata="Q5496891" start="1964" end="1976" title="Freddy Moore" label="Freddy Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q2680" start="2016" end="2028" title="Bruce Willis" label="Bruce Willis"/>
<link wikidata="Q164782" start="2084" end="2098" title="Ashton Kutcher" label="Ashton Kutcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q85769509" start="2136" end="2146" title="Inside Out (Moore book)" label="Inside Out"/>
<link wikidata="Q578913" start="2170" end="2208" title="The New York Times Best Seller list" label="&amp;quot;New York Times&amp;quot; Best Seller"/>
<link wikidata="Q33561" start="2268" end="2287" title="Roswell, New Mexico" label="Roswell, New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q11223" start="2312" end="2321" title="U.S. Air Force" label="Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q79263" start="2487" end="2502" title="Lanett, Alabama" label="Lanett, Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q495377" start="2529" end="2549" title="Richmond, California" label="Richmond, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q3303250" start="2637" end="2654" title="Elida, New Mexico" label="Elida, New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140073" start="2684" end="2697" title="South Central United States" label="South Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q49042" start="2702" end="2724" title="Southern United States" label="Southern United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q903250" start="3519" end="3534" title="Brazoria, Texas" label="Brazoria, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q16983596" start="3746" end="3765" title="Hazelden Foundation" label="Hazelden Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11326028" start="3830" end="3842" title="High Society (magazine)" label="High Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q158283" start="3895" end="3906" title="Vanity Fair (magazine)" label="Vanity Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q49003" start="3983" end="3988" title="Ghost (1990 film)" label="Ghost"/>
<link wikidata="Q509115" start="4141" end="4165" title="Canonsburg, Pennsylvania" label="Canonsburg, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q179951" start="4439" end="4449" title="strabismus" label="strabismus"/>
<link wikidata="Q846421" start="5005" end="5031" title="West Hollywood, California" label="West Hollywood, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q2565243" start="5130" end="5149" title="Fairfax High School, West Hollywood, California" label="Fairfax High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q434841" start="5511" end="5527" title="20th Century Fox" label="20th Century Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q16091769" start="5620" end="5637" title="Douglas S. Cramer" label="Douglas S. Cramer"/>
<link wikidata="Q616374" start="5659" end="5680" title="Elite Modeling Agency" label="Elite Modeling Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q76711" start="5789" end="5805" title="Nastassja Kinski" label="Nastassja Kinski"/>
<link wikidata="Q7945185" start="5908" end="5914" title="W.E.B." label="W.E.B."/>
<link wikidata="Q1248157" start="5931" end="5934" title="Kaz (TV series)" label="Kaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q5496891" start="6075" end="6087" title="Freddy Moore" label="Freddy Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q5496891" start="6120" end="6123" title="Freddy Moore" label="Boy"/>
<link wikidata="Q24309" start="6154" end="6168" title="The Troubadour (Los Angeles)" label="The Troubadour"/>
<link wikidata="Q5496891" start="6453" end="6464" title="Freddy Moore" label="the Nu-Kats"/>
<link wikidata="Q7110327" start="6628" end="6631" title="Oui (magazine)" label="Oui"/>
<link wikidata="Q211974" start="7288" end="7304" title="Silvio Narizzano" label="Silvio Narizzano"/>
<link wikidata="Q229390" start="7468" end="7471" title="3-D film" label="3-D"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194793" start="7492" end="7500" title="Parasite (1982 film)" label="Parasite"/>
<link wikidata="Q738410" start="7534" end="7546" title="Charles Band" label="Charles Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q229137" start="7617" end="7628" title="Karen Allen" label="Karen Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195412" start="7671" end="7679" title="drive-in" label="drive-in"/>
<link wikidata="Q169889" start="7752" end="7755" title="American Broadcasting Company" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136370" start="7773" end="7789" title="General Hospital" label="General Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q2618864" start="8014" end="8035" title="Young Doctors in Love" label="Young Doctors in Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q548593" start="8135" end="8150" title="Blame It on Rio" label="Blame It on Rio"/>
<link wikidata="Q337730" start="8167" end="8182" title="No Small Affair" label="No Small Affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q310367" start="8263" end="8272" title="Jon Cryer" label="Jon Cryer"/>
<link wikidata="Q295207" start="8349" end="8364" title="Joel Schumacher" label="Joel Schumacher"/>
<link wikidata="Q72879" start="8372" end="8378" title="yuppie" label="yuppie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406821" start="8391" end="8411" title="St. Elmo&amp;#x27;s Fire (film)" label="St. Elmo&amp;#x27;s Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q639239" start="8607" end="8616" title="Brat Pack" label="Brat Pack"/>
<link wikidata="Q1535888" start="8737" end="8756" title="About Last Night (1986 film)" label="About Last Night..."/>
<link wikidata="Q296505" start="8831" end="8839" title="Rob Lowe" label="Rob Lowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q212173" start="8980" end="8991" title="Roger Ebert" label="Roger Ebert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1305495" start="9302" end="9318" title="One Crazy Summer" label="One Crazy Summer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1463361" start="9335" end="9341" title="Wisdom (film)" label="Wisdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058828" start="9451" end="9463" title="off-Broadway" label="off-Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5121424" start="9523" end="9547" title="Circle Repertory Company" label="Circle Repertory Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q656861" start="9645" end="9661" title="The Seventh Sign" label="The Seventh Sign"/>
<link wikidata="Q55428" start="9791" end="9802" title="Neil Jordan" label="Neil Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="9810" end="9820" title="Great Depression" label="Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q617833" start="9840" end="9860" title="We&amp;#x27;re No Angels (1989 film)" label="We&amp;#x27;re No Angels"/>
<link wikidata="Q36949" start="9877" end="9891" title="Robert De Niro" label="Robert De Niro"/>
<link wikidata="Q49003" start="10019" end="10024" title="Ghost (1990 film)" label="Ghost"/>
<link wikidata="Q49004" start="10328" end="10342" title="Patrick Swayze" label="Patrick Swayze"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128390" start="10369" end="10388" title="potter&amp;#x27;s wheel" label="potter&amp;#x27;s wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q949416" start="10411" end="10427" title="Unchained Melody" label="Unchained Melody"/>
<link wikidata="Q102427" start="10521" end="10551" title="Academy Award for Best Picture" label="Academy Award for Best Picture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011547" start="10597" end="10609" title="Golden Globe" label="Golden Globe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413741" start="10629" end="10658" title="Saturn Award for Best Actress" label="Saturn Award for Best Actress"/>
<link wikidata="Q24283525" start="10717" end="10723" title="gamine" label="gamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q105993" start="10853" end="10863" title="Die Hard 2" label="Die Hard 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q2680" start="10906" end="10918" title="Bruce Willis" label="Bruce Willis"/>
<link wikidata="Q646269" start="11126" end="11145" title="Nothing but Trouble (1991 film)" label="Nothing but Trouble"/>
<link wikidata="Q389791" start="11180" end="11195" title="Mortal Thoughts" label="Mortal Thoughts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195550" start="11233" end="11256" title="The Butcher&amp;#x27;s Wife" label="The Butcher&amp;#x27;s Wife"/>
<link wikidata="Q4646993" start="11539" end="11545" title="A-list" label="A-list"/>
<link wikidata="Q287607" start="11605" end="11615" title="Rob Reiner" label="Rob Reiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q108946" start="11629" end="11643" title="A Few Good Men" label="A Few Good Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q373474" start="11683" end="11694" title="Adrian Lyne" label="Adrian Lyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q603448" start="11708" end="11725" title="Indecent Proposal" label="Indecent Proposal"/>
<link wikidata="Q269692" start="11775" end="11789" title="Barry Levinson" label="Barry Levinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330619" start="11803" end="11813" title="Disclosure (1994 film)" label="Disclosure"/>
<link wikidata="Q614966" start="12155" end="12167" title="Now and Then (film)" label="Now and Then"/>
<link wikidata="Q209672" start="12223" end="12237" title="cult following" label="cult following"/>
<link wikidata="Q5746330" start="12294" end="12307" title="Hester Prynne" label="Hester Prynne"/>
<link wikidata="Q617942" start="12317" end="12335" title="The Scarlet Letter (1995 film)" label="The Scarlet Letter"/>
<link wikidata="Q69339" start="12422" end="12441" title="Nathaniel Hawthorne" label="Nathaniel Hawthorne"/>
<link wikidata="Q8333" start="12529" end="12532" title="FBI" label="FBI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141526" start="12550" end="12558" title="stripper" label="stripper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141460" start="12568" end="12578" title="Striptease (film)" label="Striptease"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475275" start="12737" end="12746" title="The Juror" label="The Juror"/>
<link wikidata="Q602866" start="12861" end="12901" title="Golden Raspberry Award for Worst Actress" label="Golden Raspberry Award for Worst Actress"/>
<link wikidata="Q23633" start="12934" end="12937" title="HBO" label="HBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1590893" start="12951" end="12976" title="If These Walls Could Talk" label="If These Walls Could Talk"/>
<link wikidata="Q8452" start="13020" end="13028" title="abortion" label="abortion"/>
<link wikidata="Q190994" start="13039" end="13051" title="Sissy Spacek" label="Sissy Spacek"/>
<link wikidata="Q12003" start="13056" end="13060" title="Cher" label="Cher"/>
<link wikidata="Q3335603" start="13080" end="13092" title="Nancy Savoca" label="Nancy Savoca"/>
<link wikidata="Q673229" start="13277" end="13321" title="Golden Globe Award for Best Actress – Miniseries or Television Film" label="Best Actress – Miniseries or Television Film"/>
<link wikidata="Q265435" start="13326" end="13379" title="Golden Globe Award for Best Limited or Anthology Series or Television Film" label="Best Miniseries or Motion Picture Made for Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q661491" start="13416" end="13425" title="Esmeralda (The Hunchback of Notre Dame)" label="Esmeralda"/>
<link wikidata="Q213787" start="13435" end="13462" title="The Hunchback of Notre Dame (1996 film)" label="The Hunchback of Notre Dame"/>
<link wikidata="Q616842" start="13497" end="13528" title="Beavis and Butt-Head Do America" label="Beavis and Butt-Head Do America"/>
<link wikidata="Q178033" start="13676" end="13685" title="Navy SEAL" label="Navy SEAL"/>
<link wikidata="Q56005" start="13690" end="13702" title="Ridley Scott" label="Ridley Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q526690" start="13716" end="13725" title="G.I. Jane" label="G.I. Jane"/>
<link wikidata="Q131446562" start="13864" end="13878" title="Jewish convert" label="Jewish convert"/>
<link wikidata="Q25089" start="13895" end="13906" title="Woody Allen" label="Woody Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q551762" start="13920" end="13940" title="Deconstructing Harry" label="Deconstructing Harry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517614" start="14084" end="14097" title="Hailey, Idaho" label="Hailey, Idaho"/>
<link wikidata="Q1392448" start="14266" end="14281" title="Passion of Mind" label="Passion of Mind"/>
<link wikidata="Q628951" start="14350" end="14364" title="Alain Berliner" label="Alain Berliner"/>
<link wikidata="Q18657" start="14398" end="14428" title="dissociative identity disorder" label="dissociative identity disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q950428" start="14652" end="14665" title="Irwin Winkler" label="Irwin Winkler"/>
<link wikidata="" start="14901" end="14937" title="Charlie&amp;#x27;s Angels: Full Throttle" label="Charlie&amp;#x27;s Angels: Full Throttle"/>
<link wikidata="Q44380" start="14954" end="14966" title="Cameron Diaz" label="Cameron Diaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q676094" start="14968" end="14982" title="Drew Barrymore" label="Drew Barrymore"/>
<link wikidata="Q188375" start="14987" end="14995" title="Lucy Liu" label="Lucy Liu"/>
<link wikidata="Q890207" start="15066" end="15079" title="Peter Travers" label="Peter Travers"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="15089" end="15102" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q148659" start="15363" end="15376" title="Indiana Jones (character)" label="Indiana Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q696376" start="15551" end="15558" title="Versace" label="Versace"/>
<link wikidata="Q241599" start="15581" end="15598" title="Helena Rubinstein" label="Helena Rubinstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q220918" start="15623" end="15637" title="Emilio Estevez" label="Emilio Estevez"/>
<link wikidata="Q679657" start="15657" end="15662" title="Bobby (2006 film)" label="Bobby"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187550" start="15810" end="15841" title="Robert F. Kennedy assassination" label="Robert F. Kennedy assassination"/>
<link wikidata="Q518675" start="15894" end="15953" title="Screen Actors Guild Award for Best Cast in a Motion Picture" label="Screen Actors Guild Award for Best Cast in a Motion Picture"/>
<link wikidata="Q763083" start="15972" end="16001" title="Hollywood Film Festival" label="Hollywood Film Festival Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q691534" start="16087" end="16097" title="Half Light (film)" label="Half Light"/>
<link wikidata="Q590103" start="16177" end="16199" title="psychological thriller" label="psychological thriller"/>
<link wikidata="Q548906" start="16206" end="16216" title="Mr. Brooks" label="Mr. Brooks"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="16237" end="16250" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q123351" start="16508" end="16521" title="Michael Caine" label="Michael Caine"/>
<link wikidata="Q311525" start="16561" end="16569" title="Flawless (2007 film)" label="Flawless"/>
<link wikidata="Q1706651" start="16773" end="16785" title="Miami Herald" label="Miami Herald"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584307" start="17182" end="17193" title="Happy Tears" label="Happy Tears"/>
<link wikidata="Q326472" start="17294" end="17305" title="The Joneses" label="The Joneses"/>
<link wikidata="Q2702930" start="17529" end="17536" title="Bunraku (film)" label="Bunraku"/>
<link wikidata="Q11690" start="17739" end="17750" title="Wall Street" label="Wall Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q319845" start="17751" end="17766" title="Investment banking" label="investment bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q896666" start="17800" end="17827" title="financial crisis of 2007–08" label="financial crisis of 2007–08"/>
<link wikidata="Q624614" start="17878" end="17889" title="Margin Call" label="Margin Call"/>
<link wikidata="Q25144" start="17957" end="17969" title="Kevin Spacey" label="Kevin Spacey"/>
<link wikidata="Q192021" start="17971" end="17982" title="Simon Baker" label="Simon Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q242707" start="17988" end="18000" title="Paul Bettany" label="Paul Bettany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538791" start="18081" end="18094" title="Gotham Awards" label="Gotham Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1111310" start="18191" end="18223" title="Directors Guild of America Award" label="Directors Guild of America Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q5280678" start="18239" end="18284" title="Directors Guild of America Award for Outstanding Directing – Miniseries or TV Film" label="Outstanding Directing – Miniseries or TV Film"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319610" start="18332" end="18340" title="Lifetime (TV network)" label="Lifetime"/>
<link wikidata="Q15088590" start="18362" end="18366" title="Five (2011 film)" label="Five"/>
<link wikidata="Q2073855" start="18472" end="18489" title="Another Happy Day" label="Another Happy Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q590444" start="18545" end="18548" title="LOL (2012 film)" label="LOL"/>
<link wikidata="Q610471" start="18572" end="18587" title="Very Good Girls" label="Very Good Girls"/>
<link wikidata="Q16636715" start="18665" end="18673" title="Forsaken (2015 film)" label="Forsaken"/>
<link wikidata="Q18155835" start="18759" end="18768" title="Wild Oats (film)" label="Wild Oats"/>
<link wikidata="Q29588627" start="18852" end="18857" title="Blind (2016 film)" label="Blind"/>
<link wikidata="Q16992512" start="18965" end="18971" title="Empire (2015 TV series)" label="Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q27701601" start="18996" end="19007" title="Rough Night" label="Rough Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q24806839" start="19276" end="19286" title="Love Sonia" label="Love Sonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q55080340" start="19349" end="19366" title="Corporate Animals" label="Corporate Animals"/>
<link wikidata="Q85769509" start="19409" end="19419" title="Inside Out (Moore book)" label="Inside Out"/>
<link wikidata="Q95149" start="19463" end="19476" title="HarperCollins" label="HarperCollins"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="19515" end="19533" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q97189755" start="19732" end="19740" title="Songbird (2020 film)" label="Songbird"/>
<link wikidata="Q106239047" start="19785" end="19808" title="Dirty Diana (podcast)" label="&amp;quot;Dirty Diana&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q36844" start="19888" end="19895" title="Rihanna" label="Rihanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q102036260" start="20020" end="20038" title="Please Baby Please" label="Please Baby Please"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134208" start="20080" end="20091" title="Irish Times" label="Irish Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q191796" start="20149" end="20165" title="cameo appearance" label="cameo appearance"/>
<link wikidata="Q42869" start="20169" end="20181" title="Nicolas Cage" label="Nicolas Cage"/>
<link wikidata="Q87220566" start="20225" end="20264" title="The Unbearable Weight of Massive Talent" label="The Unbearable Weight of Massive Talent"/>
<link wikidata="Q90473598" start="20359" end="20371" title="Ann Woodward" label="Ann Woodward"/>
<link wikidata="Q316844" start="20379" end="20390" title="Ryan Murphy (filmmaker)" label="Ryan Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q651228" start="20424" end="20426" title="FX (TV channel)" label="FX"/>
<link wikidata="Q24335412" start="20479" end="20494" title="Taylor Sheridan" label="Taylor Sheridan"/>
<link wikidata="Q124447212" start="20521" end="20528" title="Landman (TV series)" label="Landman"/>
<link wikidata="Q27903045" start="20538" end="20548" title="Paramount+" label="Paramount+"/>
<link wikidata="Q60837652" start="20554" end="20569" title="Coralie Fargeat" label="Coralie Fargeat"/>
<link wikidata="Q113380226" start="20600" end="20613" title="The Substance" label="The Substance"/>
<link wikidata="Q119141934" start="20729" end="20754" title="2024 Cannes Film Festival" label="2024 Cannes Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="20828" end="20831" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2657609" start="20993" end="21001" title="Time Out (magazine)" label="Time Out"/>
<link wikidata="Q106383" start="21063" end="21078" title="Isabelle Adjani" label="Isabelle Adjani"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773078" start="21088" end="21098" title="Possession (1981 film)" label="Possession"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011564" start="21207" end="21282" title="Golden Globe Award for Best Actress in a Motion Picture – Musical or Comedy" label="Golden Globe Award for Best Actress in a Motion Picture – Musical or Comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q922226" start="21288" end="21337" title="Critics&amp;#x27; Choice Movie Award for Best Actress" label="Critics&amp;#x27; Choice Movie Award for Best Actress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129487" start="21347" end="21436" title="Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by a Female Actor in a Leading Role" label="Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by a Female Actor in a Leading Role"/>
<link wikidata="Q103618" start="21464" end="21494" title="Academy Award for Best Actress" label="Academy Award for Best Actress"/>
<link wikidata="Q687123" start="21503" end="21564" title="BAFTA Award for Best Actress in a Leading Role" label="British Academy Film Award for Best Actress in a Leading Role"/>
<link wikidata="Q4944043" start="21591" end="21602" title="Boots Riley" label="Boots Riley"/>
<link wikidata="Q131109043" start="21621" end="21636" title="I Love Boosters" label="I Love Boosters"/>
<link wikidata="Q380675" start="21751" end="21760" title="Cinema of the United States" label="Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141460" start="21797" end="21807" title="Striptease (film)" label="Striptease"/>
<link wikidata="Q526690" start="21952" end="21961" title="G.I. Jane" label="G.I. Jane"/>
<link wikidata="Q693249" start="22203" end="22207" title="Prima donna" label="diva"/>
<link wikidata="Q40791" start="22237" end="22251" title="Sandra Bullock" label="Sandra Bullock"/>
<link wikidata="Q492093" start="22266" end="22289" title="While You Were Sleeping (film)" label="While You Were Sleeping"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="22860" end="22872" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4992117" start="22930" end="22953" title="E! True Hollywood Story" label="E! True Hollywood Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q33659" start="23152" end="23158" title="People (magazine)" label="People"/>
<link wikidata="Q778079" start="23297" end="23309" title="Marie Claire" label="Marie Claire"/>
<link wikidata="Q25161472" start="23357" end="23363" title="Forbes" label="Forbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6544648" start="23580" end="23596" title="Life &amp;amp; Style (magazine)" label="Life &amp;amp; Style"/>
<link wikidata="Q164746" start="23681" end="23704" title="The Wall Street Journal" label="The Wall Street Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q918" start="23823" end="23830" title="Twitter" label="Twitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q21129531" start="23904" end="23922" title="Sex trafficking" label="sexual trafficking"/>
<link wikidata="Q8463" start="23927" end="23934" title="slavery" label="slavery"/>
<link wikidata="Q654606" start="24082" end="24102" title="Harper&amp;#x27;s Bazaar" label="Harper&amp;#x27;s Bazaar"/>
<link wikidata="Q209330" start="24393" end="24402" title="Instagram" label="Instagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q154020" start="24517" end="24521" title="Elle (magazine)" label="Elle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544126" start="24545" end="24551" title="Grazia" label="Grazia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1853094" start="24568" end="24581" title="W (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;W&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q158283" start="24589" end="24600" title="Vanity Fair (magazine)" label="Vanity Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364121" start="24614" end="24623" title="Interview (magazine)" label="Interview"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="24637" end="24650" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q472870" start="24664" end="24671" title="Glamour (magazine)" label="Glamour"/>
<link wikidata="Q2629237" start="24688" end="24695" title="InStyle" label="InStyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q654606" start="24726" end="24746" title="Harper&amp;#x27;s Bazaar" label="Harper&amp;#x27;s Bazaar"/>
<link wikidata="Q778079" start="24777" end="24789" title="Marie Claire" label="Marie Claire"/>
<link wikidata="Q154008" start="24847" end="24852" title="Vogue (magazine)" label="Vogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630615" start="25077" end="25081" title="Keds" label="Keds"/>
<link wikidata="Q20992639" start="25083" end="25094" title="Oscar Mayer" label="Oscar Mayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815345" start="25096" end="25105" title="Diet Coke" label="Diet Coke"/>
<link wikidata="Q665425" start="25107" end="25110" title="Lux (soap)" label="Lux"/>
<link wikidata="Q847688" start="25125" end="25148" title="Seibu Department Stores" label="Seibu Department Stores"/>
<link wikidata="Q696376" start="25168" end="25175" title="Versace" label="Versace"/>
<link wikidata="Q4766699" start="25180" end="25190" title="Ann Inc." label="Ann Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q158283" start="25296" end="25307" title="Vanity Fair (magazine)" label="Vanity Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q10544831" start="25336" end="25351" title="More Demi Moore" label="More Demi Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q225283" start="25359" end="25374" title="Annie Leibovitz" label="Annie Leibovitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530195" start="25765" end="25787" title="sexual objectification" label="sexual objectification"/>
<link wikidata="Q868575" start="25837" end="25848" title="empowerment" label="empowerment"/>
<link wikidata="Q3494289" start="25920" end="25923" title="Spy magazine" label="Spy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2680" start="25987" end="25999" title="Bruce Willis" label="Bruce Willis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6519101" start="26069" end="26106" title="Leibovitz v. Paramount Pictures Corp." label="Leibovitz v. Paramount Pictures Corp."/>
<link wikidata="Q170539" start="26138" end="26144" title="parody" label="parody"/>
<link wikidata="Q82786" start="26155" end="26169" title="Leslie Nielsen" label="Leslie Nielsen"/>
<link wikidata="" start="26207" end="26235" title="Naked Gun 33 1/3: The Final Insult" label="Naked Gun : The Final Insult"/>
<link wikidata="Q110996780" start="26374" end="26380" title="teaser trailer" label="teaser"/>
<link wikidata="Q5442930" start="26588" end="26603" title="Femmes du Maroc" label="Femmes du Maroc"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="26707" end="26713" title="Muslim" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q620505" start="26829" end="26842" title="body painting" label="body painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q6206123" start="26850" end="26861" title="Joanne Gair" label="Joanne Gair"/>
<link wikidata="Q5255315" start="26871" end="26896" title="Demi&amp;#x27;s Birthday Suit" label="Demi&amp;#x27;s Birthday Suit"/>
<link wikidata="Q654606" start="26958" end="26978" title="Harper&amp;#x27;s Bazaar" label="Harper&amp;#x27;s Bazaar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5496891" start="27101" end="27113" title="Freddy Moore" label="Freddy Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055303" start="27253" end="27263" title="stage name" label="stage name"/>
<link wikidata="Q310324" start="27334" end="27348" title="Timothy Hutton" label="Timothy Hutton"/>
<link wikidata="Q220918" start="27471" end="27485" title="Emilio Estevez" label="Emilio Estevez"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406821" start="27521" end="27541" title="St. Elmo&amp;#x27;s Fire (film)" label="St. Elmo&amp;#x27;s Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1463361" start="27558" end="27564" title="Wisdom (film)" label="Wisdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q4540608" start="27713" end="27727" title="paternity suit" label="paternity suit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2680" start="27831" end="27843" title="Bruce Willis" label="Bruce Willis"/>
<link wikidata="Q234566" start="27881" end="27899" title="Rumer Willis" label="Rumer Glenn Willis"/>
<link wikidata="Q443073" start="28159" end="28177" title="Emma Heming Willis" label="Emma Heming Willis"/>
<link wikidata="Q164782" start="28456" end="28470" title="Ashton Kutcher" label="Ashton Kutcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q745832" start="28543" end="28553" title="stillbirth" label="stillbirth"/>
<link wikidata="Q6073552" start="29007" end="29033" title="irreconcilable differences" label="irreconcilable differences"/>
<link wikidata="Q368305" start="29093" end="29108" title="spousal support" label="spousal support"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="29331" end="29347" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q556870" start="29387" end="29398" title="Philip Berg" label="Philip Berg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1719589" start="29406" end="29421" title="Kabbalah Centre" label="Kabbalah Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="29743" end="29761" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q3100461" start="29872" end="29885" title="Gene Marshall" label="Gene Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q673218" start="29886" end="29898" title="fashion doll" label="fashion doll"/>
<link wikidata="Q3782571" start="30072" end="30109" title="AmfAR, The Foundation for AIDS Research" label="American Foundation for AIDS Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q17001321" start="30111" end="30140" title="Artists for Peace and Justice" label="Artists for Peace and Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q5138002" start="30142" end="30186" title="Coalition to Abolish Slavery and Trafficking" label="Coalition to Abolish Slavery and Trafficking"/>
<link wikidata="Q16954949" start="30188" end="30204" title="Declare Yourself" label="Declare Yourself"/>
<link wikidata="Q5500318" start="30206" end="30221" title="Free the Slaves" label="Free The Slaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q928450" start="30223" end="30250" title="Healthy Child Healthy World" label="Healthy Child Healthy World"/>
<link wikidata="Q7285152" start="30252" end="30266" title="Raising Malawi" label="Raising Malawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q85806404" start="30268" end="30286" title="The Art of Elysium" label="The Art of Elysium"/>
<link wikidata="Q740308" start="30291" end="30297" title="UNICEF" label="UNICEF"/>
<link wikidata="Q3454165" start="30323" end="30334" title="Kevin Bacon" label="Kevin Bacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q47719" start="30349" end="30354" title="Pepsi" label="Pepsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q790" start="30617" end="30622" title="Haiti" label="Haiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q5013135" start="30854" end="30873" title="CNN Freedom Project" label="CNN Freedom Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q837" start="30890" end="30895" title="Nepal" label="Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3522396" start="30935" end="30951" title="Anuradha Koirala" label="Anuradha Koirala"/>
<link wikidata="Q4454139" start="30974" end="30985" title="Maiti Nepal" label="Maiti Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q48340" start="31117" end="31120" title="CNN" label="CNN"/>
<link wikidata="Q57819" start="31306" end="31322" title="Jhala Nath Khanal" label="Jhalanath Khanal"/>
<link wikidata="Q151888" start="31436" end="31440" title="People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals" label="PETA"/>
<link wikidata="Q79913" start="31672" end="31701" title="non-governmental organization" label="non-governmental organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q875521" start="31734" end="31748" title="sexual slavery" label="sexual slavery"/>
<link wikidata="Q43432" start="31827" end="31844" title="Justin Timberlake" label="Justin Timberlake"/>
<link wikidata="Q44221" start="31846" end="31855" title="Sean Penn" label="Sean Penn"/>
<link wikidata="Q205707" start="31857" end="31871" title="Bradley Cooper" label="Bradley Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q16211951" start="32023" end="32059" title="Thorn (organization)" label="Thorn: Digital Defenders of Children"/>
<link wikidata="Q660567" start="32212" end="32229" title="child pornography" label="child pornography"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011547" start="32994" end="33012" title="Golden Globe Award" label="Golden Globe Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q7585305" start="33016" end="33048" title="Critics&amp;#x27; Choice Movie Award" label="Critics&amp;#x27; Choice Movie Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q268200" start="33055" end="33080" title="Screen Actors Guild Award" label="Screen Actors Guild Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="33112" end="33125" title="Academy Award" label="Academy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q732997" start="33129" end="33155" title="British Academy Film Award" label="British Academy Film Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044427" start="33159" end="33179" title="Primetime Emmy Awards" label="Primetime Emmy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1111310" start="33183" end="33215" title="Directors Guild of America Award" label="Directors Guild of America Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q311836" start="33225" end="33250" title="Independent Spirit Awards" label="Independent Spirit Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q105584" start="33333" end="33348" title="Rotten Tomatoes" label="Rotten Tomatoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1535888" start="33367" end="33386" title="About Last Night (1986 film)" label="About Last Night..."/>
<link wikidata="Q49003" start="33408" end="33413" title="Ghost (1990 film)" label="Ghost"/>
<link wikidata="Q108946" start="33435" end="33449" title="A Few Good Men" label="A Few Good Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q1590893" start="33471" end="33496" title="If These Walls Could Talk" label="If These Walls Could Talk"/>
<link wikidata="Q213787" start="33518" end="33545" title="The Hunchback of Notre Dame (1996 film)" label="The Hunchback of Notre Dame"/>
<link wikidata="Q616842" start="33567" end="33598" title="Beavis and Butt-Head Do America" label="Beavis and Butt-Head Do America"/>
<link wikidata="Q551762" start="33620" end="33640" title="Deconstructing Harry" label="Deconstructing Harry"/>
<link wikidata="Q326472" start="33662" end="33673" title="The Joneses" label="The Joneses"/>
<link wikidata="Q624614" start="33695" end="33706" title="Margin Call" label="Margin Call"/>
<link wikidata="Q87220566" start="33728" end="33767" title="The Unbearable Weight of Massive Talent" label="The Unbearable Weight of Massive Talent"/>
<link wikidata="Q113380226" start="33789" end="33802" title="The Substance" label="The Substance"/>
<link wikidata="Q85769509" start="33843" end="33863" title="Inside Out (Moore book)" label="Inside Out: A Memoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q95149" start="33871" end="33884" title="HarperCollins" label="HarperCollins"/>
<link wikidata="Q6340321" start="33965" end="33969" title="KVUE (Texas)" label="KVUE"/>
<link wikidata="Q1535888" start="33989" end="34005" title="About Last Night (1986 film)" label="About Last Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q7768586" start="34011" end="34044" title="Texas Archive of the Moving Image" label="Texas Archive of the Moving Image"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="187810" wikidata="Q122574" url="?curid=187810" title="Gulf of Bothnia">
<text>The Gulf of Bothnia (; ; ) is divided into the Bothnian Bay and Bothnian Sea, and it is the northernmost arm of the Baltic Sea, between Finland&#x27;s west coast (East Bothnia) and the northern part of Sweden&#x27;s east coast (West Bothnia and North Bothnia). In the south of the gulf lies Åland, between the Sea of Åland and the Archipelago Sea.

==Name==

Bothnia is a latinization. The Swedish name was originally just , with being Old Norse for &quot;gulf&quot; or &quot;bay&quot;, which is also the meaning of the second element .

The name was applied to the Gulf of Bothnia as in Old Norse, after , which at the time referred to the coastland west of the gulf. Later, was applied to the regions of on the western side and on the eastern side (&#x27;West Bottom&#x27; and &#x27;East Bottom&#x27;). The Finnish name of Österbotten, (, meaning &#x27;land&#x27;), hint as to the meaning in both languages: the meaning of includes both &#x27;bottom&#x27; and &#x27;north&#x27;. is the base word for north, , with an adjectival suffix added.

/ is cognate with the English word &quot;bottom&quot;, and it might be part of a general north European distinction of lowlands, as opposed to highlands, such as the Netherlandic region, Samogitia (Lithuanian), and Sambia (Russia).

Julius Pokorny gives the extended Proto-Indo-European root as with a variant, from which the Latin , as in &quot;fundament&quot;, is derived. The original meaning of English &quot;north&quot;, from Proto-Indo-European &#x27;under&#x27;, indicates an original sense of &#x27;lowlands&#x27; for &quot;bottomlands&quot;. On the other hand, by &quot;north&quot; the classical authors usually meant &#x27;outermost&#x27;, as the northern lands were outermost to them. In Saami, the cardinal directions were named according to the different parts of the typical tent used by this nomadic people. The door of the tent was traditionally pointed south, in the most sunny direction, and the bottom of the tent would be aligned with the north. Thus the origin of the word in its use as &#x27;north&#x27;. According to Lönnrot, north was viewed as the bottom direction because the lowest point of the sun&#x27;s path is there.

==Geography==

The International Hydrographic Organization defines the southern limit of the Gulf of Bothnia as follows:

From Simpnäsklubb (59°54&#x27;N) in Sweden, to Flötjan, Lagskær [sic], Fæstörne [sic], Kökarsörn, and Vænö-Kalkskær [sic] to the SW point of Hangöudde (Hangö Head, 59°49&#x27;N) in Finland, thus including Åland and adjacent shoals and channels in the Gulf of Bothnia.

The gulf is long, wide and has an average depth of . The maximum depth is . The surface area is . The northernmost point is situated in Töre in the Bothnian Bay. its coordinates are 65° 54&#x27;07&quot; N 22° 39&#x27;00 E.

The depth and surface area of the Gulf of Bothnia are constantly decreasing, as the land is rising after it had been pressed down by about by the continental ice during last ice age. The rise is 80 cm every hundred years. It is estimated that the land has a further to rise before equilibrium is reached. This recovery rate will progressively slow as isostatic equilibrium is approached.

Into the gulf flow a number of rivers from both sides; consequently, a salinity gradient exists from north to south.
In the south the water is the normal brackish water of the Baltic Sea, but in the north, in the Bothnian Bay, the salinity is so low, from 0.4% near Kvarken to 0.2% in the northernmost part, that many freshwater fish such as the pike, whitefish and perch thrive in it.

The gulf is a combination of the Bothnian Bay in the north and the Bothnian Sea in the south, separated by the Kvarken region with a water depth of around and a rate of land rising of almost a year. Within 2000 years the bay is expected to separate from the rest of the gulf and become a freshwater lake.

Being nearly fresh, the gulf is frozen over five months every year. The icing of the Baltic Sea begins and ends in the northern Gulf of Bothnia. Traffic restrictions for icebreaker assistance are typically in force for all the gulf from late January to late April and for the northernmost ports from the middle of December to the middle of May.

==Geology==

Geologically the Gulf of Bothnia is an ancient depression of tectonic origin. The depression is partly filled with sedimentary rock deposited in the Precambrian and Paleozoic. Nearby plains adjoining the gulf are part of the Sub-Cambrian peneplain. While being repeatedly covered by glaciers during the last 2.5 million years glacial erosion has had a limited effect in changing the topography.

It is estimated that within about 2,000 years, ongoing post-glacial rebound will raise the seafloor in the Norra Kvarken area above water, splitting the Gulf of Bothnia into a southern gulf and northern lake.

==History==
The gulf was not known by ancient and medieval geographers and as late as in 1427 not indicated by the Danish cartographer Claudius Clavus, not even in the map of Hartmann Schedel, printed in 1493. The first map in which the gulf has been delineated, although without name, is that of Nicolaus Germanus from the year 1482.

==Economy==

The land surrounding the Gulf of Bothnia is heavily forested. Trees are logged, then transported to the coast for milling. The gulf is also important for oil transport to the coastal cities and ore transport to steel mills, for instance in Raahe.

In terms of tonnage in international traffic, the largest ports on the Finnish side are Rauma, Kokkola and Tornio. The main ports of the Swedish side are in Luleå, Skellefteå, Umeå, Sundsvall, Gävle and Hargshamn. In Luleå, iron ore pellets are exported and coal is imported. Gävle is Sweden&#x27;s third-largest container port. It also ships forest products and oil. The only regular cruiseferry route across the Gulf of Bothnia is the Wasaline service between Umeå and Vaasa. 

In port operations in the Gulf of Bothnia, icebreaker assistance can be required for an ice season that averages as long as six months; whereas in the Gulf of Finland, the icebreaking season averages only three months.

There is some fishery, mainly Baltic herring, for domestic needs. A persistent problem has been pollution, because the sea is enclosed by a large drainage basin and is poorly connected to fresher waters from the Atlantic. Mercury and PCB levels have been relatively high, although the Finnish Food Safety Authority considers the herring edible. Although the levels exceed the limits, the fatty acids have health benefits that offset this risk.

==Rivers==

*Kalajoki
*Kemijoki
*Kiiminkijoki
*Kokemäenjoki
*Oulujoki
*Dalälven
*Ljusnan
*Ljungan
*Indalsälven
*Ångerman
*Ume River
*Skellefte River
*Pite River
*Lule River
*Kalix River
*Torne
==Cities and towns==

*Gävle
*Härnösand
*Jakobstad
*Kalajoki
*Kokkola
*Kristinestad
*Luleå
*Oulu
*Pori
*Rauma
*Sundsvall
*Umeå
*Vaasa
==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q122574" start="4" end="19" title="Gulf of Bothnia" label="Gulf of Bothnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q13234218" start="47" end="59" title="Bothnian Bay" label="Bothnian Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649939" start="64" end="76" title="Bothnian Sea" label="Bothnian Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q4792460" start="105" end="108" title="Arm (geography)" label="arm"/>
<link wikidata="Q545" start="116" end="126" title="Baltic Sea" label="Baltic Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q33" start="136" end="143" title="Finland" label="Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q643535" start="163" end="175" title="Ostrobothnia (historical province)" label="East Bothnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="202" end="208" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q211652" start="228" end="240" title="Westrobothnia" label="West Bothnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q211649" start="245" end="258" title="North Bothnia" label="North Bothnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5689" start="291" end="296" title="Åland" label="Åland"/>
<link wikidata="Q271043" start="310" end="322" title="Sea of Åland" label="Sea of Åland"/>
<link wikidata="Q650654" start="331" end="346" title="Archipelago Sea" label="Archipelago Sea"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="372" end="384" title="Latinisation of names#Place names" label="latinization"/>
<link wikidata="Q35505" start="436" end="445" title="Old Norse" label="Old Norse"/>
<link wikidata="Q690548" start="1050" end="1057" title="cognate" label="cognate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="1067" end="1074" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="1211" end="1223" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlandic"/>
<link wikidata="Q111362" start="1232" end="1241" title="Samogitia" label="Samogitia"/>
<link wikidata="Q37" start="1243" end="1252" title="Lithuania" label="Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q329676" start="1260" end="1266" title="Sambia" label="Sambia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1749" start="1268" end="1274" title="Kaliningrad Oblast" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q215638" start="1278" end="1292" title="Julius Pokorny" label="Julius Pokorny"/>
<link wikidata="Q37178" start="1312" end="1331" title="Proto-Indo-European" label="Proto-Indo-European"/>
<link wikidata="Q56463" start="1744" end="1749" title="Sami languages" label="Saami"/>
<link wikidata="Q153159" start="2085" end="2092" title="Elias Lönnrot" label="Lönnrot"/>
<link wikidata="Q233611" start="2213" end="2252" title="International Hydrographic Organization" label="International Hydrographic Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q10572499" start="2372" end="2379" title="Lågskär" label="Lagskær"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2387" end="2395" title="Fästörna" label="Fæstörne"/>
<link wikidata="Q179730" start="2403" end="2408" title="Kökar" label="Kökar"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2418" end="2431" title="Vänö" label="Vænö-Kalkskær"/>
<link wikidata="Q216790" start="2468" end="2473" title="Hanko, Finland" label="Hangö"/>
<link wikidata="Q5689" start="2521" end="2526" title="Åland" label="Åland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3235942" start="2721" end="2725" title="Töre" label="Töre"/>
<link wikidata="Q13234218" start="2733" end="2745" title="Bothnian Bay" label="Bothnian Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q179615" start="3269" end="3277" title="salinity" label="salinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q105533" start="3352" end="3366" title="brackish water" label="brackish water"/>
<link wikidata="Q545" start="3374" end="3384" title="Baltic Sea" label="Baltic Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q13234218" start="3411" end="3423" title="Bothnian Bay" label="Bothnian Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q217245" start="3464" end="3471" title="Kvarken" label="Kvarken"/>
<link wikidata="Q102192" start="3516" end="3526" title="Fresh water" label="freshwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q13234218" start="3618" end="3630" title="Bothnian Bay" label="Bothnian Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649939" start="3652" end="3664" title="Bothnian Sea" label="Bothnian Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q217245" start="3696" end="3703" title="Kvarken" label="Kvarken"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161410" start="3754" end="3765" title="Post-glacial rebound" label="land rising"/>
<link wikidata="Q545" start="3976" end="3986" title="Baltic Sea" label="Baltic Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q14978" start="4061" end="4071" title="icebreaker" label="icebreaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q193343" start="4311" end="4319" title="tectonics" label="tectonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q103910" start="4399" end="4410" title="Precambrian" label="Precambrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q75507" start="4415" end="4424" title="Paleozoic" label="Paleozoic"/>
<link wikidata="Q19876595" start="4475" end="4497" title="Sub-Cambrian peneplain" label="Sub-Cambrian peneplain"/>
<link wikidata="Q26185" start="4553" end="4575" title="Quaternary" label="last 2.5 million years"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161410" start="4701" end="4721" title="post-glacial rebound" label="post-glacial rebound"/>
<link wikidata="Q217245" start="4753" end="4766" title="Kvarken" label="Norra Kvarken"/>
<link wikidata="Q1098291" start="4991" end="5006" title="Claudius Clavus" label="Claudius Clavus"/>
<link wikidata="Q58768" start="5031" end="5047" title="Hartmann Schedel" label="Hartmann Schedel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1241997" start="5153" end="5170" title="Nicolaus Germanus" label="Nicolaus Germanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3276983" start="5838" end="5849" title="cruiseferry" label="cruiseferry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3463109" start="5890" end="5898" title="Wasa Line" label="Wasaline"/>
<link wikidata="Q2396858" start="6183" end="6197" title="Baltic herring" label="Baltic herring"/>
<link wikidata="Q166620" start="6299" end="6313" title="drainage basin" label="drainage basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q939758" start="6611" end="6619" title="Kalajoki" label="Kalajoki"/>
<link wikidata="Q214779" start="6621" end="6629" title="Kemijoki" label="Kemijoki"/>
<link wikidata="Q598474" start="6631" end="6643" title="Kiiminkijoki" label="Kiiminkijoki"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329599" start="6645" end="6657" title="Kokemäenjoki" label="Kokemäenjoki"/>
<link wikidata="Q736575" start="6659" end="6667" title="Oulujoki" label="Oulujoki"/>
<link wikidata="Q216627" start="6669" end="6677" title="Dalälven" label="Dalälven"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160449" start="6679" end="6686" title="Ljusnan" label="Ljusnan"/>
<link wikidata="Q949042" start="6688" end="6695" title="Ljungan" label="Ljungan"/>
<link wikidata="Q426516" start="6697" end="6708" title="Indalsälven" label="Indalsälven"/>
<link wikidata="Q271112" start="6710" end="6718" title="Ångerman" label="Ångerman"/>
<link wikidata="Q51845" start="6720" end="6729" title="Ume River" label="Ume River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410160" start="6731" end="6746" title="Skellefte River" label="Skellefte River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330818" start="6748" end="6758" title="Pite River" label="Pite River"/>
<link wikidata="Q857676" start="6760" end="6770" title="Lule River" label="Lule River"/>
<link wikidata="Q845520" start="6772" end="6783" title="Kalix River" label="Kalix River"/>
<link wikidata="Q121538" start="6785" end="6790" title="Torne (Finnish and Swedish river)" label="Torne"/>
<link wikidata="Q25748" start="6814" end="6819" title="Gävle" label="Gävle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3240427" start="6821" end="6830" title="Härnösand" label="Härnösand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1679567" start="6832" end="6841" title="Jakobstad" label="Jakobstad"/>
<link wikidata="Q939758" start="6843" end="6851" title="Kalajoki" label="Kalajoki"/>
<link wikidata="Q207891" start="6853" end="6860" title="Kokkola" label="Kokkola"/>
<link wikidata="Q659642" start="6862" end="6874" title="Kristinestad" label="Kristinestad"/>
<link wikidata="Q26268" start="6876" end="6881" title="Luleå" label="Luleå"/>
<link wikidata="Q47048" start="6883" end="6887" title="Oulu" label="Oulu"/>
<link wikidata="Q180233" start="6889" end="6893" title="Pori" label="Pori"/>
<link wikidata="Q37013" start="6895" end="6900" title="Rauma, Finland" label="Rauma"/>
<link wikidata="Q26476" start="6902" end="6911" title="Sundsvall" label="Sundsvall"/>
<link wikidata="Q25579" start="6913" end="6917" title="Umeå" label="Umeå"/>
<link wikidata="Q125080" start="6919" end="6924" title="Vaasa" label="Vaasa"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="187812" wikidata="Q465254" url="?curid=187812" title="American Iron and Steel Institute">
<text>The American Iron and Steel Institute (AISI) is a trade association of North American steel producers. Including its predecessor organizations, it is one of the oldest trade associations in the United States, dating back to 1855. It assumed its present form in 1908, with Judge Elbert H. Gary, chairman of the United States Steel Corporation, as its first president. Its development was in response to the need for a cooperative agency in the iron and steel industry for collecting and disseminating statistics and information, carrying on investigations, providing a forum for the discussion of problems and generally advancing the interests of the industry.

== Stainless steel numbering system ==
The AISI maintained a numbering system for wrought stainless steel in which the three digits indicate the various compositions. The 200 and 300 series are generally austenitic stainless steels, whereas the 400 series are either ferritic or martensitic. Some of the grades have a one-letter or two-letter suffix that indicates a particular modification of the composition. In 1995 the AISI turned over future maintenance of the system to the Society of Automotive Engineers.

==Elbert H. Gary Medal==
Since 1927, the institute has awarded the Elbert H. Gary Medal, an annual medal named for its first president, to a leader within the North American steel industry. Recipients include:
*1944: Quincy Bent
*1991: Frank W. Luerssen
*1997: Joseph F. Toot Jr.
*2003: John T. Mayberry 
*2004: Daniel R. DiMicco 
*2005: David Sutherland 
*2006: John P. Surma

==See also==
* World Steel Association
* List of steel producers
* Metal Building Manufacturers Association
* SAE steel grades
* Pittsburgh Steelers

==References==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q465254" start="4" end="37" title="American Iron and Steel Institute" label="American Iron and Steel Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q2178147" start="50" end="67" title="trade association" label="trade association"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="71" end="84" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q11427" start="86" end="91" title="steel" label="steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q72539" start="310" end="341" title="United States Steel Corporation" label="United States Steel Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q172587" start="751" end="766" title="stainless steel" label="stainless steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q487286" start="865" end="875" title="austenitic" label="austenitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5105088" start="928" end="936" title="ferritic" label="ferritic"/>
<link wikidata="Q488950" start="940" end="951" title="martensitic" label="martensitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149879" start="1123" end="1133" title="SAE steel grades" label="the system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427072" start="1141" end="1172" title="Society of Automotive Engineers" label="Society of Automotive Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q55419355" start="1392" end="1403" title="Quincy Bent" label="Quincy Bent"/>
<link wikidata="Q6251718" start="1538" end="1551" title="John P. Surma" label="John P. Surma"/>
<link wikidata="Q2651277" start="1568" end="1591" title="World Steel Association" label="World Steel Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q2314657" start="1594" end="1617" title="List of steel producers" label="List of steel producers"/>
<link wikidata="Q17164837" start="1620" end="1660" title="Metal Building Manufacturers Association" label="Metal Building Manufacturers Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149879" start="1663" end="1679" title="SAE steel grades" label="SAE steel grades"/>
<link wikidata="Q191477" start="1682" end="1701" title="Pittsburgh Steelers" label="Pittsburgh Steelers"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="187813" wikidata="Q206494" url="?curid=187813" title="Transport Layer Security">
<text>Transport Layer Security (TLS) is a cryptographic protocol designed to provide communications security over a computer network, such as the Internet. The protocol is widely used in applications such as email, instant messaging, and voice over IP, but its use in securing HTTPS remains the most publicly visible.

The TLS protocol aims primarily to provide security, including privacy (confidentiality), integrity, and authenticity through the use of cryptography, such as the use of certificates, between two or more communicating computer applications. It runs in the presentation layer and is itself composed of two layers: the TLS record and the TLS handshake protocols.

The closely related [[Transport Layer Security|Datagram Transport Layer Security]] ([[Transport Layer Security|DTLS]]) is a communications protocol that provides security to datagram-based applications. In technical writing, references to &quot;(D)TLS&quot; are often seen when it applies to both versions.

TLS is a proposed Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) standard, first defined in 1999, and the current version is TLS 1.3, defined in August 2018. TLS builds on the now-deprecated SSL (Secure Sockets Layer) specifications (1994, 1995, 1996) developed by Netscape Communications for adding the HTTPS protocol to their Netscape Navigator web browser.

==Description==
Client-server applications use the TLS protocol to communicate across a network in a way designed to prevent eavesdropping and tampering.

Since applications can communicate either with or without TLS (or SSL), it is necessary for the client to request that the server set up a TLS connection. One of the main ways of achieving this is to use a different port number for TLS connections. Port 80 is typically used for unencrypted HTTP traffic while port 443 is the common port used for encrypted HTTPS traffic. Another mechanism is to make a protocol-specific STARTTLS request to the server to switch the connection to TLS – for example, when using the mail and news protocols.

Once the client and server have agreed to use TLS, they negotiate a stateful connection by using a handshaking procedure (see ). The protocols use a handshake with an asymmetric cipher to establish not only cipher settings but also a session-specific shared key with which further communication is encrypted using a symmetric cipher. During this handshake, the client and server agree on various parameters used to establish the connection&#x27;s security:
*The handshake begins when a client connects to a TLS-enabled server requesting a secure connection and the client presents a list of supported cipher suites (ciphers and hash functions).
*From this list, the server picks a cipher and hash function that it also supports and notifies the client of the decision.
*The server usually then provides identification in the form of a digital certificate. The certificate contains the server name, the trusted certificate authority (CA) that vouches for the authenticity of the certificate, and the server&#x27;s public encryption key.
*The client confirms the validity of the certificate before proceeding.
*To generate the session keys used for the secure connection, the client either:
**encrypts a random number (&quot;PreMasterSecret&quot;) with the server&#x27;s public key and sends the result to the server (which only the server should be able to decrypt with its private key); both parties then use the random number to generate a unique session key for subsequent encryption and decryption of data during the session, or
**uses Diffie–Hellman key exchange (or its variant elliptic-curve DH) to securely generate a random and unique session key for encryption and decryption that has the additional property of forward secrecy: if the server&#x27;s private key is disclosed in future, it cannot be used to decrypt the current session, even if the session is intercepted and recorded by a third party.
This concludes the handshake and begins the secured connection, which is encrypted and decrypted with the session key until the connection closes. If any one of the above steps fails, then the TLS handshake fails and the connection is not created.

TLS and SSL do not fit neatly into any single layer of the OSI model or the TCP/IP model. TLS runs &quot;on top of some reliable transport protocol (e.g., TCP),&quot; which would imply that it is above the transport layer. It serves encryption to higher layers, which is normally the function of the presentation layer. However, applications generally use TLS as if it were a transport layer, even though applications using TLS must actively control initiating TLS handshakes and handling of exchanged authentication certificates.

When secured by TLS, connections between a client (e.g., a web browser) and a server (e.g., wikipedia.org) will have all of the following properties:
*The connection is &quot;private&quot; (or has &quot;confidentiality&quot;) because a symmetric-key algorithm is used to encrypt the data transmitted. The keys for this symmetric encryption are generated uniquely for each connection and are based on a shared secret that was negotiated at the start of the session. The server and client negotiate the details of which encryption algorithm and cryptographic keys to use before the first byte of data is transmitted (see below). The negotiation of a shared secret is both secure (the negotiated secret is unavailable to eavesdroppers and cannot be obtained, even by an attacker who places themselves in the middle of the connection) and reliable (no attacker can modify the communications during the negotiation without being detected).
*The identity of the communicating parties can be &quot;authenticated&quot; using public-key cryptography. This authentication is required for the server and optional for the client.
*The connection is &quot;reliable&quot; (or has &quot;integrity&quot;) because each message transmitted includes a message integrity check using a message authentication code to prevent undetected loss or alteration of the data during transmission.

TLS supports many different methods for exchanging keys, encrypting data, and authenticating message integrity. As a result, secure configuration of TLS involves many configurable parameters, and not all choices provide all of the privacy-related properties described in the list above (see the tables below § Key exchange, § Cipher security, and ).

Attempts have been made to subvert aspects of the communications security that TLS seeks to provide, and the protocol has been revised several times to address these security threats. Developers of web browsers have repeatedly revised their products to defend against potential security weaknesses after these were discovered (see TLS/SSL support history of web browsers).

=== Datagram Transport Layer Security ===
Datagram Transport Layer Security, abbreviated DTLS, is a related communications protocol providing security to datagram-based applications by allowing them to communicate in a way designed to prevent eavesdropping, tampering, or message forgery. The DTLS protocol is based on the stream-oriented Transport Layer Security (TLS) protocol and is intended to provide similar security guarantees. However, unlike TLS, it can be used with most datagram oriented protocols including User Datagram Protocol (UDP), Datagram Congestion Control Protocol (DCCP), Control And Provisioning of Wireless Access Points (CAPWAP), Stream Control Transmission Protocol (SCTP) encapsulation, and Secure Real-time Transport Protocol (SRTP).

As the DTLS protocol datagram preserves the semantics of the underlying transport, the application does not suffer from the delays associated with stream protocols. However, the application has to deal with packet reordering, loss of datagram and data larger than the size of a datagram network packet. Because DTLS uses UDP or SCTP rather than TCP, it avoids the TCP meltdown problem, when being used to create a VPN tunnel.

The original 2006 release of DTLS version 1.0 was not a standalone document. It was given as a series of deltas to TLS 1.1. Similarly the follow-up 2012 release of DTLS is a delta to TLS 1.2. It was given the version number of DTLS 1.2 to match its TLS version. Lastly, the 2022 DTLS 1.3 is a delta to TLS 1.3. Like the two previous versions, DTLS 1.3 is intended to provide &quot;equivalent security guarantees [to TLS 1.3] with the exception of order protection/non-replayability&quot;.

Many VPN clients including Cisco AnyConnect &amp; InterCloud Fabric, OpenConnect, ZScaler tunnel, F5 Networks Edge VPN Client, and Citrix Systems NetScaler use DTLS to secure UDP traffic. In addition all modern web browsers support DTLS-SRTP for WebRTC.

==History and development==
===Secure Data Network System===

The Transport Layer Security Protocol (TLS), together with several other basic network security platforms, was developed through a joint initiative begun in August 1986, among the National Security Agency, the National Bureau of Standards, the Defense Communications Agency, and twelve communications and computer corporations who initiated a special project called the Secure Data Network System (SDNS). The program was described in September 1987 at the 10th National Computer Security Conference in an extensive set of published papers. 

The innovative research program focused on designing the next generation of secure computer communications network and product specifications to be implemented for applications on public and private internets. It was intended to complement the rapidly emerging new OSI internet standards moving forward both in the U.S. government&#x27;s GOSIP Profiles and in the huge ITU-ISO JTC1 internet effort internationally. Originally known as the SP4 protocol, it was renamed TLS and subsequently published in 1995 as international standard ITU-T X.274|ISO/IEC 10736:1995.

===Secure Network Programming (SNP)===
Early research efforts towards transport layer security included the Secure Network Programming (SNP) application programming interface (API), which in 1993 explored the approach of having a secure transport layer API closely resembling Berkeley sockets, to facilitate retrofitting pre-existing network applications with security measures. SNP was published and presented in the 1994 USENIX Summer Technical Conference. The SNP project was funded by a grant from NSA to Professor Simon Lam at UT-Austin in 1991. Secure Network Programming won the 2004 ACM Software System Award. Simon Lam was inducted into the Internet Hall of Fame for &quot;inventing secure sockets and implementing the first secure sockets layer, named SNP, in 1993.&quot;

===SSL 1.0, 2.0, and 3.0===

Netscape developed the original SSL protocols, and Taher Elgamal, chief scientist at Netscape Communications from 1995 to 1998, has been described as the &quot;father of SSL&quot;. SSL version 1.0 was never publicly released because of serious security flaws in the protocol. Version 2.0, after being released in February 1995 was quickly found to contain a number of security and usability flaws. It used the same cryptographic keys for message authentication and encryption. It had a weak MAC construction that used the MD5 hash function with a secret prefix, making it vulnerable to length extension attacks. It also provided no protection for either the opening handshake or an explicit message close, both of which meant man-in-the-middle attacks could go undetected. Moreover, SSL 2.0 assumed a single service and a fixed domain certificate, conflicting with the widely used feature of virtual hosting in Web servers, so most websites were effectively impaired from using SSL.

These flaws necessitated the complete redesign of the protocol to SSL version 3.0. Released in 1996, it was produced by Paul Kocher working with Netscape engineers Phil Karlton and Alan Freier, with a reference implementation by Christopher Allen and Tim Dierks of Certicom. Newer versions of SSL/TLS are based on SSL 3.0. The 1996 draft of SSL 3.0 was published by IETF as a historical document in .

SSL 2.0 was deprecated in 2011 by . In 2014, SSL 3.0 was found to be vulnerable to the POODLE attack that affects all block ciphers in SSL; RC4, the only non-block cipher supported by SSL 3.0, is also feasibly broken as used in SSL 3.0. SSL 3.0 was deprecated in June 2015 by .

===TLS 1.0===
TLS 1.0 was first defined in in January 1999 as an upgrade of SSL Version 3.0, and written by Christopher Allen and Tim Dierks of Certicom. As stated in the RFC, &quot;the differences between this protocol and SSL 3.0 are not dramatic, but they are significant enough to preclude interoperability between TLS 1.0 and SSL 3.0&quot;. Tim Dierks later wrote that these changes, and the renaming from &quot;SSL&quot; to &quot;TLS&quot;, were a face-saving gesture to Microsoft, &quot;so it wouldn&#x27;t look [like] the IETF was just rubberstamping Netscape&#x27;s protocol&quot;.

The PCI Council suggested that organizations migrate from TLS 1.0 to TLS 1.1 or higher before June 30, 2018. In October 2018, Apple, Google, Microsoft, and Mozilla jointly announced they would deprecate TLS 1.0 and 1.1 in March 2020. TLS 1.0 and 1.1 were formally deprecated in in March 2021.

===TLS 1.1===
TLS 1.1 was defined in RFC 4346 in April 2006. It is an update from TLS version 1.0. Significant differences in this version include:
*Added protection against cipher-block chaining (CBC) attacks.
**The implicit initialization vector (IV) was replaced with an explicit IV.
**Change in handling of padding errors.
*Support for IANA registration of parameters.
Support for TLS versions 1.0 and 1.1 was widely deprecated by web sites around 2020, disabling access to Firefox versions before 24 and Chromium-based browsers before 29.

===TLS 1.2===
TLS 1.2 was defined in in August 2008. It is based on the earlier TLS 1.1 specification. Major differences include:
*The MD5 and SHA-1 combination in the pseudorandom function (PRF) was replaced with SHA-256, with an option to use cipher suite specified PRFs.
*The MD5 and SHA-1 combination in the finished message hash was replaced with SHA-256, with an option to use cipher suite specific hash algorithms. However, the size of the hash in the finished message must still be at least 96 bits.
*The MD5 and SHA-1 combination in the digitally signed element was replaced with a single hash negotiated during handshake, which defaults to SHA-1.
*Enhancement in the client&#x27;s and server&#x27;s ability to specify which hashes and signature algorithms they accept.
*Expansion of support for authenticated encryption ciphers, used mainly for Galois/Counter Mode (GCM) and CCM mode of Advanced Encryption Standard (AES) encryption.
*TLS Extensions definition and AES cipher suites were added.

All TLS versions were further refined in in March 2011, removing their backward compatibility with SSL such that TLS sessions never negotiate the use of Secure Sockets Layer (SSL) version 2.0. There is currently no formal date for TLS 1.2 to be deprecated. The specifications for TLS 1.2 became redefined as well by the Standards Track Document to keep it as secure as possible; it is to be seen as a failover protocol now, meant only to be negotiated with clients which are unable to talk over TLS 1.3 (The original RFC 5246 definition for TLS 1.2 is since then obsolete).

===TLS 1.3===
TLS 1.3 was defined in RFC 8446 in August 2018. It is based on the earlier TLS 1.2 specification. Major differences from TLS 1.2 include:
*Separating key agreement and authentication algorithms from the cipher suites
*Removing support for weak and less-used named elliptic curves
*Removing support for MD5 and SHA-224 cryptographic hash functions
*Requiring digital signatures even when a previous configuration is used
*Integrating HKDF and the semi-ephemeral DH proposal
*Replacing resumption with PSK and tickets
*Supporting 1-RTT handshakes and initial support for 0-RTT
*Mandating perfect forward secrecy, by means of using ephemeral keys during the (EC)DH key agreement
*Dropping support for many insecure or obsolete features including compression, renegotiation, non-AEAD ciphers, null ciphers, non-PFS key exchange (among which are static RSA and static DH key exchanges), custom DHE groups, EC point format negotiation, Change Cipher Spec protocol, Hello message UNIX time, and the length field AD input to AEAD ciphers
*Prohibiting SSL or RC4 negotiation for backwards compatibility
*Integrating use of session hash
*Deprecating use of the record layer version number and freezing the number for improved backwards compatibility
*Moving some security-related algorithm details from an appendix to the specification and relegating ClientKeyShare to an appendix
*Adding the ChaCha20 stream cipher with the Poly1305 message authentication code
*Adding the Ed25519 and Ed448 digital signature algorithms
*Adding the x25519 and x448 key exchange protocols
*Adding support for sending multiple OCSP responses
*Encrypting all handshake messages after the ServerHello

Network Security Services (NSS), the cryptography library developed by Mozilla and used by its web browser Firefox, enabled TLS 1.3 by default in February 2017. TLS 1.3 support was subsequently added — but due to compatibility issues for a small number of users, not automatically enabled — to Firefox 52.0, which was released in March 2017. TLS 1.3 was enabled by default in May 2018 with the release of Firefox 60.0.

Google Chrome set TLS 1.3 as the default version for a short time in 2017. It then removed it as the default, due to incompatible middleboxes such as Blue Coat web proxies.

The intolerance of the new version of TLS was protocol ossification; middleboxes had ossified the protocol&#x27;s version parameter. As a result, version 1.3 mimics the wire image of version 1.2. This change occurred very late in the design process, only having been discovered during browser deployment. The discovery of this intolerance also led to the prior version negotiation strategy, where the highest matching version was picked, being abandoned due to unworkable levels of ossification. &#x27;Greasing&#x27; an extension point, where one protocol participant claims support for non-existent extensions to ensure that unrecognised-but-actually-existent extensions are tolerated and so to resist ossification, was originally designed for TLS, but it has since been adopted elsewhere.

During the IETF 100 Hackathon, which took place in Singapore in 2017, the TLS Group worked on adapting open-source applications to use TLS 1.3. The TLS group was made up of individuals from Japan, United Kingdom, and Mauritius via the cyberstorm.mu team. This work was continued in the IETF 101 Hackathon in London, and the IETF 102 Hackathon in Montreal.

wolfSSL enabled the use of TLS 1.3 as of version 3.11.1, released in May 2017. As the first commercial TLS 1.3 implementation, wolfSSL 3.11.1 supported Draft 18 and now supports Draft 28, the final version, as well as many older versions. A series of blogs were published on the performance difference between TLS 1.2 and 1.3.

In &lt;time datetime=2018-09-11T12:00:00+00:00&gt;September 2018&lt;/time&gt;, the popular OpenSSL project released version 1.1.1 of its library, in which support for TLS 1.3 was &quot;the headline new feature&quot;.

Support for TLS 1.3 was added to Secure Channel (schannel) for the releases of Windows 11 and Windows Server 2022.

====Enterprise Transport Security====
The Electronic Frontier Foundation praised TLS 1.3 and expressed concern about the variant protocol Enterprise Transport Security (ETS) that intentionally disables important security measures in TLS 1.3. Originally called Enterprise TLS (eTLS), ETS is a published standard known as the &#x27;ETSI TS103523-3&#x27;, &quot;Middlebox Security Protocol, Part3: Enterprise Transport Security&quot;. It is intended for use entirely within proprietary networks such as banking systems. ETS does not support forward secrecy so as to allow third-party organizations connected to the proprietary networks to be able to use their private key to monitor network traffic for the detection of malware and to make it easier to conduct audits. Despite the claimed benefits, the EFF warned that the loss of forward secrecy could make it easier for data to be exposed along with saying that there are better ways to analyze traffic.

==Digital certificates==
A digital certificate certifies the ownership of a public key by the named subject of the certificate, and indicates certain expected usages of that key. This allows others (relying parties) to rely upon signatures or on assertions made by the private key that corresponds to the certified public key. Keystores and trust stores can be in various formats, such as .pem, .crt, .pfx, and .jks.

===Certificate authorities===

TLS typically relies on a set of trusted third-party certificate authorities to establish the authenticity of certificates. Trust is usually anchored in a list of certificates distributed with user agent software, and can be modified by the relying party.

According to Netcraft, who monitors active TLS certificates, the market-leading certificate authority (CA) has been Symantec since the beginning of their survey (or VeriSign before the authentication services business unit was purchased by Symantec). As of 2015, Symantec accounted for just under a third of all certificates and 44% of the valid certificates used by the 1 million busiest websites, as counted by Netcraft. In 2017, Symantec sold its TLS/SSL business to DigiCert. In an updated report, it was shown that IdenTrust, DigiCert, and Sectigo are the top 3 certificate authorities in terms of market share since May 2019.

As a consequence of choosing X.509 certificates, certificate authorities and a public key infrastructure are necessary to verify the relation between a certificate and its owner, as well as to generate, sign, and administer the validity of certificates. While this can be more convenient than verifying the identities via a web of trust, the 2013 mass surveillance disclosures made it more widely known that certificate authorities are a weak point from a security standpoint, allowing man-in-the-middle attacks (MITM) if the certificate authority cooperates (or is compromised).

=== Importance of SSL Certificates ===

* Encryption: SSL certificates encrypt data sent between a web server and a user’s browser, ensuring that sensitive information is protected throughout transmission. This encryption technology stops unauthorized parties from intercepting and interpreting data, so protecting it from possible risks such as hacking or data breaches.
* Authentication: SSL certificates also offer authentication, certifying the integrity of a website and that visitors are connecting to the correct server rather than a malicious impostor. This authentication method helps consumers gain trust by ensuring that they are dealing with a trustworthy and secure website.
* Integrity: Another important role of SSL certificates is to ensure data integrity. SSL uses cryptographic techniques to verify that data communicated between the server and the browser is intact and unmodified during transit. This keeps malevolent actors from interfering with the data, ensuring its integrity and trustworthiness.

==Algorithms==
===Key exchange or key agreement===
Before a client and server can begin to exchange information protected by TLS, they must securely exchange or agree upon an encryption key and a cipher to use when encrypting data (see ). Among the methods used for key exchange/agreement are: public and private keys generated with RSA (denoted TLS_RSA in the TLS handshake protocol), Diffie–Hellman (TLS_DH), ephemeral Diffie–Hellman (TLS_DHE), elliptic-curve Diffie–Hellman (TLS_ECDH), ephemeral elliptic-curve Diffie–Hellman (TLS_ECDHE), anonymous Diffie–Hellman (TLS_DH_anon), pre-shared key (TLS_PSK) and Secure Remote Password (TLS_SRP).

The TLS_DH_anon and TLS_ECDH_anon key agreement methods do not authenticate the server or the user and hence are rarely used because those are vulnerable to man-in-the-middle attacks. Only TLS_DHE and TLS_ECDHE provide forward secrecy.

Public key certificates used during exchange/agreement also vary in the size of the public/private encryption keys used during the exchange and hence the robustness of the security provided. In July 2013, Google announced that it would no longer use 1024-bit public keys and would switch instead to 2048-bit keys to increase the security of the TLS encryption it provides to its users because the encryption strength is directly related to the key size.

===Cipher===

;Notes
===Data integrity===
A message authentication code (MAC) is used for data integrity. HMAC is used for CBC mode of block ciphers. Authenticated encryption (AEAD) such as GCM and CCM mode uses AEAD-integrated MAC and does not use HMAC. HMAC-based PRF, or HKDF is used for TLS handshake.

==Applications and adoption==
In applications design, TLS is usually implemented on top of Transport Layer protocols, encrypting all of the protocol-related data of protocols such as HTTP, FTP, SMTP, NNTP and XMPP.

Historically, TLS has been used primarily with reliable transport protocols such as the Transmission Control Protocol (TCP). However, it has also been implemented with datagram-oriented transport protocols, such as the User Datagram Protocol (UDP) and the Datagram Congestion Control Protocol (DCCP), usage of which has been standardized independently using the term &quot;Datagram Transport Layer Security&quot; (&quot;DTLS&quot;).

===Websites===
A primary use of TLS is to secure World Wide Web traffic between a website and a web browser encoded with the HTTP protocol. This use of TLS to secure HTTP traffic constitutes the HTTPS protocol.

;Notes
===Web browsers===
, the latest versions of all major web browsers support TLS 1.0, 1.1, and 1.2, and have them enabled by default. However, not all supported Microsoft operating systems support the latest version of IE. Additionally, many Microsoft operating systems currently support multiple versions of IE, but this has changed according to Microsoft&#x27;s Internet Explorer Support Lifecycle Policy FAQ , &quot;beginning January 12, 2016, only the most current version of Internet Explorer available for a supported operating system will receive technical support and security updates.&quot; The page then goes on to list the latest supported version of IE at that date for each operating system. The next critical date would be when an operating system reaches the end of life stage. Since June 15, 2022, Internet Explorer 11 dropped support for Windows 10 editions which follow Microsoft&#x27;s Modern Lifecycle Policy.

Mitigations against known attacks are not enough yet:
*Mitigations against POODLE attack: some browsers already prevent fallback to SSL 3.0; however, this mitigation needs to be supported by not only clients but also servers. Disabling SSL 3.0 itself, implementation of &quot;anti-POODLE record splitting&quot;, or denying CBC ciphers in SSL 3.0 is required.
**Google Chrome: complete (TLS_FALLBACK_SCSV is implemented since version 33, fallback to SSL 3.0 is disabled since version 39, SSL 3.0 itself is disabled by default since version 40. Support of SSL 3.0 itself was dropped since version 44.)
**Mozilla Firefox: complete (support of SSL 3.0 itself is dropped since version 39. SSL 3.0 itself is disabled by default and fallback to SSL 3.0 are disabled since version 34, TLS_FALLBACK_SCSV is implemented since version 35. In ESR, SSL 3.0 itself is disabled by default and TLS_FALLBACK_SCSV is implemented since ESR 31.3.0.)
**Internet Explorer: partial (only in version 11, SSL 3.0 is disabled by default since April 2015. Version 10 and older are still vulnerable against POODLE.)
**Opera: complete (TLS_FALLBACK_SCSV is implemented since version 20, &quot;anti-POODLE record splitting&quot;, which is effective only with client-side implementation, is implemented since version 25, SSL 3.0 itself is disabled by default since version 27. Support of SSL 3.0 itself will be dropped since version 31.)
**Safari: complete (only on OS X 10.8 and later and iOS 8, CBC ciphers during fallback to SSL 3.0 is denied, but this means it will use RC4, which is not recommended as well. Support of SSL 3.0 itself is dropped on OS X 10.11 and later and iOS 9.)
*Mitigation against RC4 attacks:
**Google Chrome disabled RC4 except as a fallback since version 43. RC4 is disabled since Chrome 48.
**Firefox disabled RC4 except as a fallback since version 36. Firefox 44 disabled RC4 by default.
**Opera disabled RC4 except as a fallback since version 30. RC4 is disabled since Opera 35.
**Internet Explorer for Windows 7/Server 2008 R2 and for Windows 8/Server 2012 have set the priority of RC4 to lowest and can also disable RC4 except as a fallback through registry settings. Internet Explorer 11 Mobile 11 for Windows Phone 8.1 disable RC4 except as a fallback if no other enabled algorithm works. Edge [Legacy] and IE 11 disable RC4 completely in August 2016.
*Mitigation against FREAK attack:
**The Android Browser included with Android 4.0 and older is still vulnerable to the FREAK attack.
**Internet Explorer 11 Mobile is still vulnerable to the FREAK attack.
**Google Chrome, Internet Explorer (desktop), Safari (desktop &amp; mobile), and Opera (mobile) have FREAK mitigations in place.
**Mozilla Firefox on all platforms and Google Chrome on Windows were not affected by FREAK.

===Libraries===

Most SSL and TLS programming libraries are free and open-source software.
*BoringSSL, a fork of OpenSSL for Chrome/Chromium and Android as well as other Google applications.
*Botan, a BSD-licensed cryptographic library written in C++.
*BSAFE Micro Edition Suite: a multi-platform implementation of TLS written in C using a FIPS-validated cryptographic module
*BSAFE SSL-J: a TLS library providing both a proprietary API and JSSE API, using FIPS-validated cryptographic module
*cryptlib: a portable open source cryptography library (includes TLS/SSL implementation)
*Delphi programmers may use a library called Indy which utilizes OpenSSL or alternatively ICS which supports TLS 1.3 now.
*GnuTLS: a free implementation (LGPL licensed)
*Java Secure Socket Extension (JSSE): the Java API and provider implementation (named SunJSSE)
*LibreSSL: a fork of OpenSSL by OpenBSD project.
*MatrixSSL: a dual licensed implementation
*Mbed TLS (previously PolarSSL): A tiny SSL library implementation for embedded devices that is designed for ease of use
*Network Security Services: FIPS 140 validated open source library
*OpenSSL: a free implementation (BSD license with some extensions)
*Schannel: an implementation of SSL and TLS Microsoft Windows as part of its package.
*Secure Transport: an implementation of SSL and TLS used in OS X and iOS as part of their packages.
*wolfSSL (previously CyaSSL): Embedded SSL/TLS Library with a strong focus on speed and size.

A paper presented at the 2012 ACM conference on computer and communications security showed that many applications used some of these SSL libraries incorrectly, leading to vulnerabilities. According to the authors:
&quot;The root cause of most of these vulnerabilities is the terrible design of the APIs to the underlying SSL libraries. Instead of expressing high-level security properties of network tunnels such as confidentiality and authentication, these APIs expose low-level details of the SSL protocol to application developers. As a consequence, developers often use SSL APIs incorrectly, misinterpreting and misunderstanding their manifold parameters, options, side effects, and return values.&quot;

===Other uses===
The Simple Mail Transfer Protocol (SMTP) can also be protected by TLS. These applications use public key certificates to verify the identity of endpoints.

TLS can also be used for tunneling an entire network stack to create a VPN, which is the case with OpenVPN and OpenConnect. Many vendors have by now married TLS&#x27;s encryption and authentication capabilities with authorization. There has also been substantial development since the late 1990s in creating client technology outside of Web-browsers, in order to enable support for client/server applications. Compared to traditional IPsec VPN technologies, TLS has some inherent advantages in firewall and NAT traversal that make it easier to administer for large remote-access populations.

TLS is also a standard method for protecting Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) application signaling. TLS can be used for providing authentication and encryption of the SIP signaling associated with VoIP and other SIP-based applications.

==Security==
===Attacks against TLS/SSL===
Significant attacks against TLS/SSL are listed below.

In February 2015, IETF issued an informational RFC summarizing the various known attacks against TLS/SSL.

====Renegotiation attack====
A vulnerability of the renegotiation procedure was discovered in August 2009 that can lead to plaintext injection attacks against SSL 3.0 and all current versions of TLS. For example, it allows an attacker who can hijack an https connection to splice their own requests into the beginning of the conversation the client has with the web server. The attacker cannot actually decrypt the client–server communication, so it is different from a typical man-in-the-middle attack. A short-term fix is for web servers to stop allowing renegotiation, which typically will not require other changes unless client certificate authentication is used. To fix the vulnerability, a renegotiation indication extension was proposed for TLS. It will require the client and server to include and verify information about previous handshakes in any renegotiation handshakes. This extension has become a proposed standard and has been assigned the number . The RFC has been implemented by several libraries.

====Downgrade attacks: FREAK attack and Logjam attack====

A protocol downgrade attack (also called a version rollback attack) tricks a web server into negotiating connections with previous versions of TLS (such as SSLv2) that have long since been abandoned as insecure.

Previous modifications to the original protocols, like False Start (adopted and enabled by Google Chrome) or Snap Start, reportedly introduced limited TLS protocol downgrade attacks or allowed modifications to the cipher suite list sent by the client to the server. In doing so, an attacker might succeed in influencing the cipher suite selection in an attempt to downgrade the cipher suite negotiated to use either a weaker symmetric encryption algorithm or a weaker key exchange. A paper presented at an ACM conference on computer and communications security in 2012 demonstrated that the False Start extension was at risk: in certain circumstances it could allow an attacker to recover the encryption keys offline and to access the encrypted data.

Encryption downgrade attacks can force servers and clients to negotiate a connection using cryptographically weak keys. In 2014, a man-in-the-middle attack called FREAK was discovered affecting the OpenSSL stack, the default Android web browser, and some Safari browsers. The attack involved tricking servers into negotiating a TLS connection using cryptographically weak 512 bit encryption keys.

Logjam is a security exploit discovered in May 2015 that exploits the option of using legacy &quot;export-grade&quot; 512-bit Diffie–Hellman groups dating back to the 1990s. It forces susceptible servers to downgrade to cryptographically weak 512-bit Diffie–Hellman groups. An attacker can then deduce the keys the client and server determine using the Diffie–Hellman key exchange.

====Cross-protocol attacks: DROWN====

The DROWN attack is an exploit that attacks servers supporting contemporary SSL/TLS protocol suites by exploiting their support for the obsolete, insecure, SSLv2 protocol to leverage an attack on connections using up-to-date protocols that would otherwise be secure. DROWN exploits a vulnerability in the protocols used and the configuration of the server, rather than any specific implementation error. Full details of DROWN were announced in March 2016, together with a patch for the exploit. At that time, more than 81,000 of the top 1 million most popular websites were among the TLS protected websites that were vulnerable to the DROWN attack.

====BEAST attack====
On September 23, 2011, researchers Thai Duong and Juliano Rizzo demonstrated a proof of concept called BEAST (Browser Exploit Against SSL/TLS) using a Java applet to violate same origin policy constraints, for a long-known cipher block chaining (CBC) vulnerability in TLS 1.0: an attacker observing 2 consecutive ciphertext blocks C0, C1 can test if the plaintext block P1 is equal to x by choosing the next plaintext block ; as per CBC operation, , which will be equal to C1 if . Practical exploits had not been previously demonstrated for this vulnerability, which was originally discovered by Phillip Rogaway in 2002. The vulnerability of the attack had been fixed with TLS 1.1 in 2006, but TLS 1.1 had not seen wide adoption prior to this attack demonstration.

RC4 as a stream cipher is immune to BEAST attack. Therefore, RC4 was widely used as a way to mitigate BEAST attack on the server side. However, in 2013, researchers found more weaknesses in RC4. Thereafter enabling RC4 on server side was no longer recommended.

Chrome and Firefox themselves are not vulnerable to BEAST attack, however, Mozilla updated their NSS libraries to mitigate BEAST-like attacks. NSS is used by Mozilla Firefox and Google Chrome to implement SSL. Some web servers that have a broken implementation of the SSL specification may stop working as a result.

Microsoft released Security Bulletin MS12-006 on January 10, 2012, which fixed the BEAST vulnerability by changing the way that the Windows Secure Channel (Schannel) component transmits encrypted network packets from the server end. Users of Internet Explorer (prior to version 11) that run on older versions of Windows (Windows 7, Windows 8 and Windows Server 2008 R2) can restrict use of TLS to 1.1 or higher.

Apple fixed BEAST vulnerability by implementing 1/n-1 split and turning it on by default in OS X Mavericks, released on October 22, 2013.

==== CRIME and BREACH attacks====

The authors of the BEAST attack are also the creators of the later CRIME attack, which can allow an attacker to recover the content of web cookies when data compression is used along with TLS. When used to recover the content of secret authentication cookies, it allows an attacker to perform session hijacking on an authenticated web session.

While the CRIME attack was presented as a general attack that could work effectively against a large number of protocols, including but not limited to TLS, and application-layer protocols such as SPDY or HTTP, only exploits against TLS and SPDY were demonstrated and largely mitigated in browsers and servers. The CRIME exploit against HTTP compression has not been mitigated at all, even though the authors of CRIME have warned that this vulnerability might be even more widespread than SPDY and TLS compression combined. In 2013 a new instance of the CRIME attack against HTTP compression, dubbed BREACH, was announced. Based on the CRIME attack a BREACH attack can extract login tokens, email addresses or other sensitive information from TLS encrypted web traffic in as little as 30 seconds (depending on the number of bytes to be extracted), provided the attacker tricks the victim into visiting a malicious web link or is able to inject content into valid pages the user is visiting (ex: a wireless network under the control of the attacker). All versions of TLS and SSL are at risk from BREACH regardless of the encryption algorithm or cipher used. Unlike previous instances of CRIME, which can be successfully defended against by turning off TLS compression or SPDY header compression, BREACH exploits HTTP compression which cannot realistically be turned off, as virtually all web servers rely upon it to improve data transmission speeds for users. This is a known limitation of TLS as it is susceptible to chosen-plaintext attack against the application-layer data it was meant to protect.

====Timing attacks on padding====
Earlier TLS versions were vulnerable against the padding oracle attack discovered in 2002. A novel variant, called the Lucky Thirteen attack, was published in 2013.

Some experts also recommended avoiding triple DES CBC. Since the last supported ciphers developed to support any program using Windows XP&#x27;s SSL/TLS library like Internet Explorer on Windows XP are RC4 and Triple-DES, and since RC4 is now deprecated (see discussion of ), this makes it difficult to support any version of SSL for any program using this library on XP.

A fix was released as the Encrypt-then-MAC extension to the TLS specification, released as . The Lucky Thirteen attack can be mitigated in TLS 1.2 by using only AES_GCM ciphers; AES_CBC remains vulnerable. SSL may safeguard email, VoIP, and other types of communications over insecure networks in addition to its primary use case of secure data transmission between a client and the server.

====POODLE attack====

On October 14, 2014, Google researchers published a vulnerability in the design of SSL 3.0, which makes CBC mode of operation with SSL 3.0 vulnerable to a padding attack (). They named this attack POODLE (Padding Oracle On Downgraded Legacy Encryption). On average, attackers only need to make 256 SSL 3.0 requests to reveal one byte of encrypted messages.

Although this vulnerability only exists in SSL 3.0 and most clients and servers support TLS 1.0 and above, all major browsers voluntarily downgrade to SSL 3.0 if the handshakes with newer versions of TLS fail unless they provide the option for a user or administrator to disable SSL 3.0 and the user or administrator does so. Therefore, the man-in-the-middle can first conduct a version rollback attack and then exploit this vulnerability.

On December 8, 2014, a variant of POODLE was announced that impacts TLS implementations that do not properly enforce padding byte requirements.

====RC4 attacks====

Despite the existence of attacks on RC4 that broke its security, cipher suites in SSL and TLS that were based on RC4 were still considered secure prior to 2013 based on the way in which they were used in SSL and TLS. In 2011, the RC4 suite was actually recommended as a workaround for the BEAST attack. New forms of attack disclosed in March 2013 conclusively demonstrated the feasibility of breaking RC4 in TLS, suggesting it was not a good workaround for BEAST. An attack scenario was proposed by AlFardan, Bernstein, Paterson, Poettering and Schuldt that used newly discovered statistical biases in the RC4 key table to recover parts of the plaintext with a large number of TLS encryptions. An attack on RC4 in TLS and SSL that requires 13 × 220 encryptions to break RC4 was unveiled on 8 July 2013 and later described as &quot;feasible&quot; in the accompanying presentation at a USENIX Security Symposium in August 2013. In July 2015, subsequent improvements in the attack make it increasingly practical to defeat the security of RC4-encrypted TLS.

As many modern browsers have been designed to defeat BEAST attacks (except Safari for Mac OS X 10.7 or earlier, for iOS 6 or earlier, and for Windows; see ), RC4 is no longer a good choice for TLS 1.0. The CBC ciphers which were affected by the BEAST attack in the past have become a more popular choice for protection. Mozilla and Microsoft recommend disabling RC4 where possible. prohibits the use of RC4 cipher suites in all versions of TLS.

On September 1, 2015, Microsoft, Google, and Mozilla announced that RC4 cipher suites would be disabled by default in their browsers (Microsoft Edge [Legacy], Internet Explorer 11 on Windows 7/8.1/10, Firefox, and Chrome) in early 2016.

====Truncation attack====
A TLS (logout) truncation attack blocks a victim&#x27;s account logout requests so that the user unknowingly remains logged into a web service. When the request to sign out is sent, the attacker injects an unencrypted TCP FIN message (no more data from sender) to close the connection. The server therefore does not receive the logout request and is unaware of the abnormal termination.

Published in July 2013, the attack causes web services such as Gmail and Hotmail to display a page that informs the user that they have successfully signed-out, while ensuring that the user&#x27;s browser maintains authorization with the service, allowing an attacker with subsequent access to the browser to access and take over control of the user&#x27;s logged-in account. The attack does not rely on installing malware on the victim&#x27;s computer; attackers need only place themselves between the victim and the web server (e.g., by setting up a rogue wireless hotspot). This vulnerability also requires access to the victim&#x27;s computer.
Another possibility is when using FTP the data connection can have a false FIN in the data stream, and if the protocol rules for exchanging close_notify alerts is not adhered to a file can be truncated.

====Plaintext attack against DTLS====
In February 2013 two researchers from Royal Holloway, University of London discovered a timing attack which allowed them to recover (parts of the) plaintext from a DTLS connection using the OpenSSL or GnuTLS implementation of DTLS when Cipher Block Chaining mode encryption was used.

====Unholy PAC attack====
This attack, discovered in mid-2016, exploits weaknesses in the Web Proxy Autodiscovery Protocol (WPAD) to expose the URL that a web user is attempting to reach via a TLS-enabled web link. Disclosure of a URL can violate a user&#x27;s privacy, not only because of the website accessed, but also because URLs are sometimes used to authenticate users. Document sharing services, such as those offered by Google and Dropbox, also work by sending a user a security token that is included in the URL. An attacker who obtains such URLs may be able to gain full access to a victim&#x27;s account or data.

The exploit works against almost all browsers and operating systems.

====Sweet32 attack====
The Sweet32 attack breaks all 64-bit block ciphers used in CBC mode as used in TLS by exploiting a birthday attack and either a man-in-the-middle attack or injection of a malicious JavaScript into a web page. The purpose of the man-in-the-middle attack or the JavaScript injection is to allow the attacker to capture enough traffic to mount a birthday attack.

====Implementation errors: Heartbleed bug, BERserk attack, Cloudflare bug====

The Heartbleed bug is a serious vulnerability specific to the implementation of SSL/TLS in the popular OpenSSL cryptographic software library, affecting versions 1.0.1 to 1.0.1f. This weakness, reported in April 2014, allows attackers to steal private keys from servers that should normally be protected. The Heartbleed bug allows anyone on the Internet to read the memory of the systems protected by the vulnerable versions of the OpenSSL software. This compromises the secret private keys associated with the public certificates used to identify the service providers and to encrypt the traffic, the names and passwords of the users and the actual content. This allows attackers to eavesdrop on communications, steal data directly from the services and users and to impersonate services and users. The vulnerability is caused by a buffer over-read bug in the OpenSSL software, rather than a defect in the SSL or TLS protocol specification.

In September 2014, a variant of Daniel Bleichenbacher&#x27;s PKCS#1 v1.5 RSA Signature Forgery vulnerability was announced by Intel Security Advanced Threat Research. This attack, dubbed BERserk, is a result of incomplete ASN.1 length decoding of public key signatures in some SSL implementations, and allows a man-in-the-middle attack by forging a public key signature.

In February 2015, after media reported the hidden pre-installation of superfish adware on some Lenovo notebooks, a researcher found a trusted root certificate on affected Lenovo machines to be insecure, as the keys could easily be accessed using the company name, Komodia, as a passphrase. The Komodia library was designed to intercept client-side TLS/SSL traffic for parental control and surveillance, but it was also used in numerous adware programs, including Superfish, that were often surreptitiously installed unbeknownst to the computer user. In turn, these potentially unwanted programs installed the corrupt root certificate, allowing attackers to completely control web traffic and confirm false websites as authentic.

In May 2016, it was reported that dozens of Danish HTTPS-protected websites belonging to Visa Inc. were vulnerable to attacks allowing hackers to inject malicious code and forged content into the browsers of visitors. The attacks worked because the TLS implementation used on the affected servers incorrectly reused random numbers (nonces) that are intended to be used only once, ensuring that each TLS handshake is unique.

In February 2017, an implementation error caused by a single mistyped character in code used to parse HTML created a buffer overflow error on Cloudflare servers. Similar in its effects to the Heartbleed bug discovered in 2014, this overflow error, widely known as Cloudbleed, allowed unauthorized third parties to read data in the memory of programs running on the servers—data that should otherwise have been protected by TLS.

====Survey of websites vulnerable to attacks====
, the Trustworthy Internet Movement estimated the ratio of websites that are vulnerable to TLS attacks.
===Forward secrecy===

Forward secrecy is a property of cryptographic systems which ensures that a session key derived from a set of public and private keys will not be compromised if one of the private keys is compromised in the future. Without forward secrecy, if the server&#x27;s private key is compromised, not only will all future TLS-encrypted sessions using that server certificate be compromised, but also any past sessions that used it as well (provided that these past sessions were intercepted and stored at the time of transmission). An implementation of TLS can provide forward secrecy by requiring the use of ephemeral Diffie–Hellman key exchange to establish session keys, and some notable TLS implementations do so exclusively: e.g., Gmail and other Google HTTPS services that use OpenSSL. However, many clients and servers supporting TLS (including browsers and web servers) are not configured to implement such restrictions. In practice, unless a web service uses Diffie–Hellman key exchange to implement forward secrecy, all of the encrypted web traffic to and from that service can be decrypted by a third party if it obtains the server&#x27;s master (private) key; e.g., by means of a court order.

Even where Diffie–Hellman key exchange is implemented, server-side session management mechanisms can impact forward secrecy. The use of TLS session tickets (a TLS extension) causes the session to be protected by AES128-CBC-SHA256 regardless of any other negotiated TLS parameters, including forward secrecy ciphersuites, and the long-lived TLS session ticket keys defeat the attempt to implement forward secrecy. Stanford University research in 2014 also found that of 473,802 TLS servers surveyed, 82.9% of the servers deploying ephemeral Diffie–Hellman (DHE) key exchange to support forward secrecy were using weak Diffie–Hellman parameters. These weak parameter choices could potentially compromise the effectiveness of the forward secrecy that the servers sought to provide.

Since late 2011, Google has provided forward secrecy with TLS by default to users of its Gmail service, along with Google Docs and encrypted search, among other services.
Since November 2013, Twitter has provided forward secrecy with TLS to users of its service. , about 80% of TLS-enabled websites are configured to use cipher suites that provide forward secrecy to most web browsers.

===TLS interception===

TLS interception (or HTTPS interception if applied particularly to that protocol) is the practice of intercepting an encrypted data stream in order to decrypt it, read and possibly manipulate it, and then re-encrypt it and send the data on its way again. This is done by way of a &quot;transparent proxy&quot;: the interception software terminates the incoming TLS connection, inspects the HTTP plaintext, and then creates a new TLS connection to the destination.

TLS/HTTPS interception is used as an information security measure by network operators in order to be able to scan for and protect against the intrusion of malicious content into the network, such as computer viruses and other malware. Such content could otherwise not be detected as long as it is protected by encryption, which is increasingly the case as a result of the routine use of HTTPS and other secure protocols.

A significant drawback of TLS/HTTPS interception is that it introduces new security risks of its own. One notable limitation is that it provides a point where network traffic is available unencrypted thus giving attackers an incentive to attack this point in particular in order to gain access to otherwise secure content. The interception also allows the network operator, or persons who gain access to its interception system, to perform man-in-the-middle attacks against network users. A 2017 study found that &quot;HTTPS interception has become startlingly widespread, and that interception products as a class have a dramatically negative impact on connection security&quot;.

==Protocol details==
The TLS protocol exchanges &quot;records&quot;, which encapsulate the data to be exchanged in a specific format (see below). Each record can be compressed, padded, appended with a message authentication code (MAC), or encrypted, all depending on the state of the connection. Each record has a &quot;content type&quot; field that designates the type of data encapsulated, a length field and a TLS version field. The data encapsulated may be control or procedural messages of the TLS itself, or simply the application data needed to be transferred by TLS. The specifications (cipher suite, keys etc.) required to exchange application data by TLS, are agreed upon in the &quot;TLS handshake&quot; between the client requesting the data and the server responding to requests. The protocol therefore defines both the structure of payloads transferred in TLS and the procedure to establish and monitor the transfer.

===TLS handshake===
When the connection starts, the record encapsulates a &quot;control&quot; protocol – the handshake messaging protocol (&quot;content type&quot; 22). This protocol is used to exchange all the information required by both sides for the exchange of the actual application data by TLS. It defines the format of messages and the order of their exchange. These may vary according to the demands of the client and server – i.e., there are several possible procedures to set up the connection. This initial exchange results in a successful TLS connection (both parties ready to transfer application data with TLS) or an alert message (as specified below).

====Basic TLS handshake====
A typical connection example follows, illustrating a handshake where the server (but not the client) is authenticated by its certificate:

#Negotiation phase:
#*A client sends a ClientHello message specifying the highest TLS protocol version it supports, a random number, a list of suggested cipher suites and suggested compression methods. If the client is attempting to perform a resumed handshake, it may send a &quot;session ID&quot;. If the client can use Application-Layer Protocol Negotiation, it may include a list of supported application protocols, such as HTTP/2.
#*The server responds with a ServerHello message, containing the chosen protocol version, a random number, cipher suite and compression method from the choices offered by the client. To confirm or allow resumed handshakes the server may send a &quot;session ID&quot;. The chosen protocol version should be the highest that both the client and server support. For example, if the client supports TLS version 1.1 and the server supports version 1.2, version 1.1 should be selected; version 1.2 should not be selected.
#*The server sends its Certificate message (depending on the selected cipher suite, this may be omitted by the server).
#*The server sends its ServerKeyExchange message (depending on the selected cipher suite, this may be omitted by the server). This message is sent for all DHE, ECDHE and DH_anon cipher suites.
#*The server sends a ServerHelloDone message, indicating it is done with handshake negotiation.
#*The client responds with a ClientKeyExchange message, which may contain a &quot;PreMasterSecret&quot;, public key, or nothing. (Again, this depends on the selected cipher.) This &quot;PreMasterSecret&quot; is encrypted using the public key of the server certificate.
#*The client and server then use the random numbers and &quot;PreMasterSecret&quot; to compute a common secret, called the &quot;master secret&quot;. All other key data (session keys such as IV, symmetric encryption key, MAC key) for this connection is derived from this master secret (and the client- and server-generated random values), which is passed through a carefully designed pseudorandom function.
#The client now sends a ChangeCipherSpec record, essentially telling the server, &quot;Everything I tell you from now on will be authenticated (and encrypted if encryption parameters were present in the server certificate).&quot; The ChangeCipherSpec is itself a record-level protocol with content type of 20.
#*The client sends an authenticated and encrypted Finished message, containing a hash and MAC over the previous handshake messages.
#*The server will attempt to decrypt the client&#x27;s &quot;Finished&quot; message and verify the hash and MAC. If the decryption or verification fails, the handshake is considered to have failed and the connection should be terminated.
#Finally, the server sends a ChangeCipherSpec, telling the client, &quot;Everything I tell you from now on will be authenticated (and encrypted, if encryption was negotiated).&quot;
#*The server sends its authenticated and encrypted Finished message.
#*The client performs the same decryption and verification procedure as the server did in the previous step.
#Application phase: at this point, the &quot;handshake&quot; is complete and the application protocol is enabled, with content type of 23. Application messages exchanged between client and server will also be authenticated and optionally encrypted exactly like in their &quot;Finished&quot; message. Otherwise, the content type will return 25 and the client will not authenticate.

====Client-authenticated TLS handshake====
The following &quot;full&quot; example shows a client being authenticated (in addition to the server as in the example above; see mutual authentication) via TLS using certificates exchanged between both peers.

#Negotiation Phase:
#*A client sends a ClientHello message specifying the highest TLS protocol version it supports, a random number, a list of suggested cipher suites and compression methods.
#*The server responds with a ServerHello message, containing the chosen protocol version, a random number, cipher suite and compression method from the choices offered by the client. The server may also send a &quot;session id&quot; as part of the message to perform a resumed handshake.
#*The server sends its Certificate message (depending on the selected cipher suite, this may be omitted by the server).
#*The server sends its ServerKeyExchange message (depending on the selected cipher suite, this may be omitted by the server). This message is sent for all DHE, ECDHE and DH_anon ciphersuites.
#*The server sends a CertificateRequest message, to request a certificate from the client.
#*The server sends a ServerHelloDone message, indicating it is done with handshake negotiation.
#*The client responds with a Certificate message, which contains the client&#x27;s certificate, but not its private key.
#*The client sends a ClientKeyExchange message, which may contain a &quot;PreMasterSecret&quot;, public key, or nothing. (Again, this depends on the selected cipher.) This &quot;PreMasterSecret&quot; is encrypted using the public key of the server certificate.
#*The client sends a CertificateVerify message, which is a signature over the previous handshake messages using the client&#x27;s certificate&#x27;s private key. This signature can be verified by using the client&#x27;s certificate&#x27;s public key. This lets the server know that the client has access to the private key of the certificate and thus owns the certificate.
#*The client and server then use the random numbers and &quot;PreMasterSecret&quot; to compute a common secret, called the &quot;master secret&quot;. All other key data (&quot;session keys&quot;) for this connection is derived from this master secret (and the client- and server-generated random values), which is passed through a carefully designed pseudorandom function.
#The client now sends a ChangeCipherSpec record, essentially telling the server, &quot;Everything I tell you from now on will be authenticated (and encrypted if encryption was negotiated). &quot;The ChangeCipherSpec is itself a record-level protocol and has type 20 and not 22.
#*Finally, the client sends an encrypted Finished message, containing a hash and MAC over the previous handshake messages.
#*The server will attempt to decrypt the client&#x27;s &quot;Finished&quot; message and verify the hash and MAC. If the decryption or verification fails, the handshake is considered to have failed and the connection should be torn down.
#Finally, the server sends a ChangeCipherSpec, telling the client, &quot;Everything I tell you from now on will be authenticated (and encrypted if encryption was negotiated).&quot;
#*The server sends its own encrypted Finished message.
#*The client performs the same decryption and verification procedure as the server did in the previous step.
#Application phase: at this point, the &quot;handshake&quot; is complete and the application protocol is enabled, with content type of 23. Application messages exchanged between client and server will also be encrypted exactly like in their &quot;Finished&quot; message.

====Resumed TLS handshake====
Public key operations (e.g., RSA) are relatively expensive in terms of computational power. TLS provides a secure shortcut in the handshake mechanism to avoid these operations: resumed sessions. Resumed sessions are implemented using session IDs or session tickets.

Apart from the performance benefit, resumed sessions can also be used for single sign-on, as it guarantees that both the original session and any resumed session originate from the same client. This is of particular importance for the FTP over TLS/SSL protocol, which would otherwise suffer from a man-in-the-middle attack in which an attacker could intercept the contents of the secondary data connections.

====TLS 1.3 handshake====

The TLS 1.3 handshake was condensed to only one round trip compared to the two round trips required in previous versions of TLS/SSL.

To start the handshake, the client guesses which key exchange algorithm will be selected by the server and sends a ClientHello message to the server containing a list of supported ciphers (in order of the client&#x27;s preference) and public keys for some or all of its key exchange guesses. If the client successfully guesses the key exchange algorithm, 1 round trip is eliminated from the handshake. After receiving the ClientHello, the server selects a cipher and sends back a ServerHello with its own public key, followed by server Certificate and Finished messages.

After the client receives the server&#x27;s finished message, it now is coordinated with the server on which cipher suite to use.

=====Session IDs=====
In an ordinary &quot;full&quot; handshake, the server sends a &quot;session id&quot; as part of the ServerHello message. The client associates this &quot;session id&quot; with the server&#x27;s IP address and TCP port, so that when the client connects again to that server, it can use the &quot;session id&quot; to shortcut the handshake. In the server, the &quot;session id&quot; maps to the cryptographic parameters previously negotiated, specifically the &quot;master secret&quot;. Both sides must have the same &quot;master secret&quot; or the resumed handshake will fail (this prevents an eavesdropper from using a &quot;session id&quot;). The random data in the ClientHello and ServerHello messages virtually guarantee that the generated connection keys will be different from in the previous connection. In the RFCs, this type of handshake is called an &quot;abbreviated&quot; handshake. It is also described in the literature as a &quot;restart&quot; handshake.

#Negotiation phase:
#*A client sends a ClientHello message specifying the highest TLS protocol version it supports, a random number, a list of suggested cipher suites and compression methods. Included in the message is the &quot;session id&quot; from the previous TLS connection.
#*The server responds with a ServerHello message, containing the chosen protocol version, a random number, cipher suite and compression method from the choices offered by the client. If the server recognizes the &quot;session id&quot; sent by the client, it responds with the same &quot;session id&quot;. The client uses this to recognize that a resumed handshake is being performed. If the server does not recognize the &quot;session id&quot; sent by the client, it sends a different value for its &quot;session id&quot;. This tells the client that a resumed handshake will not be performed. At this point, both the client and server have the &quot;master secret&quot; and random data to generate the key data to be used for this connection.
#The server now sends a ChangeCipherSpec record, essentially telling the client, &quot;Everything I tell you from now on will be encrypted.&quot; The ChangeCipherSpec is itself a record-level protocol and has type 20 and not 22.
#*Finally, the server sends an encrypted Finished message, containing a hash and MAC over the previous handshake messages.
#*The client will attempt to decrypt the server&#x27;s &quot;Finished&quot; message and verify the hash and MAC. If the decryption or verification fails, the handshake is considered to have failed and the connection should be torn down.
#Finally, the client sends a ChangeCipherSpec, telling the server, &quot;Everything I tell you from now on will be encrypted.&quot;
#*The client sends its own encrypted Finished message.
#*The server performs the same decryption and verification procedure as the client did in the previous step.
#Application phase: at this point, the &quot;handshake&quot; is complete and the application protocol is enabled, with content type of 23. Application messages exchanged between client and server will also be encrypted exactly like in their &quot;Finished&quot; message.

=====Session tickets=====
 extends TLS via use of session tickets, instead of session IDs. It defines a way to resume a TLS session without requiring that session-specific state is stored at the TLS server.

When using session tickets, the TLS server stores its session-specific state in a session ticket and sends the session ticket to the TLS client for storing. The client resumes a TLS session by sending the session ticket to the server, and the server resumes the TLS session according to the session-specific state in the ticket. The session ticket is encrypted and authenticated by the server, and the server verifies its validity before using its contents.

One particular weakness of this method with OpenSSL is that it always limits encryption and authentication security of the transmitted TLS session ticket to codice_1, no matter what other TLS parameters were negotiated for the actual TLS session. This means that the state information (the TLS session ticket) is not as well protected as the TLS session itself. Of particular concern is OpenSSL&#x27;s storage of the keys in an application-wide context (codice_2), i.e. for the life of the application, and not allowing for re-keying of the codice_1 TLS session tickets without resetting the application-wide OpenSSL context (which is uncommon, error-prone and often requires manual administrative intervention).

===TLS record===
This is the general format of all TLS records.

;Content type
:This field identifies the Record Layer Protocol Type contained in this record.
;Legacy version
:This field identifies the major and minor version of TLS prior to TLS 1.3 for the contained message. For a ClientHello message, this need not be the &quot;highest&quot; version supported by the client. For TLS 1.3 and later, this must to be set 0x0303 and application must send supported versions in an extra message extension block.
;Length

:The length of &quot;protocol message(s)&quot;, &quot;MAC&quot; and &quot;padding&quot; fields combined (i.e. &quot;q&quot;−5), not to exceed 214 bytes (16 KiB).
;Protocol message(s)
:One or more messages identified by the Protocol field. Note that this field may be encrypted depending on the state of the connection.
;MAC and padding
:A message authentication code computed over the &quot;protocol message(s)&quot; field, with additional key material included. Note that this field may be encrypted, or not included entirely, depending on the state of the connection.
:No &quot;MAC&quot; or &quot;padding&quot; fields can be present at end of TLS records before all cipher algorithms and parameters have been negotiated and handshaked and then confirmed by sending a CipherStateChange record (see below) for signalling that these parameters will take effect in all further records sent by the same peer.

====Handshake protocol====
Most messages exchanged during the setup of the TLS session are based on this record, unless an error or warning occurs and needs to be signaled by an Alert protocol record (see below), or the encryption mode of the session is modified by another record (see ChangeCipherSpec protocol below).

;Message type: This field identifies the handshake message type.

;Handshake message data length
:This is a 3-byte field indicating the length of the handshake data, not including the header.

Note that multiple handshake messages may be combined within one record.

====Alert protocol====
This record should normally not be sent during normal handshaking or application exchanges. However, this message can be sent at any time during the handshake and up to the closure of the session. If this is used to signal a fatal error, the session will be closed immediately after sending this record, so this record is used to give a reason for this closure. If the alert level is flagged as a warning, the remote can decide to close the session if it decides that the session is not reliable enough for its needs (before doing so, the remote may also send its own signal).

;Level
:This field identifies the level of alert. If the level is fatal, the sender should close the session immediately. Otherwise, the recipient may decide to terminate the session itself, by sending its own fatal alert and closing the session itself immediately after sending it. The use of Alert records is optional, however if it is missing before the session closure, the session may be resumed automatically (with its handshakes).
:Normal closure of a session after termination of the transported application should preferably be alerted with at least the &quot;Close notify&quot; Alert type (with a simple warning level) to prevent such automatic resume of a new session. Signalling explicitly the normal closure of a secure session before effectively closing its transport layer is useful to prevent or detect attacks (like attempts to truncate the securely transported data, if it intrinsically does not have a predetermined length or duration that the recipient of the secured data may expect).
;Description
:This field identifies which type of alert is being sent.
====ChangeCipherSpec protocol====
;CCS protocol type
:Currently only 1.

====Application protocol====
;Length
:Length of application data (excluding the protocol header and including the MAC and padding trailers)
;MAC
:32 bytes for the SHA-256-based HMAC, 20 bytes for the SHA-1-based HMAC, 16 bytes for the MD5-based HMAC.
;Padding
:Variable length; last byte contains the padding length.

==Support for name-based virtual servers==
From the application protocol point of view, TLS belongs to a lower layer, although the TCP/IP model is too coarse to show it. This means that the TLS handshake is usually (except in the STARTTLS case) performed before the application protocol can start. In the name-based virtual server feature being provided by the application layer, all co-hosted virtual servers share the same certificate because the server has to select and send a certificate immediately after the ClientHello message. This is a big problem in hosting environments because it means either sharing the same certificate among all customers or using a different IP address for each of them.

There are two known workarounds provided by X.509:
*If all virtual servers belong to the same domain, a wildcard certificate can be used. Besides the loose host name selection that might be a problem or not, there is no common agreement about how to match wildcard certificates. Different rules are applied depending on the application protocol or software used.
*Add every virtual host name in the subjectAltName extension. The major problem being that the certificate needs to be reissued whenever a new virtual server is added.

To provide the server name, Transport Layer Security (TLS) Extensions allow clients to include a Server Name Indication extension (SNI) in the extended ClientHello message. This extension hints to the server immediately which name the client wishes to connect to, so the server
can select the appropriate certificate to send to the clients.

 also documents a method to implement name-based virtual hosting by upgrading HTTP to TLS via an HTTP/1.1 Upgrade header. Normally this is to securely implement HTTP over TLS within the main &quot;http&quot; URI scheme (which avoids forking the URI space and reduces the number of used ports), however, few implementations currently support this.

==See also==
*Application-Layer Protocol Negotiation – a TLS extension used for SPDY and TLS False Start
*Bullrun (decryption program) – a secret anti-encryption program run by the U.S. National Security Agency
*Certificate authority
*Certificate Transparency
*Datagram TLS (DTLS)
*Delegated credential
*HTTP Strict Transport Security – HSTS
*Key ring file
*Private Communications Technology (PCT) – a historic Microsoft competitor to SSL 2.0
*QUIC (Quick UDP Internet Connections) – &quot;…was designed to provide security protection equivalent to TLS/SSL&quot;; QUIC&#x27;s main goal is to improve perceived performance of connection-oriented web applications that are currently using TCP
*Server-Gated Cryptography
*tcpcrypt
*Datagram Transport Layer Security
*TLS acceleration

==References==
==Further reading==
*
*
*
*Creating VPNs with IPsec and SSL/TLS Linux Journal article by Rami Rosen
*
*

===Primary standards===
The current approved version of (D)TLS is version 1.3, which is specified in:
*: &quot;The Transport Layer Security (TLS) Protocol Version 1.3&quot;.
*: &quot;The Datagram Transport Layer Security (DTLS) Protocol Version 1.3&quot;

The current standards replaces these former versions, which are now considered obsolete:
*: &quot;The Transport Layer Security (TLS) Protocol Version 1.2&quot;.
*: &quot;Datagram Transport Layer Security Version 1.2&quot;
*: &quot;The Transport Layer Security (TLS) Protocol Version 1.1&quot;.
*&quot; &quot;Datagram Transport Layer Security&quot;
*: &quot;The TLS Protocol Version 1.0&quot;.
*: &quot;The Secure Sockets Layer (SSL) Protocol Version 3.0&quot;.
*Internet Draft (1995): &quot;The SSL Protocol&quot;

===Extensions===
Other RFCs subsequently extended (D)TLS.

Extensions to (D)TLS 1.3 include:
*: &quot;GOST Cipher Suites for Transport Layer Security (TLS) Protocol Version 1.3&quot;.
Extensions to (D)TLS 1.2 include:
*: &quot;AES Galois Counter Mode (GCM) Cipher Suites for TLS&quot;.
*: &quot;TLS Elliptic Curve Cipher Suites with SHA-256/384 and AES Galois Counter Mode (GCM)&quot;.
*: &quot;Transport Layer Security (TLS) Renegotiation Indication Extension&quot;.
*: &quot;Transport Layer Security (TLS) Authorization Extensions&quot;.
*: &quot;Camellia Cipher Suites for TLS&quot;
*: &quot;Transport Layer Security (TLS) Extensions: Extension Definitions&quot;, includes Server Name Indication and OCSP stapling.
*: &quot;Using OpenPGP Keys for Transport Layer Security (TLS) Authentication&quot;.
*: &quot;Prohibiting Secure Sockets Layer (SSL) Version 2.0&quot;.
*: &quot;Addition of the ARIA Cipher Suites to Transport Layer Security (TLS)&quot;.
*: &quot;Datagram Transport Layer Security Version 1.2&quot;.
*: &quot;Addition of the Camellia Cipher Suites to Transport Layer Security (TLS)&quot;.
*: &quot;Suite B Profile for Transport Layer Security (TLS)&quot;.
*: &quot;AES-CCM Cipher Suites for Transport Layer Security (TLS)&quot;.
*: &quot;Elliptic Curve Cryptography (ECC) Brainpool Curves for Transport Layer Security (TLS)&quot;.
*: &quot;AES-CCM Elliptic Curve Cryptography (ECC) Cipher Suites for TLS&quot;.
*: &quot;Transport Layer Security (TLS) Application-Layer Protocol Negotiation Extension&quot;.
*: &quot;Encrypt-then-MAC for Transport Layer Security (TLS) and Datagram Transport Layer Security (DTLS)&quot;.
*: &quot;Prohibiting RC4 Cipher Suites&quot;.
*: &quot;TLS Fallback Signaling Cipher Suite Value (SCSV) for Preventing Protocol Downgrade Attacks&quot;.
*: &quot;Deprecating Secure Sockets Layer Version 3.0&quot;.
*: &quot;Transport Layer Security (TLS) Session Hash and Extended Master Secret Extension&quot;.
*: &quot;A Transport Layer Security (TLS) ClientHello Padding Extension&quot;.
*: &quot;GOST Cipher Suites for Transport Layer Security (TLS) Protocol Version 1.2&quot;.
Extensions to (D)TLS 1.1 include:
*: &quot;Transport Layer Security (TLS) Extensions&quot; describes both a set of specific extensions and a generic extension mechanism.
*: &quot;Elliptic Curve Cryptography (ECC) Cipher Suites for Transport Layer Security (TLS)&quot;.
*: &quot;TLS Handshake Message for Supplemental Data&quot;.
*: &quot;TLS User Mapping Extension&quot;.
*: &quot;Pre-Shared Key (PSK) Ciphersuites with NULL Encryption for Transport Layer Security (TLS)&quot;.
*: &quot;Using the Secure Remote Password (SRP) Protocol for TLS Authentication&quot;. Defines the TLS-SRP ciphersuites.
*: &quot;Transport Layer Security (TLS) Session Resumption without Server-Side State&quot;.
*: &quot;Using OpenPGP Keys for Transport Layer Security (TLS) Authentication&quot;, obsoleted by .
*: &quot;The EAP-TLS Authentication Protocol&quot;

Extensions to TLS 1.0 include:
*: &quot;Using TLS with IMAP, POP3 and ACAP&quot;. Specifies an extension to the IMAP, POP3 and ACAP services that allow the server and client to use transport-layer security to provide private, authenticated communication over the Internet.
*: &quot;Addition of Kerberos Cipher Suites to Transport Layer Security (TLS)&quot;. The 40-bit cipher suites defined in this memo appear only for the purpose of documenting the fact that those cipher suite codes have already been assigned.
*: &quot;Upgrading to TLS Within HTTP/1.1&quot;, explains how to use the Upgrade mechanism in HTTP/1.1 to initiate Transport Layer Security (TLS) over an existing TCP connection. This allows unsecured and secured HTTP traffic to share the same &quot;well known&quot; port (in this case, http: at 80 rather than https: at 443).
*: &quot;HTTP Over TLS&quot;, distinguishes secured traffic from insecure traffic by the use of a different &#x27;server port&#x27;.
*: &quot;SMTP Service Extension for Secure SMTP over Transport Layer Security&quot;. Specifies an extension to the SMTP service that allows an SMTP server and client to use transport-layer security to provide private, authenticated communication over the Internet.
*: &quot;AES Ciphersuites for TLS&quot;. Adds Advanced Encryption Standard (AES) cipher suites to the previously existing symmetric ciphers.
*: &quot;Transport Layer Security (TLS) Extensions&quot;, adds a mechanism for negotiating protocol extensions during session initialisation and defines some extensions. Made obsolete by .
*: &quot;Transport Layer Security Protocol Compression Methods&quot;, specifies the framework for compression methods and the DEFLATE compression method.
*: &quot;Transport Layer Security (TLS) Protocol Compression Using Lempel-Ziv-Stac (LZS)&quot;.
*: &quot;Addition of Camellia Cipher Suites to Transport Layer Security (TLS)&quot;.
*: &quot;Addition of SEED Cipher Suites to Transport Layer Security (TLS)&quot;.
*: &quot;Securing FTP with TLS&quot;.
*: &quot;Pre-Shared Key Ciphersuites for Transport Layer Security (TLS)&quot;, adds three sets of new cipher suites for the TLS protocol to support authentication based on pre-shared keys.

===Informational RFCs===
*: &quot;Summarizing Known Attacks on Transport Layer Security (TLS) and Datagram TLS (DTLS)&quot;
*: &quot;Recommendations for Secure Use of Transport Layer Security (TLS) and Datagram Transport Layer Security (DTLS)&quot;

==External links==
*Internet Engineering Task Force – TLS Workgroup </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q206494" start="0" end="24" title="Transport Layer Security" label="Transport Layer Security"/>
<link wikidata="Q206494" start="26" end="29" title="Transport Layer Security" label="TLS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1254335" start="36" end="58" title="cryptographic protocol" label="cryptographic protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q75" start="140" end="148" title="Internet" label="Internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q132364" start="154" end="162" title="communication protocol" label="protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q9158" start="202" end="207" title="email" label="email"/>
<link wikidata="Q58199" start="209" end="226" title="instant messaging" label="instant messaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q81945" start="232" end="245" title="voice over IP" label="voice over IP"/>
<link wikidata="Q44484" start="271" end="276" title="HTTPS" label="HTTPS"/>
<link wikidata="Q188728" start="376" end="383" title="privacy" label="privacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8789" start="450" end="462" title="cryptography" label="cryptography"/>
<link wikidata="Q274758" start="483" end="495" title="public key certificate" label="certificates"/>
<link wikidata="Q215121" start="569" end="587" title="presentation layer" label="presentation layer"/>
<link wikidata="Q548838" start="653" end="672" title="Handshake (computing)" label="handshake protocols"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172260" start="695" end="793" title="DTLS" label="[[Transport Layer Security|Datagram Transport Layer Security]] ([[Transport Layer Security|DTLS]])"/>
<link wikidata="Q132364" start="799" end="822" title="communications protocol" label="communications protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q5154228" start="837" end="845" title="communications security" label="security"/>
<link wikidata="Q726868" start="849" end="857" title="datagram" label="datagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q206494" start="921" end="922" title="Transport Layer Security" label="D"/>
<link wikidata="Q206494" start="923" end="926" title="Transport Layer Security" label="TLS"/>
<link wikidata="Q217082" start="1001" end="1032" title="Internet Engineering Task Force" label="Internet Engineering Task Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q206494" start="1166" end="1169" title="Transport Layer Security" label="SSL"/>
<link wikidata="Q206494" start="1171" end="1191" title="Transport Layer Security" label="Secure Sockets Layer"/>
<link wikidata="Q210057" start="1240" end="1263" title="Netscape Communications" label="Netscape Communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q235419" start="1303" end="1321" title="Netscape Navigator" label="Netscape Navigator"/>
<link wikidata="Q146813" start="1352" end="1365" title="Client–server model" label="Client-server"/>
<link wikidata="Q1254335" start="1391" end="1399" title="cryptographic protocol" label="protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q320769" start="1461" end="1474" title="eavesdropping" label="eavesdropping"/>
<link wikidata="Q7681758" start="1479" end="1488" title="tamper-evident" label="tampering"/>
<link wikidata="Q528166" start="1587" end="1593" title="client (computing)" label="client"/>
<link wikidata="Q44127" start="1614" end="1620" title="server (computing)" label="server"/>
<link wikidata="Q858321" start="1707" end="1718" title="port (computer networking)" label="port number"/>
<link wikidata="Q8777" start="1782" end="1786" title="Hypertext Transfer Protocol" label="HTTP"/>
<link wikidata="Q44484" start="1848" end="1853" title="HTTPS" label="HTTPS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435358" start="1912" end="1920" title="opportunistic TLS" label="STARTTLS"/>
<link wikidata="Q193162" start="2014" end="2018" title="usenet" label="news"/>
<link wikidata="Q599031" start="2099" end="2107" title="state (computer science)" label="stateful"/>
<link wikidata="Q201339" start="2198" end="2215" title="asymmetric cipher" label="asymmetric cipher"/>
<link wikidata="Q327675" start="2347" end="2363" title="symmetric cipher" label="symmetric cipher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092688" start="2632" end="2644" title="cipher suite" label="cipher suite"/>
<link wikidata="Q141090" start="2647" end="2654" title="encryption" label="ciphers"/>
<link wikidata="Q183427" start="2659" end="2672" title="hash function" label="hash function"/>
<link wikidata="Q274758" start="2866" end="2885" title="Public key certificate" label="digital certificate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073408" start="2916" end="2927" title="hostname" label="server name"/>
<link wikidata="Q196776" start="2941" end="2962" title="certificate authority" label="certificate authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q228206" start="3233" end="3246" title="random number generation" label="random number"/>
<link wikidata="Q623447" start="3570" end="3597" title="Diffie–Hellman key exchange" label="Diffie–Hellman key exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q3512728" start="3614" end="3631" title="Elliptic-curve Diffie–Hellman" label="elliptic-curve DH"/>
<link wikidata="Q935662" start="3752" end="3767" title="forward secrecy" label="forward secrecy"/>
<link wikidata="Q93312" start="4250" end="4259" title="OSI model" label="OSI model"/>
<link wikidata="Q81414" start="4267" end="4279" title="internet protocol suite" label="TCP/IP model"/>
<link wikidata="Q209372" start="4397" end="4412" title="transport layer" label="transport layer"/>
<link wikidata="Q215121" start="4491" end="4509" title="presentation layer" label="presentation layer"/>
<link wikidata="Q327675" start="4959" end="4982" title="symmetric-key algorithm" label="symmetric-key algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q201339" start="5740" end="5763" title="public-key cryptography" label="public-key cryptography"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052621" start="5988" end="6015" title="message authentication code" label="message authentication code"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6399" end="6413" title="#Key exchange or key agreement" label="§ Key exchange"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6415" end="6432" title="#Cipher" label="§ Cipher security"/>
<link wikidata="Q132364" start="6924" end="6947" title="communications protocol" label="communications protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q5154228" start="6958" end="6966" title="communications security" label="security"/>
<link wikidata="Q726868" start="6970" end="6978" title="datagram" label="datagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q320769" start="7059" end="7072" title="eavesdropping" label="eavesdropping"/>
<link wikidata="Q554830" start="7074" end="7083" title="man in the middle attack" label="tampering"/>
<link wikidata="Q6821769" start="7088" end="7103" title="message forgery" label="message forgery"/>
<link wikidata="Q618814" start="7139" end="7145" title="Stream (computing)" label="stream"/>
<link wikidata="Q11163" start="7335" end="7357" title="User Datagram Protocol" label="User Datagram Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049960" start="7365" end="7401" title="Datagram Congestion Control Protocol" label="Datagram Congestion Control Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q5008769" start="7410" end="7460" title="CAPWAP" label="Control And Provisioning of Wireless Access Points"/>
<link wikidata="Q576997" start="7471" end="7507" title="Stream Control Transmission Protocol" label="Stream Control Transmission Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1529243" start="7534" end="7569" title="Secure Real-time Transport Protocol" label="Secure Real-time Transport Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q7111391" start="7786" end="7803" title="packet reordering" label="packet reordering"/>
<link wikidata="Q214111" start="7866" end="7880" title="network packet" label="network packet"/>
<link wikidata="Q957589" start="7943" end="7963" title="TCP meltdown problem" label="TCP meltdown problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q170963" start="8501" end="8512" title="Virtual private network" label="VPN clients"/>
<link wikidata="Q173395" start="8523" end="8528" title="Cisco" label="Cisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q27676115" start="8529" end="8539" title="AnyConnect" label="AnyConnect"/>
<link wikidata="Q15978834" start="8565" end="8576" title="OpenConnect" label="OpenConnect"/>
<link wikidata="Q8074786" start="8578" end="8585" title="Zscaler" label="ZScaler"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8606" end="8621" title="F5 Networks#BIG-IP product modules" label="Edge VPN Client"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8642" end="8651" title="Citrix Systems#Networking and cloud" label="NetScaler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089715" start="8742" end="8748" title="WebRTC" label="WebRTC"/>
<link wikidata="Q85800207" start="10029" end="10055" title="Secure Network Programming" label="Secure Network Programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q165194" start="10062" end="10095" title="application programming interface" label="application programming interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q13360597" start="10197" end="10213" title="Berkeley sockets" label="Berkeley sockets"/>
<link wikidata="Q2141768" start="10344" end="10350" title="USENIX" label="USENIX"/>
<link wikidata="Q121194" start="10423" end="10426" title="National Security Agency" label="NSA"/>
<link wikidata="Q4678408" start="10440" end="10449" title="Simon Lam" label="Simon Lam"/>
<link wikidata="Q49213" start="10453" end="10462" title="University of Texas at Austin" label="UT-Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q85800207" start="10472" end="10498" title="Secure Network Programming" label="Secure Network Programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q986509" start="10512" end="10537" title="ACM Software System Award" label="ACM Software System Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q6055547" start="10571" end="10592" title="Internet Hall of Fame" label="Internet Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q910915" start="10784" end="10797" title="Taher Elgamal" label="Taher Elgamal"/>
<link wikidata="Q210057" start="10818" end="10841" title="Netscape" label="Netscape Communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q554830" start="11459" end="11484" title="man-in-the-middle attacks" label="man-in-the-middle attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q3371582" start="11837" end="11848" title="Paul Carl Kocher" label="Paul Kocher"/>
<link wikidata="Q18274255" start="12206" end="12212" title="POODLE" label="POODLE"/>
<link wikidata="Q543151" start="12237" end="12249" title="block cipher" label="block cipher"/>
<link wikidata="Q846955" start="12259" end="12262" title="RC4" label="RC4"/>
<link wikidata="Q18387244" start="12994" end="13005" title="Payment Card Industry Security Standards Council" label="PCI Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q312" start="13116" end="13121" title="Apple Inc." label="Apple"/>
<link wikidata="Q95" start="13123" end="13129" title="Google" label="Google"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283" start="13131" end="13140" title="Microsoft" label="Microsoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q9661" start="13146" end="13153" title="Mozilla" label="Mozilla"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13458" end="13479" title="Block cipher mode of operation#Cipher Block Chaining (CBC)" label="cipher-block chaining"/>
<link wikidata="Q1663550" start="13510" end="13531" title="initialization vector" label="initialization vector"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13595" end="13609" title="Block cipher mode of operation#Padding" label="padding errors"/>
<link wikidata="Q242540" start="13624" end="13628" title="Internet Assigned Numbers Authority" label="IANA"/>
<link wikidata="Q698" start="13762" end="13769" title="Firefox" label="Firefox"/>
<link wikidata="Q48524" start="13793" end="13816" title="Chromium (web browser)" label="Chromium-based browsers"/>
<link wikidata="Q185235" start="13964" end="13967" title="MD5" label="MD5"/>
<link wikidata="Q13414952" start="13972" end="13977" title="SHA-1" label="SHA-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q734896" start="13997" end="14018" title="Pseudorandom function family" label="pseudorandom function"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968605" start="14043" end="14050" title="SHA-256" label="SHA-256"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092688" start="14074" end="14086" title="cipher suite" label="cipher suite"/>
<link wikidata="Q183427" start="14158" end="14162" title="Hash function" label="hash"/>
<link wikidata="Q8805" start="14331" end="14334" title="bit" label="bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q548838" start="14450" end="14459" title="Handshake (computing)" label="handshake"/>
<link wikidata="Q15263584" start="14634" end="14658" title="authenticated encryption" label="authenticated encryption"/>
<link wikidata="Q5519271" start="14684" end="14703" title="Galois/Counter Mode" label="Galois/Counter Mode"/>
<link wikidata="Q5009649" start="14714" end="14722" title="CCM mode" label="CCM mode"/>
<link wikidata="Q190746" start="14726" end="14754" title="Advanced Encryption Standard" label="Advanced Encryption Standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048911" start="15688" end="15703" title="elliptic-curve cryptography" label="elliptic curves"/>
<link wikidata="Q477202" start="15742" end="15769" title="cryptographic hash function" label="cryptographic hash function"/>
<link wikidata="Q24962849" start="15857" end="15861" title="HKDF" label="HKDF"/>
<link wikidata="Q7670608" start="15924" end="15927" title="TLS-PSK" label="PSK"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346398" start="15954" end="15957" title="round-trip delay time" label="RTT"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346398" start="15995" end="15998" title="round-trip delay time" label="RTT"/>
<link wikidata="Q935662" start="16018" end="16033" title="forward secrecy" label="forward secrecy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2493" start="16167" end="16178" title="data compression" label="compression"/>
<link wikidata="Q15263584" start="16199" end="16203" title="authenticated encryption" label="AEAD"/>
<link wikidata="Q1961588" start="16213" end="16224" title="Null encryption" label="null cipher"/>
<link wikidata="Q935662" start="16231" end="16234" title="forward secrecy" label="PFS"/>
<link wikidata="Q181551" start="16272" end="16275" title="RSA (cryptosystem)" label="RSA"/>
<link wikidata="Q623447" start="16287" end="16289" title="Diffie–Hellman key exchange" label="DH"/>
<link wikidata="Q623447" start="16313" end="16316" title="Diffie–Hellman key exchange" label="DHE"/>
<link wikidata="Q2563030" start="16807" end="16815" title="ChaCha20" label="ChaCha20"/>
<link wikidata="Q7226098" start="16839" end="16847" title="Poly1305" label="Poly1305"/>
<link wikidata="Q16966748" start="16888" end="16895" title="Ed25519" label="Ed25519"/>
<link wikidata="Q16966748" start="16900" end="16905" title="Ed448" label="Ed448"/>
<link wikidata="Q15702839" start="16947" end="16953" title="x25519" label="x25519"/>
<link wikidata="Q55608705" start="16958" end="16962" title="x448" label="x448"/>
<link wikidata="Q603970" start="17023" end="17027" title="Online Certificate Status Protocol" label="OCSP"/>
<link wikidata="Q7000904" start="17096" end="17121" title="Network Security Services" label="Network Security Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q9661" start="17167" end="17174" title="Mozilla" label="Mozilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q698" start="17203" end="17210" title="Firefox" label="Firefox"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17390" end="17402" title="History of Firefox#Firefox 52 through 59" label="Firefox 52.0"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17501" end="17513" title="History of Firefox#Firefox 60 through 67" label="Firefox 60.0"/>
<link wikidata="Q777" start="17516" end="17529" title="Google Chrome" label="Google Chrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q4928982" start="17666" end="17687" title="Blue Coat Systems" label="Blue Coat web proxies"/>
<link wikidata="Q96400336" start="17736" end="17757" title="protocol ossification" label="protocol ossification"/>
<link wikidata="Q17145883" start="17859" end="17869" title="wire image (networking)" label="wire image"/>
<link wikidata="Q96400336" start="18192" end="18200" title="Grease (networking)" label="Greasing"/>
<link wikidata="Q46855" start="18502" end="18511" title="Hackathon" label="Hackathon"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="18533" end="18542" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130645" start="18585" end="18609" title="Open-source software" label="open-source applications"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="18790" end="18796" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q5197351" start="18839" end="18846" title="wolfSSL" label="wolfSSL"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052790" start="19258" end="19265" title="OpenSSL" label="OpenSSL"/>
<link wikidata="Q4049250" start="19418" end="19432" title="Security Support Provider Interface" label="Secure Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q107269746" start="19464" end="19474" title="Windows 11" label="Windows 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q106039330" start="19479" end="19498" title="Windows Server 2022" label="Windows Server 2022"/>
<link wikidata="Q624023" start="19543" end="19573" title="Electronic Frontier Foundation" label="Electronic Frontier Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q899383" start="19831" end="19835" title="ETSI" label="ETSI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1840684" start="20844" end="20848" title="Privacy-Enhanced Mail" label=".pem"/>
<link wikidata="Q3359717" start="20856" end="20860" title="PKCS 12" label=".pfx"/>
<link wikidata="Q283750" start="20866" end="20870" title="Java KeyStore" label=".jks"/>
<link wikidata="Q681027" start="21174" end="21182" title="Netcraft" label="Netcraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q677085" start="21277" end="21285" title="NortonLifeLock" label="Symantec"/>
<link wikidata="Q734338" start="21326" end="21334" title="Verisign" label="VeriSign"/>
<link wikidata="Q16996537" start="21681" end="21690" title="IdenTrust" label="IdenTrust"/>
<link wikidata="Q3027764" start="21692" end="21700" title="DigiCert" label="DigiCert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1985340" start="21706" end="21713" title="Sectigo" label="Sectigo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065865" start="21823" end="21828" title="X.509" label="X.509"/>
<link wikidata="Q658476" start="21873" end="21898" title="public key infrastructure" label="public key infrastructure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1928707" start="22118" end="22130" title="web of trust" label="web of trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q13644106" start="22136" end="22170" title="Global surveillance disclosures (2013–present)" label="2013 mass surveillance disclosures"/>
<link wikidata="Q554830" start="22280" end="22304" title="man-in-the-middle attack" label="man-in-the-middle attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q181551" start="23730" end="23733" title="RSA (algorithm)" label="RSA"/>
<link wikidata="Q623447" start="23783" end="23797" title="Diffie–Hellman" label="Diffie–Hellman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3512728" start="23844" end="23873" title="elliptic-curve Diffie–Hellman" label="elliptic-curve Diffie–Hellman"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23939" end="23963" title="Key-agreement protocol#Exponential key exchange" label="anonymous Diffie–Hellman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7670608" start="23979" end="23993" title="TLS-PSK" label="pre-shared key"/>
<link wikidata="Q7670611" start="24008" end="24030" title="TLS-SRP" label="Secure Remote Password"/>
<link wikidata="Q554830" start="24200" end="24224" title="man-in-the-middle attack" label="man-in-the-middle attack"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24262" end="24277" title="#Forward secrecy" label="forward secrecy"/>
<link wikidata="Q95" start="24485" end="24491" title="Google" label="Google"/>
<link wikidata="Q1557574" start="24724" end="24732" title="key size" label="key size"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052621" start="24779" end="24806" title="message authentication code" label="message authentication code"/>
<link wikidata="Q1669397" start="24841" end="24845" title="HMAC" label="HMAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q154021" start="24858" end="24861" title="cipher block chaining" label="CBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q15263584" start="24885" end="24909" title="Authenticated encryption" label="Authenticated encryption"/>
<link wikidata="Q5519271" start="24925" end="24928" title="Galois/Counter Mode" label="GCM"/>
<link wikidata="Q5009649" start="24933" end="24941" title="CCM mode" label="CCM mode"/>
<link wikidata="Q1669397" start="24984" end="24988" title="HMAC" label="HMAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q734896" start="25001" end="25004" title="pseudorandom function family" label="PRF"/>
<link wikidata="Q24962849" start="25009" end="25013" title="HKDF" label="HKDF"/>
<link wikidata="Q8777" start="25225" end="25229" title="Hypertext Transfer Protocol" label="HTTP"/>
<link wikidata="Q42283" start="25231" end="25234" title="File Transfer Protocol" label="FTP"/>
<link wikidata="Q160453" start="25236" end="25240" title="Simple Mail Transfer Protocol" label="SMTP"/>
<link wikidata="Q219730" start="25242" end="25246" title="Network News Transfer Protocol" label="NNTP"/>
<link wikidata="Q188951" start="25251" end="25255" title="XMPP" label="XMPP"/>
<link wikidata="Q8803" start="25346" end="25375" title="Transmission Control Protocol" label="Transmission Control Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q11163" start="25477" end="25499" title="User Datagram Protocol" label="User Datagram Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049960" start="25514" end="25550" title="Datagram Congestion Control Protocol" label="Datagram Congestion Control Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172260" start="25631" end="25664" title="Datagram Transport Layer Security" label="Datagram Transport Layer Security"/>
<link wikidata="Q466" start="25741" end="25755" title="World Wide Web" label="World Wide Web"/>
<link wikidata="Q35127" start="25774" end="25781" title="website" label="website"/>
<link wikidata="Q6368" start="25788" end="25799" title="web browser" label="web browser"/>
<link wikidata="Q44484" start="25887" end="25892" title="HTTPS" label="HTTPS"/>
<link wikidata="Q6590262" start="26070" end="26097" title="List of Microsoft operating systems" label="Microsoft operating systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q13733263" start="26723" end="26743" title="Internet Explorer 11" label="Internet Explorer 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q20023017" start="26764" end="26783" title="Windows 10 editions" label="Windows 10 editions"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26915" end="26928" title="#POODLE attack" label="POODLE attack"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27512" end="27522" title="History of Firefox#Version 38–44" label="version 39"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27605" end="27615" title="History of Firefox#Version 31–37" label="version 34"/>
<link wikidata="Q41242" start="27930" end="27935" title="Opera (web browser)" label="Opera"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28515" end="28526" title="#RC4 attacks" label="RC4 attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q11215" start="28843" end="28852" title="Windows 7" label="Windows 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q5046" start="28876" end="28885" title="Windows 8" label="Windows 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q15282750" start="29045" end="29062" title="Windows Phone 8.1" label="Windows Phone 8.1"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29216" end="29228" title="#FREAK" label="FREAK attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q2846919" start="29266" end="29277" title="Android Ice Cream Sandwich" label="Android 4.0"/>
<link wikidata="Q506883" start="29682" end="29711" title="free and open-source software" label="free and open-source software"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052790" start="29714" end="29723" title="BoringSSL" label="BoringSSL"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948409" start="29814" end="29819" title="Botan (programming library)" label="Botan"/>
<link wikidata="Q17083990" start="29875" end="29880" title="BSAFE" label="BSAFE"/>
<link wikidata="Q15777" start="29952" end="29953" title="C (programming language)" label="C"/>
<link wikidata="Q17083990" start="29999" end="30004" title="BSAFE" label="BSAFE"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041302" start="30063" end="30067" title="Java Secure Socket Extension" label="JSSE"/>
<link wikidata="Q309604" start="30116" end="30124" title="cryptlib" label="cryptlib"/>
<link wikidata="Q487378" start="30205" end="30211" title="Delphi (programming language)" label="Delphi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4041519" start="30249" end="30253" title="Internet Direct" label="Indy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052790" start="30269" end="30276" title="OpenSSL" label="OpenSSL"/>
<link wikidata="Q1533305" start="30327" end="30333" title="GnuTLS" label="GnuTLS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041302" start="30374" end="30402" title="Java Secure Socket Extension" label="Java Secure Socket Extension"/>
<link wikidata="Q251" start="30415" end="30419" title="Java (programming language)" label="Java"/>
<link wikidata="Q16590706" start="30469" end="30477" title="LibreSSL" label="LibreSSL"/>
<link wikidata="Q6787839" start="30518" end="30527" title="MatrixSSL" label="MatrixSSL"/>
<link wikidata="Q7208994" start="30561" end="30569" title="Mbed TLS" label="Mbed TLS"/>
<link wikidata="Q7000904" start="30682" end="30707" title="Network Security Services" label="Network Security Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q5425847" start="30709" end="30717" title="FIPS 140" label="FIPS 140"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052790" start="30749" end="30756" title="OpenSSL" label="OpenSSL"/>
<link wikidata="Q4049250" start="30816" end="30824" title="Security Support Provider Interface" label="Schannel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="30859" end="30876" title="Microsoft Windows" label="Microsoft Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q5155792" start="30902" end="30918" title="Secure Transport" label="Secure Transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q14116" start="30961" end="30965" title="OS X" label="OS X"/>
<link wikidata="Q48493" start="30970" end="30973" title="iOS" label="iOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q5197351" start="31002" end="31009" title="wolfSSL" label="wolfSSL"/>
<link wikidata="Q127992" start="31126" end="31129" title="Association for Computing Machinery" label="ACM"/>
<link wikidata="Q5157579" start="31130" end="31180" title="computer security conference" label="conference on computer and communications security"/>
<link wikidata="Q160453" start="31827" end="31856" title="Simple Mail Transfer Protocol" label="Simple Mail Transfer Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q274758" start="31917" end="31939" title="public key certificate" label="public key certificate"/>
<link wikidata="Q170963" start="32050" end="32053" title="virtual private network" label="VPN"/>
<link wikidata="Q509075" start="32078" end="32085" title="OpenVPN" label="OpenVPN"/>
<link wikidata="Q15978834" start="32090" end="32101" title="OpenConnect" label="OpenConnect"/>
<link wikidata="Q210214" start="32413" end="32418" title="IPsec" label="IPsec"/>
<link wikidata="Q11182" start="32486" end="32489" title="network address translation" label="NAT"/>
<link wikidata="Q191018" start="32617" end="32644" title="Session Initiation Protocol" label="Session Initiation Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q81945" start="32771" end="32775" title="Voice over IP" label="VoIP"/>
<link wikidata="Q44484" start="33269" end="33274" title="https" label="https"/>
<link wikidata="Q554830" start="33494" end="33518" title="man-in-the-middle attack" label="man-in-the-middle attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q18347934" start="33642" end="33660" title="client certificate" label="client certificate"/>
<link wikidata="Q20707942" start="34104" end="34120" title="downgrade attack" label="downgrade attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q127992" start="34812" end="34815" title="Association for Computing Machinery" label="ACM"/>
<link wikidata="Q5157579" start="34816" end="34866" title="Computer security conference" label="conference on computer and communications security"/>
<link wikidata="Q554830" start="35189" end="35206" title="man-in-the-middle" label="man-in-the-middle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052790" start="35256" end="35263" title="OpenSSL" label="OpenSSL"/>
<link wikidata="Q94" start="35283" end="35290" title="Android (operating system)" label="Android"/>
<link wikidata="Q35773" start="35313" end="35319" title="Safari (web browser)" label="Safari"/>
<link wikidata="Q11287" start="35468" end="35484" title="security exploit" label="security exploit"/>
<link wikidata="Q16240758" start="35549" end="35573" title="Arms Export Control Act" label="&amp;quot;export-grade&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q623447" start="35582" end="35596" title="Diffie–Hellman key exchange" label="Diffie–Hellman"/>
<link wikidata="Q623447" start="35809" end="35836" title="Diffie–Hellman key exchange" label="Diffie–Hellman key exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q22985864" start="35882" end="35894" title="DROWN attack" label="DROWN attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q865817" start="36700" end="36711" title="Java applet" label="Java applet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031810" start="36723" end="36741" title="same origin policy" label="same origin policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q154021" start="36772" end="36793" title="cipher block chaining" label="cipher block chaining"/>
<link wikidata="Q11287" start="37040" end="37048" title="exploit (computer security)" label="exploits"/>
<link wikidata="Q631425" start="37095" end="37108" title="vulnerability (computing)" label="vulnerability"/>
<link wikidata="Q7185796" start="37145" end="37160" title="Phillip Rogaway" label="Phillip Rogaway"/>
<link wikidata="Q846955" start="37315" end="37318" title="RC4" label="RC4"/>
<link wikidata="Q7000904" start="37674" end="37677" title="Network Security Services" label="NSS"/>
<link wikidata="Q4071928" start="37711" end="37718" title="Attack (computing)" label="attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q698" start="37735" end="37750" title="Mozilla Firefox" label="Mozilla Firefox"/>
<link wikidata="Q777" start="37755" end="37768" title="Google Chrome" label="Google Chrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q11288" start="37792" end="37802" title="web server" label="web server"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283" start="37894" end="37903" title="Microsoft" label="Microsoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q4049250" start="38050" end="38058" title="Schannel" label="Schannel"/>
<link wikidata="Q11215" start="38215" end="38224" title="Windows 7" label="Windows 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q5046" start="38226" end="38235" title="Windows 8" label="Windows 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q11233" start="38240" end="38262" title="Windows Server 2008" label="Windows Server 2008 R2"/>
<link wikidata="Q312" start="38307" end="38312" title="Apple Inc." label="Apple"/>
<link wikidata="Q13426234" start="38399" end="38413" title="OS X Mavericks" label="OS X Mavericks"/>
<link wikidata="Q3084134" start="38548" end="38553" title="CRIME" label="CRIME"/>
<link wikidata="Q2493" start="38633" end="38649" title="data compression" label="data compression"/>
<link wikidata="Q178995" start="38717" end="38738" title="authentication cookie" label="authentication cookie"/>
<link wikidata="Q638079" start="38774" end="38791" title="session hijacking" label="session hijacking"/>
<link wikidata="Q621530" start="39022" end="39026" title="SPDY" label="SPDY"/>
<link wikidata="Q8777" start="39030" end="39034" title="HTTP" label="HTTP"/>
<link wikidata="Q3495340" start="39162" end="39178" title="HTTP compression" label="HTTP compression"/>
<link wikidata="Q15700545" start="39425" end="39431" title="BREACH" label="BREACH"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981730" start="40342" end="40365" title="chosen-plaintext attack" label="chosen-plaintext attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q7123320" start="40510" end="40531" title="padding oracle attack" label="padding oracle attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q6698050" start="40580" end="40601" title="Lucky Thirteen attack" label="Lucky Thirteen attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q134983" start="40666" end="40676" title="triple DES" label="triple DES"/>
<link wikidata="Q11248" start="40754" end="40764" title="Windows XP" label="Windows XP"/>
<link wikidata="Q846955" start="40829" end="40832" title="RC4" label="RC4"/>
<link wikidata="Q154021" start="41519" end="41540" title="CBC mode of operation" label="CBC mode of operation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7123320" start="41570" end="41584" title="padding oracle attack" label="padding attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q20707942" start="42152" end="42175" title="version rollback attack" label="version rollback attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q846955" start="42416" end="42419" title="RC4" label="RC4"/>
<link wikidata="Q206494" start="42669" end="42674" title="BEAST (computer security)" label="BEAST"/>
<link wikidata="Q2141768" start="43264" end="43270" title="USENIX" label="USENIX"/>
<link wikidata="Q131598139" start="44015" end="44037" title="Microsoft Edge Legacy" label="Microsoft Edge [Legacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q13733263" start="44040" end="44060" title="Internet Explorer 11" label="Internet Explorer 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q698" start="44082" end="44089" title="Firefox" label="Firefox"/>
<link wikidata="Q777" start="44095" end="44101" title="Google Chrome" label="Chrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q8803" start="44363" end="44366" title="Transmission Control Protocol" label="TCP"/>
<link wikidata="Q9334" start="44596" end="44601" title="Gmail" label="Gmail"/>
<link wikidata="Q219136" start="44606" end="44613" title="outlook.com" label="Hotmail"/>
<link wikidata="Q154021" start="45659" end="45680" title="Cipher Block Chaining" label="Cipher Block Chaining"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747573" start="45798" end="45830" title="Web Proxy Autodiscovery Protocol" label="Web Proxy Autodiscovery Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q615485" start="46525" end="46540" title="birthday attack" label="birthday attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q554830" start="46554" end="46578" title="man-in-the-middle attack" label="man-in-the-middle attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q2005" start="46607" end="46617" title="JavaScript" label="JavaScript"/>
<link wikidata="Q16244272" start="46870" end="46880" title="Heartbleed" label="Heartbleed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052790" start="46969" end="46976" title="OpenSSL" label="OpenSSL"/>
<link wikidata="Q201339" start="47110" end="47122" title="Public-key cryptography" label="private keys"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065865" start="47377" end="47396" title="X.509" label="public certificates"/>
<link wikidata="Q16848739" start="47699" end="47715" title="buffer over-read" label="buffer over-read"/>
<link wikidata="Q5216580" start="47841" end="47862" title="Daniel Bleichenbacher" label="Daniel Bleichenbacher"/>
<link wikidata="Q19326099" start="48251" end="48260" title="superfish" label="superfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q22907861" start="48746" end="48774" title="potentially unwanted program" label="potentially unwanted program"/>
<link wikidata="Q328840" start="49000" end="49009" title="Visa Inc." label="Visa Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q1749235" start="49243" end="49249" title="cryptographic nonce" label="nonces"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="49310" end="49323" title="#TLS handshake" label="TLS handshake"/>
<link wikidata="Q4778915" start="49478" end="49488" title="Cloudflare" label="Cloudflare"/>
<link wikidata="Q28836333" start="49600" end="49610" title="Cloudbleed" label="Cloudbleed"/>
<link wikidata="Q623447" start="50552" end="50579" title="Diffie–Hellman key exchange" label="Diffie–Hellman key exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q9334" start="50669" end="50674" title="Gmail" label="Gmail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052790" start="50716" end="50723" title="OpenSSL" label="OpenSSL"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="51275" end="51294" title="#Resumed TLS handshake" label="TLS session tickets"/>
<link wikidata="Q9334" start="52008" end="52013" title="Gmail" label="Gmail"/>
<link wikidata="Q9344" start="52034" end="52045" title="Google Docs" label="Google Docs"/>
<link wikidata="Q918" start="52111" end="52118" title="Twitter" label="Twitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q44484" start="52351" end="52356" title="HTTPS" label="HTTPS"/>
<link wikidata="Q11189" start="52616" end="52633" title="transparent proxy" label="transparent proxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q189900" start="52832" end="52852" title="information security" label="information security"/>
<link wikidata="Q485" start="52995" end="53009" title="computer virus" label="computer virus"/>
<link wikidata="Q14001" start="53022" end="53029" title="malware" label="malware"/>
<link wikidata="Q554830" start="53658" end="53682" title="man-in-the-middle attack" label="man-in-the-middle attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052621" start="54101" end="54128" title="message authentication code" label="message authentication code"/>
<link wikidata="Q548838" start="55582" end="55591" title="Handshake (computing)" label="handshake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092688" start="55821" end="55833" title="cipher suite" label="cipher suite"/>
<link wikidata="Q7021111" start="55990" end="56028" title="Application-Layer Protocol Negotiation" label="Application-Layer Protocol Negotiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q132364" start="56077" end="56086" title="communications protocol" label="protocols"/>
<link wikidata="Q739120" start="56096" end="56102" title="HTTP/2" label="HTTP/2"/>
<link wikidata="Q623447" start="56895" end="56898" title="Diffie–Hellman key exchange" label="DHE"/>
<link wikidata="Q3512728" start="56900" end="56905" title="ECDHE" label="ECDHE"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755775" start="57468" end="57479" title="session key" label="session key"/>
<link wikidata="Q1663550" start="57489" end="57491" title="initialization vector" label="IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q327675" start="57493" end="57513" title="symmetric encryption" label="symmetric encryption"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052621" start="57519" end="57522" title="message authentication code" label="MAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2115856" start="57682" end="57694" title="pseudorandomness" label="pseudorandom"/>
<link wikidata="Q6944186" start="59300" end="59321" title="mutual authentication" label="mutual authentication"/>
<link wikidata="Q568494" start="63114" end="63128" title="single sign-on" label="single sign-on"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057712" start="63275" end="63291" title="FTPS" label="FTP over TLS/SSL"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052790" start="68197" end="68204" title="OpenSSL" label="OpenSSL"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052621" start="69725" end="69752" title="message authentication code" label="message authentication code"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968605" start="72795" end="72802" title="SHA-256" label="SHA-256"/>
<link wikidata="Q1669397" start="72809" end="72813" title="HMAC" label="HMAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q13414952" start="72832" end="72837" title="SHA-1" label="SHA-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q185235" start="72867" end="72870" title="MD5" label="MD5"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435358" start="73180" end="73188" title="STARTTLS" label="STARTTLS"/>
<link wikidata="Q588365" start="73255" end="73280" title="Virtual domain" label="name-based virtual server"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065865" start="73700" end="73705" title="X.509" label="X.509"/>
<link wikidata="Q274758" start="73760" end="73780" title="wildcard certificate" label="wildcard certificate"/>
<link wikidata="Q906028" start="74285" end="74307" title="Server Name Indication" label="Server Name Indication"/>
<link wikidata="Q5636136" start="74627" end="74650" title="HTTP/1.1 Upgrade header" label="HTTP/1.1 Upgrade header"/>
<link wikidata="Q61694" start="74738" end="74748" title="URI scheme" label="URI scheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q7021111" start="74892" end="74930" title="Application-Layer Protocol Negotiation" label="Application-Layer Protocol Negotiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q14831675" start="74984" end="75012" title="Bullrun (decryption program)" label="Bullrun (decryption program)"/>
<link wikidata="Q196776" start="75090" end="75111" title="Certificate authority" label="Certificate authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q17080777" start="75113" end="75137" title="Certificate Transparency" label="Certificate Transparency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172260" start="75139" end="75151" title="Datagram Transport Layer Security" label="Datagram TLS"/>
<link wikidata="Q97356398" start="75160" end="75180" title="Delegated credential" label="Delegated credential"/>
<link wikidata="Q2438540" start="75182" end="75212" title="HTTP Strict Transport Security" label="HTTP Strict Transport Security"/>
<link wikidata="Q17062104" start="75221" end="75234" title="Key ring file" label="Key ring file"/>
<link wikidata="Q7246062" start="75236" end="75269" title="Private Communications Technology" label="Private Communications Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7265601" start="75322" end="75326" title="QUIC" label="QUIC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7455608" start="75570" end="75595" title="Server-Gated Cryptography" label="Server-Gated Cryptography"/>
<link wikidata="Q4050762" start="75597" end="75605" title="tcpcrypt" label="tcpcrypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172260" start="75607" end="75640" title="Datagram Transport Layer Security" label="Datagram Transport Layer Security"/>
<link wikidata="Q7393020" start="75642" end="75658" title="TLS acceleration" label="TLS acceleration"/>
<link wikidata="Q212971" start="76574" end="76578" title="Request for Comments" label="RFCs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5519271" start="76782" end="76801" title="Galois/Counter Mode" label="Galois Counter Mode"/>
<link wikidata="Q906028" start="77227" end="77249" title="Server Name Indication" label="Server Name Indication"/>
<link wikidata="Q7072382" start="77254" end="77267" title="OCSP stapling" label="OCSP stapling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227452" start="77284" end="77291" title="OpenPGP" label="OpenPGP"/>
<link wikidata="Q840633" start="77446" end="77450" title="ARIA (cipher)" label="ARIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7021111" start="78019" end="78057" title="Application-Layer Protocol Negotiation" label="Application-Layer Protocol Negotiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048911" start="78848" end="78875" title="Elliptic Curve Cryptography" label="Elliptic Curve Cryptography"/>
<link wikidata="Q576988" start="79166" end="79188" title="Secure Remote Password protocol" label="Secure Remote Password"/>
<link wikidata="Q7670611" start="79246" end="79253" title="TLS-SRP" label="TLS-SRP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227452" start="79375" end="79382" title="OpenPGP" label="OpenPGP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146165" start="79473" end="79476" title="Extensible Authentication Protocol" label="EAP"/>
<link wikidata="Q506053" start="79806" end="79814" title="kerberos (protocol)" label="Kerberos"/>
<link wikidata="Q5636136" start="80099" end="80128" title="HTTP/1.1 Upgrade header" label="Upgrade mechanism in HTTP/1.1"/>
<link wikidata="Q190746" start="80797" end="80825" title="Advanced Encryption Standard" label="Advanced Encryption Standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2712" start="81207" end="81214" title="DEFLATE" label="DEFLATE"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028476" start="81352" end="81360" title="Camellia (cipher)" label="Camellia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061548" start="81437" end="81441" title="SEED" label="SEED"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057712" start="81515" end="81527" title="FTPS" label="FTP with TLS"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="187816" wikidata="Q1091034" url="?curid=187816" title="Indian Motorcycle">
<text>Indian Motorcycle (or &quot;Indian&quot;) is an American brand of motorcycles owned and produced by automotive manufacturer Polaris Inc.

Originally produced from 1901 to 1953 in Springfield, Massachusetts, Hendee Manufacturing Company initially produced the motorcycles, but the name was changed to the Indian Company in 1923. In 2011, Polaris Industries purchased the &quot;Indian&quot; motorcycle marque and moved operations from North Carolina, merging them into their existing facilities in Minnesota and Iowa. Since August 2013, Polaris has designed, engineered, and manufactured many lines of motorcycles under the Indian Motorcycle brand reflecting Indian&#x27;s traditional styling.

The Indian Motorcycle factory team took the first three places in the 1911 Isle of Man Tourist Trophy. During the 1910s, Indian Motorcycle became the largest manufacturer of motorcycles in the world. Indian Motocycle&#x27;s most popular models were the Scout, made from 1920 to 1946, and the Chief, made from 1922 until 1953, when the Indian made Manufacturing Company was declared bankrupt. Various organizations tried to perpetuate the Indian Motorcycle brand name in subsequent years, with limited success.

==History==

===Early years – Hendee and Hedstrom===


The &quot;Indian Co.&quot; was founded as the Hendee Manufacturing Company by George M. Hendee in 1897 to manufacture bicycles. These were initially badged as &quot;Silver King&quot; and &quot;Silver Queen&quot; brands but the name &quot;American Indian&quot;, quickly shortened to just &quot;Indian&quot;, was adopted by Hendee from 1898 onwards because it gave better product recognition in export markets. Oscar Hedstrom joined in 1900. Both Hendee and Hedstrom were former bicycle racers and manufacturers, and after building three prototypes in Middletown, Connecticut, they teamed up to produce a motorcycle with a 1.75 bhp, single-cylinder engine in Hendee&#x27;s home town of Springfield. The motorcycle was successful and sales increased dramatically during the next decade.

The first Indian prototype was then built and completed on May 25, 1901, by Hedström at the old Worcester Cycle Manufacturing Company in Middletown, Connecticut, and the first public demonstration was held on Cross Street in Springfield, Massachusetts at 12:00 noon on Saturday, June 1, 1901.

In 1901, a prototype and two production units of the diamond-framed Indian Single were successfully designed, built and tested. The first Indian motorcycles, having chain drives and streamlined styling, were sold to the public in 1902. In 1903, Indian&#x27;s co-founder and chief engineer Oscar Hedstrom set the world motorcycle speed record of 56 mph. In 1904 the company introduced the deep red color that would become Indian&#x27;s trademark. Annual production of Indian motorcycles then exceeded 500, rising to a peak of 32,000 in 1913. The engines of the Indian Single were built by the Aurora Firm in Illinois under license from the Hendee Mfg. Co. until 1906.

Aurora produced engines under license for Indian from about 1901 to 1907. Aurora was also allowed to sell Indian design engines to third parties and pay Indian a fee. After 1907, Aurora could make its own complete motorcycles, which it did as Thor, and Indian began manufacturing its own engines.

====Competitive successes====

In 1905, Indian built its first V-twin factory racer and in following years made a strong showing in racing and record-breaking. In 1907, the company introduced the first street version V-twin and a roadster styled after the factory racer. The roadster can be distinguished from the racers by the presence of twist grip linkages. One of the firm&#x27;s most famous riders was Erwin &quot;Cannonball&quot; Baker, who set many long-distance records. In 1914, he rode an Indian across America, from San Diego to New York, in a record 11 days, 12 hours and ten minutes. Baker&#x27;s mount in subsequent years was the Powerplus, a side-valve V-twin, which was introduced in 1916. Its 61ci (1000 cc), 42 degree V-twin engine was more powerful and quieter than previous designs, giving a top speed of 60 mph (96 km/h). The Powerplus was highly successful, both as a roadster and as the basis for racing bikes. It remained in production with few changes until 1924.
Competition success played a big part in Indian&#x27;s rapid growth and spurred technical innovation as well. One of the American firm&#x27;s best early results came in the Isle of Man TT in 1911, when Indian riders Oliver Cyril Godfrey, Franklin and Moorehouse finished first, second and third. Indian star Jake DeRosier set several speed records, both in America and at Brooklands in Britain, and won an estimated 900 races on dirt and board tracks. He left Indian for Excelsior and died in 1913, aged 33, of injuries sustained in a board track race crash with Charles &quot;Fearless&quot; Balke, who later became Indian&#x27;s top rider. Work at the Indian factory stopped as DeRosier&#x27;s funeral procession passed.

Oscar Hedstrom left Indian in 1913 after disagreements with the board of directors regarding dubious practices to inflate the company&#x27;s stock value. George Hendee resigned in 1916.

===Lightweights 1916–1919===
Indian introduced the 221 cc single cylinder two-stroke Model K &quot;Featherweight&quot; in 1916. The Model K had an open cradle frame with the engine as a stressed member and a pivoting front fork that had been used earlier on single-cylinder motorcycles but had mostly been replaced on other Indian motorcycles by a leaf-sprung trailing link fork.

The Model K was manufactured for one year and was replaced in 1917 by the Model O. The Model O had a four-stroke flat-twin engine and a new frame, but retained the pivoting fork at the front. The Model O was manufactured until 1919.

===World War I===
As the US entered World War I, Indian sold most of its Powerplus line in 1917 and 1918 to the United States government, starving its network of dealers. This blow to domestic availability of the motorcycles led to a loss of dealers from which Indian never quite recovered. While the motorcycles were popular in the military, post-war demand was then taken up by other manufacturers to whom many of the previously loyal Indian dealers turned. While Indian shared in the business boom of the 1920s, it had lost its Number One position in the US market to Harley-Davidson.

===Inter-war era===

The Scout and Chief V-twins, introduced in the early 1920s, became the Springfield firm&#x27;s most successful models. Designed by Charles Franklin, the middleweight Scout and larger Chief shared a 42-degree V-twin engine layout. Both models gained a reputation for strength and reliability.

In 1930, Indian merged with Du Pont Motors. DuPont Motors founder E. Paul DuPont ceased production of duPont automobiles and concentrated the company&#x27;s resources on Indian. DuPont&#x27;s paint industry connections resulted in no fewer than 24 color options in 1934. Models of that era had Indian&#x27;s famous war bonnet logo on the gas tank. Indian&#x27;s huge Springfield factory was known as the Wigwam, and native American imagery was much used in advertising.

In 1940, Indian sold nearly as many motorcycles as its major rival, Harley-Davidson. During this time, Indian also manufactured other products such as aircraft engines, bicycles, boat motors and air conditioners.

====Scout====
The Indian Scout was built from 1920 through 1949. It rivaled the Chief as Indian&#x27;s most important model.

The Scout was introduced for 1920. Designed by Charles B. Franklin, the Scout had its gearbox bolted to the engine and was driven by gears instead of by belt or chain. The engine originally displaced ; the Scout 45, with a displacement of , became available in 1927 to compete with the Excelsior Super X. A front brake became standard on the original Scout early in 1928.

In 1928, the Scout and Scout 45 were replaced by the Model 101 Scout. Another Franklin design, the 101 Scout had a longer wheelbase and lower seat height than the original. The 101 Scout was well known for its handling.

The 101 Scout was replaced by the Standard Scout for 1932. The Standard Scout shared its frame with the Chief and the Four; as a result, the Standard Scout was heavier and less nimble than the 101.

A second line of Scouts was introduced for 1933. Based on the frame of the discontinued Indian Prince single-cylinder motorcycle, the Motoplane used the 45 cubic inch engine from the Standard Scout while the Pony Scout had a reduced displacement of . In 1934 the Motoplane was replaced by the Sport Scout with a heavier but stiffer frame better able to withstand the power of the 45 cubic inch engine, while the Pony Scout, later renamed the Junior Scout, was continued with the Prince/Motoplane frame. Between the introduction of the Sport Scout in 1934 and the discontinuation of the Standard Scout in 1937 there were three Scout models (Pony/Junior, Standard, and Sport) with three different frames. The Sport Scout and the Junior Scout were continued until civilian production was interrupted in early 1942.

====Chief====

Introduced in 1922, the Indian Chief had a engine based on the Powerplus engine; a year later the engine was enlarged to . Numerous improvements were made to the Chief over the years, including the provision of a front brake in 1928.

In 1940, all models were fitted with the large skirted fenders that became an Indian trademark, and the Chief gained a new sprung frame that was superior to rival Harley&#x27;s unsprung rear end. The 1940s Chiefs were handsome and comfortable machines, capable of in standard form and over when tuned, although their increased weight hampered acceleration.

The 1948 Chief had a 74 cubic inch engine, hand shift and foot clutch. While one handlebar grip controlled the throttle the other was a manual spark advance.

In 1950, the V-twin engine was enlarged to and telescopic forks were adopted. But Indian&#x27;s financial problems meant that few bikes were built. Production of the Chief ended in 1953.

====Four====
Indian purchased the Ace Motor Corporation in 1927 and moved production of the 4-cylinder Ace motorcycle to Springfield. It was marketed as the Indian Ace in 1927.

In 1928, the Indian Ace was replaced by the Indian 401, a development of the Ace designed by Arthur O. Lemon, former Chief Engineer at Ace, who was employed by Indian when they bought Ace. The Ace&#x27;s leading-link forks and central coil spring were replaced by Indian&#x27;s trailing-link forks and quarter-elliptic leaf spring.

In 1929, the Indian 401 was replaced by the Indian 402 which received a stronger twin-downtube frame based on the 101 Scout frame and a sturdier five-bearing crankshaft than the Ace, which only had a three-bearing crankshaft.

Despite the low demand for luxury motorcycles during the Great Depression, Indian not only continued production of the Four, but continued to develop the motorcycle. One of the less popular versions of the Four was the &quot;upside down&quot; engine on the 1936-37 models. While earlier (and later) Fours had inlet-over-exhaust (IOE) cylinder heads with overhead inlet valves and side exhaust valves, the 1936-1937 Indian Four had a unique EOI cylinder head, with the positions reversed. In theory, this would improve fuel vaporization, and the new engine was more powerful. However, the new system made the cylinder head, and the rider&#x27;s inseam, very hot. This, along with an exhaust valvetrain that required frequent adjustment, caused sales to drop. The addition of dual carburetors in 1937 did not revive interest. The design was returned to the original configuration in 1938.

Like the Chief, the Four was given large, skirted fenders and plunger rear suspension in 1940. In 1941, the 18-inch wheels of previous models were replaced with 16-inch wheels with balloon tires.

The Indian Four was discontinued in 1942.
Recognition of the historical significance of the 1940 four-cylinder model was made with an August 2006 United States Postal Service 39-cent stamp issue, part of a four-panel set entitled &quot;American Motorcycles&quot;. A 1941 model is part of the Smithsonian Motorcycle Collection on display at the National Museum of American History. Single examples of both the 1931 and 1935 Indian Fours are in the ground vehicle collection of the Old Rhinebeck Aerodrome.

===World War II===
During World War II, Chiefs, Scouts, and Junior Scouts were used in small numbers for various purposes by the United States Army and were also used extensively by British and other Commonwealth military services, under Lend Lease programs. However, none of these Indian models could unseat the Harley-Davidson WLA as the motorcycle mainly used by the US military.

An early war military design by Indian was based on the Scout 640 (and was often compared to Harley-Davidson&#x27;s WLA), but was either too expensive or heavy, or a combination of both. Indian&#x27;s later offering, the 741B was not selected to gain a US Military contract. Indian also made a version based on the Chief, the 344. Approximately 1,000 experimental versions mounting the 750 cc motor sideways and using shaft drive, as on a modern Moto Guzzi, the 841, were also tried.

Indian made a prototype of a lightweight bike, called the M1 light motorcycle for the World War 2 Airborne forces. The lightweight design could be airdropped with the troops. The design never made it past prototype.

====841====

During World War II, the US Army requested experimental motorcycle designs suitable for desert fighting. In response Indian designed and built the 841. Approximately 1,056 models were built.

The Indian 841 was heavily inspired by the BMW R71 motorcycle (which, though not used by the German Army later was the basis for the Soviet M72, which is the basis for the Ural and Chiang Jiang motorcycle) as was its competitor, the Harley-Davidson XA. However, unlike the XA, the 841 was not a copy of the R71. Although its tubular frame, plunger rear suspension, and shaft drive were similar to the BMW&#x27;s, the 841 was different from the BMW in several aspects, most noticeably so with its 90-degree longitudinal-crankshaft V-twin engine and girder fork.

The Indian 841 and the Harley-Davidson XA were both tested by the Army, but neither motorcycle was adopted for wider military use. It was determined that the Jeep was more suitable for the roles and missions for which these motorcycles had been intended.

===Post-war decline and demise===

In 1945, a group headed by Ralph B. Rogers purchased a controlling interest of the company. On November 1, 1945, duPont formally turned the operations of Indian over to Rogers. Under Rogers&#x27; control, Indian resumed production with only one model, the Chief, for 1946 and &#x27;47. 1947 was also the year the Indian-head fender light, also known as the &quot;war bonnet&quot;, was introduced. In 1948, they added two rebadged import models, the Czech built CZ125b, and the Brockhouse Engineering produced Corgi Scooter. The Scooter, a novel 100cc vehicle developed for paratroopers during World War II, was rebadged the Papoose. Indian also produced a limited number (appx. 50) 648 model Scouts for racing.

In 1949, they discontinued the Chief, as they began domestic manufacture of two lightweight motorcycles, the single-cylinder 220 cc 149 Arrow and the twin-cylinder 440 cc 249 Scout. The Scout was offered in various trim levels. The initial shipment of lightweights developed a reputation for unreliability, often associated with a rush to market. Later shipments were reported by publications of the time to have resolved most reliability issues by the following year.

The 1950 lineup brought back the Chief, with telescopic forks. It also saw the introduction of the twin-cylinder 500 cc Warrior model, which received both a standard and high pipe sporting TT trim. On the Corporate side, Rogers would step down as CEO of Indian to take employment at Texas Instruments. Replacing Rogers was hand-picked successor John Brockhouse, President and owner of Brockhouse Engineering. Unfortunately, new management did not bring new fortune, and production of all models wound down in 1952, with most 1953 Chiefs built from remaining parts. All product manufacturing ended in 1953.

===Corporate successors===
====Brockhouse Engineering (1953–1960)====

As Rogers liquidated Indian in 1953, Brockhouse Engineering acquired the rights to the Indian name. The Indian Sales Corp continued to support the rebranded Papoose Scooter (which would cease production in 1954) and the Brave, a European-styled 250 cc lightweight bike with a four-stroke side valve engine. All other models were abandoned after reducing inventory. The Brave had been designed prior to the acquisition, and produced by an English subsidiary owned by Brockhouse. Indian had imported these outsourced models since 1951, when Brockhouse was then-President of Indian under Rogers Ownership. Outside these two models that directly benefitted Brockhouses umbrella industries, ISC also sold a variety of rebadged imports, including Vincent, AJS, and Matchless from various dates until solidifying their import models line-up to a single manufacturer.

From 1955 through 1960, they imported English Royal Enfield motorcycles, mildly customized them in the United States, and sold them under Indian branding. Almost all Royal Enfield models had a corresponding Indian model in the US. The models were Indian Chief, Trailblazer, Apache (all three were 700 cc twins), Tomahawk (500 cc twin), Woodsman (500 cc single), Westerner (500 cc single), Hounds Arrow (250 cc single), Fire Arrow (250 cc single), Lance (150 cc 2-stroke single) and a 3-wheeled Patrol Car (350 cc single).

====Associated Motor Cycles (1960–1963)====
In 1960, the Indian name was bought by AMC of the UK. Royal Enfield being their competition, they abruptly stopped all Enfield-based Indian models except the 700 cc Chief. In 1962 AMC, facing financial issues, withdrew from all marketing of the Indian brand name, as the company chose to focus exclusively on their Norton and Matchless brands.

====Floyd Clymer (1963–1970)====
From the 1960s, entrepreneur Floyd Clymer began using the Indian name. He attached it to imported motorcycles, commissioned to Italian ex-pilot and engineer Leopoldo Tartarini, owner of Italjet Moto, to manufacture Minarelli-engined 50 cc minibikes under the Indian Papoose name. These were successful so Clymer commissioned Tartarini to build full-size Indian motorcycles based on the &quot;Italjet Griffon&quot; design, fitted with Royal Enfield Interceptor 750 cc parallel-twin engines.

A further development was the &quot;Indian Velo 500&quot;, a limited-production run using a Velocette single-cylinder engine with various Norton, and Royal Enfield drivetrain components, and Italian Chassis parts. This included a lightweight frame from the Italjet company, Marzocchi front forks with Grimeca front hub having a twin-leading shoe brake, Borrani aluminium rims and quickly-detachable tank and seat, resulting in a weight-saving of compared to the traditional Velocette Venom.

The project ended abruptly due to Clymer&#x27;s death and the failure of Velocette, with 200 machines shipped to US and a further 50 remaining in Italy, which were bought by London Velocette dealer Geoff Dodkin. When roadtesting, UK monthly magazine &quot;Motorcycle Sport&quot; described it as &quot;British engineering and Italian styling in a package originally intended for the American market&quot;, reporting that Dodkin would supply his bikes with either a standard Venom engine specification, or, at higher cost, a Thruxton version.

====Alan Newman ownership (1970–1977)====
After Clymer&#x27;s death in 1970 his widow sold the alleged Indian trademark to Los Angeles attorney Alan Newman, who continued to import minicycles made by ItalJet, and later manufactured in a wholly owned assembly plant located in Taipei (Taiwan). Several models with engine displacement between 50 cc and 175 cc were produced, mostly fitted with Italian two-stroke engines made either by Italjet or Franco Morini.

In 1974, Newman planned to revive large-capacity machines as the &quot;Indian 900&quot;, using a Ducati 860 cc engine and commissioned Leo Tartarini of Italjet to produce a prototype. The project failed, leaving the prototype as the only survivor.

Sales of Newman&#x27;s Indians were dwindling by 1975. The company was declared bankrupt in January 1977.

====American Moped Associates &amp; DMCA (1977–1984)====
The Indian Trademark was purchased from bankruptcy court for $10,000 in late 1977 by American Moped Associates, who would employ the Taiwanese manufacturing plant to make a new moped using licensed patents from Honda&#x27;s discontinued PC50-K1. The result was the &quot;Indian AMI-50 Chief&quot;. This moped was offered from 1978 until late 1983, as the trademark was purchased by Carmen DeLeone&#x27;s DMCA (Derbi) group in 1982, who discounted the remaining moped stock, and discontinued manufacture. Derbi-Manco would offer Badge engineered go-carts utilizing the &#x27;4-stroke Indian&#x27; moniker, before the Indian name disappeared from all motorized vehicles in 1984. The right to the brand name then passed through a succession of owners and became a subject of competing claims in the late 1980s.

====Other attempts at reviving the marque (1984–1999)====
By 1992, the Clymer claim to the trademark had been transferred to Indian Motocycle Manufacturing Co. Inc. of Berlin, a corporation headed by Philip S. Zanghi.

In June 1994, in Albuquerque, New Mexico, Wayne Baughman, president of Indian Motorcycle Manufacturing Incorporated, presented, started, and rode a prototype Indian Century V-Twin Chief. Baughman had made previous statements about building new motorcycles under the Indian brand but this was his first appearance with a working motorcycle.

Neither Zanghi nor Baughman began production of motorcycles. In August 1997, Zanghi was convicted of securities fraud, tax evasion, and money laundering.

In January 1998, Eller Industries was given permission to purchase the Indian copyright from the receivers of the previous owner. Eller Industries hired Roush Industries to design the engine for the motorcycle, and was negotiating with the Cow Creek Band of Umpqua Tribe of Indians to build a motorcycle factory on their tribal land. Three renderings, one each of a cruiser, a sport cruiser, and a sport bike, on frames specified by suspension designer James Parker, were shown to the motorcycling press in February 1998.

Eller Industries arranged a public unveiling of the cruiser prototype for November 1998, but was prevented from showing the prototype by a restraining order from the receiver, who said that Eller had failed to meet the terms of its obligations. The contract was withdrawn after the company missed its deadline to close the deal and could not agree with the receiver to an extension on the deadline. Other conditions, including payment of administrative costs and presenting a working prototype, were also not met by Eller Industries. Based on this, a Federal bankruptcy court in Denver, Colorado, allowed the sale of the trademark to IMCOA Licensing America Inc. in December 1998.

====Indian Motorcycle Company of America (1999–2003)====
The Indian Motorcycle Company of America was formed from the merger of nine companies, including manufacturer California Motorcycle Company, Inc. (CMC) and IMCOA Licensing America Inc., which was awarded the Indian trademark by the Federal District Court of Colorado in 1998. The new company began manufacturing motorcycles in 1999 at the former CMC&#x27;s facilities in Gilroy, California. The first &quot;Gilroy Indian&quot; model was a new design called the Chief. Scout and Spirit models were also manufactured from 2001. These bikes were initially made with off-the-shelf 88 cubic inch S&amp;S engines, but later used the Powerplus (bottlecap) engine design from 2002 to 2003. The Indian Motorcycle Corporation went into bankruptcy and ceased all production operations in Gilroy on September 19, 2003.

====Indian Motorcycle Company (2006-2011)====
On July 20, 2006, the newly formed Indian Motorcycle Company, owned largely by Stellican Limited, a London-based private equity firm, announced its new home in Kings Mountain, North Carolina, where it restarted the Indian motorcycle brand, manufacturing Indian Chief motorcycles in limited numbers, with a focus on exclusivity rather than performance. Starting out where the defunct Gilroy IMC operation left off in 2003, the &quot;Kings Mountain&quot; models were continuation models based on the new series of motorcycles developed in 1999. The 2009 Indian Chief incorporated a redesigned Powerplus V-twin powertrain with electronic closed-loop sequential-port fuel injection, and a charging system providing increased capacity for the electronic fuel injection.

====Polaris Acquisition (since 2011)====
In April 2011, Polaris Industries, the off-road and leisure vehicle maker and parent company of Victory Motorcycles, announced its intention to acquire Indian Motorcycle. Indian&#x27;s production facilities were moved to Spirit Lake, Iowa, where production began on August 5, 2011. In March 2013, Indian unveiled their new &quot;Thunder Stroke&quot; engine, and began to sell their newly designed motorcycles based on it in August 2013.

==Current production==
On August 3, 2013, Polaris announced three all-new Indian-branded motorcycles based on the traditional styling of the Indian marque, along with the Thunder Stroke 111 V-twin engine. The motor has a triple-cam design with a chain-driven center cam turning front and rear cams via gears, permitting parallel placement of the pushrods to give a similar appearance to older Indian designs. It is air cooled, with large traditional fins and an airbox in the cast aluminum frame. All Indians using the Thunder Stroke 111 engine share this aluminum frame design, though the wheelbase and front end rake vary depending on model. The integrated transmission is also gear-driven.

Since 2013, Indian has expanded its line up to five models, currently offered in 23 trim levels. Of these, twelve have the Thunderstroke 111 engine. Five offerings use the smaller engine displacement, liquid-cooled Scout engines. The Scout has four trims in its line featuring the engine, while the Scout 60 has its eponymous variant. Indian offers 3 distinctions of their FTR 1200, a sportier cycle introduced in 2019. And as of 2020, the Challenger Bagger featuring the all-new Indian PowerPlus liquid-cooled 60-degree V-twin has been introduced, with three variations.

===Chief Classic (2014–2018)===
The standard Chief Classic has the valanced fenders and the lighted &quot;war bonnet&quot; on the front fender. Cruise control, antilock braking system, keyless starting, and electronic fuel injection are standard on this and all other models. It has a six-speed transmission and manually-adjustable single-shock swingarm.

===Chief Vintage (2014–2020)===

The Indian Chief Vintage shares the chassis, drivetrain, and styling of the Chief Classic, and adds tan leather quick-release saddlebags, matching tan leather two-up seat, additional chrome trim, quick-release windshield, and a six-speed transmission.

===Super Chief (2022– )===

Indian introduced the Super Chief in 2022. The Super Chief carries the same Thunderstroke 111 motor as the Chief Bobber, but includes floorboard, windscreen and saddlebags standard. The Super Chief Limited also has an all-chrome Thunderstroke 116 engine, cruiser handlebars, and the bluetooth-capable Ride Command digital gauge system.

===Springfield (2016– )===

The Springfield was introduced in March 2016 during Daytona Bike Week. It is named after the birthplace of Indian Motorcycles, Springfield, Massachusetts. The Springfield is a bit of a hybrid bike, sharing steering geometry and hardbags with the Chieftain and RoadMaster models but is equipped with a quick detach windshield like the Vintage. It also boasts an adjustable rear air shock like the other touring models.

===Chieftain (2014– )===
The Indian Chieftain touring motorcycle is the first Indian model with front fairing and hard saddlebags. It has a stereo with speakers in the fairing, Bluetooth media players, tire pressure sensors, air-adjustable rear shock, and motorized windshield adjustment. Initial reports from the press were favorable for styling, performance, and handling. The Chieftain was named 2013 Motorcycle of the Year by RoadRunner Motorcycle Touring &amp; Travel magazine.

===Scout (2015– )===
The Indian Scout was introduced at the 2014 Sturgis Motorcycle Rally as a 2015 model. The 2015 Scout is a cruiser with a over head cam V-twin engine and a frame formed by multiple aluminum alloy castings bolted to each other and to the engine. The Indian Scout was named 2015 Motorcycle of the year by Motorcycle.com.

===Scout Sixty (2016– )===
The Indian Scout Sixty was introduced in November 2015 as a 2016 model. The Scout Sixty is a cruiser with a V-twin engine. The new Scout Sixty has many of the same features as the 2014 Scout, but with a smaller 999 cc engine.

===Roadmaster (2015– )===
The Indian Roadmaster was introduced at the 2014 Sturgis Motorcycle Rally shortly before the Scout. The Roadmaster is a Chieftain with an added trunk, front fairing lowers, heated seats, heated grips, LED headlights, passenger floorboards, and a rear crash bar. The Roadmaster had been developed before the Chieftain. Cycle World recorded @ 4,440 rpm and @ 2,480 rpm at the rear tire. They also recorded a tested 1/4 mile time of 13.91 seconds at and a acceleration at 5.2 seconds, a braking distance of , and fuel economy of .

===Chief Dark Horse (2016– )===
The 2016 Indian Dark Horse was introduced on Valentine&#x27;s Day 2015. It is based on a Chief Classic painted in flat black, with the driving lights, oil cooler, analog fuel gauge, passenger pillion seat and passenger pegs removed.

===Chieftain Dark Horse (2016– )===
The 2016 Indian Chieftain Dark Horse was introduced in May 2016. It has a full fairing and hard saddlebags, and carries the same accessories and features of the standard Chieftain. It has a claimed @ 3000 rpm and a dry weight of .

===Chieftain Limited (2017– )===
The 2017 Indian Chieftain Limited adds more of a bagger style to the Chieftain. The front fender was opened up to show off 19&quot; custom wheels, and a limited coloring scheme. This model also boasts the full ride command touch screen display that the Roadmaster also uses. It has the upper fairing with power windscreen and optional passenger seat.

===RoadMaster Classic (2017–2018)===
The 2017 Indian Roadmaster Classic was introduced in February 2017, and discontinued before the end of 2018. It has the traditional styling tan leather bags and trunk along with heated seats, heated grips, LED headlights, passenger floorboards, and rear crash bars. It does not have the hard front lowers found on the original Roadmaster.

===Springfield Dark Horse (2018– )===
For 2018 Indian offers the Springfield in Dark Horse flavor. Open front fender with 19&quot; cast front wheel.

===Scout Bobber (2018– )===
The Scout Bobber is a factory-modified version of the Scout that features style components taken from the &quot;bobber&quot; community of motorcycles, hence the name. These modifications include chopped front and rear mud guards, bar end mirrors, low seat, low handlebars, and a side-mounted license plate holder.

===FTR 1200 (2019–2025)===
The FTR is a standard motorcycle that takes its inspiration from the flat track racing heritage of Indian.

===Challenger (2020– )===
The Challenger is the first fixed fairing bagger crafted by Indian Motorcycle. It embeds the new Indian PowerPlus liquid-cooled 60-degree V-twin engine that produces 122 horsepower and 128 foot-pounds of torque. The front suspension uses an inverted 43mm fork, which provides 5.1 inches of travel and rear suspension is provided by a hydraulically adjustable rear shock.

===Challenger Dark Horse (2020– )===
The Indian Challenger with the Dark Horse flavor is powered by the PowerPlus liquid-cooled 60-degree V-twin engine that produces 122 horsepower and 128 foot-pounds of torque. The front suspension uses an inverted 43mm fork, which provides 5.1 inches of travel and rear suspension is provided by a hydraulically adjustable rear shock.

==Land speed records==
Between 1962 and 1967, Burt Munro from New Zealand used a modified 1920s Indian Scout to set a number of land speed records, as dramatized in the 2005 film &quot;The World&#x27;s Fastest Indian&quot;. In 2014 Indian had a similar custom streamliner built, the &quot;Spirit of Munro&quot;, to promote their new 111 cubic-inch engine and challenge speed records. Munro was the fastest.

== Bicycles ==
Both Hendee and Hedstrom had built bicycles before they met, and Hendee had marketed his under the Silver King and Silver Queen names. They continued to manufacture bicycles after their motorcycles became successful and even made bicycles designed to resemble their motorcycles.

==References==
==Further reading==
*
*
*
*


==External links==

* MYSTERY SOLVED Middletown man finds birthplace of 1st Indian Motorcycle hidden on Wesleyan property - Middletown Press, Middletown, Connecticut USA 8-12-2015
* Indianmotorcycle.com
* Indian Motorcycle Trade Catalog from 1915 in the Hagley Digital Archives
* &quot;Army Tests Experimental Shaft Driven Motorcycles&quot;, September 1942, Popular Science</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1091034" start="0" end="17" title="Indian Motorcycle" label="Indian Motorcycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q34493" start="66" end="76" title="motorcycle" label="motorcycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1850587" start="124" end="136" title="Polaris Inc." label="Polaris Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q49158" start="179" end="205" title="Springfield, Massachusetts" label="Springfield, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091034" start="304" end="318" title="Indian Motorcycle" label="Indian Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1850587" start="337" end="355" title="Polaris Industries" label="Polaris Industries"/>
<link wikidata="Q431289" start="400" end="406" title="marque" label="marque"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454" start="433" end="447" title="North Carolina" label="North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527" start="496" end="505" title="Minnesota" label="Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546" start="510" end="514" title="Iowa" label="Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q522661" start="768" end="794" title="Isle of Man TT" label="Isle of Man Tourist Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507846" start="1337" end="1353" title="George M. Hendee" label="George M. Hendee"/>
<link wikidata="Q5796596" start="1668" end="1682" title="Oscar Hedstrom" label="Oscar Hedstrom"/>
<link wikidata="Q49192" start="1809" end="1832" title="Middletown, Connecticut" label="Middletown, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q34493" start="1960" end="1970" title="motorcycle" label="motorcycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q19848687" start="3249" end="3253" title="Thor (motorcycles)" label="Thor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1861637" start="3367" end="3373" title="V-twin" label="V-twin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1495075" start="3644" end="3654" title="twist grip" label="twist grip"/>
<link wikidata="Q3732687" start="3711" end="3745" title="Erwin Baker" label="Erwin &amp;quot;Cannonball&amp;quot; Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q16552" start="3831" end="3840" title="San Diego" label="San Diego"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="3844" end="3852" title="New York City" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q522661" start="4466" end="4480" title="Isle of Man TT" label="Isle of Man TT"/>
<link wikidata="Q4559328" start="4484" end="4488" title="1911 Isle of Man TT" label="1911"/>
<link wikidata="Q5075291" start="4531" end="4539" title="Charles B. Franklin" label="Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2235267" start="4601" end="4614" title="Jake DeRosier" label="Jake DeRosier"/>
<link wikidata="Q929193" start="4665" end="4675" title="Brooklands" label="Brooklands"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="4679" end="4686" title="UK" label="Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2141352" start="4722" end="4726" title="dirt track racing" label="dirt"/>
<link wikidata="Q13569199" start="4731" end="4743" title="Board track racing" label="board tracks"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419479" start="4764" end="4773" title="Excelsior Motor Manufacturing &amp;amp; Supply Company" label="Excelsior"/>
<link wikidata="Q152323" start="5277" end="5287" title="Two-stroke engine" label="two-stroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q16983073" start="5658" end="5665" title="Indian Model O" label="Model O"/>
<link wikidata="Q3063504" start="5697" end="5713" title="flat-twin engine" label="flat-twin engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="5854" end="5865" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q192814" start="6389" end="6404" title="Harley-Davidson" label="Harley-Davidson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5075291" start="6559" end="6575" title="Charles Franklin" label="Charles Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1861637" start="6636" end="6649" title="V-twin engine" label="V-twin engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262374" start="6749" end="6763" title="Du Pont Motors" label="Du Pont Motors"/>
<link wikidata="Q258933" start="7036" end="7046" title="war bonnet" label="war bonnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5075291" start="7579" end="7598" title="Charles B. Franklin" label="Charles B. Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2644088" start="7655" end="7670" title="Gear train" label="driven by gears"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419483" start="7818" end="7835" title="Excelsior Super X" label="Excelsior Super X"/>
<link wikidata="Q17111346" start="8413" end="8426" title="Indian Prince (motorcycle)" label="Indian Prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q248240" start="9889" end="9902" title="Ignition timing" label="spark advance"/>
<link wikidata="Q278135" start="10127" end="10148" title="Ace Motor Corporation" label="Ace Motor Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="10888" end="10904" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413600" start="11140" end="11164" title="IOE engine" label="inlet-over-exhaust (IOE)"/>
<link wikidata="Q668687" start="12062" end="12090" title="United States Postal Service" label="United States Postal Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q37930" start="12099" end="12104" title="Postage stamp" label="stamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q6629337" start="12208" end="12241" title="List of motorcycles in the Smithsonian Institution" label="Smithsonian Motorcycle Collection"/>
<link wikidata="Q148584" start="12260" end="12295" title="National Museum of American History" label="National Museum of American History"/>
<link wikidata="Q7084836" start="12396" end="12419" title="Old Rhinebeck Aerodrome" label="Old Rhinebeck Aerodrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="12448" end="12460" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="12551" end="12569" title="United States Army" label="United States Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="12622" end="12634" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q3783387" start="12735" end="12754" title="Harley-Davidson WLA" label="Harley-Davidson WLA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149018" start="13252" end="13262" title="Moto Guzzi" label="Moto Guzzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q864306" start="13389" end="13404" title="Airborne forces" label="Airborne forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q701923" start="13806" end="13817" title="German Army (Wehrmacht)" label="German Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471026" start="13853" end="13856" title="Dnepr M-72" label="M72"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543724" start="13885" end="13889" title="IMZ-Ural" label="Ural"/>
<link wikidata="Q447860" start="13894" end="13906" title="Chang Jiang (motorcycle)" label="Chiang Jiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q5658758" start="13946" end="13964" title="Harley-Davidson XA" label="Harley-Davidson XA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1861637" start="14243" end="14249" title="V-twin" label="V-twin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14261" end="14272" title="Motorcycle fork#Girder" label="girder fork"/>
<link wikidata="Q30113" start="14433" end="14437" title="Jeep" label="Jeep"/>
<link wikidata="Q193412" start="16031" end="16048" title="Texas Instruments" label="Texas Instruments"/>
<link wikidata="Q2668720" start="17333" end="17346" title="Royal Enfield" label="Royal Enfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q2130281" start="17893" end="17896" title="Associated Motor Cycles" label="AMC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150827" start="18169" end="18175" title="Norton Motorcycle Company" label="Norton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428119" start="18180" end="18189" title="Matchless" label="Matchless"/>
<link wikidata="Q5462396" start="18261" end="18273" title="Floyd Clymer" label="Floyd Clymer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374144" start="18666" end="18691" title="Royal Enfield Interceptor" label="Royal Enfield Interceptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150827" start="18861" end="18867" title="Norton Motorcycle Company" label="Norton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2668720" start="18873" end="18886" title="Royal Enfield" label="Royal Enfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424713" start="18980" end="18987" title="Italjet" label="Italjet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1906562" start="18997" end="19006" title="Marzocchi" label="Marzocchi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19024" end="19031" title="Grimeca" label="Grimeca"/>
<link wikidata="Q2911327" start="19076" end="19083" title="Borrani" label="Borrani"/>
<link wikidata="Q7919265" start="19197" end="19212" title="Velocette Venom" label="Velocette Venom"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="19389" end="19395" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q7919263" start="19738" end="19754" title="Velocette Thruxton" label="Thruxton version"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="19880" end="19891" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1867" start="20033" end="20039" title="Taipei" label="Taipei"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="20041" end="20047" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1949745" start="20202" end="20215" title="Moto Morini" label="Franco Morini"/>
<link wikidata="Q593174" start="20315" end="20335" title="Ducati 860 GT" label="Ducati 860 cc engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q9584" start="20842" end="20853" title="Honda" label="Honda&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q798992" start="21159" end="21175" title="Badge engineered" label="Badge engineered"/>
<link wikidata="Q34804" start="21676" end="21687" title="Albuquerque" label="Albuquerque"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522" start="21689" end="21699" title="New Mexico" label="New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1677194" start="22308" end="22324" title="Jack Roush" label="Roush Industries"/>
<link wikidata="Q5179403" start="22395" end="22436" title="Cow Creek Band of Umpqua Tribe of Indians" label="Cow Creek Band of Umpqua Tribe of Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339146" start="22553" end="22563" title="sport bike" label="sport bike"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23527" end="23562" title="California Motorcycle Company, Inc." label="California Motorcycle Company, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q1614849" start="23649" end="23683" title="United States district court" label="Federal District Court of Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q837097" start="23788" end="23806" title="Gilroy, California" label="Gilroy, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q7387004" start="24008" end="24015" title="S&amp;amp;S Cycle" label="S&amp;amp;S"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="24371" end="24377" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1742139" start="24431" end="24461" title="Kings Mountain, North Carolina" label="Kings Mountain, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q308881" start="25009" end="25034" title="electronic fuel injection" label="electronic fuel injection"/>
<link wikidata="Q1850587" start="25093" end="25111" title="Polaris Industries" label="Polaris Industries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1879651" start="25174" end="25193" title="Victory Motorcycles" label="Victory Motorcycles"/>
<link wikidata="Q989683" start="25299" end="25316" title="Spirit Lake, Iowa" label="Spirit Lake, Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q466511" start="26390" end="26409" title="engine displacement" label="engine displacement"/>
<link wikidata="Q16968637" start="28667" end="28718" title="Roadrunner (magazine)" label="RoadRunner Motorcycle Touring &amp;amp; Travel magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q548404" start="28786" end="28810" title="Sturgis Motorcycle Rally" label="Sturgis Motorcycle Rally"/>
<link wikidata="Q548404" start="29390" end="29414" title="Sturgis Motorcycle Rally" label="Sturgis Motorcycle Rally"/>
<link wikidata="Q5198151" start="29659" end="29670" title="Cycle World" label="Cycle World"/>
<link wikidata="Q96382084" start="31690" end="31693" title="Indian FTR" label="FTR"/>
<link wikidata="Q63354" start="31699" end="31718" title="standard motorcycle" label="standard motorcycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q443607" start="32610" end="32620" title="Burt Munro" label="Burt Munro"/>
<link wikidata="Q128924" start="32749" end="32780" title="The World&amp;#x27;s Fastest Indian" label="The World&amp;#x27;s Fastest Indian"/>
<link wikidata="Q887455" start="32824" end="32835" title="streamliner" label="streamliner"/>
<link wikidata="Q4785686" start="33566" end="33589" title="Hagley Digital Archives" label="Hagley Digital Archives"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="187818" wikidata="Q1329683" url="?curid=187818" title="USS Alabama">
<text>At least seven United States Navy ships have been named Alabama, after the southern state of Alabama.

* , a 74-gun ship of the line, laid down in 1819, though never completed as such. She was eventually launched in 1864 as the storeship USS &quot;New Hampshire&quot;.
* , a sidewheel steamer transferred to the Navy in 1849 that served as a troop transport during the Mexican–American War.
* , a sidewheel steamer merchant vessel that was commissioned in 1861 during the American Civil War.
* , a pre-dreadnought battleship commissioned in 1900 and scrapped in 1924.
* , a 69-foot motor boat inspected by the Navy in the summer of 1917 and assigned the designation SP-1052.
* , a battleship commissioned in 1942, converted to a museum ship in 1964 and now docked in Mobile, Alabama.
* , an currently in service.

==See also==
* &quot;USS Alabama&quot; was the French title for the film &quot;Crimson Tide&quot;, which was set on the eponymous submarine.

==See also==
* 
*, the merchant ship involved in a 2009 piracy incident

==Sources==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="15" end="33" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q173" start="93" end="100" title="Alabama" label="Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="472" end="490" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051067" start="498" end="524" title="pre-dreadnought battleship" label="pre-dreadnought battleship"/>
<link wikidata="Q182531" start="681" end="691" title="battleship" label="battleship"/>
<link wikidata="Q575727" start="729" end="740" title="museum ship" label="museum ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q79875" start="767" end="782" title="Mobile, Alabama" label="Mobile, Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140085" start="893" end="905" title="Crimson Tide (film)" label="Crimson Tide"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="187824" wikidata="Q18531" url="?curid=187824" title="Offside (association football)">
<text>Offside is one of the laws in association football, codified in Law 11 of the Laws of the Game. The law states that a player is in an offside position if any of their body parts are in the opponents&#x27; half of the pitch, and closer to the opponent&#x27;s goal line than both the ball and the second-last opponent (the last opponent is usually, but not necessarily, the goalkeeper).

Being in an offside position is not an offence in itself, but a player so positioned when the ball is played by a teammate can be judged guilty of an offside offence if they receive the ball or will otherwise become &quot;involved in active play&quot;, will &quot;interfere with an opponent&quot;, or will &quot;gain an advantage&quot; by being in that position. Offside is often considered one of the most difficult-to-understand aspects of the sport.

==Significance==
Offside is judged at the moment the ball is last touched by the most recent teammate to touch the ball. Being in an offside position is not an offence in itself. A player who was in an offside position at the moment the ball was last touched or played by a teammate must then become &quot;involved in active play&quot;, in the opinion of the referee, in order for an offence to occur. When the offside offence occurs, the referee stops play, and awards an indirect free kick to the defending team from the place where the offending player became involved in active play.

The offside offence is neither a foul nor misconduct as it does not belong to Law 12. Like fouls, however, any play (such as the scoring of a goal) that occurs after an offence has taken place, but before the referee is able to stop the play, is nullified. The only time an offence related to offside is cautionable is if a defender deliberately leaves the field in order to deceive their opponents regarding a player&#x27;s offside position, or if a forward, having left the field, returns and gains an advantage. In neither of these cases is the player penalised for being offside; instead they are cautioned for acts of unsporting behaviour.

An attacker who is able to receive the ball behind the opposition defenders is often in a good position to score. The offside rule limits attackers&#x27; ability to do this, requiring that they be onside when the ball is played forward. Though restricted, well-timed passes and fast running allow an attacker to move into such a situation &quot;after&quot; the ball is kicked forward without committing the offence. Officiating decisions regarding offside, which can often be a matter of only centimetres or inches, can be critical in games, as they may determine whether a promising attack can continue, or even if a goal is allowed to stand.

One of the main duties of the assistant referees is to assist the referee in adjudicating offside—their position on the sidelines giving a more useful view sideways across the pitch. Assistant referees communicate that an offside offence has occurred by raising a signal flag. However, as with all officiating decisions in the game, adjudicating offside is ultimately up to the referee, who can overrule the advice of their assistants if they see fit.

==Application==
The application of the offside rule may be considered in three steps: &quot;offside position&quot;, &quot;offside offence&quot;, and &quot;offside sanction&quot;.

===Offside position===

A player is in an &quot;offside position&quot; if they are in the opposing team&#x27;s half of the field and also &quot;nearer to the opponents&#x27; goal line than both the ball and the second-last opponent.&quot; The 2005 edition of the Laws of the Game included a new IFAB decision that stated, &quot;In the definition of offside position, &#x27;nearer to his opponents&#x27; goal line&#x27; means that any part of their head, body or feet is nearer to their opponents&#x27; goal line than both the ball and the second last opponent. The arms are not included in this definition&quot;. By 2017, the wording had changed to say that, in judging offside position, &quot;The hands and arms of all players, including the goalkeepers, are not considered.&quot; In other words, a player is in an &quot;offside position&quot; if two conditions are met:

* Any part of the player&#x27;s head, body or feet is in the opponents&#x27; half of the field (excluding the half-way line).
* Any part of the player&#x27;s head, body or feet is closer to the opponents&#x27; goal line than both the ball and the second-last opponent.

The goalkeeper counts as an opponent in the second condition, but it is not necessary that the last opponent be the goalkeeper.

===Offside offence===
A player in an offside position at the moment the ball is touched or played by a teammate is only penalised for committing an &quot;offside offence&quot; if, in the opinion of the referee, they become involved in active play by:
; Interfering with play
: &quot;playing or touching the ball passed or touched by a team-mate&quot;
; Interfering with an opponent
: &quot;preventing an opponent from playing or being able to play the ball by clearly obstructing the opponent&#x27;s line of vision or
: challenging an opponent for the ball or
: clearly attempting to play a ball which is close to them when this action impacts on an opponent or
: making an obvious action which clearly impacts on the ability of an opponent to play the ball&quot;
; Gaining an advantage by playing the ball or interfering with an opponent when it has
: &quot;- rebounded or been deflected off the goalpost, crossbar, match official or an opponent
: – been deliberately saved by any opponent&quot;

In addition to the above criteria, in the 2017–18 edition of the Laws of the Game, the IFAB made a further clarification that, &quot;In situations where a player moving from, or standing in, an offside position is in the way of an opponent and interferes with the movement of the opponent towards the ball this is an offside offence if it impacts on the ability of the opponent to play or challenge for the ball.&quot;

There is no offside offence if a player receives the ball directly from a goal kick, a corner kick, or a throw-in. It is also not an offence if the ball was last deliberately played by an opponent (except for a deliberate save). In this context, according to the IFAB, &quot;A &#x27;save&#x27; is when a player stops, or attempts to stop, a ball which is going into or very close to the goal with any part of the body except the hands/arms (unless the goalkeeper within the penalty area).&quot;

An offside offence may occur if a player receives the ball directly from either a direct free kick, indirect free kick or dropped-ball.

Since offside is judged at the time the ball is touched or played by a teammate, not when the player receives the ball, it is possible for a player to receive the ball significantly past the second-to-last opponent, or even the last opponent, without committing an offence, since an onside player is free to run to any position after the ball is played.

A player who was offside when their teammate played the ball (and therefore liable for an offside offence should they interfere with play) but becomes onside when the ball is played by another player then ceases to be liable for an offside offence. That is, the determination of offside is reset each time the ball is played by a different onside player. 

Determining whether a player is &quot;involved in active play&quot; can be complex. The quote, &quot;If he&#x27;s not interfering with play, what&#x27;s he doing on the pitch?&quot; has been attributed to Bill Nicholson and Danny Blanchflower. In an effort to avoid such criticisms, which were based on the fact that phrases such as &quot;interfering with play&quot;, &quot;interfering with an opponent&quot;, and &quot;gaining an advantage&quot; were not clearly defined, FIFA issued new guidelines for interpreting the offside law in 2003; and these were incorporated into Law 11 in July 2005. The new wording sought to define the three cases more precisely, but a number of football associations and confederations continued to request more information about what movements a player in an offside position could make without interfering with an opponent. In response to these requests, IFAB circular 3 was issued in 2015 to provide additional guidance on the criteria for interfering with an opponent. This additional guidance is now included in the main body of the law, and forms the last three conditions under the heading &quot;Interfering with an opponent&quot; as shown above. The circular also contained additional guidance on the meaning of a save, in the context of a ball that has &quot;been deliberately saved by any opponent.&quot;

===Offside sanction===
The sanction for an offside offence is an indirect free kick for the opponent at the place where the offence occurred, even if it is in the player&#x27;s own half of the field of play.

===Officiating===

In enforcing this rule, the referee depends greatly on an assistant referee, who generally keeps in line with the second-to-last opponent, the ball, or the halfway line, whichever is closer to the goal line of their relevant end. An assistant referee signals for an offside offence by first raising their flag to a vertical position and then, if the referee stops play, by partly lowering their flag to an angle that signifies the location of the offence:
* Flag pointed at a 45-degree angle downwards: offence has occurred in the third of the pitch nearest to the assistant referee;
* Flag parallel to the ground: offence has occurred in the middle third of the pitch;
* Flag pointed at a 45-degree angle upwards: offence has occurred in the third of the pitch furthest from the assistant referee.

The assistant referees&#x27; task with regard to offside can be difficult, as they need to keep up with attacks and counter-attacks, consider which players are in an offside position when the ball is played, and then determine whether and when the offside-positioned players become involved in active play. The risk of false judgement is further increased by the foreshortening effect, which occurs when the distance between the attacking player and the assistant referee is significantly different from the distance to the defending player, and the assistant referee is not directly in line with the defender. The difficulty of offside officiating is often underestimated by spectators. Trying to judge if a player is level with an opponent at the moment the ball is kicked is not easy: if an attacker and a defender are running in opposite directions, they can be two metres (6&#x27;) apart in less than a second.

Some researchers believe that offside officiating errors are &quot;optically inevitable&quot;. It has been argued that human beings and technological media are incapable of accurately detecting an offside position quickly enough to make a timely decision. Sometimes it simply is not possible to keep all the relevant players in the visual field at once. There have been some proposals for automated enforcement of the offside rule.

==Motivation==
The motivations for offside rules varied at different times, and were not always clearly stated when the rules were changed. 

According to the anonymous author of a November 1863 newspaper article in the &quot;Sporting Gazette&quot;, &quot;For a player to place himself nearer his opponent&#x27;s goal than the ball, and to wait for it to be kicked to him, is not anywhere recognised but as being decidedly unfair&quot;. Curry and Dunning suggest that offside play was considered &quot;highly ungentlemanly&quot; at some schools; this attitude may have been reflected in the use of terminology such as &quot;sneaking&quot; at Eton and &quot;loiter[ing]&quot; at Cambridge.

In general, offside rules intend to prevent players from &quot;goal-hanging&quot;–staying near the opponent&#x27;s goal and waiting for the ball to be passed to them directly. This was considered to be unsportsmanlike and made the game boring.
In contrast, the offside rules force players not to get ahead of the ball, and thus favour dribbling the ball and short passes over few long passes.

==History==
=== Before 1863 ===

====Traditional games====
A law similar to offside was used in the game of hurling to goals played in Cornwall in the early 17th century:

====School and university football====
Offside laws are found in the largely uncodified and informal football games played at English public schools in the early 19th century. An 1832 article discussing the Eton wall game complained of &quot;[t]he interminable multiplicity of rules about &quot;sneaking&quot;, &quot;picking up&quot;, &quot;throwing&quot;, &quot;rolling&quot;, &quot;in straight&quot;, with a vast number more&quot;, using the term &quot;sneaking&quot; to refer to Eton&#x27;s offside law. The novel &quot;Tom Brown&#x27;s School Days&quot;, published in 1857 but based on the author&#x27;s experiences at Rugby School from 1834 to 1842, discussed that school&#x27;s offside law: 

The first published set of laws of any code of football (Rugby School, 1845), stated that &quot;[a] player is off his side if the ball has touched one of his own side behind him, until the other side touch it.&quot; Such a player was prevented from kicking the ball, touching the ball down, or interfering with an opponent.

Many other school and university laws from this period were similar to Rugby School&#x27;s in that they were &quot;strict&quot;—i.e. any player ahead of the ball was in an off-side position. (This is similar to the current offside law in rugby, under which any player between the ball and the opponent&#x27;s goal who takes part in play, is liable to be penalised.) Such laws included Shrewsbury School (1855), Uppingham School (1857), Trinity College, Hartford (1858), Winchester College (1863), and the Cambridge Rules of 1863.

Some school and university rules provided an exception to this general pattern. In the 1847 laws of the Eton Field Game, a player could not be considered &quot;sneaking&quot; if there were four or more opponents between him and the opponents&#x27; goal line. A similar &quot;rule of four&quot; was found in the 1856 Cambridge Rules and the rules of Charterhouse School (1863).

====Club football====
Most surviving rules of independent football &quot;clubs&quot; from before 1860 lack any offside law. This is true of the brief handwritten set of laws for the Foot-Ball Club of Edinburgh (1833), the published laws of Surrey Football Club (1849), the first set of laws of Sheffield Football Club (1858) and those of Melbourne Football Club (1859). In the Sheffield game, players known as &quot;kick-throughs&quot; were positioned permanently near the opponents&#x27; goal.

In the early 1860s, this began to change. In 1861, Forest FC adopted a set of laws based on the 1856 Cambridge Rules, with its &quot;rule of four&quot;. The 1862 laws of Barnes FC featured a strict offside law. Sheffield FC adopted a weak offside law at the beginning of the 1863–64 season.

====J. C. Thring====
J. C. Thring was an advocate for the strictest possible offside law. A resident master at Uppingham School from 1859 to 1864, Thring criticised most existing offside laws for being too lax. The Rugby laws, for example, were at fault because they permitted an offside player to rejoin play immediately after an opponent touched the ball, while Eton&#x27;s rule of four allowed &quot;an immense amount of sneaking&quot; when the number of players was unlimited.

Thring expressed his views through correspondence in the sporting newspapers such as &quot;The Field&quot;, and through the publication in 1862 of &quot;The Simplest Game&quot;, a proposed set of laws of football. In &quot;The Simplest Game&quot;, Thring included a strict offside law which required a player in an offside position (&quot;out of play&quot;, in Thring&#x27;s terminology) to &quot;return behind the ball as soon as possible&quot;. 

The influence of Thring&#x27;s views is evidenced by the adoption of his proposed offside law from &quot;The Simplest Game&quot; in the first draft of the FA laws (see below).

===The F. A. laws of 1863===
On 17 November 1863, the newly formed Football Association adopted a resolution mirroring Thring&#x27;s law from the &quot;Simplest Game&quot;:

This text was reflected in the first draft of laws drawn up by FA secretary Ebenezer Morley.

On 24 November, Morley presented his draft laws to the FA for final approval. That meeting was, however, disrupted by a dispute over the subject of &quot;hacking&quot; (allowing players to carry the ball, provided they could be kicked in the shins by opponents when doing so, in the manner of Rugby School). The opponents of hacking brought the delegates&#x27; attention to the Cambridge Rules of 1863 (which banned carrying and hacking): Discussion of the Cambridge rules, and suggestions for possible communication with Cambridge on the subject, served to delay the final &quot;settlement&quot; of the laws to a further meeting, on 1 December. A number of representatives who supported rugby-style football did not attend this additional meeting, resulting in hacking and carrying being banned.

Although the offside law was not itself a significant issue in the dispute between the pro- and anti-hacking clubs, it was completely rewritten. The original law, taken from Thring&#x27;s &quot;Simplest Game&quot;, was replaced by a modified version of the equivalent law from the Cambridge Rules:
The law adopted by the FA was &quot;strict&quot;—i.e., it penalised any player in front of the ball. There was one exception for the &quot;kick from behind the goal line&quot; (the 1863 laws&#x27; equivalent of a goal kick). This exception was necessary because every player on the attacking side would have otherwise been &quot;out of play&quot; from such a kick.

===Subsequent developments: offside position===
====Three-player rule (1866)====
At the first revision of the FA laws, in February 1866, an important qualifier was added to soften the &quot;strict&quot; offside law: 

At the FA&#x27;s meeting, the alteration &quot;gave rise to a lengthy discussion, many thinking with Mr Morley that it would be better to do away with the off side [law] altogether, especially as the Sheffield clubs had none. It being found, however, that the rule could not be expunged without notice, the alteration was passed.&quot;

Contemporaneous reports do not indicate the reason for the change. Charles Alcock, writing in 1890, suggested that it was made in order to induce two public schools, Westminster and Charterhouse, to join the association. Those two schools did indeed become members of the FA after the next annual FA meeting (February 1867), in response to a letter-writing campaign by newly installed FA secretary Robert Graham.

====Early proposals for change (1867–1874)====
Over the next seven years, there were several attempts to change the three-player rule, but none was successful:

* In 1867, Barnes FC proposed that the offside rule should be removed altogether, arguing that &quot;a player did not stop to count whether there were three of his opponents between him and their own goal&quot;.
* It was also proposed that the FA should revert to its original &quot;strict&quot; offside rule. This change was introduced in 1868 (Branham College), 1871 (&quot;The Oxford Association&quot;) and 1872 (Notts County).
* There were attempts to introduce the one-player rule of the Sheffield Football Association in 1867 (Sheffield FC), 1872 (Sheffield Football Association), 1873 (Nottingham Forest), and 1874 (Sheffield Association).
Offside was the subject of the biggest dispute between the Sheffield Football Association (which produced its own &quot;Sheffield Rules&quot;) and the Football Association. However, the two codes were eventually unified without any change in this area; the Sheffield Clubs accepted the FA&#x27;s three-player offside rule in 1877, after the FA compromised by allowing the throw-in to be taken in any direction.

====Offside in own half (1907)====
The original laws allowed players to be in an offside position even when in their own half. This happened rarely, but was possible when one team pressed high up the field, for example in a Sunderland v Wolverhampton Wanderers match in December 1901. When an attacking team adopted the so-called &quot;one back&quot; game, in which only the goalkeeper and one outfield player remained in defensive positions, it was even possible for players to be caught offside in their own penalty area.

In May 1905, Clyde FC suggested that players should not be offside in their own half, but this suggestion was rejected by the Scottish Football Association. It was objected that the change would lead to &quot;forwards hanging about close to the half-way line, as opportunists&quot;. After the Scotland v England international of April 1906 ended with the Scottish wingers being repeatedly caught offside by England&#x27;s use of a &quot;one back&quot; game, Clyde again proposed the same rule-change to the Scottish FA meeting: this time it was accepted.

The Scottish proposal gained support in England. At the 1906 meeting of the International Football Association Board, the Scottish FA announced that it would introduce the proposed change at the next annual meeting, in 1907. In March 1907, the council of the [English] Football Association approved this change, and it was passed by IFAB in June 1907.

====Two-player rule (1925)====
The Scottish FA urged the change from a three-player to a two-player offside rule as early as 1893. Such a change was first proposed at a meeting of IFAB in 1894, where it was rejected. It was proposed again by the SFA in 1902, upon the urging of Celtic FC, and again rejected. A further proposal from the SFA also failed in 1913, after the Football Association objected. The SFA advanced the same proposal in 1914, when it was again rejected after opposition from both the Football Association and the Football Association of Wales.

Meetings of the International Board were suspended after 1914 because of the First World War. After they resumed in 1920, the SFA once again proposed the two-player rule in 1922, 1923, and 1924. In 1922 and 1923, the Scottish Association withdrew its proposal after English FA opposed it. In 1924, the Scottish proposal was once again opposed by the English FA, and defeated; it was, however, indicated that a version of the proposal would be adopted the next year.

On 30 March 1925, the FA arranged a trial match at Highbury where two proposed changes to the offside rules were tested. During the first half, a player could not be offside unless within forty yards of the opponents&#x27; goal-line. In the second half, the two-player rule was used.

The two-player proposal was considered by the FA at its annual meeting on 8 June. Proponents cited the new rule&#x27;s potential to reduce stoppages, avoid refereeing errors, and improve the spectacle, while opponents complained that it would give &quot;undue advantage to attackers&quot;; referees were overwhelmingly opposed to the change. The two-player rule was nevertheless approved by the FA by a large majority. At IFAB&#x27;s meeting later that month, the two-player rule finally became part of the Laws of the Game.

The two-player rule was one of the more significant rule changes in the history of the game during the 20th century. It led to an immediate change in the style of play, with the game becoming more stretched, &quot;short passing giv[ing] way to longer balls&quot;, and the development of the W-M formation. It also led to an increase in goalscoring: 4,700 goals were scored in 1,848 Football League games in 1924–25. This number rose to 6,373 goals (from the same number of games) in 1925–26.

====Attacker level with second-last defender (1990)====
In 1990, IFAB declared that an attacker level with the second-last defender is onside, whereas previously such a player had been considered offside. This change, proposed by the Scottish FA, was made in order to &quot;encourage the attacking team&quot; by &quot;giving the attacking player an advantage over the defender&quot;.

====Parts of body (2005)====
In 2005, IFAB clarified that, when evaluating an attacking player&#x27;s position for the purposes of the offside law, the part of the player&#x27;s head, body or feet closest to the defending team&#x27;s goal-line should be considered, with the hands and arms being excluded because &quot;there is no advantage to be gained if only the arms are in advance of the opponent&quot;. In 2016, it was further clarified that this principle should apply to all players, both attackers and defenders, including the goalkeeper.

====Defender outside the field of play (2009)====
In 2009, it was stated that a defender who leaves the field of play without the referee&#x27;s permission must be considered to be on the nearest boundary line for the purposes of deciding whether an attacker is in an offside position.

====Halfway line (2016)====
In 2016, it was clarified that a player on the halfway line itself cannot be in an offside position: part of the player&#x27;s head, body or feet must be within the opponent&#x27;s half of the field of play in order to be considered offside.

====Unadopted experiments====
During the 1973–74 and 1974–75 seasons, an experimental version of the offside rule was operated in the Scottish League Cup and Drybrough Cup competitions. The concept was that offside should only apply in the last of play (inside or beside the penalty area). To signify this, the horizontal line of the penalty area was extended to the touchlines. FIFA President Sir Stanley Rous attended the 1973 Scottish League Cup Final, which was played using these rules. The manager of one of the teams involved, Celtic manager Jock Stein, complained that it was unfair to expect teams to play under one set of rules in one game and then a different set a few days before or later. The experiment was quietly dropped after the 1974–75 season, as no proposal for a
further experiment or rule change was submitted for the Scottish Football Association board to consider. It was briefly experimented again in the 1991 FIFA U-17 World Championship, in Italy.

In 1972, the North American Soccer League adopted a variation of the offside rule in which it added a line on the field 35 yards from each goal line; a player could only be offside within that area of the opponent&#x27;s half. The rule was dropped in 1982 at the insistence of FIFA which threatened to withdraw recognition of the league if it did not apply all of the official rules of football.
===Subsequent developments: exceptions at the restart of play===
====Goal kick====
Since the first FA laws of 1863, a player has not been penalised for being in an offside position at the moment a teammate takes a goal kick. (According to the &quot;strict&quot; offside law used in 1863, every player on the attacking side would automatically have been in an offside position from such a goalkick, since it had to be taken from the goal line and a player could be in an offside position even when in their own half.)

====Throw-in====
Under the original laws of 1863, it was not possible to be offside from a throw-in; however, since the ball was required to be thrown in at right-angles to the touch-line, it would have been unusual for a player to gain significant advantage from being ahead of the ball.

In 1877, the throw-in law was changed to allow the ball to be thrown in any direction. The next year (1878) a new law was introduced to allow a player to be offside from a throw-in.

This situation lasted until 1920, when the law was altered to prevent a player being offside from a throw-in. This rule-change was praised on the grounds that it would deter teams from &quot;seeking safety or wasting time by sending [the ball] into touch&quot;, and thus reduce stoppages.

====Corner kick====
When first introduced in 1872, the corner kick was required to be taken from the corner-flag itself, which made it impossible for an attacking player to be in an offside position relative to the ball. In 1874, the corner-kick was allowed to be taken up to one yard from the corner-flag, thus opening up the possibility of a player being in an offside position. At the International Football Conference of December 1882, it was agreed that a player should not be offside from a corner-kick; this change was incorporated into the Laws of the Game in 1883.

====Free kick====
The laws of football have always permitted an offside offence to be committed from a free kick. The free kick contrasts, in this respect, with other restarts of play such as the goal kick, corner kick, and throw-in.

A 1920 proposal by the FA to exempt the free-kick from the offside rule was unexpectedly rejected by IFAB. A further unsuccessful proposal to remove the possibility of being offside from a direct free-kick was rejected in 1929. Similar proposals to prevent offside offences from any free-kick were advanced in 1974 and 1986, each time without success. In 1987, the Football Association (FA) obtained the permission of IFAB to test such a rule in the 1987–88 GM Vauxhall Conference. At the next annual meeting, the FA reported to IFAB that the experiment had, as predicted, &quot;assisted further the non-offending team and also generated more action near goal, resulting in greater excitement for players and spectators&quot;; it nevertheless withdrew the proposal.

==Offside trap==
Pioneered in the early 20th century by Notts County and later adopted by influential Argentine coach Osvaldo Zubeldía, the offside trap is a defensive tactic designed to force the attacking team into an offside position. Just before an attacking player is played a through ball, the last defender or defenders move up field, isolating the attacker into an offside position. The execution requires careful timing by the defence and is considered a risk, since running up field against the direction of attack may leave the goal exposed. Now that changes to the interpretations of &quot;interfering with play, interfering with an opponent and gaining an advantage&quot; mean a player is not guilty of an offside offence unless they become directly and clearly involved in active play, players not involved in active play cannot be &quot;caught offside&quot;, making the tactic riskier. An attacker, upon realising they are in an offside position, may simply choose to avoid interfering with play until the ball is played by someone else.

Manager Arrigo Sacchi was also known for using a high defensive line, with distance between the defence and midfield lines never greater than 25 to 30 metres (yards), and the offside trap with his teams. He introduced a more attacking–minded tactical philosophy with A.C. Milan, which was highly successful, namely an aggressive high-pressing system, which used a 4–4–2 formation, an attractive, fast, attacking, and possession-based playing style, and which also used innovative elements such as zonal marking and a high back–line line playing the offside trap, which largely deviated from previous systems in Italian football, despite still maintaining defensive solidity.

Liverpool F.C. under Jürgen Klopp, a noted follower of Sacchi, have been known for their highly effective offside trap. It involves playing a high defensive line with quick centre-backs like Virgil van Dijk and Ibrahima Konaté who can move forward quickly to catch opponents offside. In the 2021–22 Premier League season, they caught 53% more the amount of opponents offside than the next best team (144 times compared to Manchester City&#x27;s 94).

Not all offside traps need to have a high line, the offside trap can be executed from everywhere on the pitch. Manuel Pellegrini often used the offside trap with the defenders sitting at the edge of their own box. The positioning of the defensive line dictates the available space that the opponents can run into. By adopting a high line, the opposition sometimes may be crammed into their own half, while a lower defensive line gives less space to run in behind.

== Citations ==
== General and cited references ==

==External links==

* Laws of the Game 2021 - Offside
* FIFA Offside Presentation, June 2005
* The Offside Trap in Football Explained - Simple Football
* FIFA interactive guide
* Professional Referee Organization offside discussion, from 2015 pre-season (includes video examples)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q18531" start="0" end="7" title="Offside (association football)" label="Offside"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="30" end="50" title="association football" label="association football"/>
<link wikidata="Q506630" start="78" end="94" title="Laws of the Game (association football)" label="Laws of the Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q18531" start="134" end="150" title="Offside (association football)" label="offside position"/>
<link wikidata="Q8524" start="217" end="222" title="association football pitch" label="pitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q8524" start="258" end="267" title="goal line (association football)" label="goal line"/>
<link wikidata="Q18531" start="536" end="551" title="Offside (association football)" label="offside offence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379266" start="1313" end="1331" title="indirect free kick" label="indirect free kick"/>
<link wikidata="Q265777" start="1507" end="1513" title="Fouls and misconduct (association football)" label="Law 12"/>
<link wikidata="Q28454519" start="1558" end="1575" title="Scoring in association football" label="scoring of a goal"/>
<link wikidata="Q28454519" start="2693" end="2697" title="scoring in association football" label="goal"/>
<link wikidata="Q223291" start="2750" end="2767" title="Assistant referee (association football)" label="assistant referee"/>
<link wikidata="Q859528" start="3098" end="3105" title="referee (association football)" label="referee"/>
<link wikidata="Q201330" start="4500" end="4510" title="Goalkeeper (association football)" label="goalkeeper"/>
<link wikidata="Q503218" start="5710" end="5714" title="IFAB" label="IFAB"/>
<link wikidata="Q333282" start="6117" end="6126" title="goal kick" label="goal kick"/>
<link wikidata="Q242415" start="6130" end="6141" title="corner kick" label="corner kick"/>
<link wikidata="Q329285" start="6148" end="6156" title="throw-in" label="throw-in"/>
<link wikidata="Q503218" start="6306" end="6310" title="IFAB" label="IFAB"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379266" start="6621" end="6637" title="direct free kick" label="direct free kick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379266" start="6639" end="6657" title="indirect free kick" label="indirect free kick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378798" start="6661" end="6673" title="dropped-ball" label="dropped-ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q712767" start="7593" end="7607" title="Bill Nicholson (footballer)" label="Bill Nicholson"/>
<link wikidata="Q262861" start="7612" end="7630" title="Danny Blanchflower" label="Danny Blanchflower"/>
<link wikidata="Q253414" start="7861" end="7865" title="FIFA" label="FIFA"/>
<link wikidata="Q503218" start="8277" end="8281" title="IFAB" label="IFAB"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379266" start="8801" end="8819" title="indirect free kick" label="indirect free kick"/>
<link wikidata="Q859528" start="8992" end="8999" title="referee (association football)" label="referee"/>
<link wikidata="Q223291" start="9022" end="9039" title="Assistant referee (association football)" label="assistant referee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1900281" start="10127" end="10141" title="foreshortening" label="foreshortening"/>
<link wikidata="Q4618077" start="12306" end="12322" title="Cornish hurling" label="hurling to goals"/>
<link wikidata="Q4205333" start="12577" end="12591" title="Eton wall game" label="Eton wall game"/>
<link wikidata="Q7815084" start="12893" end="12921" title="Tom Brown&amp;#x27;s School Days" label="Tom Brown&amp;#x27;s School Days"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143281" start="12993" end="13005" title="Rugby School" label="Rugby School"/>
<link wikidata="Q3140745" start="13617" end="13624" title="offside (rugby)" label="offside"/>
<link wikidata="Q5378" start="13632" end="13637" title="rugby football" label="rugby"/>
<link wikidata="Q2280221" start="13779" end="13796" title="Shrewsbury School" label="Shrewsbury School"/>
<link wikidata="Q3403302" start="13805" end="13821" title="Uppingham School" label="Uppingham School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1927705" start="13830" end="13855" title="Trinity College (Connecticut)" label="Trinity College, Hartford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059517" start="13864" end="13882" title="Winchester College" label="Winchester College"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13899" end="13922" title="Cambridge Rules#1863" label="Cambridge Rules of 1863"/>
<link wikidata="Q5404814" start="14029" end="14044" title="Eton Field Game" label="Eton Field Game"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14236" end="14256" title="Cambridge Rules#1856" label="1856 Cambridge Rules"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067870" start="14274" end="14293" title="Charterhouse School" label="Charterhouse School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465720" start="14485" end="14499" title="Foot-Ball Club" label="Foot-Ball Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q18491" start="14597" end="14620" title="Sheffield Football Club" label="Sheffield Football Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q911681" start="14641" end="14664" title="Melbourne Football Club" label="Melbourne Football Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q841201" start="14850" end="14859" title="Wanderers F.C." label="Forest FC"/>
<link wikidata="Q56276372" start="14969" end="14978" title="Barnes FC" label="Barnes FC"/>
<link wikidata="Q19203505" start="15112" end="15124" title="John Charles Thring" label="J. C. Thring"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15726" end="15743" title="John Charles Thring#&amp;quot;The Simplest Game&amp;quot;" label="The Simplest Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q9500" start="16266" end="16286" title="Football Association" label="Football Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q2425484" start="16449" end="16464" title="Ebenezer Morley" label="Ebenezer Morley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2425484" start="18248" end="18257" title="Ebenezer Morley" label="Mr Morley"/>
<link wikidata="Q967572" start="18551" end="18565" title="Charles W. Alcock" label="Charles Alcock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341516" start="18650" end="18661" title="Westminster School" label="Westminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067870" start="18666" end="18678" title="Charterhouse School" label="Charterhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q67005999" start="18882" end="18895" title="Robert George Graham" label="Robert Graham"/>
<link wikidata="Q2902608" start="19765" end="19795" title="Sheffield &amp;amp; Hallamshire County Football Association" label="Sheffield Football Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343113" start="19826" end="19841" title="Sheffield Rules" label="Sheffield Rules"/>
<link wikidata="Q188304" start="20342" end="20352" title="Sunderland" label="Sunderland"/>
<link wikidata="Q19500" start="20355" end="20378" title="Wolverhampton Wanderers" label="Wolverhampton Wanderers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059415" start="20656" end="20664" title="Clyde FC" label="Clyde FC"/>
<link wikidata="Q478320" start="20769" end="20798" title="Scottish Football Association" label="Scottish Football Association"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20936" end="20954" title="1905–06 British Home Championship#Results" label="Scotland v England"/>
<link wikidata="Q19593" start="21830" end="21839" title="Celtic FC" label="Celtic FC"/>
<link wikidata="Q275173" start="22086" end="22115" title="Football Association of Wales" label="Football Association of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="22195" end="22210" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q124394" start="22636" end="22644" title="Highbury" label="Highbury"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23687" end="23700" title="Formation (association football)#WM" label="W-M formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2340854" start="23778" end="23810" title="1924–25 Football League" label="Football League games in 1924–25"/>
<link wikidata="Q2340838" start="23879" end="23886" title="1925–26 Football League" label="1925–26"/>
<link wikidata="Q4575968" start="25422" end="25429" title="1973–74 in Scottish football" label="1973–74"/>
<link wikidata="Q4576507" start="25434" end="25441" title="1974–75 in Scottish football" label="1974–75"/>
<link wikidata="Q864672" start="25515" end="25534" title="Scottish League Cup" label="Scottish League Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q3040183" start="25539" end="25552" title="Drybrough Cup" label="Drybrough Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q218270" start="25779" end="25791" title="Stanley Rous" label="Stanley Rous"/>
<link wikidata="Q4484649" start="25805" end="25835" title="1973 Scottish League Cup Final" label="1973 Scottish League Cup Final"/>
<link wikidata="Q19593" start="25915" end="25921" title="Celtic F.C." label="Celtic"/>
<link wikidata="Q355378" start="25930" end="25940" title="Jock Stein" label="Jock Stein"/>
<link wikidata="Q478320" start="26222" end="26251" title="Scottish Football Association" label="Scottish Football Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084735" start="26312" end="26345" title="1991 FIFA U-17 World Championship" label="1991 FIFA U-17 World Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1095556" start="26371" end="26399" title="North American Soccer League (1968-1984)" label="North American Soccer League"/>
<link wikidata="Q253414" start="26635" end="26639" title="FIFA" label="FIFA"/>
<link wikidata="Q333282" start="26968" end="26977" title="goal kick" label="goal kick"/>
<link wikidata="Q329285" start="27363" end="27371" title="throw-in" label="throw-in"/>
<link wikidata="Q242415" start="28090" end="28101" title="corner kick" label="corner kick"/>
<link wikidata="Q74110091" start="28423" end="28456" title="International Football Conference" label="International Football Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q844888" start="28713" end="28722" title="free kick" label="free kick"/>
<link wikidata="Q9500" start="29210" end="29230" title="Football Association" label="Football Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q503218" start="29263" end="29267" title="IFAB" label="IFAB"/>
<link wikidata="Q4493635" start="29295" end="29325" title="1987–88 Football Conference" label="1987–88 GM Vauxhall Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q19598" start="29668" end="29680" title="Notts County F.C." label="Notts County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331999" start="29730" end="29746" title="Osvaldo Zubeldía" label="Osvaldo Zubeldía"/>
<link wikidata="Q294259" start="30674" end="30687" title="Arrigo Sacchi" label="Arrigo Sacchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543" start="30933" end="30943" title="A.C. Milan" label="A.C. Milan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31000" end="31008" title="Glossary of association football terms#P" label="pressing"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31030" end="31045" title="Formation (association football)#4–4–2" label="4–4–2 formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736098" start="31163" end="31176" title="zonal marking" label="zonal marking"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130849" start="31342" end="31356" title="Liverpool F.C." label="Liverpool F.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q83106" start="31363" end="31375" title="Jürgen Klopp" label="Jürgen Klopp"/>
<link wikidata="Q133903" start="31533" end="31548" title="Virgil van Dijk" label="Virgil van Dijk"/>
<link wikidata="Q30301454" start="31553" end="31568" title="Ibrahima Konaté" label="Ibrahima Konaté"/>
<link wikidata="Q105718943" start="31633" end="31662" title="2021–22 Premier League" label="2021–22 Premier League season"/>
<link wikidata="Q50602" start="31764" end="31779" title="Manchester City" label="Manchester City"/>
<link wikidata="Q296036" start="31904" end="31921" title="Manuel Pellegrini" label="Manuel Pellegrini"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="187825" wikidata="Q2280202" url="?curid=187825" title="USS Baltimore">
<text>USS &quot;Baltimore&quot; may refer to:

*, was a 12-gun brigantine that served in the Continental Navy from 1777 to 1780.
*, was a 20-gun ship built in 1798.
*, was a side-wheel steamer captured in 1861.
*, was a protected cruiser commissioned in 1890.

:*The &quot;Baltimore&quot; crisis, an 1891 diplomatic incident involving USS &quot;Baltimore&quot; (C-3)

*, was a heavy cruiser commissioned in 1943.
*, was a &quot;Los Angeles&quot;-class nuclear attack submarine, decommissioned on 10 July 1998.
*USS &quot;Baltimore&quot; (SSN-812), a future &quot;Virginia&quot;-class nuclear attack submarine

==See also==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2280202" start="0" end="19" title="USS Baltimore" label="USS &amp;quot;Baltimore"/>
<link wikidata="Q805733" start="261" end="289" title="Baltimore crisis" label="&amp;quot;Baltimore&amp;quot; crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q130419082" start="505" end="540" title="USS Baltimore (SSN-812)" label="USS &amp;quot;Baltimore&amp;quot; (SSN-812)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="187828" wikidata="Q7419214" url="?curid=187828" title="Santa Barbara City College">
<text>Santa Barbara City College (SBCC) is a public community college in Santa Barbara, California. It opened in 1909 and is located on a campus.

==History==

Santa Barbara City College was established by the Santa Barbara High School District in 1909, making it one of the oldest community colleges in California. The college was discontinued shortly after World War I, and its work largely taken over by the Santa Barbara State Normal School, which became the Santa Barbara State College, and later, the University of California, Santa Barbara.

SBCC was reorganized by the high school district in the fall of 1946. Called Santa Barbara Junior College from its inception, the Santa Barbara Board of Education formally changed the name to Santa Barbara City College in July 1959. Also in the summer of 1959, the institution moved to its present and permanent location on the Santa Barbara Mesa, former site of the University of California, Santa Barbara. Situated on a 74-acre bluff, the campus overlooks the harbor and Pacific Ocean. Passage of a 1969 construction bond issue and a 1973 land acquisition bond issue ensured that the college would have a single, consolidated Mesa campus.

In 2013, Santa Barbara City College was awarded the Aspen Prize for Community College Excellence.

==Academics==

The School of Media Arts (SOMA) was established in 2001 to focus on applied communication, visual literacy and digital media. The school covers many areas of interest, including film studies, film production, photography, and computer and multimedia arts.

The music department at features several performance groups, including three jazz ensembles, large and small vocal ensembles, a concert band, and a full symphony orchestra.

The automotive program has been certified by the National Institute for Automotive Service Excellence (ASE) as a master training institution, having met industry standards in all eight of the automotive specialty areas: engine repair, engine performance, heating and air conditioning, electrical systems, automatic transmissions, manual transmission and axle, and brakes and front end.

Santa Barbara City College&#x27;s Marine Diving Technologies Program is the only community college degree program in the nation which is accredited by the Association of Commercial Diving Educators (ACDE), the International Diving Schools Association (IDSA), and the National Association of Underwater Instructors (NAUI). The program trains and certifies for all levels of SCUBA diving.

The Cancer Information Management Program at Santa Barbara City College offers two types of degrees: An Associate in Science in Cancer Information Management and the Certificate of Completion in Cancer Information Management. It is one of the few Cancer Information Management programs in the nation to currently offer an associate degree which is required to sit for the National Exam to become a Certified Tumor Registrar with the National Cancer Registrars Association starting in 2009.

The student newspaper is named &quot;The Channels&quot;.

==Athletics==
The college&#x27;s athletic teams are known as the Vaqueros. Santa Barbara competes as a member of the California Community College Athletic Association (CCCAA) in the Western State Conference (WSC) for all sports except football, which competes in Southern California Football Association (SCFA). City College offers intercollegiate athletic competition with nine men sports and eleven women&#x27;s sports.

Santa Barbara City College has won 11 CCCAA State Championship with the women&#x27;s water polo team being the most recent winner in 2017. Under the leadership of Athletic Director Rocco Constantino in 2017–2018, the Vaqueros finished tenth in the state of California in the NATYCAA Cup Standings, which measures the overall success of the athletic program on the state level. They were the highest ranking Western State Conference school in these standings. This represented the best showing for SBCC in the Cup&#x27;s history. In 2017–2018, the Vaqueros won a WSC-leading six conference championships. The SBCC Vaqueros soccer and football teams play at the 10,000-capacity La Playa Stadium in Santa Barbara.

A number of SBCC alumni have gone on to play professional sports in America. This group is highlighted by Jesse Orosco, Tyler Gilbert, Dylan Axelrod, Delwyn Young, Gary Woods, Lemmie Miller and Scott Randall (Major League Baseball), Larry Moriarty, Mitch Wishnowsky and Booker Brown (National Football League) and Don Ford (National Basketball Association). Orosco is a member of the CCCAA Hall of Fame, along with former SBCC coaches and administrators Pat Moorhouse and Bob Dinaberg. In 2019, the Santa Barbara City College established the SBCC Vaqueros Hall of Fame to recognize athletes, coaches, contributors and teams from their past. The inaugural Hall of Fame Class of 2019 includes former head coaches/administrators Bob Dinaberg, Pat Moorhouse and Bud Revis, student-athletes Booker Brown, Gary Woods, Marina Gomez and Debbie Ekola and the 1977 State Champion Women&#x27;s Track &amp; Field team.

==Notable people==

===Notable alumni===
* Jaime Ambriz, professional soccer player
* Ron Anderson, NBA
* Dylan Axelrod, professional baseball player
* Eion Bailey, actor
* David Crosby, folk rock musician
* Tyler Gilbert, professional baseball player
* Phillip Gonyea, professional musician
* Ben Howland, college basketball coach
* James Kiffe, professional soccer player
* Ozzy Lusth of &quot;&quot; and &quot;&quot;
* Mansour bin Zayed Al Nahyan, deputy prime minister of the United Arab Emirates and minister of presidential affairs
* Randolph Mantooth, actor, writer, and producer
* Airin Older, professional musician
* Jesse Orosco, professional baseball player
* Katy Perry, singer/songwriter
* Chris Plante, television reporter and host of eponymous radio show
* Elliot Rodger, perpetrator of the 2014 Isla Vista killings
* Mark Andrew Smith, graphic novelist
* Matthew Landy Steen, political activist, co-founder Weather Underground
* Grace Tame, 2021 Australian of the Year
* Das Williams, California State Assembly member
* Mitch Wishnowsky, professional football player
* David Woodard, conductor
* Delwyn Young, professional baseball player

===Notable faculty===
* Kathryn Ish, acting teacher

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7419214" start="0" end="26" title="Santa Barbara City College" label="Santa Barbara City College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7419214" start="28" end="32" title="Santa Barbara City College" label="SBCC"/>
<link wikidata="Q875538" start="39" end="45" title="Public college" label="public"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336920" start="46" end="63" title="community college" label="community college"/>
<link wikidata="Q159288" start="67" end="92" title="Santa Barbara, California" label="Santa Barbara, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q263064" start="501" end="540" title="University of California, Santa Barbara" label="University of California, Santa Barbara"/>
<link wikidata="Q457528" start="1237" end="1242" title="Aspen Institute" label="Aspen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1684430" start="1633" end="1646" title="jazz ensemble" label="jazz ensemble"/>
<link wikidata="Q131186" start="1665" end="1679" title="vocal ensemble" label="vocal ensemble"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422683" start="1965" end="1983" title="Engine tuning" label="engine performance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1798773" start="1985" end="2013" title="HVAC" label="heating and air conditioning"/>
<link wikidata="Q843592" start="2035" end="2057" title="automatic transmission" label="automatic transmission"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208529" start="2060" end="2079" title="manual transmission" label="manual transmission"/>
<link wikidata="Q1534839" start="2094" end="2099" title="brake" label="brake"/>
<link wikidata="Q17097021" start="2327" end="2367" title="International Diving Schools Association" label="International Diving Schools Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q645615" start="2384" end="2430" title="National Association of Underwater Instructors" label="National Association of Underwater Instructors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096878" start="2490" end="2502" title="SCUBA diving" label="SCUBA diving"/>
<link wikidata="Q6971240" start="2938" end="2976" title="National Cancer Registrars Association" label="National Cancer Registrars Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q5020348" start="3171" end="3220" title="California Community College Athletic Association" label="California Community College Athletic Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988330" start="3236" end="3260" title="Western State Conference" label="Western State Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q127394068" start="3317" end="3357" title="Southern California Football Association" label="Southern California Football Association"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3658" end="3675" title="Rocco Constantino" label="Rocco Constantino"/>
<link wikidata="Q54958618" start="4153" end="4169" title="La Playa Stadium" label="La Playa Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q3079492" start="4295" end="4307" title="Jesse Orosco" label="Jesse Orosco"/>
<link wikidata="Q107868719" start="4309" end="4322" title="Tyler Gilbert" label="Tyler Gilbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q3041928" start="4324" end="4337" title="Dylan Axelrod" label="Dylan Axelrod"/>
<link wikidata="Q3021961" start="4339" end="4351" title="Delwyn Young" label="Delwyn Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q5526194" start="4353" end="4363" title="Gary Woods" label="Gary Woods"/>
<link wikidata="Q6521202" start="4365" end="4378" title="Lemmie Miller" label="Lemmie Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q7437099" start="4383" end="4396" title="Scott Randall" label="Scott Randall"/>
<link wikidata="Q6490832" start="4422" end="4436" title="Larry Moriarty" label="Larry Moriarty"/>
<link wikidata="Q28037508" start="4438" end="4454" title="Mitch Wishnowsky" label="Mitch Wishnowsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q17579902" start="4459" end="4471" title="Booker Brown" label="Booker Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q3713516" start="4503" end="4511" title="Don Ford" label="Don Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q10436014" start="5140" end="5152" title="Jaime Ambriz" label="Jaime Ambriz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1627976" start="5183" end="5195" title="Ron Anderson (basketball, born 1958)" label="Ron Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3041928" start="5203" end="5216" title="Dylan Axelrod" label="Dylan Axelrod"/>
<link wikidata="Q964006" start="5249" end="5260" title="Eion Bailey" label="Eion Bailey"/>
<link wikidata="Q370560" start="5270" end="5282" title="David Crosby" label="David Crosby"/>
<link wikidata="Q107868719" start="5305" end="5318" title="Tyler Gilbert" label="Tyler Gilbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q20857818" start="5351" end="5365" title="Phillip Gonyea" label="Phillip Gonyea"/>
<link wikidata="Q4885868" start="5391" end="5402" title="Ben Howland" label="Ben Howland"/>
<link wikidata="Q17708826" start="5431" end="5442" title="James Kiffe" label="James Kiffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q10342187" start="5473" end="5483" title="Ozzy Lusth" label="Ozzy Lusth"/>
<link wikidata="Q556607" start="5519" end="5546" title="Mansour bin Zayed Al Nahyan" label="Mansour bin Zayed Al Nahyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q878" start="5577" end="5597" title="United Arab Emirates" label="United Arab Emirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q978784" start="5637" end="5654" title="Randolph Mantooth" label="Randolph Mantooth"/>
<link wikidata="Q646511" start="5686" end="5697" title="Airin Older" label="Airin Older"/>
<link wikidata="Q3079492" start="5723" end="5735" title="Jesse Orosco" label="Jesse Orosco"/>
<link wikidata="Q42493" start="5768" end="5778" title="Katy Perry" label="Katy Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q27663164" start="5800" end="5812" title="Chris Plante" label="Chris Plante"/>
<link wikidata="Q16943141" start="5869" end="5882" title="Elliot Rodger" label="Elliot Rodger"/>
<link wikidata="Q16938335" start="5903" end="5927" title="2014 Isla Vista killings" label="2014 Isla Vista killings"/>
<link wikidata="Q6766549" start="5930" end="5947" title="Mark Andrew Smith" label="Mark Andrew Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q6790842" start="5968" end="5987" title="Matthew Landy Steen" label="Matthew Landy Steen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163724" start="6020" end="6039" title="Weather Underground" label="Weather Underground"/>
<link wikidata="Q105070881" start="6042" end="6052" title="Grace Tame" label="Grace Tame"/>
<link wikidata="Q782788" start="6059" end="6081" title="Australian of the Year" label="Australian of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q5226471" start="6084" end="6096" title="Das Williams" label="Das Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026858" start="6098" end="6123" title="California State Assembly" label="California State Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q28037508" start="6133" end="6149" title="Mitch Wishnowsky" label="Mitch Wishnowsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1177254" start="6182" end="6195" title="David Woodard" label="David Woodard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3021961" start="6209" end="6221" title="Delwyn Young" label="Delwyn Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q6377065" start="6277" end="6288" title="Kathryn Ish" label="Kathryn Ish"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="187829" wikidata="Q1955878" url="?curid=187829" title="Offside">
<text>Offside, off-side or off side may refer to:

==Sport==
* Offside (sport), a rule in a number of field team sports restricting where players may position themselves
** Football codes
*** Offside (association football) 
*** Offside (American football) 
*** Offside (rugby)
** Hockey
*** Offside (bandy)
*** Offside (ice hockey) 
*** Offside (field hockey)
* Off side, a side of the field in cricket fielding
==Media==
* &quot;Offside&quot; (TV series), Scottish football programme
* &quot;Offside&quot; (manga), a Japanese football manga from Natsuko Heiuchi
* &quot;Offside&quot; (2000 film), a 2000 Turkish comedy-drama film
* &quot;Offside&quot; (2005 film), German film
* &quot;Offside&quot; (2006 Iranian film), Iranian film
* &quot;Offside&quot; (2006 Swedish film), Swedish film
* &quot;Offside&quot; (magazine), Swedish football magazine
* &quot;Offside&quot; (book), Spanish novel from Manuel Vázquez Montalbán
* &quot;Off Sides (Pigs vs. Freaks)&quot;, 1980s American film starring Eugene Roche, Grant Goodeve and Tony Randall

==Other uses==
* Offside, the side of the car furthest from the curb; See Right- and left-hand traffic
* Off-side rule, an interpretation for indentation in some computer programming languages

== See also ==
* Off-site (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1955878" start="0" end="7" title="Offside" label="Offside"/>
<link wikidata="Q1955878" start="9" end="17" title="Offside" label="off-side"/>
<link wikidata="Q1955878" start="21" end="29" title="Offside" label="off side"/>
<link wikidata="Q4567" start="57" end="72" title="Offside (sport)" label="Offside (sport)"/>
<link wikidata="Q18531" start="186" end="216" title="Offside (association football)" label="Offside (association football)"/>
<link wikidata="Q17047230" start="222" end="249" title="Offside (American football)" label="Offside (American football)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3140745" start="255" end="270" title="Offside (rugby)" label="Offside (rugby)"/>
<link wikidata="Q15964624" start="285" end="300" title="Offside (bandy)" label="Offside (bandy)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2473200" start="305" end="325" title="Offside (ice hockey)" label="Offside (ice hockey)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2776321" start="331" end="353" title="Offside (field hockey)" label="Offside (field hockey)"/>
<link wikidata="Q30671661" start="356" end="364" title="Off side" label="Off side"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="397" end="405" title="fielding (cricket)#Off- and leg-side fields" label="fielding"/>
<link wikidata="Q16846742" start="418" end="449" title="Offside (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Offside&amp;quot; (TV series)"/>
<link wikidata="Q702688" start="481" end="508" title="Offside (manga)" label="&amp;quot;Offside&amp;quot; (manga)"/>
<link wikidata="Q12809142" start="559" end="590" title="Offside (2000 film)" label="&amp;quot;Offside&amp;quot; (2000 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1306685" start="627" end="658" title="Offside (2005 film)" label="&amp;quot;Offside&amp;quot; (2005 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753074" start="674" end="713" title="Offside (2006 Iranian film)" label="&amp;quot;Offside&amp;quot; (2006 Iranian film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7079705" start="730" end="769" title="Offside (2006 Swedish film)" label="&amp;quot;Offside&amp;quot; (2006 Swedish film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375432" start="786" end="816" title="Offside (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Offside&amp;quot; (magazine)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196763" start="846" end="872" title="Offside (book)" label="&amp;quot;Offside&amp;quot; (book)"/>
<link wikidata="Q20164461" start="926" end="953" title="Off Sides (Pigs vs. Freaks)" label="Off Sides (Pigs vs. Freaks)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1110" end="1138" title="Right- and left-hand traffic#Terminology" label="Right- and left-hand traffic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3150006" start="1141" end="1154" title="Off-side rule" label="Off-side rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q16864999" start="1247" end="1272" title="Off-site (disambiguation)" label="Off-site (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="187834" wikidata="Q694643" url="?curid=187834" title="SMS Zrínyi">
<text>SMS &quot;Zrínyi&quot; (&quot;His Majesty&#x27;s ship Zrínyi&quot; ) was a semi-dreadnought battleship (&quot;Schlachtschiff&quot;) of the Austro-Hungarian Navy (&quot;K.u.K. Kriegsmarine&quot;), named for the Zrinski, a Croatian-Hungarian noble family (). &quot;Zrínyi&quot; and her sisters, and , were the last pre-dreadnoughts built for the Austro-Hungarian Navy.

During World War I, &quot;Zrínyi&quot; saw action in the Adriatic Sea. She served with the Second Division of the Austro-Hungarian Navy&#x27;s battleships and shelled Senigallia as part of the bombardment of the key seaport of Ancona, Italy, during May 1915. However, Allied control of the Strait of Otranto meant that the Austro-Hungarian Navy was effectively contained in the Adriatic. Nonetheless, the presence of the &quot;Zrínyi&quot; and other battleships tied down a substantial force of Allied ships.

With the war going against the Austrians by the end of 1918, &quot;Zrínyi&quot; was prepared for transfer to the new State of Slovenes, Croats and Serbs. On 10 November 1918, just one day before the end of the war, navy officers sailed the battleship out of Pola (Pula) and surrendered to a squadron of American submarine chasers. Following the handover to the United States Navy, she was briefly designated USS &quot;Zrínyi&quot;. In the Treaty of Saint-Germain-en-Laye, the transfer was not recognized; instead, &quot;Zrínyi&quot; was given to Italy and broken up for scrap.

== Design and construction ==

&quot;Zrínyi&quot; was built at the Stabilimento Tecnico Triestino dockyard in Trieste, the same place where her sister ships were built earlier. She was laid down on 15 November 1908 and launched from the slipway on 12 April 1910. The teak used on &quot;Zrínyi&quot;″s deck was the only material Austria-Hungary had to purchase abroad to build the ship. The ship was completed by 15 July 1911, and on 22 November 1911 she was commissioned into the fleet. She was the last ship of the class to be completed and had a crew of 880 to 890 officers and men.

&quot;Zrínyi&quot; was 138.8 m (455 ft 4 in) long, and had a beam of 24.6 m (80 ft 8 in) and a draft of 8.1 m (26 ft 9 in). She displaced normally, and up to with a full combat load. She was powered by two-shaft four-cylinder vertical triple expansion engines rated at 19,800 indicated horsepower. The ship had a top speed of . &quot;Zrínyi&quot; was the first warship in the Austro-Hungarian Navy to use fuel oil to supplement her 12 Yarrow-type coal-fired boilers. She had a maximum range of at a cruising speed of .

The ship&#x27;s primary armament consisted of four 30.5 cm (12 in) 45-caliber guns in two twin gun turrets. This was augmented by a heavy secondary battery of eight 24 cm (9.4 in) guns in four wing turrets. The tertiary battery consisted of twenty 10 cm L/50 guns in casemated single mounts, four  (1.85 in) L/44 and one 47 mm L/33 quick-firing guns. Furthermore, the ship&#x27;s boats were equipped with two  L/18 landing guns for operations ashore. After 1916–17 refits four Škoda 7 cm K16 anti-aircraft guns were installed. Three 45 cm (17.7 in) torpedo tubes were also carried, one on each broadside and one in the stern.
== Service history ==

The ship was assigned to the Austro-Hungarian Fleet&#x27;s 1st Battle Squadron after her 1911 commissioning. In 1912, &quot;Zrínyi&quot; and her two sister ships conducted two training cruises into the eastern Mediterranean Sea. On the second cruise into the Aegean Sea, conducted from November to December, &quot;Zrínyi&quot; and her sister ships were accompanied by the cruiser and a pair of destroyers. After returning to Pola, the entire fleet mobilized for possible hostilities, as tensions flared in the Balkans.

In 1913, &quot;Zrínyi&quot; participated in an international naval demonstration in the Ionian Sea to protest the Balkan Wars. Ships from other navies included in the demonstration were the British pre-dreadnought , the Italian pre-dreadnought , the French armored cruiser , and the German light cruiser . The most important action of the combined flotilla, which was under the command of British Admiral Cecil Burney, was to blockade the Montenegrin coast. The goal of the blockade was to prevent Serbian reinforcements from supporting the siege at Scutari, where Montenegro had besieged a combined force of Albanians and Ottomans. Pressured by the international blockade, Serbia withdrew its army from Scutari, which was subsequently occupied by a joint Allied ground force.

During that year, the first of four new dreadnoughts, , that made up the —the only dreadnoughts built for the Austro-Hungarian Navy—came into active service. With the commissioning of these dreadnoughts, &quot;Zrínyi&quot; and her sisters were moved from the 1st Division to the 2nd Division of the 1st Battle Squadron.

=== World War I ===

At the time of the assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austria on 28 June 1914, the battleships in the Austro-Hungarian Navy consisted of the &quot;Radetzky&quot; class, the &quot;Tegetthoff&quot; class (which still had one ship, , under construction), the and finally, the older . Along with the remainder of the Austro-Hungarian Navy, &quot;Zrínyi&quot; was mobilized in late July 1914 to support the flight of and . The two German ships broke out of Messina, which was surrounded by the British navy and reached Turkey. The flotilla had advanced as far south as Brindisi in southeastern Italy when news of the successful breakout reached Vienna. The Austro-Hungarian ships were then recalled before seeing action.

On 23 May 1915, between two and four hours after news of the Italian declaration of war reached the main Austro-Hungarian naval base at Pola, &quot;Zrínyi&quot; and the rest of the fleet departed to bombard the Italian and Montenegrin coast. Their focus was on the important naval base at Ancona, and later the coast of Montenegro. The bombardment of Montenegro was part of the larger Austro-Hungarian campaign against the Kingdoms of Montenegro and Serbia, which were members of the Entente, during the first half of 1915. The attack on Ancona was an immense success, and the ships were unopposed during the operation. The bombardment of the province and the surrounding area resulted in the destruction of an Italian steamer in the port of Ancona itself, and an Italian destroyer, , was severely damaged further south. On the shore, the infrastructure of the port of Ancona, as well as the surrounding towns, were severely damaged. The railroad yard in Ancona, as well as the port facilities in the town, were damaged or destroyed. The local shore batteries were also suppressed. During the bombardment, &quot;Zrínyi&quot; also helped to destroy a train, a railway station, and a bridge at Senigallia. Additional targets that were damaged or destroyed included wharves, warehouses, oil tanks, radio stations, and the local barracks. Sixty-three Italians, both civilians and military personnel, were killed in the bombardment. By the time Italian ships from Taranto and Brindisi arrived on the scene, the Austro-Hungarians were safely back in Pola.

The objective of the bombardment of Ancona was to delay the Italian Army from deploying its forces along the border with Austria-Hungary by destroying critical transportation systems. The surprise attack on Ancona succeeded in delaying the Italian deployment to the Alps for two weeks. This delay gave Austria-Hungary valuable time to strengthen its Italian border and re-deploy some of its troops from the Eastern and Balkan fronts.

Aside from the attack on Ancona, the Austro-Hungarian battleships were largely confined to Pola for the duration of the war. Their operations were limited by Admiral Anton Haus, the commander of the Austro-Hungarian Navy, who believed that he would need to husband his ships to counter any Italian attempt to seize the Dalmatian coast. Since coal was diverted to the newer &quot;Tegetthoff&quot;-class battleships, the remainder of the war saw &quot;Zrínyi&quot; and the rest of the Austro-Hungarian Navy acting as a fleet in being. This resulted in the Allied blockade of the Otranto Strait. With his fleet blockaded in the Adriatic Sea, and with a shortage of coal, Haus followed a strategy based on mines and submarines designed to reduce the numerical superiority of the Allied navies.

=== Post-war fate ===
After the Austro-Hungarian Empire collapsed in 1918, the Austrians wanted to turn the fleet over to the newly created State of Slovenes, Croats and Serbs (later to become a part of the Kingdom of Yugoslavia) in order to prevent the Italians from claiming the ships as spoils of war. However, the victorious Allies refused to acknowledge the conversations between the Austrians and the south Slavs and, in due course, reallocated the ships. The ship had been boarded by a scratch Yugoslav crew on 10 November 1918, one day before the Armistice, and had left Pola along with her sister ship, &quot;Radetzky&quot;. They were soon spotted by heavy Italian ships, so the two battleships hoisted American flags and sailed south along the Adriatic coast to Castelli Bay near Spalato (also known as Split). They appealed for American naval forces to meet them and accept their surrender, which a squadron of United States Navy (USN) submarine chasers in the area did. She had apparently been turned over to the fledgling south Slav state, as it was a Croat naval officer, &quot;Korvettenkapitän&quot; Marijan Polić, who presented the ship as a prize of war to representatives of the United States Navy on the afternoon of 22 November 1919 at Spalato (Split) in Dalmatia. Simultaneously she was commissioned as USS &quot;Zrínyi&quot; and Lieutenant E.E. Hazlett, USN, assumed command. The initial American complement consisted of four officers and 174 enlisted men—the latter entirely composed of United States Navy Reserve Force personnel. The ship remained at anchor at Spalato for nearly a year during the allied occupation of the eastern Adriatic while the negotiations that would determine her ultimate fate dragged on. Only once did she apparently turn her engines over, and that occurred during a severe gale that struck Spalato on 9 February 1920.

On the morning of 7 November 1920, &quot;Zrínyi&quot; was decommissioned. took her in tow and, assisted by and , towed the battleship to Italy. Under the terms of the treaties of Versailles and St. Germain, &quot;Zrínyi&quot; was ultimately turned over to the Italian government at Venice. She was broken up for scrap later that year and into 1921.

== Notes ==
===Footnotes===
===Citations===
== References ==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q694643" start="0" end="16" title="SMS Zrínyi" label="SMS &amp;quot;Zrínyi"/>
<link wikidata="Q847109" start="75" end="91" title="semi-dreadnought" label="semi-dreadnought"/>
<link wikidata="Q182531" start="92" end="102" title="battleship" label="battleship"/>
<link wikidata="Q159211" start="139" end="160" title="Austro-Hungarian Navy" label="Austro-Hungarian Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q227184" start="210" end="217" title="Zrinski family" label="Zrinski"/>
<link wikidata="Q14914903" start="221" end="229" title="Croatian nobility" label="Croatian"/>
<link wikidata="Q927915" start="230" end="239" title="Hungarian nobility" label="Hungarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q923085" start="284" end="291" title="Sister ship" label="sisters"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="375" end="386" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q13924" start="425" end="437" title="Adriatic Sea" label="Adriatic Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q124925" start="535" end="545" title="Senigallia" label="Senigallia"/>
<link wikidata="Q543048" start="557" end="608" title="Bombardment of Ancona" label="the bombardment of the key seaport of Ancona, Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q215669" start="636" end="642" title="Allies of World War I" label="Allied"/>
<link wikidata="Q164070" start="658" end="675" title="Strait of Otranto" label="Strait of Otranto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387833" start="769" end="781" title="fleet in being" label="the presence"/>
<link wikidata="Q718374" start="995" end="1030" title="State of Slovenes, Croats and Serbs" label="State of Slovenes, Croats and Serbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q4656" start="1136" end="1140" title="Pula" label="Pola"/>
<link wikidata="Q744967" start="1190" end="1206" title="submarine chaser" label="submarine chaser"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="1239" end="1257" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q694643" start="1286" end="1302" title="SMS Zrínyi" label="USS &amp;quot;Zrínyi"/>
<link wikidata="Q192924" start="1317" end="1348" title="Treaty of Saint-Germain-en-Laye (1919)" label="Treaty of Saint-Germain-en-Laye"/>
<link wikidata="Q336332" start="1434" end="1453" title="ship breaking" label="broken up for scrap"/>
<link wikidata="Q502713" start="1523" end="1553" title="Stabilimento Tecnico Triestino" label="Stabilimento Tecnico Triestino"/>
<link wikidata="Q546" start="1566" end="1573" title="Trieste" label="Trieste"/>
<link wikidata="Q596643" start="1675" end="1683" title="ship naming and launching" label="launched"/>
<link wikidata="Q361945" start="1693" end="1700" title="slipway" label="slipway"/>
<link wikidata="Q156938" start="1723" end="1727" title="teak" label="teak"/>
<link wikidata="Q2376482" start="2103" end="2107" title="Beam (nautical)" label="beam"/>
<link wikidata="Q244777" start="2137" end="2142" title="draft (hull)" label="draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q12760" start="2277" end="2300" title="triple expansion engine" label="triple expansion engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q160857" start="2318" end="2338" title="indicated horsepower" label="indicated horsepower"/>
<link wikidata="Q214199" start="2447" end="2455" title="fuel oil" label="fuel oil"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2477" end="2488" title="Water-tube boiler#Yarrow" label="Yarrow-type"/>
<link wikidata="Q16624082" start="2613" end="2631" title="Škoda 30.5 cm /45 K10" label="30.5 cm (12 in) 45"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2632" end="2639" title="Caliber#Caliber as measurement of length" label="caliber"/>
<link wikidata="Q558591" start="2657" end="2667" title="gun turret" label="gun turret"/>
<link wikidata="Q558591" start="2755" end="2766" title="wing turret" label="wing turret"/>
<link wikidata="Q16624075" start="2810" end="2820" title="Škoda 10 cm K10" label="10 cm L/50"/>
<link wikidata="Q89521" start="2829" end="2837" title="casemate" label="casemate"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2859" end="2859" title="QF 3-pounder Hotchkiss#Austro-Hungarian service" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q383028" start="2894" end="2910" title="quick-firing gun" label="quick-firing gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q39053296" start="2971" end="2971" title="Škoda 7 cm guns" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q16624083" start="3039" end="3053" title="Škoda 7 cm K10" label="Škoda 7 cm K16"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330003" start="3111" end="3123" title="torpedo tube" label="torpedo tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q629252" start="3156" end="3165" title="Broadside (naval)" label="broadside"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="3421" end="3438" title="Mediterranean Sea" label="Mediterranean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q34575" start="3470" end="3480" title="Aegean Sea" label="Aegean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q37495" start="3819" end="3829" title="Ionian Sea" label="Ionian Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q165725" start="3845" end="3856" title="Balkan Wars" label="Balkan Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q847478" start="3988" end="4003" title="armored cruiser" label="armored cruiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q778129" start="4021" end="4034" title="light cruiser" label="light cruiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q5055980" start="4136" end="4148" title="Cecil Burney" label="Cecil Burney"/>
<link wikidata="Q116973707" start="4157" end="4187" title="blockade of Montenegro" label="blockade the Montenegrin coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q403" start="4229" end="4235" title="Serbia" label="Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2149254" start="4272" end="4288" title="Siege of Scutari (1912–1913)" label="siege at Scutari"/>
<link wikidata="Q179248" start="4340" end="4349" title="Albanians" label="Albanians"/>
<link wikidata="Q2359535" start="4354" end="4362" title="Ottoman Turks" label="Ottomans"/>
<link wikidata="Q847109" start="4549" end="4560" title="dreadnought" label="dreadnought"/>
<link wikidata="Q192050" start="4870" end="4922" title="assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austria" label="assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q13666" start="5313" end="5320" title="Messina" label="Messina"/>
<link wikidata="Q13496" start="5425" end="5433" title="Brindisi" label="Brindisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2053006" start="5469" end="5492" title="Pursuit of Goeben and Breslau" label="the successful breakout"/>
<link wikidata="Q3415" start="5867" end="5873" title="Ancona" label="Ancona"/>
<link wikidata="Q841559" start="5980" end="6034" title="Serbian Campaign (World War I)" label="campaign against the Kingdoms of Montenegro and Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q215669" start="6047" end="6069" title="Allies of World War I" label="members of the Entente"/>
<link wikidata="Q124925" start="6770" end="6780" title="Senigallia" label="Senigallia"/>
<link wikidata="Q828909" start="6841" end="6848" title="wharves" label="wharves"/>
<link wikidata="Q13498" start="7037" end="7044" title="Taranto" label="Taranto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286" start="7395" end="7399" title="Alps" label="Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q590116" start="7730" end="7740" title="Anton Haus" label="Anton Haus"/>
<link wikidata="Q528042" start="7883" end="7891" title="Dalmatia" label="Dalmatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387833" start="8081" end="8095" title="fleet in being" label="fleet in being"/>
<link wikidata="Q696752" start="8118" end="8133" title="Otranto Barrage" label="Allied blockade"/>
<link wikidata="Q164070" start="8141" end="8155" title="Otranto Strait" label="Otranto Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q28513" start="8387" end="8410" title="Austro-Hungarian Empire" label="Austro-Hungarian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q718374" start="8495" end="8530" title="State of Slovenes, Croats and Serbs" label="State of Slovenes, Croats and Serbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q191077" start="8562" end="8583" title="Kingdom of Yugoslavia" label="Kingdom of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q13924" start="9109" end="9117" title="Adriatic" label="Adriatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q396579" start="9127" end="9139" title="Castelli Bay" label="Castelli Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1663" start="9145" end="9152" title="Split (city)" label="Spalato"/>
<link wikidata="Q1663" start="9168" end="9173" title="Split (city)" label="Split"/>
<link wikidata="Q167420" start="9420" end="9425" title="Croats" label="Croat"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="9552" end="9570" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q528042" start="9630" end="9638" title="Dalmatia" label="Dalmatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3550750" start="9865" end="9891" title="United States Navy Reserve" label="United States Navy Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q131400125" start="9984" end="10018" title="occupation of the eastern Adriatic" label="occupation of the eastern Adriatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q8736" start="10404" end="10414" title="Treaty of Versailles" label="Versailles"/>
<link wikidata="Q192924" start="10419" end="10430" title="Treaty of Saint-Germain-en-Laye (1919)" label="St. Germain"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="10485" end="10492" title="Italy" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q641" start="10507" end="10513" title="Venice" label="Venice"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="187846" wikidata="Q7493721" url="?curid=187846" title="Shell pavement design method">
<text>The Shell pavement design method was used in many countries for the design of new pavements made of asphalt. First published in 1963, it was the first mechanistic design method, providing a procedure that was no longer based on codification of historic experience but instead that permitted computation of strain levels at key positions in the pavement. By analyzing different proposed constructions (layer materials and thicknesses), the procedure allowed a designer to keep the tensile strain at the bottom of the asphalt at a level less than a critical value and to keep the vertical strain at the top of the subgrade less than another critical value. With these two strains kept, respectively, within the design limits, premature fatigue failure in the asphalt and rutting of the pavement would be precluded. Relationships linking strain values to fatigue and rutting permitted a user to design a pavement able to carry almost any desired number of transits of standard wheel loads. 

In such structural road design, the main inputs consist of soil parameters, parameters (thickness and stiffness) for the other road foundation materials, and the expected number of times a standard load will pass over. The output of the calculation is the thickness of the asphalt layer.

Originally published for highway design, it was expanded to include a procedure for airfields in the early 1970s. New criteria were added in 1978.

The approach put forward in the shell pavement design method formed the basis for most early mechanistic structural road design methods, while the AASHTO Mechanistic Empirical Design Guide (the &#x27;MEPDG&#x27;), first published in 2004, is, in effect, a modern successor.

== See also ==
*Road surface

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7493721" start="4" end="32" title="Shell pavement design method" label="Shell pavement design method"/>
<link wikidata="Q6256" start="50" end="59" title="countries" label="countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q177749" start="82" end="91" title="Sidewalk" label="pavements"/>
<link wikidata="Q189259" start="100" end="107" title="asphalt concrete" label="asphalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q16965333" start="997" end="1019" title="structural road design" label="structural road design"/>
<link wikidata="Q36133" start="1048" end="1052" title="soil" label="soil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413083" start="1053" end="1062" title="parameter" label="parameter"/>
<link wikidata="Q191360" start="1121" end="1131" title="Foundation (engineering)" label="foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q16965333" start="1531" end="1553" title="structural road design" label="structural road design"/>
<link wikidata="Q463415" start="1573" end="1579" title="AASHTO" label="AASHTO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049667" start="1717" end="1729" title="Road surface" label="Road surface"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="187849" wikidata="Q331710" url="?curid=187849" title="Fitness (biology)">
<text>Fitness (often denoted formula_1 or ω in population genetics models) is a quantitative representation of individual reproductive success. It is also equal to the average contribution to the gene pool of the next generation, made by the same individuals of the specified genotype or phenotype. Fitness can be defined either with respect to a genotype or to a phenotype in a given environment or time. The fitness of a genotype is manifested through its phenotype, which is also affected by the developmental environment. The fitness of a given phenotype can also be different in different selective environments.

With asexual reproduction, it is sufficient to assign fitnesses to genotypes. With sexual reproduction, recombination scrambles alleles into different genotypes every generation; in this case, fitness values can be assigned to alleles by averaging over possible genetic backgrounds. Natural selection tends to make alleles with higher fitness more common over time, resulting in Darwinian evolution.

The term &quot;Darwinian fitness&quot; can be used to make clear the distinction with physical fitness. Fitness does not include a measure of survival or life-span; Herbert Spencer&#x27;s well-known phrase &quot;survival of the fittest&quot; should be interpreted as: &quot;Survival of the form (phenotypic or genotypic) that will leave the most copies of itself in successive generations.&quot;

Inclusive fitness differs from individual fitness by including the ability of an allele in one individual to promote the survival and/or reproduction of other individuals that share that allele, in preference to individuals with a different allele. To avoid double counting, inclusive fitness excludes the contribution of other individuals to the survival and reproduction of the focal individual. One mechanism of inclusive fitness is kin selection.

==Fitness as propensity==
Fitness is often defined as a propensity or probability, rather than the actual number of offspring. For example, according to Maynard Smith, &quot;Fitness is a property, not of an individual, but of a class of individuals—for example homozygous for allele A at a particular locus. Thus the phrase &#x27;expected number of offspring&#x27; means the average number, not the number produced by some one individual. If the first human infant with a gene for levitation were struck by lightning in its pram, this would not prove the new genotype to have low fitness, but only that the particular child was unlucky.&quot;

Alternatively, &quot;the fitness of the individual—having an array x of phenotypes—is the probability, s(x), that the individual will be included among the group selected as parents of the next generation.&quot;

== Models of fitness ==
In order to avoid the complications of sex and recombination, the concept of fitness is presented below in the restricted setting of an asexual population without genetic recombination. Thus, fitnesses can be assigned directly to genotypes. There are two commonly used operationalizations of fitness – absolute fitness and relative fitness.

===Absolute fitness===
The absolute fitness (formula_2) of a genotype is defined as the proportional change in the abundance of that genotype over one generation attributable to selection. For example, if formula_3 is the abundance of a genotype in generation formula_4 in an infinitely large population (so that there is no genetic drift), and neglecting the change in genotype abundances due to mutations, then

:formula_5.

An absolute fitness larger than 1 indicates growth in that genotype&#x27;s abundance; an absolute fitness smaller than 1 indicates decline.

===Relative fitness===
Whereas absolute fitness determines changes in genotype abundance, relative fitness (formula_1) determines changes in genotype frequency. If formula_7 is the total population size in generation formula_4, and the relevant genotype&#x27;s frequency is formula_9, then

:formula_10,

where formula_11 is the mean relative fitness in the population (again setting aside changes in frequency due to drift and mutation). Relative fitnesses only indicate the change in prevalence of different genotypes relative to each other, and so only their values relative to each other are important; relative fitnesses can be any nonnegative number, including 0. It is often convenient to choose one genotype as a reference and set its relative fitness to 1. Relative fitness is used in the standard Wright–Fisher and Moran models of population genetics.

Absolute fitnesses can be used to calculate relative fitness, since formula_12 (we have used the fact that formula_13, where formula_14 is the mean absolute fitness in the population). This implies that formula_15, or in other words, relative fitness is proportional to formula_16. It is not possible to calculate absolute fitnesses from relative fitnesses alone, since relative fitnesses contain no information about changes in overall population abundance formula_7.

Assigning relative fitness values to genotypes is mathematically appropriate when two conditions are met: first, the population is at demographic equilibrium, and second, individuals vary in their birth rate, contest ability, or death rate, but not a combination of these traits.

=== Change in genotype frequencies due to selection ===
The change in genotype frequencies due to selection follows immediately from the definition of relative fitness,

:formula_18.

Thus, a genotype&#x27;s frequency will decline or increase depending on whether its fitness is lower or greater than the mean fitness, respectively.

In the particular case that there are only two genotypes of interest (e.g. representing the invasion of a new mutant allele), the change in genotype frequencies is often written in a different form. Suppose that two genotypes formula_19 and formula_20 have fitnesses formula_21 and formula_22, and frequencies formula_23 and formula_24, respectively. Then formula_25, and so

:formula_26.

Thus, the change in genotype formula_27&#x27;s frequency depends crucially on the difference between its fitness and the fitness of genotype formula_28. Supposing that formula_27 is more fit than formula_28, and defining the selection coefficient formula_31 by formula_32, we obtain

:formula_33,

where the last approximation holds for formula_34. In other words, the fitter genotype&#x27;s frequency grows approximately logistically.

== History ==

The British sociologist Herbert Spencer coined the phrase &quot;survival of the fittest&quot; in his 1864 work &quot;Principles of Biology&quot; to characterise what Charles Darwin had called natural selection.

The British-Indian biologist J.B.S. Haldane was the first to quantify fitness, in terms of the modern evolutionary synthesis of Darwinism and Mendelian genetics starting with his 1924 paper &quot;A Mathematical Theory of Natural and Artificial Selection&quot;. The next further advance was the introduction of the concept of inclusive fitness by the British biologist W.D. Hamilton in 1964 in his paper on &quot;The Genetical Evolution of Social Behaviour&quot;.

== Genetic load ==

Genetic load measures the average fitness of a population of individuals, relative either to a theoretical genotype of optimal fitness, or relative to the most fit genotype actually present in the population. Consider n genotypes formula_35, which have the fitnesses formula_36 and the genotype frequencies formula_37 respectively. Ignoring frequency-dependent selection, then genetic load (formula_38) may be calculated as:

:formula_39

Genetic load may increase when deleterious mutations, migration, inbreeding, or outcrossing lower mean fitness. Genetic load may also increase when beneficial mutations increase the maximum fitness against which other mutations are compared; this is known as the substitutional load or cost of selection.

== See also ==
* Gene-centered view of evolution
* Inclusive fitness
* Lineage selection
* Natural selection
* Reproductive success
* Selection coefficient
* Universal Darwinism
* Differential fitness

== Notes and references ==
{{Reflist|2}}

==Bibliography==
* Sober, E. (2001). The Two Faces of Fitness. In R. Singh, D. Paul, C. Krimbas, and J. Beatty (Eds.), &quot;Thinking about Evolution: Historical, Philosophical, and Political Perspectives&quot;. Cambridge University Press, pp. 309–321. Full text
* {{cite journal |author=Orr HA |title=Fitness and its role in evolutionary genetics |journal=Nat. Rev. Genet. |volume=10 |issue=8 |pages=531–539 |date=August 2009 |pmid=19546856 |doi=10.1038/nrg2603 |pmc=2753274}}

== External links ==
* Video: Using fitness landscapes to visualize evolution in action
* BEACON Blog--Evolution 101: Fitness Landscapes
* Pleiotrophy Blog--an interesting discussion of Sergey Gavrilets&#x27;s contributions
* Evolution A-Z: Fitness
* Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy entry

{{Evolution}}
{{Evolutionary psychology}}
{{Population genetics}}
{{Authority control}}</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q331710" start="0" end="7" title="Fitness (biology)" label="Fitness"/>
<link wikidata="Q331710" start="23" end="32" title="Fitness (biology)" label="formula_1"/>
<link wikidata="Q331710" start="36" end="37" title="Fitness (biology)" label="ω"/>
<link wikidata="Q31151" start="41" end="60" title="population genetics" label="population genetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q951437" start="74" end="86" title="Numerical data" label="quantitative"/>
<link wikidata="Q751093" start="116" end="136" title="reproductive success" label="reproductive success"/>
<link wikidata="Q200125" start="162" end="182" title="expected value" label="average contribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q189800" start="190" end="199" title="gene pool" label="gene pool"/>
<link wikidata="Q106016" start="341" end="349" title="genotype" label="genotype"/>
<link wikidata="Q104053" start="358" end="367" title="phenotype" label="phenotype"/>
<link wikidata="Q173432" start="618" end="638" title="asexual reproduction" label="asexual reproduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q182353" start="696" end="715" title="sexual reproduction" label="sexual reproduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q80726" start="741" end="747" title="allele" label="allele"/>
<link wikidata="Q183493" start="992" end="1001" title="Darwinism" label="Darwinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q309252" start="1100" end="1116" title="physical fitness" label="physical fitness"/>
<link wikidata="Q144535" start="1179" end="1194" title="Herbert Spencer" label="Herbert Spencer"/>
<link wikidata="Q721322" start="1226" end="1249" title="survival of the fittest" label="survival of the fittest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1005215" start="1411" end="1428" title="Inclusive fitness" label="Inclusive fitness"/>
<link wikidata="Q741598" start="1847" end="1860" title="kin selection" label="kin selection"/>
<link wikidata="Q2112968" start="1919" end="1929" title="propensity" label="propensity"/>
<link wikidata="Q323207" start="2016" end="2029" title="Maynard Smith" label="Maynard Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q104053" start="2579" end="2589" title="phenotypes" label="phenotypes"/>
<link wikidata="Q211675" start="2907" end="2928" title="genetic recombination" label="genetic recombination"/>
<link wikidata="Q486420" start="3411" end="3424" title="genetic drift" label="genetic drift"/>
<link wikidata="Q42918" start="3483" end="3491" title="mutation" label="mutation"/>
<link wikidata="Q387981" start="3804" end="3813" title="Allele frequency" label="frequency"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4461" end="4474" title="Genetic drift#Wright–Fisher model" label="Wright–Fisher"/>
<link wikidata="Q17157279" start="4479" end="4490" title="Moran process" label="Moran model"/>
<link wikidata="Q3682251" start="6217" end="6238" title="selection coefficient" label="selection coefficient"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052379" start="6414" end="6426" title="Logistic function" label="logistically"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="6448" end="6455" title="United Kingdom" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q21201" start="6456" end="6467" title="sociologist" label="sociologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q144535" start="6468" end="6483" title="Herbert Spencer" label="Herbert Spencer"/>
<link wikidata="Q721322" start="6508" end="6531" title="survival of the fittest" label="survival of the fittest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035" start="6610" end="6624" title="Charles Darwin" label="Charles Darwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q43478" start="6636" end="6653" title="natural selection" label="natural selection"/>
<link wikidata="Q156333" start="6685" end="6699" title="J.B.S. Haldane" label="J.B.S. Haldane"/>
<link wikidata="Q337897" start="6751" end="6780" title="Modern synthesis (20th century)" label="modern evolutionary synthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q185055" start="6798" end="6816" title="Mendelian genetics" label="Mendelian genetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q4658148" start="6852" end="6909" title="A Mathematical Theory of Natural and Artificial Selection" label="A Mathematical Theory of Natural and Artificial Selection"/>
<link wikidata="Q1005215" start="6981" end="6998" title="inclusive fitness" label="inclusive fitness"/>
<link wikidata="Q15451" start="7024" end="7037" title="W.D. Hamilton" label="W.D. Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7736095" start="7068" end="7111" title="The Genetical Evolution of Social Behaviour" label="The Genetical Evolution of Social Behaviour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047416" start="7140" end="7152" title="Genetic load" label="Genetic load"/>
<link wikidata="Q656595" start="7426" end="7446" title="genotype frequency" label="genotype frequencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3954861" start="7481" end="7510" title="frequency-dependent selection" label="frequency-dependent selection"/>
<link wikidata="Q1481109" start="7644" end="7654" title="inbreeding depression" label="inbreeding"/>
<link wikidata="Q259880" start="7659" end="7670" title="outbreeding depression" label="outcrossing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2033300" start="7842" end="7882" title="Haldane&amp;#x27;s dilemma" label="substitutional load or cost of selection"/>
<link wikidata="Q3080021" start="7902" end="7933" title="Gene-centered view of evolution" label="Gene-centered view of evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1005215" start="7936" end="7953" title="Inclusive fitness" label="Inclusive fitness"/>
<link wikidata="Q6553369" start="7956" end="7973" title="Lineage selection" label="Lineage selection"/>
<link wikidata="Q43478" start="7976" end="7993" title="Natural selection" label="Natural selection"/>
<link wikidata="Q751093" start="7996" end="8016" title="Reproductive success" label="Reproductive success"/>
<link wikidata="Q3682251" start="8019" end="8040" title="Selection coefficient" label="Selection coefficient"/>
<link wikidata="Q7893935" start="8043" end="8062" title="Universal Darwinism" label="Universal Darwinism"/>
<link wikidata="Q106631082" start="8065" end="8085" title="Differential fitness" label="Differential fitness"/>
<link wikidata="Q329031" start="8148" end="8157" title="Elliott Sober" label="Sober, E."/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="187851" wikidata="Q523402" url="?curid=187851" title="Fitness">
<text>Fitness may refer to:

* Physical fitness, a state of health and well-being of the body
* Fitness culture, a sociocultural phenomenon surrounding exercise and physical fitness
* Fitness (biology), an individual&#x27;s ability to propagate its genes
* Fitness (cereal), a brand of breakfast cereals and granola bars
* &quot;Fitness&quot; (magazine), a women&#x27;s magazine, focusing on health and exercise
* Fitness and figure competition, a form of physique training, related to bodybuilding
* Fitness approximation, a method of function optimization evolutionary computation or artificial evolution methodologies
* Fitness function, a particular type of objective function in mathematics and computer science
* &quot;Fitness&quot;, a 2018 song by Lizzo

==See also ==
* FitNesse, a web server, a wiki, and a software testing tool
*Survival of the fittest</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q523402" start="0" end="7" title="Fitness" label="Fitness"/>
<link wikidata="Q309252" start="25" end="41" title="Physical fitness" label="Physical fitness"/>
<link wikidata="Q22908427" start="90" end="105" title="Fitness culture" label="Fitness culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q331710" start="178" end="195" title="Fitness (biology)" label="Fitness (biology)"/>
<link wikidata="Q19604398" start="251" end="267" title="Fitness (cereal)" label="Fitness (cereal)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5455462" start="317" end="347" title="Fitness (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Fitness&amp;quot; (magazine)"/>
<link wikidata="Q841186" start="408" end="438" title="Fitness and figure competition" label="Fitness and figure competition"/>
<link wikidata="Q16250539" start="495" end="516" title="Fitness approximation" label="Fitness approximation"/>
<link wikidata="Q629118" start="617" end="633" title="Fitness function" label="Fitness function"/>
<link wikidata="Q16232225" start="749" end="754" title="Lizzo" label="Lizzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5455377" start="772" end="780" title="FitNesse" label="FitNesse"/>
<link wikidata="Q721322" start="833" end="856" title="Survival of the fittest" label="Survival of the fittest"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="187853" wikidata="Q16965333" url="?curid=187853" title="Structural road design">
<text>Structural road design aims to ensure the road is strong enough for the expected number of vehicles in a certain number of years. The input of a calculation is the number expected of vehicles (e.g. 10,000,000) divided in groups (e.g. trucks, vans, cars) and the number of years that the road has to function before the road structure has to be fully renewed (e.g. 20 years).

The given example of 20 years does not mean that there is no maintenance during this period. There is a certain amount of maintenance, but it can be scheduled and is low.

For asphalt, the Shell pavement design method is often used.

== See also ==
* Road traffic control
* Geometric design of roads
*Road surface

==References==
==External links==
*https://web.archive.org/web/20110711165635/http://www.highwaysmaintenance.com/design.htm - The Idiots&#x27; Guide to Highways Maintenance
*http://www.cshrp.org/products/techbr-23.pdf Pavement Structural Design Practices Across Canada
*https://circle.ubc.ca/bitstream/handle/2429/26992/Haul_Road_Design_Guidelines.pdf?sequence=1 - GUIDELINES FOR MINE HAUL ROAD DESIGN</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q16965333" start="0" end="22" title="Structural road design" label="Structural road design"/>
<link wikidata="Q34442" start="42" end="46" title="road" label="road"/>
<link wikidata="Q7493721" start="565" end="593" title="Shell pavement design method" label="Shell pavement design method"/>
<link wikidata="Q6132995" start="627" end="647" title="Road traffic control" label="Road traffic control"/>
<link wikidata="Q3635230" start="650" end="675" title="Geometric design of roads" label="Geometric design of roads"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049667" start="677" end="689" title="Road surface" label="Road surface"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="187854" wikidata="Q1066908" url="?curid=187854" title="Joseph Lamb (composer)">
<text>Joseph Francis Lamb (December 6, 1887 – September 3, 1960) was an American composer of ragtime music. Lamb, of Irish descent, was the only non-African American of the &quot;Big Three&quot; composers of classical ragtime, the other two being Scott Joplin and James Scott. The ragtime of Joseph Lamb ranges from standard popular fare to complex and highly engaging. His use of long phrases was influenced by classical works he had learned from his sister and others while growing up, but his sense of structure was potentially derived from his study of Joplin&#x27;s piano rags. By the time he added some polish to his later works in the 1950s, Lamb had mastered the classic rag genre in a way that almost no other composer was able to approach at that time, and continued to play it passably as well, as evidenced by at least two separate recordings done in his home, as well as a few recorded interviews.

==Early life and education==

Lamb was born in Montclair, New Jersey. The youngest of four children, he taught himself to play the piano and admired the early ragtime publications of Scott Joplin. His first known works were &quot;Meet Me at the Chutes,&quot; and &quot;Idle Dreams&quot;, at the age of 13 in 1900, but they are unpublished and assumed lost.

While living in Toronto, Canada in his teenage years, he published several march and waltz compositions for Harry H. Sparks Music Publisher. Most notable were &quot;The Lilliputian&#x27;s Bazaar&quot;, &quot;Celestine Waltzes&quot;, and &quot;Florentine&quot;. Most were published after he left Canada.
==Career==
Lamb dropped out of St. Jerome&#x27;s College in 1904 to work for a dry goods company. He met Joplin in 1907 while purchasing the latest Joplin and Scott sheet music in the offices of John Stark &amp; Son. Joplin was impressed with Lamb&#x27;s compositions and recommended him to ragtime publisher John Stark. Stark published Lamb&#x27;s music for the next decade, starting with &quot;Sensation&quot;.

Lamb&#x27;s twelve rags published by Stark from 1908 to 1919 can be divided into two groups. The &quot;heavy&quot; rags are incorporated with Joplin&#x27;s melody–dominated style and Scott&#x27;s expansive use of the keyboard registers. This style includes &quot;Ethiopia Rag&quot; (1909), &quot;Excelsior Rag&quot; (1909), &quot;American Beauty Rag&quot; (1913), &quot;Nightingale Rag&quot; (1915), and &quot;The Top Liner Rag&quot; (1916). The &quot;light&quot; rags with the cakewalk tradition show the narrow-range melodies inspired by Joplin. This style of rags includes &quot;Champagne Rag&quot; (1910), &quot;Cleopatra Rag&quot; (1915), &quot;Reindeer: Ragtime Two Step&quot; (1915), and &quot;Bohemia Rag&quot; (1919). &quot;Contentment Rag&quot; (1915) and &quot;Patricia Rag&quot; (1916) have characteristics of both &quot;heavy&quot; and &quot;light&quot; rags.

Lamb used sequence for development purposes. He emphasized the harmonic sonority of the diminished seventh with upper-neighbor appoggiatura. He surpassed ragtime&#x27;s usual four-measure phrase structure.

In 1911, Lamb married his first wife, Henrietta Schultz, and moved to Brooklyn, New York. He worked as an arranger for the J. Fred Helf Music Publishing Company and later, starting in April 1914, as an accountant for L. F. Dommerich &amp; Company. They had one son, Joseph Jr., together, in 1915. Henrietta died of influenza in 1920 about the same time that popular music interest shifted from ragtime to jazz. Lamb stopped publishing his music, playing and composing only as a hobby. &quot;Bohemia Rag&quot; was published in 1919.

Jack Mills, Inc. hired Lamb to write four novelty piano solos, (being &quot;Cinders&quot;, &quot;Shooting the Works&quot;, &quot;Chime In&quot;, and &quot;Crimson Rambler&quot;) in the early 1920s, but these were unpublished and lost until the 2010s.
==Personal life==
Lamb married Amelia Collins in 1922. They had four children: Patricia (1924–2022), Richard (1926–?), Robert (1927–2023), and Donald (1930–2003).

With the revival of interest in ragtime in the 1950s, Lamb shared his memories of Joplin and other early ragtime figures with music historians. Many were surprised to find that not only was he still living but that he was white. He composed new rags, brought out compositions that had never been published, and made recordings. A year before his death in 1960 the album &quot;Joseph Lamb: A Study in Classic Ragtime&quot; was released by Folkways Records. He died of a heart attack in Brooklyn at age 72.

==Rags published by John Stark==

* Sensation Rag (1908)
* Ethiopia Rag (1909)
* Excelsior Rag (1909)
* Champagne Rag (1910)
* American Beauty Rag (1913)
* Contentment Rag (1915)
* Ragtime Nightingale (1915)
* Cleopatra Rag (1915)
* Reindeer Rag (1915)
* Top Liner Rag (1916)
* Patricia Rag (1916)
* Bohemia Rag (1919) 


==Additional rags (1959–1966)==

* Alabama Rag
* Alaskan Rag
* Arctic Sunset
* Beehive Rag
* Bird Brain Rag
* Blue Grass Rag
* Chasin&#x27; the Chippies (1914)
* Chimes of Dixie
* Chime In
* Cinders
* Cottontail Rag
* Crimson Rambler
* Firefly Rag
* Good and Plenty Rag
* Greased Lightning (c. 1907)
* Hot Cinders
* Hyacinth - A Rag (1907)
* Jersey Rag
* Joe Lamb&#x27;s Old Rag (c. 1908, originally titled &quot;Dynamite Rag&quot;)
* The Old Home Rag
* Ragged Rapids Rag (1905)
* Ragtime Bobolink
* Ragtime Special (c. 1908)
* Rapid Transit (c. 1907)
* Ragtime Reverie
* Shootin&#x27; the Works
* Spanish Fly (1912)
* Thoroughbred Rag
* Toad Stool Rag
* Walper House Rag (1903)
==Other selected songs, waltzes, and marches==

* Celestine Waltzes (1905)
* Doin&#x27; the Lonesome Slow Drag
* Don&#x27;t You Be Lonely
* Florentine (1906)
* Florida (1905)
* Golden Leaves (1903)
* Gee, Kid! But I Like You (1908)
* I&#x27;d Like You to Love Me
* I&#x27;ll Follow the Crowd to Coney (1913)
* Ilo-Ilo
* I&#x27;m Going to Somewhere
* I Want to Be a Birdman (1913)
* Joe Lamb&#x27;s Medley Overture No.1 (1908)
* Joe Lamb&#x27;s Medley Overture No. 2
* Le Premier (1903)
* The Lilliputian&#x27;s Bazaar (1905)
* Lorne Scots on Parade (1904)
* Love In Absence (1909)
* Mignonne (1901)
* Muskoka Falls (1902)
* My Queen of Zanzibar (1904)
* Red Feather (1906)
* Since You Took My Heart Away
* Sourdough March (1906)
* 22nd Regiment March
==References==
Works cited
* 

==External links==


* &quot;Patricia Lamb Conn: Connecting with Ragtime&#x27;s Glory Days&quot; - reminiscences of Lamb&#x27;s daughter, with family photographs
* Joseph Lamb Mini Biography
* &quot;Perfessor&quot; Bill Edwards plays many Lamb rags, with stories
* Article: &quot;Joseph Lamb: The Humble Ragtime &#x27;Sensation&#x27;&quot; by Ted Tjaden
* Lamb and his compositions on grainger.de
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1066908" start="0" end="19" title="Joseph Lamb (composer)" label="Joseph Francis Lamb"/>
<link wikidata="Q185652" start="87" end="94" title="ragtime" label="ragtime"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075293" start="111" end="116" title="Irish American" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="143" end="159" title="African American" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q191499" start="241" end="253" title="Scott Joplin" label="Scott Joplin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1383575" start="258" end="269" title="James Scott (composer)" label="James Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q678437" start="953" end="974" title="Montclair, New Jersey" label="Montclair, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q191499" start="1089" end="1101" title="Scott Joplin" label="Scott Joplin"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="1280" end="1287" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q7588540" start="1598" end="1623" title="St. Jerome&amp;#x27;s College" label="St. Jerome&amp;#x27;s College"/>
<link wikidata="Q6259216" start="1762" end="1782" title="John Stillwell Stark" label="John Stark &amp;amp; Son"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026113" start="2459" end="2467" title="cakewalk" label="cakewalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757335" start="2982" end="2994" title="appoggiatura" label="appoggiatura"/>
<link wikidata="Q6105756" start="3185" end="3197" title="J. Fred Helf" label="J. Fred Helf"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="3467" end="3471" title="jazz" label="jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292110" start="3595" end="3611" title="Jack Mills, Inc." label="Jack Mills, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q2909943" start="3637" end="3650" title="novelty piano" label="novelty piano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435522" start="4448" end="4464" title="Folkways Records" label="Folkways Records"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="187858" wikidata="Q1383575" url="?curid=187858" title="James Scott (composer)">
<text>James Sylvester Scott (February 12, 1885 – August 30, 1938) was an American ragtime composer and pianist. He is regarded as one of the &quot;Big Three&quot; composers of classical ragtime along with Scott Joplin and Joseph Lamb.

==Early life and education==
Scott was born in Neosho, Missouri, to James Scott Sr. and Molly Thomas Scott, both former slaves. In 1901, his family moved to Carthage, Missouri, where he attended Lincoln High School. He was given a piano after taking music lessons. In 1902, he began working at the music store of Charles L. Dumars, first washing windows, then demonstrating music at the piano as a song plugger, including his own pieces. Demand for his music convinced Dumars to print the first of Scott&#x27;s published compositions, &quot;A Summer Breeze - March and Two Step&quot;, in 1903. By 1904, two more compositions by Scott, &quot;Fascinator March&quot; and &quot;On the Pike March&quot; were published and sold well, but not enough to keep Dumars in business and soon the company ceased publishing.

==Career==
Ragtime Historians Rudi Blesh and Harriet Janis recount that Scott went to St. Louis, Missouri, in search of his idol Scott Joplin in 1905. He located Joplin and asked if he would listen to one of his ragtime compositions. Upon hearing the rag, Joplin introduced him to his own publisher, John Stillwell Stark, and recommended he publish the work. Stark published the rag a year later as &quot;Frog Legs Rag&quot;. It quickly became a hit and was second in sales in the Stark catalogue only to that of Joplin&#x27;s own &quot;Maple Leaf Rag&quot;. Scott became a regular contributor to the Stark catalogue until 1922.

In 1914, Scott moved to Kansas City, Missouri, where he married Nora Johnson, taught music, and accompanied silent movies as an organist and arranger at the Panama Theater. Those that knew him recall that theater work was a large part of his activity. His cousin Patsy Thomas remembers, &quot;Everybody called him &#x27;Little Professor&#x27; He always walked rapidly, looking at the ground - would pass you on the street and never see you - seemed always deep in thought.&quot;

In the last years of his life, Scott busied himself with teaching, composing and leading an eight-piece band that played for various beer parks and movie theaters in the area. With the arrival of sound movies, however, his fortunes declined. He lost his theater work, his wife died without child, and his health deteriorated. He moved in with his cousin Ruth Callahan in Kansas City, Kansas, and even though was suffering from chronic dropsy, he continued to compose and play piano. He also worked as an accompanist for dances. Scott died at Douglas Hospital on August 30, 1938, at age 52 and was laid beside his wife in Westlawn Cemetery.

Scott&#x27;s best-known compositions include &quot;Climax Rag&quot;, &#x27;&quot;Frog Legs Rag&quot;, &quot;Grace and Beauty&quot;, &quot;Ophelia Rag&quot;, and &quot;The Ragtime Oriole&quot;.

Scott was a cousin of blues singer Ada Brown.

==In popular culture==
In the third season of the HBO series &quot;Boardwalk Empire&quot;, Scott is portrayed by an uncredited actor in the episode &quot;Spaghetti and Coffee&quot;.

==See also==

* List of compositions by James Scott
* List of ragtime composers

==References==

* DeVeaux, Scott and William Howland Kenney (1992) &quot;The Music of James Scott&quot;, Smithsonian Institution Press.

==External links==
* James Scott on the Kansas City Jazz site
* &quot;Perfessor&quot; Bill Edwards plays Scott compositions and provides background on many of his works
* James Scott: Innovative American Composer

===Sheet music===
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1383575" start="0" end="21" title="James Scott (composer)" label="James Sylvester Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q185652" start="76" end="83" title="ragtime" label="ragtime"/>
<link wikidata="Q36834" start="84" end="92" title="composer" label="composer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2976236" start="170" end="187" title="Classic rag" label="classical ragtime"/>
<link wikidata="Q191499" start="199" end="211" title="Scott Joplin" label="Scott Joplin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066908" start="216" end="227" title="Joseph Lamb (composer)" label="Joseph Lamb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000065" start="277" end="293" title="Neosho, Missouri" label="Neosho, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q729304" start="387" end="405" title="Carthage, Missouri" label="Carthage, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q7560960" start="628" end="640" title="song plugger" label="song plugger"/>
<link wikidata="Q38022" start="1127" end="1146" title="St. Louis, Missouri" label="St. Louis, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q6259216" start="1341" end="1361" title="John Stillwell Stark" label="John Stillwell Stark"/>
<link wikidata="Q5505200" start="1446" end="1459" title="Frog Legs Rag" label="Frog Legs Rag"/>
<link wikidata="Q277463" start="1578" end="1592" title="Maple Leaf Rag" label="Maple Leaf Rag"/>
<link wikidata="Q41819" start="1695" end="1716" title="Kansas City, Missouri" label="Kansas City, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q486472" start="2522" end="2541" title="Kansas City, Kansas" label="Kansas City, Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q152234" start="2586" end="2592" title="dropsy" label="dropsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5505200" start="2873" end="2886" title="Frog Legs Rag" label="Frog Legs Rag"/>
<link wikidata="Q5591420" start="2900" end="2916" title="Grace and Beauty" label="Grace and Beauty"/>
<link wikidata="Q9759" start="3008" end="3013" title="blues" label="blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q4678228" start="3021" end="3030" title="Ada Brown (singer)" label="Ada Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q23633" start="3083" end="3086" title="HBO" label="HBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q585758" start="3100" end="3116" title="Boardwalk Empire" label="Boardwalk Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q12061196" start="3232" end="3267" title="List of compositions by James Scott" label="List of compositions by James Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q767967" start="3270" end="3295" title="List of ragtime composers" label="List of ragtime composers"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="187859" wikidata="Q1249251" url="?curid=187859" title="Missouri State University">
<text>Missouri State University (MSU or MO State), formerly Southwest Missouri State University, is a public university in Springfield, Missouri, United States. Founded in 1905 as the Fourth District Normal School, it is the state&#x27;s second-largest university by enrollment, with an enrollment of 23,418 in the fall semester of 2023. The school also operates a two-year campus in West Plains, Missouri offering associate degrees, which had an enrollment of 1,060 in the fall semester of 2023. A bachelor&#x27;s degree in business is offered at Liaoning Normal University in China. The university also operates a fruit research station in Mountain Grove, Missouri and a Department of Defense and Strategic Studies program in Fairfax, Virginia.

==History==
Missouri State University was formed as the Fourth District Normal School, by legislative action on March 17, 1905. Like other normal schools of the day, the school&#x27;s primary purpose was the preparation of teachers for the public school system.

Classes began on June 11, 1906, with the first class totaling 543 students in an off-campus facility. The first permanent campus building was Academic Hall. Its cornerstone was laid on August 10, 1907, and construction was completed in January 1909. The building is now known as Carrington Hall, named after William T. Carrington, the first president of the State Normal School. It serves as the university&#x27;s administrative center.

The Fourth District Normal School became Southwest Missouri State Teacher&#x27;s College in 1919 to reflect its regional and academic emphasis. Throughout the interwar period, the college&#x27;s programs expanded to include liberal arts and sciences in the curriculum, thus facilitating a name change to Southwest Missouri State College in 1945. A burgeoning student population throughout the 1950s and 1960s resulted in the establishment of residence halls, accompanied by a growth in post-graduate studies. This led to a third name change in 1972, to Southwest Missouri State University. In 1973, enrollment surpassed 10,000 students for the first time.

By 1985, SMSU had grown into the second-largest public university in the state, leading administrators to support a bill to change the name to Missouri State University, which eventually died in committee in the Missouri General Assembly. In 1990, enrollment surpassed 20,000 students for the first time, but further attempts to rename the school throughout the 1990s and early 2000s also failed. However, the state legislature did grant the university a statewide mission in Public Affairs in 1995.

In 2004, with the election of Springfield native Matt Blunt to the governorship and the approaching centennial of the university&#x27;s founding, new support developed for the name change. It was opposed by the University of Missouri System (which operates the four campuses of the University of Missouri), which feared that the name change would lead to duplication of academic programs and ongoing battles for students and state funding. In 2005 the name-change bill was passed, following a late-night compromise between University of Missouri System President Elson Floyd and then-Southwest Missouri State President John Keiser, stating that Missouri State University would not duplicate certain professional programs offered by the University of Missouri. The bill to rename the university finally passed the Missouri Senate (25–7). On March 1, 2005, after more than seven hours of debate, the bill passed the Missouri House (120–35). Governor Blunt signed it into law on March 17, 2005—the centennial anniversary of the university—at the Plaster Student Union, where several student and state leaders were present.

In 2006, the university modified its nondiscrimination policy to include sexual orientation as an officially protected status. The addition reads: &quot;... the University does not discriminate on any basis (including, but not limited to, political affiliation and sexual orientation) not related to the applicable educational requirements for students or the applicable job requirements for employees.&quot; Former university president John Keiser had firmly opposed the change, as did the Student Government Association in 2004 when Student Body President Chris Curtis moved to change the SGA constitution to mirror the university&#x27;s. However, the policy was quietly changed on September 18, 2006, during a meeting held in St. Louis. It is generally believed this move was to avoid the mostly conservative citizens of Springfield and add this policy &quot;under the radar&quot; of the critics of the change. Missouri Governor Matt Blunt quickly released criticism of the policy change, calling it &quot;unnecessary and bad&quot;, also saying the decision &quot;bows to the forces of political correctness&quot;.

In 2011, the university&#x27;s executive MBA program for students from China came under scrutiny after an article in the Springfield News-Leader questioned the financial relationship between Missouri State and its Hong Kong-based agent, alleging that students were paying double the amount that MSU was receiving. The executive MBA program accepts cohorts of students who come through a sponsor: a provincial or municipal government agency, a university, or a corporation. Missouri State&#x27;s agent, the International Management Education Corporation (IMEC), identifies and develops relationships with sponsors, who identify and prepare students, screening them for work experience, a minimum grade-point average at the undergraduate level (2.75) and English language proficiency. IMEC then provides MSU with a cohort of a minimum of 30 students, and the sponsors send MSU the students&#x27; applications for review. The fees students pay vary by sponsor and range from $15,000 to $22,000. IMEC was contracted to pay Missouri State between $10,103 and $11,886 per student; resulting in between 20 and 55 percent of the student fee being retained by IMEC. IMEC defended the fees claiming they cover marketing/promotion/recruiting and the related overhead costs as well as additional costs including intensive English training, exams, advice on applications and documentations, visa application fees and service and orientations provided by IMEC. University officials defended the program and arrangement stating that it had allowed Missouri State to quickly grow the executive MBA program without having to spend university resources recruiting and marketing overseas. The program has had 370 students since it started in 2007. However, the chair of the Faculty Senate said professors have periodically raised questions about the quality and oversight of the various China initiatives, and had prepared a list of questions for the president in light of the article, expressing a desire to ensure that proper oversight was in place to avoid compromising quality. Following translation and re-publication of information from the News-Leader article by Chinese newspapers, MSU reported that it received calls from several program sponsor organizations in China that they would no longer participate in the program. The university continued to defend the program, arguing that mistranslations of the article had provided an incorrect view of the program&#x27;s academic rigor and stating that it intended to meet with sponsors and answer any questions about the program.

&quot;The Scotsman&quot; was officially adopted as the university&#x27;s fight song in the 1960s. The Song is sung after every home football touchdown and prominent at all athletic events. The traditional alumni song of Missouri State is performed at every commencement ceremony and sometimes played at athletic events or other ceremonies.

The traditions of school colors and the school mascot were established during the 1906 school year, before the first permanent building (Carrington Hall) was even constructed. A joint committee of faculty and students decided on the colors of maroon and white to represent the university. The same committee also selected the Bear as the official school mascot, basing their choice on the design of the state seal of Missouri. The colors and mascots are reflected on the school seal.

===Presidents===
Presidents of the college include:
# William Thomas Carrington, 1906–1918
# Clyde Milton Hill, 1918–1926
# Roy Ellis, 1926–1961
# Leland Eldridge Traywick, 1961–1964
# Arthur Lee Mallory, 1964–1971
# Duane G. Meyer, 1971–1983
# Marshal Gordon, 1983–1992Russell Keeling (interim), 1992–1993
# John Keiser, 1994–2005
# Michael T. Nietzel, 2005–2010
# James E. Cofer, 2010–2011
# Clifton M. &quot;Clif&quot; Smart III, 2011–2024
# Richard &quot;Biff&quot; Williams, 2024-present

== Academics ==
Missouri State University is classified among &quot;Doctoral Universities&quot;.

===Divisions===
Missouri State University&#x27;s academic divisions include:
* Reynolds College of Arts, Social Sciences, and Humanities (RCASH)
* College of Business
* College of Education
* McQueary College of Health and Human Services
* College of Natural and Applied Sciences
* Missouri State Outreach
* Missouri State Online
* William H. Darr College of Agriculture
* Graduate School

The university offers more than 150 undergraduate majors and over 45 graduate programs. For the 2022 fiscal year, the university awarded 4,404 degrees. The Springfield campus had 721 full-time instructional faculty in fall 2009, of which 46 percent were female and 60 percent were tenured. The student-faculty ration is 20-to-1. Nearly 90 percent of full-time ranked faculty members have the most advanced degree available in their field. During its 2009 fiscal year, MSU received 196 grants totaling $20,901,035. Freshmen entering for the fall 2010 semester had an average ACT score of 24 and a high school grade point average of 3.60.

===LNU-MSU===
In June 2000, Missouri State University entered into an agreement with Liaoning Normal University of the People&#x27;s Republic of China to establish the LNU-MSU College of International Business on the campus of LNU. As an educational cooperation project between the two universities, the Branch Campus received formal approval from the governing bodies of both universities, the Missouri State Board of Governors and the Bureau of Education of Liaoning Province, China. The college currently offers an Associate of Arts, in General Studies degree and a Bachelor of Science, in General Business degree. The Branch Campus programs are fully accredited by the Higher Learning Commission of the North Central Association of Colleges and Schools as well as the Associate to Advance Collegiate Business Schools (AACSB International). Dalian has a diverse student body, with students from all over the world including Korea, Indonesia, Senegal, Nigeria, Zambia, Iran, Japan and the U.S. It is located atop a prominence on the North Campus of LNU overlooking the university to its south.

===Public affairs mission===
Missouri State University has a statewide mission in public affairs granted by the state legislature in 1995.
The mission is stated as having three broad themes: Ethical Leadership, Cultural Competence and Community Engagement. The goal of the Ethical Leadership component has been articulated by MSU as &quot;students will articulate their value systems, act ethically within the context of a democratic society, and demonstrate engaged and principled leadership.&quot; The stated objective of the Cultural Competence component is &quot;students will recognize and respect multiple perspectives and cultures.&quot; Two goals have been articulated for the Community Engagement portion of the mission. They are that &quot;students will recognize the importance of contributing their knowledge and experiences to their own community and the broader society&quot; and &quot;students will recognize the importance of scientific principles in the generation of sound public policy.&quot; The public affairs mission is emphasized and enhanced by designated Public Affairs Professorships and a Provost Fellow for Public Affairs, special scholarship programs, grant program, Excellence in Community Service Awards, a yearly week-long Missouri Public Affairs Academy for high school students, a campus-wide public affairs emphasis week and the annual MSU Public Affairs Conference which brings together a diverse group of speakers and panelist for public discussions of various aspects of the public affairs mission. Past conference speakers have included Robert F. Kennedy, Jr., Nawal El Saadawi, Les Garland, John Edwards and Frances Hesselbein.

==Campus==
Missouri State University&#x27;s main campus, containing over 40 buildings, is located on in central Springfield. National Avenue forms the eastern boundary, with Kimbrough Avenue to the west, Elm Street to the north, and Grand Street to the south. John Q. Hammons Parkway bisects the campus, running north and south.
Facing National Avenue is the &quot;Historic Quadrangle,&quot; containing Carrington Hall (1908), Hill Hall (1923) and Siceluff Hall (1927), as well as Cheek Hall (1955) and Ellis Hall (1959). South of that area is Pummill Hall (1957), Karls Hall (1958) and Craig Hall (1967), which contains the Coger Theater and is the site of an annual outdoor summer tent theatre program. Including the Art Annex (1958) acquired from nearby Camp Crowder.

In the center of campus is the Duane G. Meyer Library, constructed in 1980 and named after a former president of the university. It contains over 877,000 books, subscriptions to over 3,500 periodicals and newspapers with back issues on microfilm, microfiche, and microcard, and full text electronic access to over 20,000 periodicals. In addition, the library contains over 934,000 state, federal and United Nations government documents. The Meyer Library was renovated and expanded in 2002, and included the addition of the Jane A. Meyer Carillon, one of only 164 such instruments in the United States. In front of Meyer Library is the five-level, multi-jet John Q. Hammons Fountain (named for the MSU alumnus and hotel developer).

Missouri State&#x27;s COB is housed in David D. Glass Hall, a 4-story, building. Glass Hall is named in honor of MSU alumnus and former Wal-Mart CEO David Glass. Originally built in 1988, the College of Business underwent a major renovation in 2016 to update the building and provide more space for academic activities. All programs in the College of Business are accredited by the Association to Advance Collegiate Schools of Business (AACSB). 

Other major academic buildings are located south and west of the Meyer Library. These include Blunt Hall (formerly Temple Hall) (1971), Kemper Hall (1976), and Strong Hall (1998). The majority of the north side of the campus is dedicated to student residences and recreational areas; however, Greenwood Laboratory School, a fully functioning K-12 school, is also located in this area.

===Jane A. Meyer Carillon===

The Jane A. Meyer Carillon is located in the center of the Missouri State University campus, at the southwest corner of the Duane G. Meyer Library. It was dedicated on April 13, 2002. The total weight of the 48 bronze bells and cast-iron clappers is 32,000 pounds, with the largest bell weighing 5,894 pounds, or nearly three tons. The complete carillon and its supporting tower structure weighs 2.5 million pounds. Funds for the purchase of the bells and keyboard and for the construction of the tower were provided by Ken and Jane Meyer, longtime friends of the university and supporters of the arts. Jane Meyer was a former organ student of the MSU Department of Music. The carillon&#x27;s 48 bronze bells, cast-iron clappers and keyboard were purchased from and installed by Royal Eijsbouts, a prestigious bell making firm from the Netherlands. The carillon plays the standard Westminster chime sequence every 15 minutes, with the first of the hourly bells marking the exact start of each hour. The department of music also coordinates and presents special concerts throughout the year.

===Juanita K. Hammons Hall for the Performing Arts===
Juanita K. Hammons Hall for the Performing Arts is a 2,220-seat center located in the northwest corner of the campus. Juanita K. (as referred to by locals) not only hosts the university&#x27;s music, dance and theatre department performances, it is home to the Springfield Symphony Orchestra. It is the Springfield area&#x27;s major performance hall and presents a regular schedule of national touring companies and prominent individual performers. The hall includes multi-level boxes and moveable orchestra pit; spacious backstage facilities with individual, crew and chorus dressing rooms, cast lounge, green room, loading dock and break areas; an expansive multi-level lobby; public and private reception areas; full-service front-of-house, technical and support staff offices; an on-site computerized box office; and a 5-level parking garage adjacent to the building.

===Athletic facilities===


Southeast of Meyer Library is the Robert W. Plaster Sports Complex. Originally built in 1930, the athletic field became the stadium in 1941 and was known for many years as Briggs Stadium in honor of Coach A. W. Briggs, longtime head of Missouri State&#x27;s athletic department. In 2014, the stadium was converted to a football-specific field surface and other renovations were made for a more intimate fan experience. The playing surface was replaced and moved closer to the west grand stand. In addition, the student side (east side) was fully replaced from the ground up and includes game day locker rooms, a new scoreboard and a party platform called &quot;The Clif&quot;. The facility was renamed after a major expansion and renovation in the 1980s that included installation of an artificial playing surface, an all-weather track, a second level of seating, twelve racquetball courts, men&#x27;s and women&#x27;s locker rooms, five classrooms, and a fitness center. Immediately north of Plaster Sports Complex is McDonald Arena, built by WPA labor in 1940. It served as the university&#x27;s central indoor arena until construction of the John Q. Hammons Student Center on the campus&#x27; north-west edge in 1976. That venue was in turn replaced as the primary indoor sporting venue by construction of the adjacent 11,000-seat Great Southern Bank Arena (formerly JQH Arena) in 2008.

===Campus housing===
The Missouri State University main campus contains nine residence halls and two apartment buildings. 

Kentwood Hall was originally built as the luxury Kentwood Arms Hotel (1926), whose guests included President Harry S. Truman and comedian Groucho Marx. According to the Missouri State University newspaper &quot;The Standard&quot;, it had been used as a campaign stop for Richard Nixon during his 1960 Presidential run. It was purchased by Missouri State University from John Q. Hammonds in 1984, then renovated three times since its opening (1986, 1987, and 2014). It can accommodate up to 101 students. Used as a quarantine facility in 2020 and 2021 during the COVID-19 pandemic, it has been reopened as of August 2024 for use as a dormitory. Though with reduced amenities from its previous use. 

Computer labs, laundry rooms, kitchen facilities, and public meeting/study spaces are located in every one of the university&#x27;s residence halls. Available services include free laundry, Philo streaming internet protocol TV service, WI-FI, and 24-hour front desk assistance. Within select houses are floors designated as &quot;Living-learning Communities&quot; (or LLCs). These have a particular theme that is either academically based or interest based. All residential areas are smoke and tobacco free.

Citing the proven detrimental health effects of tobacco use, effective August 15, 2010, Missouri State University enacted a policy further restricting the use of tobacco products and smokeless tobacco on the campus.

===Robert W. Plaster Student Union===

The four-story Robert W. Plaster Student Union (PSU) is a student activity center located in the center of campus between the main academic and residential areas. This building provides a place for students to dine, socialize, study, shop, and see films and guest speakers in the theater. Multiple restaurant locations are located within the PSU, including Chick-Fil-A, a local business named Queen City Soul Food, Freddy&#x27;s Frozen Custard &amp; Steakburgers, Subway, Panda Express, Starbucks, and a university-based venue: the Union Club. It also houses a convenience store, a copy shop, a clothing store, and an e-sports center, which replaced the former bowling alley. A variety of meeting rooms are also located in the PSU and over 15,000 meetings are even hosted there each year. Offices located in the PSU include Student Engagement, Student Conduct, Multicultural Resources, BearPass Card (MSU&#x27;s ID system), Campus Recreation, Outdoor Adventures, Citizenship and Service-Learning, Conference Services, various student organizations, the dean of students, Judicial Affairs, Disability Support Services, and Student Orientation, Advisement &amp; Registration (SOAR). The PSU also includes the Leland E. Traywick Parliamentary Room. Dedicated on February 18, 2004, it is named to honor a former MSU president and his introduction of shared governance, including the establishment of the Faculty Senate, during his presidency. A bronze bear statue was dedicated to the university in 1999 and stands at the student union&#x27;s front entrance. Also located in front of the PSU is the North Mall, which is the location of the &quot;Bear Paw.&quot; The Bear Paw is an outdoor plaza and performance area constructed for concerts, forums, rallies, demonstrations, and other public activities. Any member of the university community (such as students, faculty, or staff) may reserve the Bear Paw, and when not reserved, it is available for expressive activities on a first come, first served basis.

===Recreation===
An active intramural sports program includes competition in basketball, billiards, bowling, disc golf, dodgeball, flag football, futsal, golf, racquetball, sand volleyball, soccer, softball, table tennis, tennis, track, ultimate, volleyball, and weight lifting. Two large intramural fields with artificial turf, electronic scoreboards, and stadium lighting are located on East Harrison Street near Scholars House. A Fitness and Wellness Program offers a variety of group classes and activities to students, including classes with licensed instructors in Pilates, Yoga, Belly Dance, and Zumba. The campus Outdoor Adventures program also provides opportunity and equipment rentals for activities, such as rock climbing, caving, camping, canoeing, and kayaking in the surrounding Ozarks.

In 2012, the Bill R. Foster and Family Recreation Center was opened to the public.

===Fairfax, VA Campus===
MSU operates a satellite campus in Fairfax, Virginia. This location is home to the School of Defense and Strategic Studies. The program is located in Virginia to work in close cooperation with the federal government and various defense related think tanks located in or near the Beltway. Students may also apply for national security related internships within the region. DSS offers two graduate certificates, a master&#x27;s of science with an optional focus in weapons of mass destruction, and a professional doctorate. Courses are offered both in person and online.

==Student life==
There are over 300 student organizations at Missouri State. Student organizations are grouped into eight categories according to their main purpose. These include Academic/Professional, Greek, Honorary, Religious, Service, Social, Sports, and University.

===Music===
The Pride Marching Band is the official marching band of Missouri State University. The band consists of 300 student musicians, plays at every home football game and has been featured in the Macy&#x27;s Thanksgiving Day Parade in New York City (1988, 1996, 2001), the Tournament of Roses Parade in Pasadena (1995 and 2008), and the Orange Bowl Parade in Miami (1988). They have appeared in the Louisiana Superdome for the New Orleans Saints, in the Trans World Dome for the St. Louis Rams, at Arrowhead Stadium for the Kansas City Chiefs, and at Mile High Stadium for the Denver Broncos. In December 2005 the Pride Band traveled to London, England to be the honor band in the London New Year&#x27;s Day parade, and was the Honor Band in the 2009 McDonald&#x27;s Thanksgiving Parade in Chicago, Illinois.

The university&#x27;s chorale performed at the presidential inauguration of Donald Trump in 2017.

===Chi Alpha===
The first Chi Alpha Christian Fellowship (ΧΑ) was chartered on Missouri State University&#x27;s campus in 1953. The national organization for Chi Alpha is headquartered in Springfield, MO.

===News===
&quot;The Standard&quot; is the university&#x27;s student-run newspaper. It releases consistent online coverage of campus news and Springfield-area coverage, and also releases multiple print editions each semester, including an issue pertaining to student housing released once per semester. Included in its online content is multiple podcasts and various broadcast projects. The newspaper&#x27;s content is entirely created and edited by the student staff.

&quot;Ozarks News Journal&quot; is a half-hour Public Affairs TV News Magazine produced fall and spring semesters by broadcast journalism students in the Media, Journalism &amp; Film Department. The show airs weekly on Media Com cable 22 in Springfield.

===Radio and television===
&quot;KSMU&quot; 91.1 FM is the university&#x27;s licensed public radio station, broadcasting National Public Radio content, local news and classical music. Its state-of-the-art studios are located in Strong Hall. The station has received numerous awards, including the 2002 National Edward R. Murrow Award from the RTNDA for News Series, the 2001 Regional Edward R. Murrow Award from the RTNDA for Feature Reporting, the 1987 National Edward R. Murrow Award from the RTNDA for Investigative Reporting, The Missouri Broadcasters Association Excellence Award in Documentary Public Affairs in 2002 and 2000, Certificates of Merit for Feature Reporting, Public Affairs Reporting, and Complete News from the Missouri Broadcasters Association, three Public Radio News Directors Incorporated Awards, and the Missouri State Teachers Association Award for Excellence in Education Reporting.

MSU is also the licensee operating Ozarks Public Television, providing PBS programming and instructional television services to 549,540 households in Southwest Missouri and the adjoining three state area. KOZK, the PBS member station in Springfield airs on digital channel 23, virtual channel 21, and a sister station, KOZJ, airs in Joplin, Missouri as digital channel 25, virtual channel 26. The stations digital signal multicasts as 21.1/26.1: OPT-High Definition; 21.2/26.2: OPT-ED (Airs telecourses from MSU as well as miscellaneous PBS programming); and 21.3/26.3: Create, a how-to/DIY network. The broadcast and studio facilities are located in Strong Hall.

==Athletics==
===Varsity sports===
Missouri State University sponsors 17 NCAA Division I intercollegiate athletic teams in men&#x27;s and women&#x27;s basketball, golf, soccer, swimming and diving; men&#x27;s baseball and football; and women&#x27;s beach volleyball, cross country, softball, tennis, track, and volleyball. MSU teams are nicknamed the Bears, and team colors are maroon and white. The Missouri State University Bears are members of the Missouri Valley Conference for all sports except beach volleyball (Conference USA), football (Missouri Valley Football Conference), and men&#x27;s swimming and diving (Mid-American Conference). Football competes in the NCAA Division I Football Championship Subdivision. Missouri State will leave the MVC and MVFC and join Conference USA in 2025. Missouri State teams have made 52 NCAA championship appearances since moving to Division I in the 1982–83 season. The men&#x27;s basketball team reached the Sweet Sixteen in 1999 and women&#x27;s basketball made the Final Four in 1992 and 2001, and the Sweet Sixteen in 1993, 2019, and 2021. Baseball made the College World Series in 2003 and volleyball earned their 1000th win Nov. 17, 2006 (only the second team in NCAA history to do so). In 1974, the women&#x27;s softball team won the AIAW national championship.

===Club teams===
Missouri State University also sponsors several club teams. The MSU Handball team has won several championships.

In 2001, Missouri State started a club Ice Hockey team, Missouri State University Ice Bears Hockey, that competes in the American Collegiate Hockey Association (ACHA) Division I Western Collegiate Hockey League. In 2009 the Ice Bears made their fourth straight ACHA Central Region post season tournament appearance in ACHA Division 2. In 2014, the Missouri State University Ice Bears won the Central Division Regionals and made their first ACHA National Championship Appearance in their 13-year existence. In 2015 the Ice Bears made their second consecutive National Championship Tournament appearance in Salt Lake City Utah. After a 30–2 vote the Ice Bears joined the WCHL in ACHA Division 1 for the 2015–16 season. Ice Bears home games are played at Mediacom Ice Park.

Additional club sports at Missouri State include a bowling team, pistol team, rodeo team, roller hockey club, water ski team, wrestling club, and men&#x27;s and women&#x27;s club soccer teams.

==Notable alumni==
==References==
==External links==
*Missouri State Athletics website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1249251" start="0" end="25" title="Missouri State University" label="Missouri State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249251" start="27" end="30" title="Missouri State University" label="MSU"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249251" start="34" end="42" title="Missouri State University" label="MO State"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249251" start="54" end="89" title="Missouri State University" label="Southwest Missouri State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q875538" start="96" end="113" title="public university" label="public university"/>
<link wikidata="Q135615" start="117" end="138" title="Springfield, Missouri" label="Springfield, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249251" start="178" end="207" title="Missouri State University" label="Fourth District Normal School"/>
<link wikidata="Q6879735" start="359" end="374" title="Missouri State University-West Plains" label="two-year campus"/>
<link wikidata="Q966271" start="378" end="399" title="West Plains, Missouri" label="West Plains, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q14625016" start="409" end="425" title="associate degree" label="associate degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q837969" start="542" end="568" title="Liaoning Normal University" label="Liaoning Normal University"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="572" end="577" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q956862" start="636" end="660" title="Mountain Grove, Missouri" label="Mountain Grove, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q501785" start="722" end="739" title="Fairfax, Virginia" label="Fairfax, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q627006" start="881" end="894" title="normal school" label="normal school"/>
<link wikidata="Q1080794" start="982" end="995" title="Public school (government funded)" label="public school"/>
<link wikidata="Q154611" start="1602" end="1617" title="interwar period" label="interwar period"/>
<link wikidata="Q189329" start="1667" end="1679" title="liberal arts" label="liberal arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q847950" start="1885" end="1899" title="residence hall" label="residence hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q141212" start="1929" end="1950" title="Postgraduate education" label="post-graduate studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q875538" start="2148" end="2165" title="public university" label="public university"/>
<link wikidata="Q6879566" start="2312" end="2337" title="Missouri General Assembly" label="Missouri General Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q31728" start="2576" end="2590" title="Public administration" label="Public Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q881141" start="2650" end="2660" title="Matt Blunt" label="Matt Blunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q48995876" start="2701" end="2711" title="centennial" label="centennial"/>
<link wikidata="Q2713662" start="2812" end="2841" title="University of Missouri System" label="University of Missouri System"/>
<link wikidata="Q17888" start="3795" end="3813" title="sexual orientation" label="sexual orientation"/>
<link wikidata="Q191701" start="4882" end="4885" title="Master of Business Administration" label="MBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="4912" end="4917" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q7581013" start="4962" end="4985" title="Springfield News-Leader" label="Springfield News-Leader"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="5055" end="5064" title="Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q6133057" start="8602" end="8616" title="James E. Cofer" label="James E. Cofer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4223026" start="8775" end="8785" title="Carnegie Classification of Institutions of Higher Education" label="classified"/>
<link wikidata="Q288826" start="9792" end="9795" title="ACT (examination)" label="ACT"/>
<link wikidata="Q837969" start="9941" end="9967" title="Liaoning Normal University" label="Liaoning Normal University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7739633" start="10529" end="10555" title="Higher Learning Commission" label="Higher Learning Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352872" start="12529" end="12551" title="Robert F. Kennedy, Jr." label="Robert F. Kennedy, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q238514" start="12553" end="12569" title="Nawal El Saadawi" label="Nawal El Saadawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6529520" start="12571" end="12582" title="Les Garland" label="Les Garland"/>
<link wikidata="Q217314" start="12584" end="12596" title="John Edwards" label="John Edwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q5470999" start="13379" end="13391" title="Camp Crowder" label="Camp Crowder"/>
<link wikidata="Q5310332" start="13425" end="13447" title="Duane G. Meyer Library" label="Duane G. Meyer Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="13794" end="13808" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q505174" start="13932" end="13940" title="Carillon" label="Carillon"/>
<link wikidata="Q483453" start="14068" end="14076" title="Fountain" label="Fountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q483551" start="14263" end="14271" title="Wal-Mart" label="Wal-Mart"/>
<link wikidata="Q5234167" start="14276" end="14287" title="David Glass (businessman)" label="David Glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q101401" start="15208" end="15213" title="Bell" label="bells"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400830" start="15228" end="15236" title="Clapper (musical instrument)" label="clappers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2196631" start="15769" end="15784" title="Royal Eijsbouts bell foundry" label="Royal Eijsbouts"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="15826" end="15837" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q2032728" start="15871" end="15888" title="Westminster chime" label="Westminster chime"/>
<link wikidata="Q184485" start="16168" end="16183" title="Performing Arts" label="Performing Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7202020" start="17071" end="17103" title="Plaster Sports Complex" label="Robert W. Plaster Sports Complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q754586" start="17908" end="17919" title="racquetball" label="racquetball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200079" start="18081" end="18084" title="Works Progress Administration" label="WPA"/>
<link wikidata="Q6108791" start="18371" end="18396" title="Great Southern Bank Arena" label="Great Southern Bank Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q847950" start="18505" end="18520" title="Dormitory" label="residence halls"/>
<link wikidata="Q11613" start="18661" end="18676" title="Harry S. Truman" label="Harry S. Truman"/>
<link wikidata="Q103846" start="18690" end="18702" title="Groucho Marx" label="Groucho Marx"/>
<link wikidata="Q9588" start="18823" end="18836" title="Richard Nixon" label="Richard Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q699590" start="18848" end="18869" title="1960 United States presidential election" label="1960 Presidential run"/>
<link wikidata="Q7627808" start="20074" end="20097" title="student activity center" label="student activity center"/>
<link wikidata="Q491516" start="20373" end="20384" title="Chick-fil-A" label="Chick-Fil-A"/>
<link wikidata="Q5496837" start="20431" end="20478" title="Freddy&amp;#x27;s Frozen Custard &amp;amp; Steakburgers" label="Freddy&amp;#x27;s Frozen Custard &amp;amp; Steakburgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q244457" start="20480" end="20486" title="Subway (restaurant)" label="Subway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358690" start="20488" end="20501" title="Panda Express" label="Panda Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q37158" start="20503" end="20512" title="Starbucks" label="Starbucks"/>
<link wikidata="Q382647" start="22049" end="22066" title="intramural sports" label="intramural sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q5372" start="22099" end="22109" title="basketball" label="basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q3341285" start="22111" end="22120" title="billiards" label="billiards"/>
<link wikidata="Q3177899" start="22122" end="22129" title="bowling" label="bowling"/>
<link wikidata="Q876737" start="22131" end="22140" title="disc golf" label="disc golf"/>
<link wikidata="Q473719" start="22142" end="22151" title="dodgeball" label="dodgeball"/>
<link wikidata="Q692853" start="22153" end="22166" title="flag football" label="flag football"/>
<link wikidata="Q171401" start="22168" end="22174" title="futsal" label="futsal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5377" start="22176" end="22180" title="golf" label="golf"/>
<link wikidata="Q754586" start="22182" end="22193" title="racquetball" label="racquetball"/>
<link wikidata="Q4543" start="22195" end="22210" title="sand volleyball" label="sand volleyball"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="22212" end="22218" title="soccer" label="soccer"/>
<link wikidata="Q171038" start="22220" end="22228" title="softball" label="softball"/>
<link wikidata="Q3930" start="22230" end="22242" title="table tennis" label="table tennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q847" start="22244" end="22250" title="tennis" label="tennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3312129" start="22252" end="22257" title="Track and field" label="track"/>
<link wikidata="Q244700" start="22259" end="22267" title="Ultimate (sport)" label="ultimate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1734" start="22269" end="22279" title="volleyball" label="volleyball"/>
<link wikidata="Q114397581" start="22285" end="22299" title="Weightlifting" label="weight lifting"/>
<link wikidata="Q272460" start="22593" end="22600" title="Pilates" label="Pilates"/>
<link wikidata="Q9350" start="22602" end="22606" title="Yoga" label="Yoga"/>
<link wikidata="Q182863" start="22608" end="22619" title="Belly dance" label="Belly Dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q229680" start="22625" end="22630" title="Zumba" label="Zumba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154336" start="22742" end="22755" title="rock climbing" label="rock climbing"/>
<link wikidata="Q200341" start="22757" end="22763" title="caving" label="caving"/>
<link wikidata="Q455550" start="22765" end="22772" title="camping" label="camping"/>
<link wikidata="Q20856109" start="22774" end="22782" title="canoeing" label="canoeing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094083" start="22788" end="22796" title="kayaking" label="kayaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321468" start="22816" end="22822" title="Ozarks" label="Ozarks"/>
<link wikidata="Q30313989" start="22864" end="22881" title="Recreation center" label="Recreation Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426710" start="23830" end="23843" title="marching band" label="marching band"/>
<link wikidata="Q79407" start="23981" end="24016" title="Macy&amp;#x27;s Thanksgiving Day Parade" label="Macy&amp;#x27;s Thanksgiving Day Parade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133638" start="24058" end="24084" title="Tournament of Roses Parade" label="Tournament of Roses Parade"/>
<link wikidata="Q485176" start="24088" end="24096" title="Pasadena, California" label="Pasadena"/>
<link wikidata="Q2028075" start="24122" end="24133" title="Orange Bowl" label="Orange Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q756452" start="24184" end="24203" title="Louisiana Superdome" label="Louisiana Superdome"/>
<link wikidata="Q172435" start="24212" end="24230" title="New Orleans Saints" label="New Orleans Saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292739" start="24239" end="24255" title="Trans World Dome" label="Trans World Dome"/>
<link wikidata="Q5870467" start="24264" end="24278" title="St. Louis Rams" label="St. Louis Rams"/>
<link wikidata="Q544553" start="24283" end="24300" title="Arrowhead Stadium" label="Arrowhead Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q223522" start="24309" end="24327" title="Kansas City Chiefs" label="Kansas City Chiefs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934586" start="24336" end="24353" title="Mile High Stadium" label="Mile High Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q223507" start="24362" end="24376" title="Denver Broncos" label="Denver Broncos"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="24422" end="24428" title="London, England" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="24575" end="24592" title="Chicago" label="Chicago, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q131186" start="24617" end="24624" title="Choral" label="chorale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417098" start="24655" end="24667" title="inauguration" label="inauguration"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="24671" end="24683" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q2358243" start="24720" end="24750" title="Chi Alpha Christian Fellowship" label="Chi Alpha Christian Fellowship"/>
<link wikidata="Q135615" start="24882" end="24893" title="Springfield, Missouri" label="Springfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q1581" start="24895" end="24897" title="Missouri" label="MO"/>
<link wikidata="Q11032" start="24973" end="24982" title="newspaper" label="newspaper"/>
<link wikidata="Q20899" start="25246" end="25254" title="Podcast" label="podcasts"/>
<link wikidata="Q6337973" start="25658" end="25662" title="KSMU" label="KSMU"/>
<link wikidata="Q26398" start="25711" end="25731" title="public radio station" label="public radio station"/>
<link wikidata="Q671510" start="25746" end="25767" title="National Public Radio" label="National Public Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q9730" start="25792" end="25807" title="classical music" label="classical music"/>
<link wikidata="Q7277870" start="25936" end="25958" title="Edward R. Murrow Award (Radio Television Digital News Association)" label="Edward R. Murrow Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q7281080" start="25968" end="25973" title="RTNDA" label="RTNDA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7277870" start="26009" end="26031" title="Edward R. Murrow Award (Radio Television Digital News Association)" label="Edward R. Murrow Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q7281080" start="26041" end="26046" title="RTNDA" label="RTNDA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7277870" start="26088" end="26110" title="Edward R. Murrow Award (Radio Television Digital News Association)" label="Edward R. Murrow Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q7281080" start="26120" end="26125" title="RTNDA" label="RTNDA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127717" start="26130" end="26153" title="Investigative reporting" label="Investigative Reporting"/>
<link wikidata="Q6879733" start="26454" end="26489" title="Missouri State Teachers Association" label="Missouri State Teachers Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q6335362" start="26571" end="26595" title="Ozarks Public Television" label="Ozarks Public Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q215616" start="26607" end="26610" title="PBS" label="PBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q6041792" start="26627" end="26651" title="instructional television" label="instructional television"/>
<link wikidata="Q6335362" start="26741" end="26745" title="KOZK" label="KOZK"/>
<link wikidata="Q6335362" start="26855" end="26859" title="KOZJ" label="KOZJ"/>
<link wikidata="Q317865" start="26869" end="26885" title="Joplin, Missouri" label="Joplin, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842604" start="27274" end="27289" title="NCAA Division I" label="NCAA Division I"/>
<link wikidata="Q7735" start="27391" end="27397" title="Diving (sport)" label="diving"/>
<link wikidata="Q41323" start="27423" end="27431" title="American football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q4543" start="27450" end="27466" title="beach volleyball" label="beach volleyball"/>
<link wikidata="Q500050" start="27468" end="27481" title="cross country running" label="cross country"/>
<link wikidata="Q171038" start="27483" end="27491" title="softball" label="softball"/>
<link wikidata="Q847" start="27493" end="27499" title="tennis" label="tennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3312129" start="27501" end="27506" title="Track and field" label="track"/>
<link wikidata="Q1734" start="27512" end="27522" title="volleyball" label="volleyball"/>
<link wikidata="Q5679994" start="27552" end="27557" title="Missouri State Bears" label="Bears"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536057" start="27652" end="27678" title="Missouri Valley Conference" label="Missouri Valley Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125149" start="27719" end="27733" title="Conference USA" label="Conference USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1310058" start="27746" end="27781" title="Missouri Valley Football Conference" label="Missouri Valley Football Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373755" start="27820" end="27843" title="Mid-American Conference" label="Mid-American Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q48783076" start="27871" end="27920" title="NCAA Division I Football Championship" label="NCAA Division I Football Championship Subdivision"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125149" start="27974" end="27988" title="Conference USA" label="Conference USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q996954" start="28155" end="28168" title="Sweet Sixteen (basketball)" label="Sweet Sixteen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3994975" start="28172" end="28176" title="1999 NCAA Division I men&amp;#x27;s basketball tournament" label="1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416059" start="28214" end="28224" title="Final four" label="Final Four"/>
<link wikidata="Q4587791" start="28228" end="28232" title="1992 NCAA Division I women&amp;#x27;s basketball tournament" label="1992"/>
<link wikidata="Q4598935" start="28237" end="28241" title="2001 NCAA Division I women&amp;#x27;s basketball tournament" label="2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q4588666" start="28268" end="28272" title="1993 NCAA Division I women&amp;#x27;s basketball tournament" label="1993"/>
<link wikidata="Q30635405" start="28274" end="28278" title="2019 NCAA Division I women&amp;#x27;s basketball tournament" label="2019"/>
<link wikidata="Q60527974" start="28284" end="28288" title="2021 NCAA Division I women&amp;#x27;s basketball tournament" label="2021"/>
<link wikidata="Q4601626" start="28332" end="28336" title="2003 NCAA Division I baseball tournament" label="2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q4809458" start="28487" end="28491" title="AIAW" label="AIAW"/>
<link wikidata="Q1866478" start="28601" end="28609" title="American handball" label="Handball"/>
<link wikidata="Q41466" start="28686" end="28696" title="Ice Hockey" label="Ice Hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2948695" start="28768" end="28806" title="American Collegiate Hockey Association" label="American Collegiate Hockey Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q7987732" start="28825" end="28857" title="Western Collegiate Hockey League" label="Western Collegiate Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q6806008" start="29399" end="29416" title="Mediacom Ice Park" label="Mediacom Ice Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q3177899" start="29470" end="29477" title="bowling" label="bowling"/>
<link wikidata="Q206989" start="29484" end="29490" title="shooting sports" label="pistol"/>
<link wikidata="Q207703" start="29497" end="29502" title="rodeo" label="rodeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3440462" start="29509" end="29522" title="roller hockey" label="roller hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q472827" start="29529" end="29538" title="water ski" label="water ski"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146995" start="29545" end="29554" title="collegiate wrestling" label="wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="29598" end="29604" title="Association football" label="soccer"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="187861" wikidata="Q1191071" url="?curid=187861" title="V.">
<text>V. is a satirical postmodern novel and the debut novel of Thomas Pynchon, published on March 18, 1963. It describes the exploits of a discharged U.S. Navy sailor named Benny Profane, his reconnection in New York with a group of pseudo-bohemian artists and hangers-on known as the Whole Sick Crew, and the quest of an aging traveler named Herbert Stencil to identify and locate the mysterious entity he knows only as &quot;V.&quot; It was nominated for a National Book Award.

==Plot summary==

The novel alternates between episodes featuring Benny, Stencil and other members of the Whole Sick Crew (including Profane&#x27;s sidekick Pig Bodine) in 1956 (with a few minor flashbacks), and a generation-spanning plot that comprises Stencil&#x27;s attempts to unravel the clues he believes will lead him to &quot;V.&quot; (or to the various incarnations thereof). Each of these &quot;Stencilised&quot; chapters is set at a different moment of historical crisis; the framing narrative involving Stencil, &quot;V.&quot;, and the journals of Stencil&#x27;s British spy/diplomat father threads the sequences together. The novel&#x27;s two storylines increasingly converge in the last chapters (the intersecting lines forming a V-shape, as it were), as Stencil hires Benny to travel with him to Malta.

===Chapter One: &quot;In which Benny Profane, a schlemihl and human yo-yo, gets to an apocheir&quot;===
The opening chapter is set in Norfolk, Virginia, on Christmas Eve, 1955. Benny Profane, a recently discharged seaman, is at a local sailor bar called the &quot;Sailor&#x27;s Grave&quot; in which every waitress is named Beatrice and the beer taps are rubber model breasts that the sailors suck on. Here Profane meets Ploy, a short violent sailor, his musician friend Dewey Gland, and the Maltese barmaid Paola Hod. Bar owner Mrs. Buffo begins to play a rendition of &quot;It Came Upon the Midnight Clear&quot; to celebrate Christmas only to be immediately assaulted by Ploy and the rest of the intoxicated sailors. The disorder triggers a raid by the military police. Pig Bodine, Paola, Dewey Gland and Profane escape the chaos to Pig&#x27;s apartment.

===Chapter Two: &quot;The Whole Sick Crew&quot;===
The chapter opens with Rachel Owlglass confronting the plastic surgeon Shale Schoenmaker whom she accuses of manipulating her friend and roommate Esther Havitz into debt through repeated rhinoplasty. Schoenmaker responds by entering into a monologue on the nature of Jewish women and the nature of appearance.

Section II is set during a party at Rachel&#x27;s apartment attended by the &quot;Sick Crew&quot;, Paola, Esther, and Debb. This section introduces the character Herbert Stencil, a troubled man who is obsessed with his father&#x27;s mysterious death in Malta (even more mysterious as Sidney Stencil, Herbert&#x27;s father, was a British secret agent) and the identity of &quot;V&quot;, a woman mentioned in his journal.

===Chapter Three: &quot;In which Stencil, a quick-change artist, does eight impersonations&quot;===
This chapter, set among the British community in Egypt toward the end of the 19th century, consists of an introduction and a series of eight relatively short sections, each of them from the point of view of a different person. The eight sections come together to tell a story of murder and intrigue, intersecting the life of a young woman, Victoria Wren, the first incarnation of V. The title is a hint as to how this chapter is to be understood: Stencil imagines each of the eight viewpoints as he reconstructs—we do not know on how much knowledge and how much conjecture—this episode. This chapter is a reworking of Pynchon&#x27;s short story &quot;Under the Rose&quot;, which was first published in 1961 and is collected in &quot;Slow Learner&quot; (1984). In the &quot;Slow Learner&quot; introduction, Pynchon admits he took the details of the setting (&quot;right down to the names of the diplomatic corps&quot;) from Karl Baedeker&#x27;s 1899 travel guide for Egypt. Stencil&#x27;s reconstruction follows the same basic conflict as &quot;Under the Rose&quot;, but it gives the non-European characters much more personality.

===Chapter Four: In Which Esther Gets a Nose Job===
Section I details the history of Shale Schoenmaker, M.D. and how he began his career as a plastic surgeon. During World War I he eagerly enlists in the A.E.F. hoping to become a pilot but, is instead given a position as an engineer. While serving he witnesses Evan Godolphin, a handsome pilot whom he idealized, become horribly disfigured during an air raid. A month later Schoenmaker visits Godolphin in the hospital while he is recovering from reconstructive surgery, discovering that an incompetent surgeon, Halidom, treated him using the archaic method that would inevitably lead to further disfigurement by infection. This event traumatizes Schoenmaker, causing him to now see it as his mission to help people like Godolphin, a conviction that slowly decays over time.

Stencil comes across Schoenmaker in his search for V. and refers Esther to him for her nose job. At a follow-up appointment Esther and Schoenmaker become lovers.

===Chapter Five: In Which Stencil Nearly Goes West with an Alligator===
Only marginally part of the Stencil/V. material, this chapter follows Benny and others, as Benny has a job hunting alligators in the sewers under Manhattan. It figures in the Stencil/V. story in that there is a rat named &quot;Veronica&quot; who figures in a subplot about a mad priest — Father Linus Fairing, S.J. — some decades back, living in the sewers and preaching to the rats; we hear from him in the form of his diary. Stencil himself makes a brief appearance toward the end of the chapter.

===Chapter Six: In which Profane returns to street level===
The chapter follows Profane, Geronimo, Angel, and his sister Josephine &quot;Fina&quot; into the city over several nights of drinking. Fina and Profane&#x27;s relationship develops amid concerns over her status within a local mercenary street gang known as the Playboys, who see her as a spiritual figurehead. The chapter ends amid a massive brawl, nearby which Fina is found lying naked and smiling.

===Chapter Seven: She hangs on the western wall===
In Florence in 1899, Victoria appears again, briefly, but so does the place name &quot;Vheissu&quot;, which may or may not stand for Vesuvius, Venezuela, a crude interpretation of &quot;wie heißt du&quot;, translating into &quot;who are you&quot; in the German language, or even (one character jokes) Venus. The chapter also revolves around an attempted burglary of Botticelli&#x27;s &quot;The Birth of Venus&quot; by Hugh Godolphin through the Venezuelan consulate.

===Chapter Eight: In which Rachel gets her yo-yo back, Roony sings a song, and Stencil calls on Bloody Chiclitz===
The chapter begins with Benny Profane, freshly unemployed after being laid-off from sewer-alligator hunting, in search of a job in Manhattan. After briefly contemplating the nature of money on a park bench, he, by chance, looks at an advertisement issued by The Time/Space Employment Agency. Once arriving at the agency he finds, much to his annoyance, that the secretary is his former lover Rachel Owlglass. In section IV Stencil continues his investigation of the perplexing &quot;V.&quot; (whom he now believes is either Victoria or the rat Veronica) meeting up with a Yoyodyne engineer Kurt Mondaugen.

===Chapter Nine: Mondaugen&#x27;s story===
Kurt Mondaugen, who will appear again in &quot;Gravity&#x27;s Rainbow&quot;, is the central character in a story set in South West Africa (now Namibia) partly during a siege in 1922 at which one Vera Meroving is present, but most notably in 1904, during the Herero Wars, when South West Africa was a German colony.

===Chapter Ten: In which various sets of young people get together===
McClintic Sphere, an alto sax player in a jazz band, returns home to his boarding house in Harlem. The previous week, spent playing primarily for condescending, snobby Ivy League students, has left him exhausted, and he relaxes in his room with a prostitute named Ruby. Benny, meanwhile, finally gets a job at Anthroresearch Associates, where he&#x27;s introduced to SHROUD, a synthetic humanoid with whom he holds imaginary conversations. Pig Bodine and Roony Winsome get into a fight, based on Roony&#x27;s suspicion that Pig is involved with his (Roony&#x27;s) wife, Mafia. Meanwhile, Mafia aggressively pursues sex with Benny, who declines. Schoenmaker and Esther get into a few arguments because he says he wants to bring out her inner beauty by performing more plastic surgery on her. The chapter finishes out with the Whole Sick Crew hanging out in various places: Sheridan Square, the Rusty Spoon, Slab in front of his Cheese Danish No. 35 canvas. Stencil, looking for Rachel at her apartment, comes upon Paola who gives him the Confessions of Fausto Maijstral.

===Chapter Eleven: Confessions of Fausto Maijstral===
Fausto Maijstral, Maltese civilian suffering under the German bombardment and working to clear the rubble during World War II writes a long letter to his daughter Paola, who figures in the Benny Profane story; the letter comes into Stencil&#x27;s hands. The letter includes copious quotations from Fausto&#x27;s diary. Besides the place name Valletta, V. figures in the story as an old — or possibly not-so-old — woman crushed by a beam of a fallen building.

=== Chapter Twelve: In which things are not so amusing ===
Roony and Mafia continue fighting, so Roony meets up with McClintic at the V-Note, and they travel to Lenox, Massachusetts. Returning to Matilda&#x27;s boardinghouse, they meet up with Ruby, who Roony recognizes as being a member of the Crew in disguise. Esther tells Slab she is pregnant. He wants to send her to Cuba to get an abortion, and raises the money by announcing his intentions and asking for money at a party the Crew is throwing in an abandoned warehouse. Roony&#x27;s attempts to deal with his wife then take a dark turn, but he is saved by Pig. At an airport, Esther and Slab attempt to catch Esther a flight to Cuba, but meet some resistance. Paola, traveling with McClintic, reveals her true identity to him. He delivers the line, &quot;Keep cool, but care,&quot; considered the novel&#x27;s central theme, as they drive off into the Berkshires.

=== Chapter Thirteen: In which the yo-yo string is revealed as a state of mind ===
Benny loses his job at Anthroresearch Associates by sleeping in and not being at work to notify the attendant technician that several calamities have occurred in the lab. Rachel nudges him to get a new job, and says that she will find one for him herself. An amusing story unfolds about Benny and Pig during their &quot;Scaffold&quot; days. Benny, unable and unwilling to get work, instead takes a self-described vacation and chooses to spend his spare time at the Rusty Spoon. He gets drunk with Stencil, who relates the entirety of his knowledge of V. as it stands to this point in the novel. Valletta being the last place on Stencil&#x27;s journey to find information about V., he asks Benny to accompany him and Paola to the island. Benny and Stencil commit a robbery in perilous circumstances, and then, in late September, they embark for Malta with Paola on board the &quot;Susanna Squaducci&quot;.

===Chapter Fourteen: V. in love ===
In this chapter, V. is entranced by a young ballerina, Mélanie l&#x27;Heuremaudit. The story centers on a riotous ballet performance, almost certainly modeled in part on the premiere of Igor Stravinsky&#x27;s &quot;The Rite of Spring&quot;. The performance centers on a virgin sacrifice by impalement. The young ballerina fails to wear her protective equipment and actually dies by impalement in the course of the performance; everyone assumes her death throes simply to be an uncharacteristically emotional performance.

=== Chapter Fifteen: Sahha ===
Benny and Pig Bodine have one last adventure with two girls, Flip and Flop, as they all get drunk and wander around Washington D.C.. There are two going away parties for Benny, and the chapter ends with Benny, Stencil, and Paola leaving for Malta aboard the &quot;Susanna Squaducci&quot; as the Crew looks on and says goodbye.

===Chapter Sixteen: Valletta===
As the Royal Navy mass on Malta in the early stages of the Suez Crisis, Stencil arrives with Benny in tow, searching for Fausto Maijstral. (As always, Kilroy was here first, and Pynchon proposes a novel origin for the face: that Kilroy was originally a schematic for part of a band-pass filter.) While Stencil is able to find Maijstral, he discovers very little from Paola&#x27;s father and departs without Stencil (who stays with Fausto) and Paola (who, after visiting her husband, decides to return to the States).

===Epilogue===
The last chapter is a flashback to Valletta when Stencil, Sr. was still alive. After World War I he is sent to Malta to observe the various crises going on involving the natives and their desire for independence. He is implored by Maijstral&#x27;s wife (who is pregnant with Fausto) to relieve him of his duties as a double agent because she fears for his life. Stencil, Sr. meets Veronica Manganese or V and implicitly has sex with her (she is now largely made up of artificial limbs). It is revealed they had trysted in Florence after the riots. He finds out that Maijstral is having an affair with her as well.

Linus Fairing is also working as a double agent for Stencil, and when he leaves for America, having tired of the life of a spy, Stencil&#x27;s purpose for being in Malta is null.

V releases Stencil from her auspices and Maijstral as well.

Stencil sails off into the Mediterranean and a waterspout blows the ship up into the air, then down into the depths, not too dissimilar from the conclusion of another American masterpiece, &quot;Moby-Dick&quot;, also a sailor&#x27;s story.

==Characters==

===Major characters===
* Benny Profane – The protagonist and a self-proclaimed human yo-yo
* Rachel Owlglass – An upper-class woman from the affluent Five Towns on the south shore of Long Island
* Herbert Stencil – A troubled Englishman who is obsessed with the identity of &quot;V.&quot; a woman who is mentioned in his father&#x27;s journal written shortly before he disappeared in Malta. Stencil speaks almost exclusively in the third person.

===Minor characters===
* Clayton &quot;Bloody&quot; Chiclitz, the founder of Yoyodyne Inc.
* Angel – Puerto Rican sewer alligator hunter and friend of Profane
* Fina – Angel&#x27;s sister, she acts as a saint to the Playboy gang, often quelling disputes between them and other gangs over territory. In chapter six it is heavily implied that she is raped by the same gang.
* Geronimo
* Slab
* Melvin
* Raoul
* Debb Sensay
* Brad
* Roony Winsome
* Mafia Winsome
* Paola Maijstral – Maltese immigrant who Profane estimates to be roughly sixteen. Sometime during World War II, Paola marries Pappy Hod to gain entrance to the United States.
* Esther Harvitz – Rachel&#x27;s Jewish roommate whom Rachel financially supports.
* McClintic Sphere
* Fergus Mixolydian – An &quot;Irish Armenian Jew&quot; and the &quot;laziest living being in Nueva York&quot;. Fergus is so lethargic that the only activity that he takes part in excluding television is once a week &quot;to fiddle around at the kitchen sink with dry cells, retorts, alembics, salts solutions.&quot;
* Shale Schoenmaker, M.D. – a Jewish plastic surgeon who specializes in rhinoplasty. Schoenmaker decides to become a plastic surgeon during World War I while working as an engineer in the Aviation Section. During this time he witnesses pilot Evan Godolphin become disfigured after a mission in which his plane was heavily damaged.
*Dudley Eigenvalue, D.D.S, -- Stencil&#x27;s dentist and &quot;psychodontist&quot; in whom he confides. Eigenvalue also possesses a prized pair of titanium dentures in a museum display case in his offices.
* Ploy – An engineer on the mine sweeper &quot;Impulsive&quot;. Standing five feet tall in boots, Ploy has an extremely violent temperament, oftentimes attempting to start fights with the largest sailors. Ten months before the beginning of the first chapter Ploy&#x27;s teeth are removed by the Navy, being replaced by a pair of dentures. Ploy entertains himself by biting barmaids at the Sailor&#x27;s Grave on the buttocks.
* Pig Bodine – A perverted member of the Sick Crew. Prior to joining the crew, Bodine was enlisted on the U.S.S. &quot;Scaffold&quot; where he operated a pornographic lending library and would write fetish erotica using the ship telegraph. Bodine&#x27;s knees have the odd ability to lock in place allowing him to effectively sleep while standing, much to the astonishment of the navy physicians.
* Kurt Mondaugen – An engineer who works at Yoyodyne who is interviewed by Stencil.

==Analysis and reception==
It has been suggested that Vladimir Nabokov&#x27;s novel &quot;The Real Life of Sebastian Knight&quot; was a strong influence on Pynchon. &quot;V.&quot; resembles Nabokov&#x27;s novel in plot, character, narration and style, and the title alludes directly to Nabokov&#x27;s narrator &quot;V.&quot; in &quot;The Real Life of Sebastian Knight&quot;.

&quot;Time&quot; wrote &quot;In this sort of book, there is no total to arrive at. Nothing makes any waking sense. But it makes a powerful, deeply disturbing dream sense. Nothing in the book seems to have been thrown in arbitrarily, merely to confuse, as is the case when inept authors work at illusion. Pynchon appears to be indulging in the fine, pre-Freudian luxury of dreams dreamt for the dreaming. The book sails with majesty through caverns measureless to man. What does it mean? Who, finally, is V.? Few books haunt the waking or the sleeping mind, but this is one. Who, indeed?&quot;

Tony Tanner considered the novel an exploration of the plots individuals ascribe to the ambivalent universe they have no choice but to confront, during a 20th-century period in which genuine communication between individuals has been eroded and in which ambiguous societal forces are at work (intentionally or inadvertently) towards a state of entropy; &quot;SHROUD asks, &#x27;Has it occurred to you there may be no more standards for crazy or sane, now that it&#x27;s started?&#x27; And Benny answers, &#x27;What, for Christ&#x27;s sake?&#x27; What the &#x27;it&#x27; is that has started (if there is an &#x27;it&#x27;), what common process links remote imperialist incidents with contemporary automation, tourism, Hitler, and the Whole Sick Crew (if there is any linking common process)—this is what the whole book is about.&quot;

Writing in &quot;The New York Times&quot;, George Plimpton called Pynchon &quot;a young writer of staggering promise&quot;, lauding his &quot;vigorous and imaginative style&quot;, &quot;robust humor&quot; and &quot;tremendous reservoir of information&quot;.

In 1964, the novel was awarded a William Faulkner Foundation Award for best debut novel.

There is an interesting connection to &quot;So Many Doors&quot;, a 1951 crime novel written by Oakley Hall, an author for whom Pynchon has expressed admiration. In that novel a character named Vasilia Baird is murdered and it is revealed that many suspects knew her only as &quot;V.&quot;

==Editions==
In 2012, it emerged that there were multiple versions of &quot;V.&quot; in circulation. This was due to the fact that Pynchon&#x27;s final modifications were made after the first edition was printed and thus were only implemented in the British, or Jonathan Cape, edition and the Bantam paperback. The fact was forgotten soon after in the U.S., so most US editions, including the newly released eBook, follow the first printing and are therefore unauthorized versions of the text, while the British editions, which follow the first edition printed by Jonathan Cape, contain Pynchon&#x27;s final revisions.

==In popular culture==
*The line &quot;Yesterday&#x27;s headlines blown by the wind&quot; in English rock band Radiohead&#x27;s 2003 song &quot;Scatterbrain&quot; was inspired by a passage from the novel.
*Mimi and Richard Fariña&#x27;s 1965 debut album, &quot;Celebrations for a Grey Day&quot;, includes an instrumental entitled &quot;V.&quot; which is linked directly to the novel in the liner notes.
*A suite of songs on the 1969 album &quot;Volume Two&quot; by Soft Machine is titled &quot;Esther&#x27;s Nose Job&quot;, referring to Chapter 4: &quot;In which Esther gets a nose job.&quot;
*The English band Benny Profane took their name from Pynchon&#x27;s character.
*The Insect Trust&#x27;s 1970 album &quot;Hoboken Saturday Night&quot; includes the song &quot;Eyes of a New York Woman&quot;, with lyrics taken from the novel. The same lyrics form the basis of a different song, &quot;V. in Love&quot;, from the album &quot;Colour Out of Space&quot; by Favorite Color.
*Alan Moore&#x27;s &quot;V for Vendetta&quot; includes the title character V quoting and reading from Pynchon&#x27;s book.
*Some aspects of Paul Thomas Anderson&#x27;s &quot;The Master&quot; (2012) are based on &quot;V.&quot;, such as the protagonist being a discharged sailor and his connection with a cult-like group of individuals.

==References==
==Bibliography==
* Grant, J. Kerry. &quot;A Companion to&quot; V. Athens: University of Georgia Press, 2001.
* Herman, Luc, and John Krafft. &quot;Becoming Pynchon: Genetic Narratology and&quot; V. Columbus: Ohio State University Press, 2023.
* Simonetti, Paolo, and Umberto Rossi (eds.). &quot;Dream Tonight of Peacock&#x27;s Tails: Essays on the Fiftieth Anniversary of Thomas Pynchon&#x27;s&quot; V. Newcastle upon Tyne: Cambridge Scholars Publishing, 2015. 

==External links==
*&quot;V.&quot; Wiki @ PynchonWiki.com
*&quot;V.&quot; Cover Art Over Time @ ThomasPynchon.com</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q8261" start="49" end="54" title="novel" label="novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q35155" start="58" end="72" title="Thomas Pynchon" label="Thomas Pynchon"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="145" end="154" title="United States Navy" label="U.S. Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="203" end="211" title="New York City" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q207175" start="235" end="243" title="bohemianism" label="bohemian"/>
<link wikidata="Q772259" start="256" end="266" title="Sycophancy" label="hangers-on"/>
<link wikidata="Q572316" start="454" end="473" title="National Book Award" label="National Book Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q5791104" start="940" end="957" title="international crisis" label="historical crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q185598" start="1024" end="1032" title="Diary" label="journals"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="1051" end="1058" title="United Kingdom" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q233" start="1287" end="1292" title="Malta" label="Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q49231" start="1429" end="1446" title="Norfolk, Virginia" label="Norfolk, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q106010" start="1451" end="1464" title="Christmas Eve" label="Christmas Eve"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094974" start="1870" end="1901" title="It Came Upon the Midnight Clear" label="It Came Upon the Midnight Clear"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="3084" end="3089" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2812302" start="3737" end="3741" title="1961 in literature" label="1961"/>
<link wikidata="Q595995" start="3768" end="3780" title="Slow Learner" label="Slow Learner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1463215" start="3788" end="3792" title="1984 in literature" label="1984"/>
<link wikidata="Q77302" start="3958" end="3971" title="Karl Baedeker" label="Karl Baedeker"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="4332" end="4343" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q464176" start="4370" end="4376" title="American Expeditionary Forces" label="A.E.F."/>
<link wikidata="Q1789752" start="5343" end="5367" title="Sewer alligator" label="alligators in the sewers"/>
<link wikidata="Q11299" start="5374" end="5383" title="Manhattan" label="Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="5538" end="5542" title="Society of Jesus" label="S.J."/>
<link wikidata="Q2044" start="6244" end="6252" title="Florence" label="Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q524" start="6374" end="6382" title="Vesuvius" label="Vesuvius"/>
<link wikidata="Q717" start="6384" end="6393" title="Venezuela" label="Venezuela"/>
<link wikidata="Q47652" start="6542" end="6547" title="Venus (mythology)" label="Venus"/>
<link wikidata="Q151047" start="6631" end="6649" title="The Birth of Venus" label="The Birth of Venus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1789752" start="6908" end="6923" title="sewer-alligator" label="sewer-alligator"/>
<link wikidata="Q8059427" start="7396" end="7404" title="Yoyodyne" label="Yoyodyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1212160" start="7521" end="7543" title="Gravity&amp;#x27;s Rainbow" label="Gravity&amp;#x27;s Rainbow"/>
<link wikidata="Q953068" start="7594" end="7611" title="South West Africa" label="South West Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030" start="7617" end="7624" title="Namibia" label="Namibia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16512674" start="7732" end="7743" title="Herero Wars" label="Herero Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q133156" start="7781" end="7787" title="colony" label="colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q16925177" start="7860" end="7876" title="McClintic Sphere" label="McClintic Sphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="9098" end="9110" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q23800" start="9327" end="9335" title="Valletta" label="Valletta"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314" start="11579" end="11594" title="Igor Stravinsky" label="Igor Stravinsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q206015" start="11608" end="11626" title="The Rite of Spring" label="The Rite of Spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="12313" end="12323" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q49101" start="12365" end="12376" title="Suez Crisis" label="Suez Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q597180" start="12457" end="12472" title="Kilroy was here" label="Kilroy was here"/>
<link wikidata="Q4514647" start="12559" end="12568" title="schematic" label="schematic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2718101" start="12583" end="12599" title="band-pass filter" label="band-pass filter"/>
<link wikidata="Q174596" start="13890" end="13899" title="Moby-Dick" label="Moby-Dick"/>
<link wikidata="Q33005760" start="14384" end="14396" title="Narration" label="third person"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286876" start="14879" end="14886" title="Maltese people" label="Maltese"/>
<link wikidata="Q16925177" start="15120" end="15136" title="McClintic Sphere" label="McClintic Sphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q840929" start="15526" end="15537" title="rhinoplasty" label="rhinoplasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q36591" start="16953" end="16969" title="Vladimir Nabokov" label="Vladimir Nabokov"/>
<link wikidata="Q2351667" start="16989" end="17022" title="The Real Life of Sebastian Knight" label="The Real Life of Sebastian Knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="17275" end="17291" title="Time (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Time&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7823526" start="17869" end="17880" title="Tony Tanner (scholar)" label="Tony Tanner"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="18721" end="18739" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q3075589" start="18996" end="19029" title="William Faulkner Foundation Award" label="William Faulkner Foundation Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q5248657" start="19039" end="19050" title="debut novel" label="debut novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7074155" start="19148" end="19159" title="Oakley Hall" label="Oakley Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q44190" start="20074" end="20083" title="Radiohead" label="Radiohead"/>
<link wikidata="Q274963" start="20101" end="20125" title="Hail to the Thief" label="&amp;quot;Scatterbrain&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q449554" start="20169" end="20173" title="Mimi Fariña" label="Mimi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931654" start="20178" end="20192" title="Richard Fariña" label="Richard Fariña"/>
<link wikidata="Q2732713" start="20408" end="20418" title="Volume Two (The Soft Machine album)" label="Volume Two"/>
<link wikidata="Q729505" start="20428" end="20440" title="Soft Machine" label="Soft Machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4890035" start="20574" end="20587" title="Benny Profane" label="Benny Profane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1485525" start="20636" end="20652" title="The Insect Trust" label="The Insect Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q28668518" start="20677" end="20699" title="Hoboken Saturday Night" label="Hoboken Saturday Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q103411" start="20963" end="20977" title="V for Vendetta" label="V for Vendetta"/>
<link wikidata="Q25132" start="21078" end="21098" title="Paul Thomas Anderson" label="Paul Thomas Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q283586" start="21112" end="21122" title="The Master (2012 film)" label="The Master"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="187864" wikidata="Q2260939" url="?curid=187864" title="1869 in music">
<text>This article is about music-related events in [[1869]].

== Events ==
*February 28 – The premiere of Brahms&#x27; &quot;Rinaldo&quot; took place in Vienna at a concert of the Akademischer Gesangverein. The composer conducted, with the tenor Gustav Walter, a student chorus numbering 300, and the Court Opera orchestra. 
* April 3 – Edvard Grieg&#x27;s Piano Concerto is premiered at Copenhagen&#x27;s Casino.
* May 25 – The Vienna State Opera is inaugurated with a performance of Mozart&#x27;s &quot;Don Giovanni&quot;.
* September 22 – Richard Wagner&#x27;s opera &quot;Das Rheingold&quot; debuts at the Königlich Hof- und Nationaltheater in Munich.
* Approximate date – Start of &quot;golden age&quot; of flamenco.
*Tchaikovsky completes the initial version of Romeo and Juliet. It will be revised the next year and in 1880.

== Published popular music ==
* &quot;The Little Brown Jug&quot; by J. Eastburn Winner
* &quot;Now the Day is Over&quot; w. Sabine Baring-Gould m. Joseph Barnby
* &quot;Shoo Fly, Don&#x27;t Bother Me&quot; attributed to T. Brigham Bishop (possibly w. Billy Reeves m. Frank Campbell)
* &quot;Sweet Genevieve&quot; w. George Cooper m. Henry Tucker

== Classical music ==
*Mili Balakirev – Islamey an &quot;Oriental Fantasy&quot; for piano.
*Johannes Brahms
**&quot;Ein deutsches Requiem&quot;
**&quot;Hungarian Dances&quot;
*Anton Bruckner 
**Mitternacht, WAB 80
**Symphony in D minor (&quot;Die Nullte&quot;)
*Teresa Carreño – Un bal en rêve, Op.26
*Henri Duparc 
**Feuilles volantes, Op.1
**Soupir
*Louis Moreau Gottschalk – Grande fantaisie triomphale sur l&#x27;hymne national brésilien, Op.69
*Louis James Alfred Lefébure-Wély – Vade-mecum de l&#x27;organiste, Op. 187
*Heinrich Lichner – Figurinen, Op.57
*Joachim Raff – Fantaisie, Op.142
*Camille Saint-Saëns 
**Orient et occident, Op. 25
**La coccinelle
**Paraphrase sur Mandolinata de Paladilhe
*George Stephanescu – Symphony in A
*Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky – Six Romances, Op. 6 including None but the lonely heart

== Opera ==
*Frederic Clay – &quot;Ages Ago&quot;
*Karel Miry – &quot;Een engel op wacht&quot; (opera in 1 act, libretto by P. Geiregat, premiered on December 8 in Brussels)
*Richard Wagner – &quot;Das Rheingold&quot;

== Births ==
* January 20 – George Hamlin, American opera singer (d. 1923)
*February 1 – Kerry Mills, American violinist and songwriter (d. 1948)
*February 3 – Giulio Gatti-Casazza, opera manager (d. 1940)
*February 12 – Theodor Bertram, German opera singer (d.1907) 
* March 3 – Henry Wood, conductor (d. 1944)
* May 5 – Hans Pfitzner, composer (d. 1949)
* June 6 – Siegfried Wagner, composer (d. 1930)
* July 9 – Arnold Volpe, composer (d. 1940)
* July 13 – Florence Perry, opera singer (d. 1949)
* August 14 – Armas Järnefelt, Finnish composer and conductor (d. 1958)
* September 2 – Carlos Hartling, composer of the national anthem of Honduras (d. 1920)
* September 6 – Walford Davies, British composer and organist, Master of the King&#x27;s Musick (d. 1941)
* September 21 – Henryk Melcer-Szczawiński, Polish composer, pianist, conductor, and teacher (d. 1928)
* September 30 – E. A. Couturier, American cornet virtuoso, composer, inventor and instrument manufacturer (d. 1950)
* October 8 (September 26 O.S.) – Komitas, born Soghomon Soghomonian, Turkish Armenian priest and ethnomusicologist (d. 1935)
*&quot;date unknown&quot;
**Kate Carney, born Catherine Pattinson, English music hall singer (d. 1950)
**Maximilian Maksakov, born Max Schwartz, Austro-Russian operatic baritone (d. 1936)

== Deaths ==
*January 10 – Joan Aulí, organist and composer (b. 1796)
*January 17 – Alexander Dargomyzhsky, Russian composer (b. 1813)
*January 30 – Charlotte Alington Barnard (&#x27;Claribel&#x27;), English ballad composer (b. 1830)
*March 8 – Hector Berlioz, composer (b. 1803)
*March 23 – Charles Lucas, cellist (b. 1808)
*April 1 – Alexander Dreyschock, pianist and composer (b. 1818)
*April 12 – Antonie Brentano, friend of Beethoven (b. 1780)
*April 15 – August Wilhelm Bach, German composer and organist (b. 1796)
*April 20 – Carl Loewe, composer, baritone, conductor (b. 1796)
*May 10 – Bernhard Molique, German violinist and composer (b. 1802)
*May 16 – Giovanni Peruzzini, Italian opera librettist, poet, and translator of German literature (b. 1815)
*June 4 – Joseph Ascher, pianist and composer (b. 1829)
*June 15 – Albert Grisar, composer (b. 1808)
*July 18 – Louis Bouilhet, lyricist (born 1822)
*August 13 – Giuseppe Persiani, opera composer (b. 1799)
*August 24 – Macedonio Alcalá, pianist, violinist and songwriter (b. 1831)
*November 29 – Giulia Grisi, opera singer (b. 1811)
*December 18 – Louis Moreau Gottschalk, composer and pianist (b. 1829) (overdose of quinine)
*December 23 – Julian Fontana, pianist (b. 1810)
*December 31 – Louis James Alfred Lefébure-Wély, organist (b. 1817)

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2260939" start="22" end="54" title="1869 in music" label="music-related events in [[1869]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q2362" start="71" end="82" title="February 28" label="February 28"/>
<link wikidata="Q7294" start="101" end="107" title="Brahms" label="Brahms"/>
<link wikidata="Q7334559" start="120" end="127" title="Rinaldo (cantata)" label="Rinaldo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741" start="148" end="154" title="Vienna" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q12018560" start="241" end="254" title="Gustav Walter" label="Gustav Walter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2509" start="322" end="329" title="April 3" label="April 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q80621" start="332" end="344" title="Edvard Grieg" label="Edvard Grieg"/>
<link wikidata="Q44261" start="352" end="366" title="Piano Concerto (Grieg)" label="Piano Concerto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748" start="383" end="393" title="Copenhagen" label="Copenhagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2585" start="411" end="417" title="May 25" label="May 25"/>
<link wikidata="Q209937" start="424" end="442" title="Vienna State Opera" label="Vienna State Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q254" start="480" end="486" title="Mozart" label="Mozart"/>
<link wikidata="Q192039" start="500" end="512" title="Don Giovanni" label="Don Giovanni"/>
<link wikidata="Q2889" start="522" end="534" title="September 22" label="September 22"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511" start="537" end="551" title="Richard Wagner" label="Richard Wagner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344" start="559" end="564" title="opera" label="opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q327717" start="571" end="584" title="Das Rheingold" label="Das Rheingold"/>
<link wikidata="Q1726" start="643" end="649" title="Munich" label="Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q9764" start="707" end="715" title="flamenco" label="flamenco"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315" start="718" end="729" title="Tchaikovsky" label="Tchaikovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q763716" start="763" end="779" title="Romeo and Juliet (Tchaikovsky)" label="Romeo and Juliet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3431155" start="866" end="886" title="Little Brown Jug (song)" label="The Little Brown Jug"/>
<link wikidata="Q6288024" start="896" end="914" title="Joseph Winner" label="J. Eastburn Winner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1242472" start="952" end="971" title="Sabine Baring-Gould" label="Sabine Baring-Gould"/>
<link wikidata="Q7500434" start="997" end="1027" title="Shoo Fly, Don&amp;#x27;t Bother Me" label="Shoo Fly, Don&amp;#x27;t Bother Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q7787894" start="1048" end="1065" title="Thomas Brigham Bishop" label="T. Brigham Bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q185040" start="1198" end="1212" title="Mili Balakirev" label="Mili Balakirev"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192074" start="1215" end="1222" title="Islamey" label="Islamey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7294" start="1267" end="1282" title="Johannes Brahms" label="Johannes Brahms"/>
<link wikidata="Q756299" start="1291" end="1312" title="Ein deutsches Requiem" label="Ein deutsches Requiem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065126" start="1327" end="1343" title="Hungarian Dances (Brahms)" label="Hungarian Dances"/>
<link wikidata="Q81752" start="1351" end="1365" title="Anton Bruckner" label="Anton Bruckner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1990679" start="1391" end="1410" title="Symphony in D minor (Bruckner)" label="Symphony in D minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q241494" start="1437" end="1451" title="Teresa Carreño" label="Teresa Carreño"/>
<link wikidata="Q364983" start="1477" end="1489" title="Henri Duparc (composer)" label="Henri Duparc"/>
<link wikidata="Q550701" start="1527" end="1550" title="Louis Moreau Gottschalk" label="Louis Moreau Gottschalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q546919" start="1625" end="1657" title="Alfred Lefébure-Wély" label="Louis James Alfred Lefébure-Wély"/>
<link wikidata="Q72136" start="1701" end="1717" title="Heinrich Lichner" label="Heinrich Lichner"/>
<link wikidata="Q547301" start="1738" end="1750" title="Joachim Raff" label="Joachim Raff"/>
<link wikidata="Q150445" start="1772" end="1791" title="Camille Saint-Saëns" label="Camille Saint-Saëns"/>
<link wikidata="Q3067499" start="1881" end="1899" title="George Stephanescu" label="George Stephanescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315" start="1917" end="1941" title="Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky" label="Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q4490983" start="1974" end="1999" title="None but the Lonely Heart (Tchaikovsky)" label="None but the lonely heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q5497008" start="2014" end="2027" title="Frederic Clay" label="Frederic Clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692141" start="2036" end="2044" title="Ages Ago" label="Ages Ago"/>
<link wikidata="Q3076542" start="2052" end="2062" title="Karel Miry" label="Karel Miry"/>
<link wikidata="Q240" start="2165" end="2173" title="Brussels" label="Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511" start="2176" end="2190" title="Richard Wagner" label="Richard Wagner"/>
<link wikidata="Q327717" start="2199" end="2212" title="Das Rheingold" label="Das Rheingold"/>
<link wikidata="Q2267" start="2235" end="2245" title="January 20" label="January 20"/>
<link wikidata="Q41804451" start="2248" end="2261" title="George Hamlin" label="George Hamlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2312" start="2296" end="2306" title="February 1" label="February 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274305" start="2309" end="2320" title="Kerry Mills" label="Kerry Mills"/>
<link wikidata="Q2315" start="2367" end="2377" title="February 3" label="February 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371424" start="2380" end="2400" title="Giulio Gatti-Casazza" label="Giulio Gatti-Casazza"/>
<link wikidata="Q2336" start="2427" end="2438" title="February 12" label="February 12"/>
<link wikidata="Q5574504" start="2441" end="2456" title="Theodor Bertram" label="Theodor Bertram"/>
<link wikidata="Q2391" start="2490" end="2497" title="March 3" label="March 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q449299" start="2500" end="2510" title="Henry Wood (conductor)" label="Henry Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q6989196" start="2512" end="2521" title="Conducting" label="conductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2550" start="2534" end="2539" title="May 5" label="May 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q57358" start="2542" end="2555" title="Hans Pfitzner" label="Hans Pfitzner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2620" start="2578" end="2584" title="June 6" label="June 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q143867" start="2587" end="2603" title="Siegfried Wagner" label="Siegfried Wagner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2690" start="2626" end="2632" title="July 9" label="July 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q2863383" start="2635" end="2647" title="Arnold Volpe" label="Arnold Volpe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2687" start="2670" end="2677" title="July 13" label="July 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q5460745" start="2680" end="2694" title="Florence Perry" label="Florence Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2775" start="2721" end="2730" title="August 14" label="August 14"/>
<link wikidata="Q767237" start="2733" end="2748" title="Armas Järnefelt" label="Armas Järnefelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2857" start="2793" end="2804" title="September 2" label="September 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q2939364" start="2807" end="2822" title="Carlos Hartling" label="Carlos Hartling"/>
<link wikidata="Q2858" start="2880" end="2891" title="September 6" label="September 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q3131948" start="2894" end="2908" title="Walford Davies" label="Walford Davies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2891" start="2986" end="2998" title="September 21" label="September 21"/>
<link wikidata="Q605061" start="3001" end="3026" title="Henryk Melcer-Szczawiński" label="Henryk Melcer-Szczawiński"/>
<link wikidata="Q2881" start="3089" end="3101" title="September 30" label="September 30"/>
<link wikidata="Q5321566" start="3104" end="3119" title="E. A. Couturier" label="E. A. Couturier"/>
<link wikidata="Q2924" start="3206" end="3215" title="October 8" label="October 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q1922815" start="3230" end="3234" title="Old Style and New Style dates" label="O.S."/>
<link wikidata="Q351670" start="3238" end="3245" title="Komitas" label="Komitas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6375414" start="3358" end="3369" title="Kate Carney" label="Kate Carney"/>
<link wikidata="Q4276037" start="3435" end="3454" title="Maximilian Maksakov" label="Maximilian Maksakov"/>
<link wikidata="Q2243" start="3533" end="3543" title="January 10" label="January 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q3137303" start="3546" end="3555" title="Joan Aulí" label="Joan Aulí"/>
<link wikidata="Q2264" start="3590" end="3600" title="January 17" label="January 17"/>
<link wikidata="Q311384" start="3603" end="3625" title="Alexander Dargomyzhsky" label="Alexander Dargomyzhsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q2287" start="3655" end="3665" title="January 30" label="January 30"/>
<link wikidata="Q5085825" start="3668" end="3694" title="Charlotte Alington Barnard" label="Charlotte Alington Barnard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2395" start="3754" end="3761" title="March 8" label="March 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151" start="3764" end="3778" title="Hector Berlioz" label="Hector Berlioz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2445" start="3800" end="3808" title="March 23" label="March 23"/>
<link wikidata="Q5080372" start="3811" end="3824" title="Charles Lucas (musician)" label="Charles Lucas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2510" start="3845" end="3852" title="April 1" label="April 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q600969" start="3855" end="3875" title="Alexander Dreyschock" label="Alexander Dreyschock"/>
<link wikidata="Q2499" start="3909" end="3917" title="April 12" label="April 12"/>
<link wikidata="Q87621" start="3920" end="3936" title="Antonie Brentano" label="Antonie Brentano"/>
<link wikidata="Q2497" start="3969" end="3977" title="April 15" label="April 15"/>
<link wikidata="Q71957" start="3980" end="3999" title="August Wilhelm Bach" label="August Wilhelm Bach"/>
<link wikidata="Q2524" start="4041" end="4049" title="April 20" label="April 20"/>
<link wikidata="Q158899" start="4052" end="4062" title="Johann Carl Gottfried Löwe" label="Carl Loewe"/>
<link wikidata="Q31687" start="4074" end="4082" title="baritone" label="baritone"/>
<link wikidata="Q6989196" start="4084" end="4093" title="conducting" label="conductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2557" start="4105" end="4111" title="May 10" label="May 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q571562" start="4114" end="4130" title="Bernhard Molique" label="Bernhard Molique"/>
<link wikidata="Q2574" start="4173" end="4179" title="May 16" label="May 16"/>
<link wikidata="Q62701083" start="4182" end="4200" title="Giovanni Peruzzini" label="Giovanni Peruzzini"/>
<link wikidata="Q2809842" start="4274" end="4278" title="1815 in music" label="1815"/>
<link wikidata="Q2627" start="4281" end="4287" title="June 4" label="June 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q2688409" start="4290" end="4303" title="Joseph Ascher" label="Joseph Ascher"/>
<link wikidata="Q2613" start="4337" end="4344" title="June 15" label="June 15"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003880" start="4347" end="4360" title="Albert Grisar" label="Albert Grisar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2730" start="4382" end="4389" title="July 18" label="July 18"/>
<link wikidata="Q761705" start="4392" end="4406" title="Louis Bouilhet" label="Louis Bouilhet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2776" start="4430" end="4439" title="August 13" label="August 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q2280304" start="4442" end="4459" title="Giuseppe Persiani" label="Giuseppe Persiani"/>
<link wikidata="Q2825" start="4487" end="4496" title="August 24" label="August 24"/>
<link wikidata="Q6723218" start="4499" end="4515" title="Macedonio Alcalá" label="Macedonio Alcalá"/>
<link wikidata="Q3016" start="4562" end="4573" title="November 29" label="November 29"/>
<link wikidata="Q287344" start="4576" end="4588" title="Giulia Grisi" label="Giulia Grisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2438" start="4614" end="4625" title="December 18" label="December 18"/>
<link wikidata="Q550701" start="4628" end="4651" title="Louis Moreau Gottschalk" label="Louis Moreau Gottschalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2676" start="4707" end="4718" title="December 23" label="December 23"/>
<link wikidata="Q1711991" start="4721" end="4735" title="Julian Fontana" label="Julian Fontana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2912" start="4756" end="4767" title="December 31" label="December 31"/>
<link wikidata="Q546919" start="4770" end="4802" title="Louis James Alfred Lefébure-Wély" label="Louis James Alfred Lefébure-Wély"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="187865" wikidata="Q1718353" url="?curid=187865" title="1868 in music">
<text>==Events==
*January 5 – Max Bruch&#x27;s Violin Concerto no. 1 in G minor is first performed in its revised version by Joseph Joachim in Bremen with Karl Martin Rheinthaler conducting.
*February 3 – Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky&#x27;s Symphony No. 1 (&quot;Winter Daydreams&quot;) is first performed in Moscow at a Russian Musical Society concert (having been premièred in Saint Petersburg).
*April 10 (Good Friday) – The six movement version of Brahms&#x27; &quot;A German Requiem&quot; (&quot;Ein deutsches Requiem&quot;) is premièred in Bremen Cathedral with Brahms conducting and Julius Stockhausen as the baritone soloist. 
*June 21 – Richard Wagner&#x27;s opera &quot;Die Meistersinger von Nürnberg&quot; debuts at the Königliches Hof- und National-Theater, Munich with Hans von Bülow conducting.
*August 15 – Teatro Giuseppe Verdi opens in Busseto, Italy.
*October – Modest Mussorgsky begins work on his opera &quot;Boris Godunov&quot;, which is completed six years later.
*December 21 – The newly rebuilt Gaiety Theatre, London (in the West End) reopens with operatic parodies, including the burlesque &quot;Robert the Devil, or The Nun, the Dun, and the Son of a Gun&quot;, setting new lyrics by W. S. Gilbert to popular continental opera tunes.
*Aristide Cavaillé-Coll&#x27;s organ at Notre-Dame de Paris is dedicated.
*Edvard Grieg writes his Piano Concerto while staying on Zealand.

==Published popular music==
* &quot;Captain Jinks&quot;
* &quot;Come Back To Erin&quot; by Claribel
* &quot;Crown Him with Many Crowns&quot; w. Matthew Bridges (1851) m. George Job Elvey (1868)
* &quot;Her Bright Smile Haunts Me Still&quot; w. J.E. Carpenter m. W.T. Wrighton
* &quot;I Cannot Sing The Old Songs&quot;      w.m. Claribel 
* &quot;Little Footsteps&quot; w. Michael Bennett Leavitt m. James A. Barney
* &quot;The Man on the Flying Trapeze&quot; by George Leybourne, Gaston Lyle, &amp; Alfred Lee (first published the previous year)
* &quot;The Sweet By and By&quot; w. S. Fillmore m. Joseph P. Webster
* &quot;Walking In The Zoo&quot; w. Hugh Willoughby Sweny m. Alfred Lee
* &quot;What a Friend We Have in Jesus&quot; w. Joseph M. Scriven (1855) m. Charles C. Converse (1868)
* &quot;The Whispering Hope&quot; by Septimus Winner
* &quot;The Widow In The Cottage By The Sea&quot;     w.m. Charles A. White
* &quot;Yield Not To Temptation&quot; w.m. Horatio R. Palmer

==Classical music==
*Jean-Baptiste Accolay – Concerto for Violin No. 1 in A minor
*Georges Bizet – &quot;Variations chromatiques de concert&quot; for piano
*Ignaz Brüll – Piano Concerto No. 2 in C, op. 24
*Johannes Brahms
**&quot;Ein deutsches Requiem&quot;, op. 45
**&quot;5 Lieder&quot;, op. 49
*Anton Bruckner - Symphony No. 1
*Camille Saint-Saëns – Piano Concerto No. 2
*Johann Strauss II – &quot;Tales from the Vienna Woods&quot;
*Peter Tchaikovsky 
**&quot;Songs Without Words&quot;
**&quot;Fatum&quot;

==Opera==

*Arrigo Boito – &quot;Mefistofele&quot;
*Gaetano Braga – &quot;Ruy Blas&quot;
*John Thomas Douglass – &quot;Virginia&#x27;s Ball&quot; performed (once) at the Stuyvesant Institute on Broadway in New York City, generally regarded as the first opera written by a black composer
*Gialdino Gialdini – &quot;Rosmunda&quot; premiered March 5 at the Teatro Pergola, Florence
*Jacques Offenbach – &quot;The Island of Tulipatan&quot;
*Richard Wagner – &quot;Die Meistersinger von Nürnberg&quot;, premièred in the Königliches Hof- und National-Theater, Munich

==Musical theatre==
* &quot;La Belle Hélène&quot; (Music by Jacques Offenbach Libretto by Henri Meilhac and Ludovic Halévy) New York production opened at Pike&#x27;s Opera House on November 2 and ran for 14 performances
* &quot;Ixion&quot; Broadway production opened at Wood&#x27;s Museum and Metropolitan on September 28 and ran for 120 performances. Starring Lydia Thompson.
* &quot;The White Fawn&quot; Broadway production opened at Niblo&#x27;s Garden on January 17 and ran for 176 performances

==Births==
* January 6 – Vittorio Monti, Italian violinist, composer and conductor (d. 1922)
* January 24 – Frank Peabody Atherton, composer, educator (d. 1911)
* January 26 – Juventino Rosas, composer, band leader (d. 1894)
* April 13 – John Blackwood McEwen, composer, educator (d. 1948)
* April 19 – Max von Schillings, composer, conductor (d. 1933)
* April 22 – José Vianna da Motta, composer, pianist (d. 1948)
* July 19 – Florence Foster Jenkins, soprano (d. 1944)
* August 7 – Granville Bantock, composer (d. 1946)
* August 21 – Vess Ossman, ragtime banjo player (d. 1923)
* September 8 – Seth Weeks, African American jazz mandolinist, composer, arranger and bandleader (d. 1953)
* September 12 – Jan Brandts Buys, composer (d. 1933)
* November 30 – Ernest Newman, critic (d. 1959)
* Early? (or November 24?) – Scott Joplin, African American ragtime composer, pianist (d. 1917)

==Deaths==
*January 3 – Moritz Hauptmann, composer (b. 1792)
*February 25 – Sophie Schröder, actress and singer (b. 1781)
*March 2 – Carl Eberwein, composer (b. 1786)
*April 3 – Franz Berwald, composer (b. 1796)
*April 26 – Karel Strakatý, singer (b. 1804)
*June 5 – Anselm Hüttenbrenner, composer (b. 1794)
*July 6 – Samuel Lover, songwriter (b. 1797)
*August 11 – Halfdan Kjerulf, composer (b. 1815)
*November 13 – Gioacchino Rossini, composer (b. 1792)
*November 25 – Franz Brendel, music critic (b. 1811)
*December 23 – Karl Ferdinand Adam, composer and cantor (b. 1806)
*&quot;date unknown&quot;
**Berl Broder, singer and troubadour (b. 1815)
**Erik Jonsson Helland, Hardanger fiddle maker (b. 1816)

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2202" start="12" end="21" title="January 5" label="January 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q106434" start="24" end="33" title="Max Bruch" label="Max Bruch"/>
<link wikidata="Q163689" start="41" end="73" title="Violin Concerto No. 1 (Bruch)" label="Violin Concerto no. 1 in G minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q159976" start="119" end="133" title="Joseph Joachim" label="Joseph Joachim"/>
<link wikidata="Q24879" start="137" end="143" title="Bremen" label="Bremen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1039689" start="149" end="172" title="Karl Martin Rheinthaler" label="Karl Martin Rheinthaler"/>
<link wikidata="Q2315" start="186" end="196" title="February 3" label="February 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315" start="199" end="223" title="Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky" label="Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q163606" start="231" end="245" title="Symphony No. 1 (Tchaikovsky)" label="Symphony No. 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q649" start="299" end="305" title="Moscow" label="Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q275357" start="311" end="334" title="Russian Musical Society" label="Russian Musical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q2502" start="389" end="397" title="April 10" label="April 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q7294" start="442" end="448" title="Brahms" label="Brahms"/>
<link wikidata="Q756299" start="461" end="477" title="A German Requiem (Brahms)" label="A German Requiem"/>
<link wikidata="Q695038" start="536" end="552" title="Bremen Cathedral" label="Bremen Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q526806" start="580" end="598" title="Julius Stockhausen" label="Julius Stockhausen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2671" start="626" end="633" title="June 21" label="June 21"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511" start="636" end="650" title="Richard Wagner" label="Richard Wagner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344" start="658" end="663" title="opera" label="opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q465540" start="670" end="700" title="Die Meistersinger von Nürnberg" label="Die Meistersinger von Nürnberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q707679" start="721" end="766" title="National Theatre Munich" label="Königliches Hof- und National-Theater, Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q155540" start="772" end="786" title="Hans von Bülow" label="Hans von Bülow"/>
<link wikidata="Q2774" start="800" end="809" title="August 15" label="August 15"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331708" start="812" end="833" title="Teatro Giuseppe Verdi" label="Teatro Giuseppe Verdi"/>
<link wikidata="Q100772" start="843" end="850" title="Busseto" label="Busseto"/>
<link wikidata="Q132682" start="870" end="887" title="Modest Mussorgsky" label="Modest Mussorgsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q386846" start="919" end="932" title="Boris Godunov (opera)" label="Boris Godunov"/>
<link wikidata="Q2603" start="977" end="988" title="December 21" label="December 21"/>
<link wikidata="Q3757266" start="1009" end="1031" title="Gaiety Theatre, London" label="Gaiety Theatre, London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359589" start="1040" end="1048" title="West End theatre" label="West End"/>
<link wikidata="Q170539" start="1072" end="1080" title="Parody" label="parodies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029894" start="1096" end="1105" title="Victorian burlesque" label="burlesque"/>
<link wikidata="Q7351467" start="1112" end="1171" title="Robert the Devil (Gilbert)" label="Robert the Devil, or The Nun, the Dun, and the Son of a Gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q348513" start="1201" end="1214" title="W. S. Gilbert" label="W. S. Gilbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q356502" start="1252" end="1274" title="Aristide Cavaillé-Coll" label="Aristide Cavaillé-Coll"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981" start="1291" end="1310" title="Notre-Dame de Paris" label="Notre-Dame de Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q80621" start="1326" end="1338" title="Edvard Grieg" label="Edvard Grieg"/>
<link wikidata="Q44261" start="1350" end="1364" title="Piano Concerto (Grieg)" label="Piano Concerto"/>
<link wikidata="Q25535" start="1382" end="1389" title="Zealand" label="Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q5085825" start="1483" end="1491" title="Charlotte Alington Barnard" label="Claribel"/>
<link wikidata="Q16385715" start="1815" end="1844" title="The Man on the Flying Trapeze" label="The Man on the Flying Trapeze"/>
<link wikidata="Q3101720" start="1854" end="1870" title="George Leybourne" label="George Leybourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q6012994" start="1946" end="1965" title="The Sweet By and By" label="The Sweet By and By"/>
<link wikidata="Q6233901" start="1990" end="2007" title="Joseph P. Webster" label="Joseph P. Webster"/>
<link wikidata="Q3364742" start="2088" end="2118" title="What a Friend We Have in Jesus" label="What a Friend We Have in Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q705227" start="2128" end="2145" title="Joseph M. Scriven" label="Joseph M. Scriven"/>
<link wikidata="Q323458" start="2156" end="2175" title="Charles C. Converse" label="Charles C. Converse"/>
<link wikidata="Q3479018" start="2220" end="2235" title="Septimus Winner" label="Septimus Winner"/>
<link wikidata="Q496039" start="2395" end="2416" title="Jean-Baptiste Accolay" label="Jean-Baptiste Accolay"/>
<link wikidata="Q56158" start="2457" end="2470" title="Georges Bizet" label="Georges Bizet"/>
<link wikidata="Q78703" start="2531" end="2542" title="Ignaz Brüll" label="Ignaz Brüll"/>
<link wikidata="Q7294" start="2580" end="2595" title="Johannes Brahms" label="Johannes Brahms"/>
<link wikidata="Q756299" start="2604" end="2625" title="A German Requiem (Brahms)" label="Ein deutsches Requiem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1557135" start="2642" end="2662" title="Wiegenlied (Brahms)" label="&amp;quot;5 Lieder&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q81752" start="2672" end="2686" title="Anton Bruckner" label="Anton Bruckner"/>
<link wikidata="Q163524" start="2689" end="2703" title="Symphony No. 1 (Bruckner)" label="Symphony No. 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q150445" start="2705" end="2724" title="Camille Saint-Saëns" label="Camille Saint-Saëns"/>
<link wikidata="Q176902" start="2727" end="2747" title="Piano Concerto No. 2 (Saint-Saëns)" label="Piano Concerto No. 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q83309" start="2749" end="2766" title="Johann Strauss II" label="Johann Strauss II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1483969" start="2775" end="2802" title="Tales from the Vienna Woods" label="Tales from the Vienna Woods"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315" start="2810" end="2827" title="Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky" label="Peter Tchaikovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1114910" start="2871" end="2876" title="Fatum (Tchaikovsky)" label="Fatum"/>
<link wikidata="Q219491" start="2896" end="2908" title="Arrigo Boito" label="Arrigo Boito"/>
<link wikidata="Q935669" start="2917" end="2928" title="Mefistofele" label="Mefistofele"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265757" start="2936" end="2949" title="Gaetano Braga" label="Gaetano Braga"/>
<link wikidata="Q6260551" start="2974" end="2994" title="John Thomas Douglass" label="John Thomas Douglass"/>
<link wikidata="Q3762359" start="3172" end="3189" title="Gialdino Gialdini" label="Gialdino Gialdini"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044" start="3254" end="3262" title="Florence" label="Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q41555" start="3264" end="3281" title="Jacques Offenbach" label="Jacques Offenbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1213628" start="3290" end="3313" title="L&amp;#x27;île de Tulipatan" label="The Island of Tulipatan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511" start="3321" end="3335" title="Richard Wagner" label="Richard Wagner"/>
<link wikidata="Q465540" start="3344" end="3374" title="Die Meistersinger von Nürnberg" label="Die Meistersinger von Nürnberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1726" start="3438" end="3444" title="Munich" label="Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1219408" start="3474" end="3489" title="La Belle Hélène" label="La Belle Hélène"/>
<link wikidata="Q41555" start="3506" end="3523" title="Jacques Offenbach" label="Jacques Offenbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q14707189" start="3600" end="3623" title="Pike&amp;#x27;s Opera House" label="Pike&amp;#x27;s Opera House"/>
<link wikidata="Q2996" start="3627" end="3637" title="November 2" label="November 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q271891" start="3674" end="3679" title="Ixion" label="Ixion"/>
<link wikidata="Q60786714" start="3716" end="3751" title="Daly&amp;#x27;s Theatre (30th St.)" label="Wood&amp;#x27;s Museum and Metropolitan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2883" start="3755" end="3767" title="September 28" label="September 28"/>
<link wikidata="Q274725" start="3807" end="3821" title="Lydia Thompson" label="Lydia Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3831" end="3845" title="The White Fawn" label="The White Fawn"/>
<link wikidata="Q3875796" start="3882" end="3901" title="Niblo&amp;#x27;s Garden" label="Niblo&amp;#x27;s Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2264" start="3905" end="3915" title="January 17" label="January 17"/>
<link wikidata="Q2221" start="3959" end="3968" title="January 6" label="January 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q342543" start="3971" end="3985" title="Vittorio Monti" label="Vittorio Monti"/>
<link wikidata="Q2476265" start="4033" end="4037" title="1922 in music" label="1922"/>
<link wikidata="Q2278" start="4041" end="4051" title="January 24" label="January 24"/>
<link wikidata="Q118131821" start="4054" end="4076" title="Frank Peabody Atherton" label="Frank Peabody Atherton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2282" start="4109" end="4119" title="January 26" label="January 26"/>
<link wikidata="Q461403" start="4122" end="4137" title="Juventino Rosas" label="Juventino Rosas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2498" start="4173" end="4181" title="April 13" label="April 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q373617" start="4184" end="4205" title="John Blackwood McEwen" label="John Blackwood McEwen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2523" start="4238" end="4246" title="April 19" label="April 19"/>
<link wikidata="Q704926" start="4249" end="4267" title="Max von Schillings" label="Max von Schillings"/>
<link wikidata="Q2526" start="4301" end="4309" title="April 22" label="April 22"/>
<link wikidata="Q721465" start="4312" end="4332" title="José Vianna da Motta" label="José Vianna da Motta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2726" start="4364" end="4371" title="July 19" label="July 19"/>
<link wikidata="Q275982" start="4374" end="4397" title="Florence Foster Jenkins" label="Florence Foster Jenkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q2781" start="4419" end="4427" title="August 7" label="August 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q552010" start="4430" end="4447" title="Granville Bantock" label="Granville Bantock"/>
<link wikidata="Q2823" start="4470" end="4479" title="August 21" label="August 21"/>
<link wikidata="Q6030409" start="4482" end="4493" title="Vess Ossman" label="Vess Ossman"/>
<link wikidata="Q258896" start="4503" end="4508" title="banjo" label="banjo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2850" start="4528" end="4539" title="September 8" label="September 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q17492190" start="4542" end="4552" title="Seth Weeks" label="Seth Weeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2415055" start="4627" end="4631" title="1953 in music" label="1953"/>
<link wikidata="Q2849" start="4635" end="4647" title="September 12" label="September 12"/>
<link wikidata="Q331494" start="4650" end="4666" title="Jan Brandts Buys" label="Jan Brandts Buys"/>
<link wikidata="Q3015" start="4689" end="4700" title="November 30" label="November 30"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356476" start="4703" end="4716" title="Ernest Newman" label="Ernest Newman"/>
<link wikidata="Q978466" start="4729" end="4733" title="1959 in music" label="1959"/>
<link wikidata="Q3022" start="4748" end="4759" title="November 24" label="November 24"/>
<link wikidata="Q191499" start="4764" end="4776" title="Scott Joplin" label="Scott Joplin"/>
<link wikidata="Q185652" start="4795" end="4802" title="ragtime" label="ragtime"/>
<link wikidata="Q2156" start="4844" end="4853" title="January 3" label="January 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q60908" start="4856" end="4872" title="Moritz Hauptmann" label="Moritz Hauptmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q2356" start="4894" end="4905" title="February 25" label="February 25"/>
<link wikidata="Q97039" start="4908" end="4923" title="Sophie Schröder" label="Sophie Schröder"/>
<link wikidata="Q2390" start="4955" end="4962" title="March 2" label="March 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q216234" start="4965" end="4978" title="Carl Eberwein" label="Carl Eberwein"/>
<link wikidata="Q2509" start="5000" end="5007" title="April 3" label="April 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q217044" start="5010" end="5023" title="Franz Berwald" label="Franz Berwald"/>
<link wikidata="Q2532" start="5045" end="5053" title="April 26" label="April 26"/>
<link wikidata="Q6369379" start="5056" end="5070" title="Karel Strakatý" label="Karel Strakatý"/>
<link wikidata="Q2622" start="5090" end="5096" title="June 5" label="June 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q569557" start="5099" end="5119" title="Anselm Hüttenbrenner" label="Anselm Hüttenbrenner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2695" start="5141" end="5147" title="July 6" label="July 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q3946632" start="5150" end="5162" title="Samuel Lover" label="Samuel Lover"/>
<link wikidata="Q2778" start="5186" end="5195" title="August 11" label="August 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q740077" start="5198" end="5213" title="Halfdan Kjerulf" label="Halfdan Kjerulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984" start="5235" end="5246" title="November 13" label="November 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q9726" start="5249" end="5267" title="Gioacchino Rossini" label="Gioacchino Rossini"/>
<link wikidata="Q3020" start="5289" end="5300" title="November 25" label="November 25"/>
<link wikidata="Q69501" start="5303" end="5316" title="Franz Brendel" label="Franz Brendel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2676" start="5342" end="5353" title="December 23" label="December 23"/>
<link wikidata="Q6371779" start="5356" end="5375" title="Karl Ferdinand Adam" label="Karl Ferdinand Adam"/>
<link wikidata="Q820973" start="5435" end="5446" title="Berl Broder" label="Berl Broder"/>
<link wikidata="Q5388660" start="5482" end="5502" title="Erik Jonsson Helland" label="Erik Jonsson Helland"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="187866" wikidata="Q1275255" url="?curid=187866" title="1863 in music">
<text>==Events==
*January 6 – Johannes Brahms&#x27; Piano Sonata no. 3 is premiered in Vienna, played by the 29-year-old composer. Richard Wagner is among the audience.
*January 29 – Established composer Giacomo Meyerbeer presents the young Jacques Offenbach to Augusta of Saxe-Weimar-Eisenach, the queen consort of Prussia.
*February 8 – Richard Wagner conducts a concert of his own music in Prague; Antonín Dvořák is a member of the orchestra.
*February-April – Richard Wagner conducts a concert of his own music in Saint Petersburg. Tchaikovsky and César Cui attend. Works performed included excerpts from Tristan und Isolde, Das Rheingold, Die Walküre and the overture to Die Meistersinger von Nürnberg. 
*February 25 – Johann Strauss II is appointed musical director of the Hofball.
*March 15 – In Vienna, Franz Schubert&#x27;s &quot;Der Entfernten&quot; D.331 for a male vocal quartet is performed in public for the first time, 35 years after the composer&#x27;s death.
*April 19 – Hector Berlioz is presented with the Cross of the Order of Hohenzollern.
*May 10 – Violinist Joseph Joachim marries contralto Amalie Schneeweiss.
*May 12 – Richard Wagner takes up residence at Penzing, near Vienna.
*June 20 – Franz Liszt takes up residence at the Dominican monastery of the Madonna del Rosario, Monte Mario, near Rome.
*July 11 – Pope Pius IX visits Franz Liszt at Monte Mario, and the two hold an impromptu concert.
*August 3 – 21-year-old Jules Massenet is awarded the First Grand Prix de Rome for his setting of the cantata &quot;David Rizzio&quot;.
*September 30 – Georges Bizet&#x27;s opera, &quot;Les pêcheurs de perles&quot; receives its première at the Théâtre Lyrique in Paris.
*November 2 – John Knowles Paine performs at the inauguration of a new organ at the Music Hall in Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
*November 4 – &quot;Les Troyens&quot;, opera by Hector Berlioz, debuts, also at the Théâtre Lyrique
*December 13 – Modest Mussorgsky becomes collegiate secretary at the chief engineering department of the Russian Ministry of Communications. In the same year, he begins work on an opera, &quot;Salammbô&quot;, which is never finished.

==Published popular music==
* &quot;All Quiet Along the Potomac Tonight&quot;     w. Ethel Lynn Beers m. John Hill Hewitt
* &quot;Eton Boating Song&quot; w. William Johnson Cory m. Capt. Algernon Drummond
* &quot;For the Dear Old Flag I Die&quot; by Stephen Foster
* &quot;Just Before the Battle, Mother&quot; by George F. Root
* &quot;Katy Bell&quot; by Stephen Foster
* &quot;Mother Would Comfort Me&quot; w.m. Charles C. Sawyer
* &quot;My Wife Is a Most Knowing Woman&quot; by Stephen Foster
* &quot;Oh My Darling, Clementine&quot; by Percy Montrose &amp; H S. Thompson
* &quot;Sweet and Low&quot; words by Alfred Tennyson, music by Joseph Barnby
* &quot;Tenting on the Old Camp Ground&quot; w.m. Walter Kittredge
* &quot;Weeping Sad And Lonely&quot; w. Charles Carroll Sawyer m. Henry Tucker
* &quot;When Johnny Comes Marching Home Again&quot; w.m. &#x27;Louis Lambert&#x27; (Patrick Gilmore) (copyrighted September 26)
* &quot;When This Dreadful War Is Ended&quot; by Stephen Foster
* &quot;You Are Going to the Wars, Willie Boy!&quot;     w.m. John Hill Hewitt
* &quot;The Young Volunteer&quot;     w.m. John Hill Hewitt

==Classical music==
*Mily Balakirev – On the Volga
*Johannes Brahms – Studies for Pianoforte: Variations on a Theme of Paganini Op. 35
*Max Bruch – 10 Songs for Voice and Piano, Op.17
*Anton Bruckner – &quot;Study Symphony&quot; in F minor
*Edvard Grieg 
**Poetic Tone-Pictures, Op.3
**4 Songs for Male Voices, EG 160
*Halfdan Kjerulf – 4 Sange, Op.10
*Franz Liszt
**&quot;Salve Polonia&quot; (S 518)
**&quot;Rhapsodie espagnole&quot; (S 254)
**&#x27;Venezia e Napoli&#x27; – Tarantella
**&quot;Deux légendes&quot;
**Two Concert Études
*Joachim Raff
** Suite No.1 for Orchestra, Op.101
** Piano Trio No.2, Op.112
*Henrik Rung – &quot;Det Svundne og det Vundne&quot;

*Camille Saint-Saëns
**Piano Trio No. 1 in F major opus 18,
**&quot;Spartacus&quot; overture in E♭ major
**Introduction and Rondo Capriccioso Op. 28
*William Stanley – New South Wales volunteer Rifles Quick March
*Johann Strauss II 
**&quot;Leitartikel&quot; (Leading Article) Op. 273
**&quot;Morgenblätter&quot; (Morning Journals), Op. 279

==Opera==
*Hector Berlioz – &quot;Les Troyens&quot;
*Georges Bizet – &quot;Les pêcheurs de perles&quot; (The Pearl Fishers)
*Charles Gounod – &quot;Mireille (opera)&quot;
*Giovanni Pacini – &quot;Carmelita&quot; (not performed)
*Jacques Offenbach – &quot;Il signor Fagotto&quot;
*Semen Hulak-Artemovsky – &quot;Zaporozhets za Dunayem&quot;

==Musical theater==
* &quot;Ixion&quot; London production opened at the Royalty Theatre on September 28 and ran for 153 performances

==Births==
*February 4 – Pauline de Ahna, operatic soprano (died 1950)
*February 5 – Armand Parent, composer (died 1934)
*February 13 – Hugo Becker, composer (died 1941)
*February 19 – Emánuel Moór, composer (died 1931)
*February – George J. Gaskin, tenor (died 1920)
*March 20 – Ernesto Nazareth, pianist and composer (died 1934)
*March 21 – Hugo Kaun, conductor, composer and music teacher (died 1932)
*April 3 – Wilhelm Middelschulte, composer (died 1943)
*April 4 – Blanche Marchesi, operatic contralto (died 1940)
*April 9 – Ernst Heuser, German composer (died 1942)
*April 19 – Felix Blumenfeld, Russian composer, pianist (died 1931)
*May 10 
**Upendrakishore Ray Chowdhury, Bengali writer, painter, violin player and composer (died 1915)
**Charles René, composer (died 1935)
*May 12 
**Charles Bordes, composer (died 1909)
**Henry Expert, musicologist (died 1952)
*June 2 – Felix von Weingartner, composer, conductor (died 1942)
*June 5 
**Arthur Somervell (died 1937)
**Adolf Schuppan, composer (died c. 1931)
*June 13 – Josef Venantius Wöss, composer (died 1943)
*June 16 – Paul Antonin Vidal, composer (died 1931)
*July 20 – W. H. Neidlinger, composer (died 1924)
*July 28 – Carl Adolph Preyer, composer, pianist (died 1947)
*August 11 – Árpád Szendy, composer (died 1922)
*August 16 – Gabriel Pierné, composer (died 1937)
*September 2 – Isidor Philipp, composer (died 1958)
*September 15 – Horatio Parker, composer (died 1919)
*November 1 – Alfred Reisenauer, composer (died 1907)
*December 7 – Pietro Mascagni, composer (died 1945)
*December 17 – Ion Vidu, composer (died 1931)
*December 24 – Enrique Fernández Arbós, violinist, conductor and composer (died 1939)

==Deaths==
*February 4 – Giuseppe Lillo, composer, 38
*February 25 – Laure Cinti-Damoreau, operatic soprano, 62
*March 23 – Charles William Glover, composer (born 1806)
*April 8 – Joseph Netherclift, composer, 70
*May 14 
**Ferdinand Beyer, composer (born 1803)
**Émile Prudent, composer, 46
*June – Filippo Colini, operatic baritone, 51
*June 7 – Franz Xaver Gruber, composer of &quot;Silent Night&quot;, 75
*June 12 – Pietro Alfieri, Roman Catholic music writer, 61
*June 20 – Luigi Felice Rossi, composer, 57
*June 22 – Carl Schuberth, composer (born 1811)
*July 23 – Sophie Lebrun, pianist and composer, 82
*August 5 – Adolf Friedrich Hesse, composer, 53

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2221" start="12" end="21" title="January 6" label="January 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q7294" start="24" end="39" title="Johannes Brahms" label="Johannes Brahms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538097" start="46" end="64" title="Piano Sonata No. 3 (Brahms)" label="Piano Sonata no. 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511" start="125" end="139" title="Richard Wagner" label="Richard Wagner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2286" start="164" end="174" title="January 29" label="January 29"/>
<link wikidata="Q105237" start="198" end="215" title="Giacomo Meyerbeer" label="Giacomo Meyerbeer"/>
<link wikidata="Q41555" start="235" end="252" title="Jacques Offenbach" label="Jacques Offenbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q57541" start="256" end="287" title="Augusta of Saxe-Weimar-Eisenach" label="Augusta of Saxe-Weimar-Eisenach"/>
<link wikidata="Q2323" start="320" end="330" title="February 8" label="February 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511" start="333" end="347" title="Richard Wagner" label="Richard Wagner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085" start="387" end="393" title="Prague" label="Prague"/>
<link wikidata="Q7298" start="395" end="409" title="Antonín Dvořák" label="Antonín Dvořák"/>
<link wikidata="Q109" start="441" end="449" title="February" label="February"/>
<link wikidata="Q118" start="450" end="455" title="April" label="April"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511" start="458" end="472" title="Richard Wagner" label="Richard Wagner"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="512" end="528" title="Saint Petersburg" label="Saint Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315" start="530" end="541" title="Tchaikovsky" label="Tchaikovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q208546" start="546" end="555" title="César Cui" label="César Cui"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324254" start="603" end="621" title="Tristan und Isolde" label="Tristan und Isolde"/>
<link wikidata="Q327717" start="623" end="636" title="Das Rheingold" label="Das Rheingold"/>
<link wikidata="Q324319" start="638" end="649" title="Die Walküre" label="Die Walküre"/>
<link wikidata="Q202287" start="658" end="666" title="overture" label="overture"/>
<link wikidata="Q465540" start="670" end="700" title="Die Meistersinger von Nürnberg" label="Die Meistersinger von Nürnberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2356" start="704" end="715" title="February 25" label="February 25"/>
<link wikidata="Q83309" start="718" end="735" title="Johann Strauss II" label="Johann Strauss II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2403" start="783" end="791" title="March 15" label="March 15"/>
<link wikidata="Q7312" start="805" end="819" title="Franz Schubert" label="Franz Schubert"/>
<link wikidata="Q2523" start="971" end="979" title="April 19" label="April 19"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151" start="982" end="996" title="Hector Berlioz" label="Hector Berlioz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2557" start="1056" end="1062" title="May 10" label="May 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q159976" start="1075" end="1089" title="Joseph Joachim" label="Joseph Joachim"/>
<link wikidata="Q86910" start="1108" end="1126" title="Amalie Joachim" label="Amalie Schneeweiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q2559" start="1129" end="1135" title="May 12" label="May 12"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511" start="1138" end="1152" title="Richard Wagner" label="Richard Wagner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2666" start="1198" end="1205" title="June 20" label="June 20"/>
<link wikidata="Q41309" start="1208" end="1219" title="Franz Liszt" label="Franz Liszt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2701" start="1319" end="1326" title="July 11" label="July 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q43720" start="1329" end="1341" title="Pope Pius IX" label="Pope Pius IX"/>
<link wikidata="Q2786" start="1417" end="1425" title="August 3" label="August 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q194436" start="1440" end="1454" title="Jules Massenet" label="Jules Massenet"/>
<link wikidata="Q576434" start="1476" end="1494" title="Grand Prix de Rome" label="Grand Prix de Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q2881" start="1553" end="1565" title="September 30" label="September 30"/>
<link wikidata="Q56158" start="1568" end="1581" title="Georges Bizet" label="Georges Bizet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344" start="1589" end="1594" title="opera" label="opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q56159" start="1602" end="1624" title="Les pêcheurs de perles" label="Les pêcheurs de perles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2601319" start="1660" end="1675" title="Théâtre Lyrique" label="Théâtre Lyrique"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="1679" end="1684" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q2996" start="1687" end="1697" title="November 2" label="November 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649745" start="1700" end="1718" title="John Knowles Paine" label="John Knowles Paine"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="1784" end="1805" title="Boston, Massachusetts" label="Boston, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2994" start="1813" end="1823" title="November 4" label="November 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q472325" start="1832" end="1843" title="Les Troyens" label="Les Troyens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151" start="1860" end="1874" title="Hector Berlioz" label="Hector Berlioz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2601319" start="1896" end="1911" title="Théâtre Lyrique" label="Théâtre Lyrique"/>
<link wikidata="Q2379" start="1913" end="1924" title="December 13" label="December 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q132682" start="1927" end="1944" title="Modest Mussorgsky" label="Modest Mussorgsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q2647824" start="2183" end="2218" title="All Quiet Along the Potomac Tonight" label="All Quiet Along the Potomac Tonight"/>
<link wikidata="Q5403151" start="2232" end="2248" title="Ethel Lynn Beers" label="Ethel Lynn Beers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1700464" start="2252" end="2268" title="John Hill Hewitt" label="John Hill Hewitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5404780" start="2277" end="2294" title="Eton Boating Song" label="Eton Boating Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q8013691" start="2304" end="2324" title="William Johnson Cory" label="William Johnson Cory"/>
<link wikidata="Q5467028" start="2354" end="2393" title="For the Dear Old Flag, I Die" label="&amp;quot;For the Dear Old Flag I Die&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q305202" start="2397" end="2411" title="Stephen Foster" label="Stephen Foster"/>
<link wikidata="Q6315850" start="2420" end="2450" title="Just before the Battle, Mother" label="Just Before the Battle, Mother"/>
<link wikidata="Q614867" start="2460" end="2474" title="George F. Root" label="George F. Root"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153154" start="2650" end="2675" title="Oh My Darling, Clementine" label="Oh My Darling, Clementine"/>
<link wikidata="Q173869" start="2757" end="2772" title="Alfred Tennyson" label="Alfred Tennyson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5566022" start="2783" end="2796" title="Joseph Barnby" label="Joseph Barnby"/>
<link wikidata="Q1628986" start="2805" end="2835" title="Tenting on the Old Camp Ground" label="Tenting on the Old Camp Ground"/>
<link wikidata="Q2697089" start="2847" end="2863" title="Walter Kittredge" label="Walter Kittredge"/>
<link wikidata="Q28407412" start="2872" end="2894" title="Weeping Sad And Lonely" label="Weeping Sad And Lonely"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059108" start="2951" end="2988" title="When Johnny Comes Marching Home" label="When Johnny Comes Marching Home Again"/>
<link wikidata="Q3430910" start="3027" end="3042" title="Patrick Gilmore" label="Patrick Gilmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1700464" start="3257" end="3273" title="John Hill Hewitt" label="John Hill Hewitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q185040" start="3296" end="3310" title="Mily Balakirev" label="Mily Balakirev"/>
<link wikidata="Q7294" start="3327" end="3342" title="Johannes Brahms" label="Johannes Brahms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479539" start="3345" end="3402" title="Variations on a Theme of Paganini" label="Studies for Pianoforte: Variations on a Theme of Paganini"/>
<link wikidata="Q106434" start="3411" end="3420" title="Max Bruch" label="Max Bruch"/>
<link wikidata="Q81752" start="3460" end="3474" title="Anton Bruckner" label="Anton Bruckner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1831363" start="3483" end="3497" title="Study Symphony" label="Study Symphony"/>
<link wikidata="Q283741" start="3507" end="3514" title="F minor" label="F minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q80621" start="3516" end="3528" title="Edvard Grieg" label="Edvard Grieg"/>
<link wikidata="Q740077" start="3594" end="3609" title="Halfdan Kjerulf" label="Halfdan Kjerulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q41309" start="3628" end="3639" title="Franz Liszt" label="Franz Liszt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351430" start="3669" end="3670" title="Humphrey Searle" label="S"/>
<link wikidata="Q2375476" start="3678" end="3709" title="Rhapsodie espagnole (Liszt)" label="&amp;quot;Rhapsodie espagnole&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351430" start="3711" end="3712" title="Humphrey Searle" label="S"/>
<link wikidata="Q232064" start="3770" end="3783" title="Deux légendes (Liszt)" label="Deux légendes"/>
<link wikidata="Q755485" start="3792" end="3810" title="Two Concert Études (Liszt)" label="Two Concert Études"/>
<link wikidata="Q547301" start="3812" end="3824" title="Joachim Raff" label="Joachim Raff"/>
<link wikidata="Q3360731" start="3889" end="3900" title="Henrik Rung" label="Henrik Rung"/>
<link wikidata="Q150445" start="3943" end="3962" title="Camille Saint-Saëns" label="Camille Saint-Saëns"/>
<link wikidata="Q913790" start="3985" end="3992" title="F major" label="F major"/>
<link wikidata="Q934895" start="4038" end="4046" title="E-flat major" label="E♭ major"/>
<link wikidata="Q1279714" start="4049" end="4083" title="Introduction and Rondo Capriccioso" label="Introduction and Rondo Capriccioso"/>
<link wikidata="Q41755515" start="4092" end="4107" title="William Stanley (composer)" label="William Stanley"/>
<link wikidata="Q83309" start="4156" end="4173" title="Johann Strauss II" label="Johann Strauss II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151" start="4295" end="4309" title="Hector Berlioz" label="Hector Berlioz"/>
<link wikidata="Q472325" start="4318" end="4329" title="Les Troyens" label="Les Troyens"/>
<link wikidata="Q56158" start="4337" end="4350" title="Georges Bizet" label="Georges Bizet"/>
<link wikidata="Q56159" start="4359" end="4381" title="Les pêcheurs de perles" label="Les pêcheurs de perles"/>
<link wikidata="Q180278" start="4409" end="4423" title="Charles Gounod" label="Charles Gounod"/>
<link wikidata="Q843042" start="4432" end="4448" title="Mireille (opera)" label="Mireille (opera)"/>
<link wikidata="Q357022" start="4456" end="4471" title="Giovanni Pacini" label="Giovanni Pacini"/>
<link wikidata="Q41555" start="4513" end="4530" title="Jacques Offenbach" label="Jacques Offenbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q5996788" start="4539" end="4556" title="Il signor Fagotto" label="Il signor Fagotto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400433" start="4564" end="4586" title="Semen Hulak-Artemovsky" label="Semen Hulak-Artemovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q4186875" start="4595" end="4617" title="Zaporozhets za Dunayem" label="Zaporozhets za Dunayem"/>
<link wikidata="Q271891" start="4653" end="4658" title="Ixion" label="Ixion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359589" start="4665" end="4671" title="West End Theatre" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q185184" start="4697" end="4712" title="Royalty Theatre" label="Royalty Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2883" start="4716" end="4728" title="September 28" label="September 28"/>
<link wikidata="Q2318" start="4771" end="4781" title="February 4" label="February 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q445394" start="4784" end="4799" title="Pauline de Ahna" label="Pauline de Ahna"/>
<link wikidata="Q2414971" start="4824" end="4828" title="1950 in music" label="1950"/>
<link wikidata="Q2319" start="4831" end="4841" title="February 5" label="February 5"/>
<link wikidata="" start="4844" end="4857" title=":fr:Armand Parent" label="Armand Parent"/>
<link wikidata="Q2333" start="4881" end="4892" title="February 13" label="February 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q653591" start="4895" end="4906" title="Hugo Becker" label="Hugo Becker"/>
<link wikidata="Q2340" start="4930" end="4941" title="February 19" label="February 19"/>
<link wikidata="Q324193" start="4944" end="4956" title="Emánuel Moór" label="Emánuel Moór"/>
<link wikidata="Q2454388" start="4973" end="4977" title="1931 in music" label="1931"/>
<link wikidata="Q5540998" start="4991" end="5007" title="George J. Gaskin" label="George J. Gaskin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2621263" start="5021" end="5025" title="1920 in music" label="1920"/>
<link wikidata="Q2427" start="5028" end="5036" title="March 20" label="March 20"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356808" start="5039" end="5055" title="Ernesto Nazareth" label="Ernesto Nazareth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2454342" start="5084" end="5088" title="1934 in music" label="1934"/>
<link wikidata="Q2433" start="5091" end="5099" title="March 21" label="March 21"/>
<link wikidata="Q460110" start="5102" end="5111" title="Hugo Kaun" label="Hugo Kaun"/>
<link wikidata="Q373854" start="5157" end="5161" title="1932 in music" label="1932"/>
<link wikidata="Q2509" start="5164" end="5171" title="April 3" label="April 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q881426" start="5174" end="5195" title="Wilhelm Middelschulte" label="Wilhelm Middelschulte"/>
<link wikidata="Q2508" start="5219" end="5226" title="April 4" label="April 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q881416" start="5229" end="5245" title="Blanche Marchesi" label="Blanche Marchesi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2366629" start="5272" end="5276" title="1940 in music" label="1940"/>
<link wikidata="Q2504" start="5279" end="5286" title="April 9" label="April 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q16937382" start="5289" end="5301" title="Ernst Heuser (composer)" label="Ernst Heuser"/>
<link wikidata="Q2366647" start="5325" end="5329" title="1942 in music" label="1942"/>
<link wikidata="Q2523" start="5332" end="5340" title="April 19" label="April 19"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349550" start="5343" end="5359" title="Felix Blumenfeld" label="Felix Blumenfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q2454388" start="5393" end="5397" title="1931 in music" label="1931"/>
<link wikidata="Q2557" start="5400" end="5406" title="May 10" label="May 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q737942" start="5410" end="5438" title="Upendrakishore Ray Chowdhury" label="Upendrakishore Ray Chowdhury"/>
<link wikidata="Q2811218" start="5498" end="5502" title="1915 in music" label="1915"/>
<link wikidata="" start="5506" end="5518" title=":de:Charles René" label="Charles René"/>
<link wikidata="Q2559" start="5542" end="5548" title="May 12" label="May 12"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063780" start="5552" end="5566" title="Charles Bordes" label="Charles Bordes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2811118" start="5583" end="5587" title="1909 in music" label="1909"/>
<link wikidata="" start="5591" end="5603" title=":de:Henry Expert" label="Henry Expert"/>
<link wikidata="Q2624" start="5631" end="5637" title="June 2" label="June 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q316920" start="5640" end="5661" title="Felix von Weingartner" label="Felix von Weingartner"/>
<link wikidata="Q6989196" start="5673" end="5682" title="conducting" label="conductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2366647" start="5689" end="5693" title="1942 in music" label="1942"/>
<link wikidata="Q2622" start="5696" end="5702" title="June 5" label="June 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q4800330" start="5706" end="5722" title="Arthur Somervell" label="Arthur Somervell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1786963" start="5729" end="5733" title="1937 in music" label="1937"/>
<link wikidata="" start="5737" end="5751" title=":ca:Adolf Schuppan" label="Adolf Schuppan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2614" start="5778" end="5785" title="June 13" label="June 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q1705936" start="5788" end="5808" title="Josef Venantius von Wöss" label="Josef Venantius Wöss"/>
<link wikidata="Q2653" start="5832" end="5839" title="June 16" label="June 16"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460425" start="5842" end="5860" title="Paul Antonin Vidal" label="Paul Antonin Vidal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2728" start="5884" end="5891" title="July 20" label="July 20"/>
<link wikidata="Q73548932" start="5894" end="5910" title="W. H. Neidlinger" label="W. H. Neidlinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q2718" start="5934" end="5941" title="July 28" label="July 28"/>
<link wikidata="Q28708373" start="5944" end="5962" title="Carl Adolph Preyer" label="Carl Adolph Preyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2778" start="5995" end="6004" title="August 11" label="August 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q252416" start="6007" end="6019" title="Árpád Szendy" label="Árpád Szendy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2812" start="6043" end="6052" title="August 16" label="August 16"/>
<link wikidata="Q433749" start="6055" end="6069" title="Gabriel Pierné" label="Gabriel Pierné"/>
<link wikidata="Q2857" start="6093" end="6104" title="September 2" label="September 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q707752" start="6107" end="6121" title="Isidor Philipp" label="Isidor Philipp"/>
<link wikidata="Q2846" start="6145" end="6157" title="September 15" label="September 15"/>
<link wikidata="Q957738" start="6160" end="6174" title="Horatio Parker" label="Horatio Parker"/>
<link wikidata="Q2584061" start="6191" end="6195" title="1919 in music" label="1919"/>
<link wikidata="Q2997" start="6198" end="6208" title="November 1" label="November 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q469786" start="6211" end="6228" title="Alfred Reisenauer" label="Alfred Reisenauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2811080" start="6245" end="6249" title="1907 in music" label="1907"/>
<link wikidata="Q2299" start="6252" end="6262" title="December 7" label="December 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q181894" start="6265" end="6280" title="Pietro Mascagni" label="Pietro Mascagni"/>
<link wikidata="Q385587" start="6297" end="6301" title="1945 in music" label="1945"/>
<link wikidata="Q2413" start="6304" end="6315" title="December 17" label="December 17"/>
<link wikidata="Q6063392" start="6318" end="6326" title="Ion Vidu" label="Ion Vidu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2705" start="6350" end="6361" title="December 24" label="December 24"/>
<link wikidata="Q2394722" start="6364" end="6387" title="Enrique Fernández Arbós" label="Enrique Fernández Arbós"/>
<link wikidata="Q2366680" start="6429" end="6433" title="1939 in music" label="1939"/>
<link wikidata="Q2318" start="6448" end="6458" title="February 4" label="February 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q926580" start="6461" end="6475" title="Giuseppe Lillo" label="Giuseppe Lillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2356" start="6491" end="6502" title="February 25" label="February 25"/>
<link wikidata="Q2666799" start="6505" end="6525" title="Laure Cinti-Damoreau" label="Laure Cinti-Damoreau"/>
<link wikidata="Q2445" start="6549" end="6557" title="March 23" label="March 23"/>
<link wikidata="Q5083554" start="6560" end="6582" title="Charles William Glover" label="Charles William Glover"/>
<link wikidata="Q2503" start="6606" end="6613" title="April 8" label="April 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q6285784" start="6616" end="6634" title="Joseph Netherclift" label="Joseph Netherclift"/>
<link wikidata="Q2561" start="6650" end="6656" title="May 14" label="May 14"/>
<link wikidata="Q66223" start="6660" end="6675" title="Ferdinand Beyer" label="Ferdinand Beyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q286377" start="6700" end="6713" title="Émile Prudent" label="Émile Prudent"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071883" start="6736" end="6750" title="Filippo Colini" label="Filippo Colini"/>
<link wikidata="Q2616" start="6775" end="6781" title="June 7" label="June 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q513185" start="6784" end="6802" title="Franz Xaver Gruber" label="Franz Xaver Gruber"/>
<link wikidata="Q2619" start="6846" end="6853" title="June 12" label="June 12"/>
<link wikidata="Q3388075" start="6856" end="6870" title="Pietro Alfieri" label="Pietro Alfieri"/>
<link wikidata="Q2666" start="6905" end="6912" title="June 20" label="June 20"/>
<link wikidata="Q3819056" start="6915" end="6933" title="Luigi Felice Rossi" label="Luigi Felice Rossi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2663" start="6949" end="6956" title="June 22" label="June 22"/>
<link wikidata="" start="6959" end="6973" title=":ca:Carl Schuberth" label="Carl Schuberth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2722" start="6997" end="7004" title="July 23" label="July 23"/>
<link wikidata="Q3490979" start="7007" end="7020" title="Sophie Lebrun" label="Sophie Lebrun"/>
<link wikidata="Q2783" start="7048" end="7056" title="August 5" label="August 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q361662" start="7059" end="7080" title="Adolf Friedrich Hesse" label="Adolf Friedrich Hesse"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="187868" wikidata="Q629494" url="?curid=187868" title="1864 in music">
<text>== Events ==
*January 13 – American songwriter Stephen Foster (&quot;Oh! Susanna&quot;, &quot;Old Folks at Home&quot;) dies aged 37 in New York City leaving a scrap of paper reading &quot;Dear friends and gentle hearts&quot;. His parlor song &quot;Beautiful Dreamer&quot; is published in March.
*February 24 – Bedřich Smetana&#x27;s symphonic poem &quot;Hakon Jarl&quot; is premiered in Prague.
*February 29 – Composer Gioachino Rossini celebrates his 72nd (17th) birthday with a party. It is 32 years since his last opera.
*May – Richard Wagner meets his new patron, the young Ludwig II of Bavaria, in Munich.
*December 17 – Jacques Offenbach&#x27;s operetta &quot;La Belle Hélène&quot; receives its first performance at the Paris Variétés
*Hans von Bülow takes over from Franz Lachner at the Munich opera.
*Mili Balakirev begins sketching his Symphony No. 1. It will not be performed till 1898.

== Published popular music ==

*&quot;Beautiful Dreamer&quot; by Stephen Foster
*&quot;Der Deitcher&#x27;s Dog&quot; (&quot;O Where, O Where Has My Little Dog Gone?&quot;) by Septimus Winner
*&quot;The Picture on the Wall&quot; by Henry Clay Work
*&quot;Pretty Polly Perkins of Paddington Green&quot; w. Harry Clifton m. traditional?
*&quot;Shall We Gather at the River?&quot; w.m. Robert Lowry
*&quot;Somebody&#x27;s Darling&quot; w.m. John Hill Hewitt
*&quot;Tramp! Tramp! Tramp! (The Boys Are Marching)&quot; by George F. Root

== Classical music ==
*Gaetano Braga – &quot;Souvenir du Rhin&quot;
*Johannes Brahms 
**9 Lieder and Songs, Op.32
**Piano Quintet Op. 34
*Anton Bruckner 
**Mass No.1 in D minor, WAB 26
**&quot;Herbstlied&quot;, WAB 73
**&quot;Um Mitternacht&quot;, WAB 89
*Aleksandr Dargomyzhsky – &quot;Kazachok&quot;
*Félicien David – &quot;Allegretto agitato&quot;
*Niels Gade – 3 Fantasie pieces for clarinet and piano, Op. 43
*Hermann Goetz – &quot;Frühlings-Ouvertüre&quot;, Op.15
*Louis Gottschalk – &quot;The Dying Poet&quot;
*Ferdinand Hiller 
**&quot;Operette ohne Text&quot;, Op.106
**12 Lieder (Hiller Album), Op.111
*Salomon Jadassohn – Symphony No.2, Op.28
*Adolf Jensen 
**&quot;Präludium und Romanze&quot;, Op.19
**7 Gesänge aus dem spanischen Liederbuche, Op.21
**6 Lieder, Op.24
**Piano Sonata, Op.25
*Friedrich Kiel – Piano Concerto
*Heinrich Lichner – 3 Piano Sonatas, Op.4
*William Mason – &quot;Ballade et barcarole&quot;, Op.15
*Josef Rheinberger – 5 Motets, Op.40
*Gioachino Rossini – &quot;Petite messe solennelle&quot;
*Ernst Rudorff – String Sextet, Op.5
*Camille Saint-Saëns – Piano Trio No.1, Op.18
*Franz Strauss – Nocturno for Horn and Piano
*Peter Tchaikovsky – &quot;The Storm&quot;
*Thomas Tellefsen – Trio for piano, violin and cello (Opus 31)
*Stanislas Verroust – Solo de concert No.11, Op.85
*Pauline Viardot – 12 Poems by Pushkin, Fet and Turgenev
*Robert Volkmann – Symphony no. 2
*Władysław Żeleński 
**Valse-caprice, Op.9
**2 Morceaux de salon, Op.11

== Opera ==
*Daniel François Esprit Auber – La fiancée du roi de Garbe (premiered January 11 in Paris)
*Flor van Duyse – &quot;Rosalinde&quot; (libretto by Karel Versnaeyen, premiered in Antwerp)
*Charles Gounod - &quot;Mireille&quot;, opera premiered on March 19, in Paris
*Karel Miry – &quot;Bouchard-d&#x27;Avesnes&quot; (opera in 5 acts, libretto by Hippoliet van Peene, premiered on March 6 in Ghent)
*Jacques Offenbach – &quot;Die Rheinnixen (The Rhine Fairies)&quot;
*George Alexander Macfarren – &quot;Helvellyn&quot;, (opera in 4 acts, libretto by John Oxenford, premiered on November 3 in London)

== Musical theatre ==
*&quot;La Belle Hélène&quot; (Lyrics: Henri Meilhac &amp; Ludovic Halévy Music: Jacques Offenbach) opens at the Théâtre des Variétés, Paris, on December 17.

== Births ==
*February 6 – John Henry Mackay, lyricist (died 1933)
*February 7 
**Ricardo Castro, Mexican concert pianist and composer (d. 1907)
**Arthur Collins, singer (d. 1933)
*February 9 – Miina Härma, Estonian organist, composer, and conductor (d. 1941)
*March 12 – Alice Tegnér, organist, composer (d. 1943)
*April 10 – Eugen d&#x27;Albert, composer, pianist (d. 1932)
*May 23 – Louis Glass, composer (d. 1936)
*June 11 – Richard Strauss, composer, conductor (d. 1949)
*July 6 – Alberto Nepomuceno, composer and conductor (d. 1920)
*July 20 – Erik Axel Karlfeldt, lyricist (died 1931)
*August 18 – Gemma Bellincioni, operatic soprano (d. 1950)
*October 7 – Louis F. Gottschalk, composer (d. 1934)
*&quot;date unknown&quot; – Alice Esty, operatic soprano (d. 1935)

== Deaths ==
*January 13 – Stephen Foster, songwriter (b. 1826)
*January 15 – Isaac Nathan, English-born composer and musicologist, &quot;father of Australian music&quot; (b. c.1791)
*January 26 – Otto Lindblad, composer (b. 1809)
*February 16 – Václav Jindřich Veit, lawyer and composer (b. 1806)
*March 30 – Louis Schindelmeisser, clarinettist, conductor and composer (b. 1811)
*May 2 – Giacomo Meyerbeer, composer (b. 1791)
*June 3 – Anna Maria Sessi, opera singer (b. 1790)
*July 28 – Johann Hermann Kufferath, composer (born 1797)
*August 13 – Berthold Sigismund, lyricist (born 1819)
*September 4 – Manuel Antonio Carreño, Venezuelan musician, teacher and diplomat (b. 1812)
*October 1 – Christian Friedrich Ludwig Buschmann, musical instrument maker (b. 1805)
*October 7 – Apollon Grigoryev, poet and songwriter (b. 1822) (alcoholism)
*December 20 – Josef Proksch, pianist and composer (b. 1794)

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2255" start="14" end="24" title="January 13" label="January 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q305202" start="47" end="61" title="Stephen Foster" label="Stephen Foster"/>
<link wikidata="Q573938" start="69" end="80" title="Oh! Susanna" label="Oh! Susanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q834609" start="94" end="111" title="Old Folks at Home" label="Old Folks at Home"/>
<link wikidata="Q3367083" start="248" end="265" title="Beautiful Dreamer" label="Beautiful Dreamer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2355" start="296" end="307" title="February 24" label="February 24"/>
<link wikidata="Q48173" start="310" end="325" title="Bedřich Smetana" label="Bedřich Smetana"/>
<link wikidata="Q18160838" start="354" end="364" title="Hakon Jarl (Smetana)" label="Hakon Jarl"/>
<link wikidata="Q2364" start="396" end="407" title="February 29" label="February 29"/>
<link wikidata="Q9726" start="419" end="436" title="Gioachino Rossini" label="Gioachino Rossini"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511" start="531" end="545" title="Richard Wagner" label="Richard Wagner"/>
<link wikidata="Q44039" start="578" end="598" title="Ludwig II of Bavaria" label="Ludwig II of Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2413" start="612" end="623" title="December 17" label="December 17"/>
<link wikidata="Q41555" start="626" end="643" title="Jacques Offenbach" label="Jacques Offenbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q170384" start="651" end="659" title="operetta" label="operetta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1219408" start="666" end="681" title="La Belle Hélène" label="La Belle Hélène"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="726" end="731" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q155540" start="742" end="756" title="Hans von Bülow" label="Hans von Bülow"/>
<link wikidata="Q713451" start="773" end="786" title="Franz Lachner" label="Franz Lachner"/>
<link wikidata="Q185040" start="809" end="823" title="Mili Balakirev" label="Mili Balakirev"/>
<link wikidata="Q3507637" start="845" end="859" title="Symphony No. 1 (Balakirev)" label="Symphony No. 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q3367083" start="936" end="953" title="Beautiful Dreamer" label="Beautiful Dreamer"/>
<link wikidata="Q305202" start="963" end="977" title="Stephen Foster" label="Stephen Foster"/>
<link wikidata="Q3479018" start="1073" end="1088" title="Septimus Winner" label="Septimus Winner"/>
<link wikidata="Q3025798" start="1129" end="1144" title="Henry Clay Work" label="Henry Clay Work"/>
<link wikidata="Q7242274" start="1152" end="1192" title="Pretty Polly Perkins of Paddington Green" label="Pretty Polly Perkins of Paddington Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q7487244" start="1239" end="1268" title="Shall We Gather at the River?" label="Shall We Gather at the River?"/>
<link wikidata="Q2158096" start="1280" end="1292" title="Robert Lowry (hymn writer)" label="Robert Lowry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1700464" start="1335" end="1351" title="John Hill Hewitt" label="John Hill Hewitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2448554" start="1359" end="1379" title="Tramp! Tramp! Tramp!" label="Tramp! Tramp! Tramp!"/>
<link wikidata="Q614867" start="1413" end="1427" title="George F. Root" label="George F. Root"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265757" start="1452" end="1465" title="Gaetano Braga" label="Gaetano Braga"/>
<link wikidata="Q7294" start="1498" end="1513" title="Johannes Brahms" label="Johannes Brahms"/>
<link wikidata="Q2719356" start="1545" end="1565" title="Piano Quintet (Brahms)" label="Piano Quintet Op. 34"/>
<link wikidata="Q81752" start="1567" end="1581" title="Anton Bruckner" label="Anton Bruckner"/>
<link wikidata="Q311384" start="1685" end="1707" title="Alexander Dargomyzhsky" label="Aleksandr Dargomyzhsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q951933" start="1732" end="1746" title="Félicien David" label="Félicien David"/>
<link wikidata="Q154632" start="1781" end="1791" title="Niels Gade" label="Niels Gade"/>
<link wikidata="Q61841" start="1844" end="1857" title="Hermann Goetz" label="Hermann Goetz"/>
<link wikidata="Q550701" start="1900" end="1916" title="Louis Moreau Gottschalk" label="Louis Gottschalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q213530" start="1947" end="1963" title="Ferdinand Hiller" label="Ferdinand Hiller"/>
<link wikidata="Q547227" start="2042" end="2059" title="Salomon Jadassohn" label="Salomon Jadassohn"/>
<link wikidata="Q362798" start="2084" end="2096" title="Adolf Jensen" label="Adolf Jensen"/>
<link wikidata="Q694191" start="2232" end="2246" title="Friedrich Kiel" label="Friedrich Kiel"/>
<link wikidata="Q72136" start="2265" end="2281" title="Heinrich Lichner" label="Heinrich Lichner"/>
<link wikidata="Q321967" start="2307" end="2320" title="William Mason (composer)" label="William Mason"/>
<link wikidata="Q365555" start="2364" end="2381" title="Josef Rheinberger" label="Josef Rheinberger"/>
<link wikidata="Q9726" start="2401" end="2418" title="Gioachino Rossini" label="Gioachino Rossini"/>
<link wikidata="Q2033442" start="2427" end="2450" title="Petite messe solennelle" label="Petite messe solennelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q67479" start="2458" end="2471" title="Ernst Rudorff" label="Ernst Rudorff"/>
<link wikidata="Q150445" start="2495" end="2514" title="Camille Saint-Saëns" label="Camille Saint-Saëns"/>
<link wikidata="Q452388" start="2541" end="2554" title="Franz Strauss" label="Franz Strauss"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315" start="2586" end="2603" title="Peter Tchaikovsky" label="Peter Tchaikovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q2897075" start="2612" end="2621" title="The Storm (Tchaikovsky)" label="The Storm"/>
<link wikidata="Q351878" start="2629" end="2645" title="Thomas Tellefsen" label="Thomas Tellefsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3496711" start="2692" end="2710" title="Stanislas Verroust" label="Stanislas Verroust"/>
<link wikidata="Q122998" start="2743" end="2758" title="Pauline Viardot" label="Pauline Viardot"/>
<link wikidata="Q467848" start="2800" end="2815" title="Robert Volkmann" label="Robert Volkmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391004" start="2834" end="2852" title="Władysław Żeleński (composer)" label="Władysław Żeleński"/>
<link wikidata="Q157672" start="2919" end="2947" title="Daniel Auber" label="Daniel François Esprit Auber"/>
<link wikidata="Q3035890" start="3010" end="3024" title="Flor van Duyse" label="Flor van Duyse"/>
<link wikidata="Q12892" start="3093" end="3100" title="Antwerp" label="Antwerp"/>
<link wikidata="Q180278" start="3103" end="3117" title="Charles Gounod" label="Charles Gounod"/>
<link wikidata="Q843042" start="3126" end="3134" title="Mireille (opera)" label="Mireille"/>
<link wikidata="Q3076542" start="3181" end="3191" title="Karel Miry" label="Karel Miry"/>
<link wikidata="Q12456" start="3260" end="3279" title="Hippoliet van Peene" label="Hippoliet van Peene"/>
<link wikidata="Q1296" start="3305" end="3310" title="Ghent" label="Ghent"/>
<link wikidata="Q41555" start="3313" end="3330" title="Jacques Offenbach" label="Jacques Offenbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215785" start="3339" end="3353" title="Die Rheinnixen" label="Die Rheinnixen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374708" start="3381" end="3407" title="George Alexander Macfarren" label="George Alexander Macfarren"/>
<link wikidata="Q16563119" start="3416" end="3425" title="Helvellyn (opera)" label="Helvellyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182232" start="3463" end="3476" title="John Oxenford" label="John Oxenford"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="3505" end="3511" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1219408" start="3543" end="3558" title="La Belle Hélène" label="La Belle Hélène"/>
<link wikidata="Q723648" start="3574" end="3587" title="Henri Meilhac" label="Henri Meilhac"/>
<link wikidata="Q723585" start="3594" end="3608" title="Ludovic Halévy" label="Ludovic Halévy"/>
<link wikidata="Q41555" start="3616" end="3633" title="Jacques Offenbach" label="Jacques Offenbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q373890" start="3648" end="3668" title="Théâtre des Variétés" label="Théâtre des Variétés"/>
<link wikidata="Q2413" start="3680" end="3691" title="December 17" label="December 17"/>
<link wikidata="Q2320" start="3708" end="3718" title="February 6" label="February 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q62258" start="3721" end="3738" title="John Henry Mackay" label="John Henry Mackay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2322" start="3762" end="3772" title="February 7" label="February 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q330862" start="3776" end="3790" title="Ricardo Castro" label="Ricardo Castro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1563772" start="3841" end="3855" title="Arthur Collins (singer)" label="Arthur Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q2324" start="3875" end="3885" title="February 9" label="February 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q438792" start="3888" end="3899" title="Miina Härma" label="Miina Härma"/>
<link wikidata="Q2402" start="3955" end="3963" title="March 12" label="March 12"/>
<link wikidata="Q462879" start="3966" end="3978" title="Alice Tegnér" label="Alice Tegnér"/>
<link wikidata="Q2502" start="4010" end="4018" title="April 10" label="April 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q57178" start="4021" end="4040" title="Eugen d&amp;#x27;Albert" label="Eugen d&amp;#x27;Albert"/>
<link wikidata="Q2583" start="4071" end="4077" title="May 23" label="May 23"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400256" start="4080" end="4091" title="Louis Glass" label="Louis Glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q2617" start="4113" end="4120" title="June 11" label="June 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q13894" start="4123" end="4138" title="Richard Strauss" label="Richard Strauss"/>
<link wikidata="Q2695" start="4171" end="4177" title="July 6" label="July 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391980" start="4180" end="4198" title="Alberto Nepomuceno" label="Alberto Nepomuceno"/>
<link wikidata="Q2728" start="4234" end="4241" title="July 20" label="July 20"/>
<link wikidata="Q134641" start="4244" end="4263" title="Erik Axel Karlfeldt" label="Erik Axel Karlfeldt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2826" start="4287" end="4296" title="August 18" label="August 18"/>
<link wikidata="Q289629" start="4299" end="4316" title="Gemma Bellincioni" label="Gemma Bellincioni"/>
<link wikidata="Q2926" start="4346" end="4355" title="October 7" label="October 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q2809986" start="4358" end="4377" title="Louis F. Gottschalk" label="Louis F. Gottschalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q4725848" start="4426" end="4436" title="Alice Esty (soprano)" label="Alice Esty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2255" start="4480" end="4490" title="January 13" label="January 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q305202" start="4493" end="4507" title="Stephen Foster" label="Stephen Foster"/>
<link wikidata="Q753110" start="4509" end="4519" title="songwriter" label="songwriter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2260" start="4531" end="4541" title="January 15" label="January 15"/>
<link wikidata="Q6076851" start="4544" end="4556" title="Isaac Nathan" label="Isaac Nathan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2282" start="4650" end="4660" title="January 26" label="January 26"/>
<link wikidata="Q710593" start="4663" end="4676" title="Otto Lindblad" label="Otto Lindblad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2342" start="4698" end="4709" title="February 16" label="February 16"/>
<link wikidata="Q872627" start="4712" end="4732" title="Václav Jindřich Veit" label="Václav Jindřich Veit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2460" start="4765" end="4773" title="March 30" label="March 30"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987515" start="4776" end="4797" title="Louis Schindelmeisser" label="Louis Schindelmeisser"/>
<link wikidata="Q2545" start="4847" end="4852" title="May 2" label="May 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q105237" start="4855" end="4872" title="Giacomo Meyerbeer" label="Giacomo Meyerbeer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2623" start="4894" end="4900" title="June 3" label="June 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q55857724" start="4903" end="4919" title="Anna Maria Sessi" label="Anna Maria Sessi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2718" start="4945" end="4952" title="July 28" label="July 28"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473897" start="4955" end="4979" title="Johann Hermann Kufferath" label="Johann Hermann Kufferath"/>
<link wikidata="Q2776" start="5003" end="5012" title="August 13" label="August 13"/>
<link wikidata="" start="5015" end="5033" title=":de:Berthold Sigismund" label="Berthold Sigismund"/>
<link wikidata="Q2855" start="5057" end="5068" title="September 4" label="September 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q6752388" start="5071" end="5093" title="Manuel Antonio Carreño" label="Manuel Antonio Carreño"/>
<link wikidata="Q2913" start="5148" end="5157" title="October 1" label="October 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079637" start="5160" end="5196" title="Christian Friedrich Ludwig Buschmann" label="Christian Friedrich Ludwig Buschmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q2926" start="5234" end="5243" title="October 7" label="October 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q2362334" start="5246" end="5263" title="Apollon Grigoryev" label="Apollon Grigoryev"/>
<link wikidata="Q2455" start="5309" end="5320" title="December 20" label="December 20"/>
<link wikidata="Q959789" start="5323" end="5336" title="Josef Proksch" label="Josef Proksch"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="187869" wikidata="Q1955184" url="?curid=187869" title="1865 in music">
<text>This article is about music-related events in [[1865]].

==Events==
*January 1 – Hector Berlioz completes his Memoirs.
*April 20 – Crosby&#x27;s Opera House (Chicago, Illinois) opens
*April 28 – Giacomo Meyerbeer&#x27;s opera &quot;L&#x27;Africaine&quot; is premiered in Paris at the Grand Opéra, after the composer&#x27;s death.
*June 10 – Richard Wagner&#x27;s opera &quot;Tristan und Isolde&quot; debuts in Munich at the Königliches Hof- und Nationaltheater.
*September 9 – Franz von Suppé&#x27;s operetta &quot;Die schöne Galathee&quot; debuts in Vienna&#x27;s Carl-Theater.
*September 11 – Johann Strauss II conducts a performance of &#x27;Characteristic Dances&#x27; by Peter Tchaikovsky at Pavlovsk Park. It is the first public performance of Tchaikovsky&#x27;s music. The piece would later become the &#x27;Dances of the Hay Maidens&#x27;, in The Voyevoda. 
*December 17 – Franz Schubert&#x27;s &quot;Unfinished Symphony&quot; debuts in Vienna, 43 years after of its composition.
*Philipp Scharwenka relocates to Berlin.
*Joseph Parry is admitted to the Gorsedd of bards at the National Eisteddfod of Wales.

==Published popular songs==
* &quot;Follow the Flag&quot; m. John Rogers Thomas
* &quot;Jeff in Pettycoats&quot; by Henry Tucker
* &quot;Marching Through Georgia&quot; w.m. Henry Clay Work
* &quot;Roll, Jordan, Roll&quot; traditional spiritual
* &quot;The Ship That Never Returned&quot; w.m. Henry Clay Work

==Classical music==
*Elfrida Andrée – Piano Quintet in E minor
*Antonio Bazzini – String Quartet in F major
*Johannes Brahms
**Piano Quintet, Op.34
**String Sextet No. 2 Op. 36
**Cello Sonata No. 1 Op. 38
**Sixteen Waltzes, Op. 39
**Trio for violin, horn and piano Op. 40
*Anton Bruckner 
**Military March in E-flat major, WAB 116
**Trauungschor (&quot;Wedding chorus&quot;)
*Hans von Bulow – 3 Valses caractéristiques, Op.18
*Felix Draeseke – &quot;Lacrimosa&quot;
*Antonín Dvořák
**Cello concerto No. 1 in A major (later reconstructed by Günter Raphael,
**Symphony No. 1 (&quot;The Bells of Zlonice&quot;) and later by Jarmil Burghauser)
**Symphony No. 2
*Gabriel Fauré – Cantique de Jean Racine
*César Franck – Quare fremuerunt gentes
*Herman Goetz – Sonata for Piano (Four Hands), Op.17
*Carl Goldmark – Sakuntala, Op.13
*Edvard Grieg
**Piano sonata Op. 7 in E minor
**Violin sonata No. 1 Op. 8
*Franz Liszt – &quot;Missa Choralis&quot;
*Jules Massenet – Suite No.1, Op.13
*Modest Mussorgsky 
**Prayer, Op.5
**Cradle Song, Op.16
**Memories of Childhood
*Nikolai Rimsky-Korsakov – Symphony No. 1
*Camille Saint-Saëns – Serenade in E flat major, Op. 15
*Pablo de Sarasate – Souvenirs de Faust
*Johan Svendsen
**String Quartet, Op. 1
**2 Songs (Male Chorus), Op. 2
*Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky
**Overture in F major
**Piano Sonata in C-sharp minor
**Quartet Movement in B-flat major
*Henri Wieniawski – Fantasia on Themes from &#x27;Faust&#x27;, Op.20

==Opera==
*François Bazin – &quot;Le voyage en Chine&quot;
*Giacomo Meyerbeer – &quot;L&#x27;Africaine&quot;
*Stanislaw Moniuszko – &quot;The Haunted Manor&quot;
*Camille Saint-Saëns – &quot;Le timbre d&#x27;argent&quot;
*Richard Wagner – &quot;Tristan und Isolde&quot;

==Musical theater==
* &quot;Orpheus In The Underworld&quot;, London production opened at Her Majesty&#x27;s Theatre on December 26 and ran for 76 performances

==Births==
* May 9 – August de Boeck, Belgium Composer (d. 1937)
* June 9
**Carl Nielsen, composer (d. 1931)
**Albéric Magnard, composer (d. 1914)
*June 13 – William Butler Yeats, lyricist (died 1939)
*June 14 – Auguste Sérieyx, composer (died 1949)
*July 8 – Rita Strohl, composer (died 1941)
* July 21 – Robert Kahn, composer (d. 1951)
* August 10 – Alexander Glazunov, composer (d. 1936)
* October 1 – Paul Dukas, composer (d. 1935)
* October 13 – Jón Laxdal, Icelandic composer (d. 1928)
* October 15 – Charles W. Clark, American baritone (d. 1925)
* December 3 – Gustav Jenner, composer (d. 1920)
* December 8 – Jean Sibelius, composer (d. 1957)
* December 25 – Fay Templeton, US singer and actress

==Deaths==
*January 23 – Josef Leopold Zvonař, composer and music critic (b. 1824)
*January 27 – Giuseppe Rocca, violin maker (b. 1807)
*January 28 – Felice Romani, librettist for Donizetti and Bellini (b. 1788)
*February 20 – Pierre-Louis Dietsch, French composer and conductor (b. 1808)
*April 1 – Giuditta Pasta, operatic soprano (b. 1797)
*April 2 – John Cassell, music publisher (born 1817)
*August 1 – François Xavier Bazin, bow-maker (b. 1824) (cholera)
*September 10 – George Linley, poet and composer (b. 1798)
*October 8 – Heinrich Wilhelm Ernst, violinist and composer (b. 1814)
*October 12 – William Vincent Wallace, composer (b. 1812)
*December 6 – Sebastián Iradier, composer (b. 1809)
*December 18 – Francisco Manuel da Silva, songwriter and music professor (b. 1795)

==Notes==

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1955184" start="22" end="54" title="1865 in music" label="music-related events in [[1865]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q2150" start="69" end="78" title="January 1" label="January 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151" start="81" end="95" title="Hector Berlioz" label="Hector Berlioz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2524" start="120" end="128" title="April 20" label="April 20"/>
<link wikidata="Q17511973" start="131" end="156" title="Crosby&amp;#x27;s Opera House" label="Crosby&amp;#x27;s Opera House"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="158" end="175" title="Chicago, Illinois" label="Chicago, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q2534" start="184" end="192" title="April 28" label="April 28"/>
<link wikidata="Q105237" start="195" end="212" title="Giacomo Meyerbeer" label="Giacomo Meyerbeer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344" start="220" end="225" title="opera" label="opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q784719" start="232" end="248" title="L&amp;#x27;Africaine" label="L&amp;#x27;Africaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="271" end="276" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q2615" start="331" end="338" title="June 10" label="June 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511" start="341" end="355" title="Richard Wagner" label="Richard Wagner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344" start="363" end="368" title="opera" label="opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324254" start="375" end="393" title="Tristan und Isolde" label="Tristan und Isolde"/>
<link wikidata="Q1726" start="410" end="416" title="Munich" label="Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q707679" start="424" end="460" title="National Theatre Munich" label="Königliches Hof- und Nationaltheater"/>
<link wikidata="Q2856" start="463" end="474" title="September 9" label="September 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q310431" start="477" end="492" title="Franz von Suppé" label="Franz von Suppé"/>
<link wikidata="Q170384" start="500" end="508" title="operetta" label="operetta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741" start="551" end="557" title="Vienna" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q2851" start="580" end="592" title="September 11" label="September 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q83309" start="595" end="612" title="Johann Strauss II" label="Johann Strauss II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315" start="676" end="693" title="Peter Tchaikovsky" label="Peter Tchaikovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q2506336" start="697" end="710" title="Pavlovsk Park" label="Pavlovsk Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q2618565" start="851" end="863" title="The Voyevoda (opera)" label="The Voyevoda"/>
<link wikidata="Q2413" start="867" end="878" title="December 17" label="December 17"/>
<link wikidata="Q7312" start="881" end="895" title="Franz Schubert" label="Franz Schubert"/>
<link wikidata="Q651383" start="909" end="928" title="Symphony No. 8 (Schubert)" label="Unfinished Symphony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741" start="945" end="951" title="Vienna" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q523539" start="989" end="1007" title="Philipp Scharwenka" label="Philipp Scharwenka"/>
<link wikidata="Q3395608" start="1030" end="1042" title="Joseph Parry" label="Joseph Parry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745177" start="1086" end="1114" title="National Eisteddfod of Wales" label="National Eisteddfod of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1701605" start="1178" end="1196" title="John Rogers Thomas" label="John Rogers Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3289766" start="1254" end="1278" title="Marching Through Georgia" label="Marching Through Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3025798" start="1290" end="1305" title="Henry Clay Work" label="Henry Clay Work"/>
<link wikidata="Q17152304" start="1314" end="1332" title="Roll, Jordan, Roll" label="Roll, Jordan, Roll"/>
<link wikidata="Q7763849" start="1369" end="1397" title="The Ship That Never Returned" label="The Ship That Never Returned"/>
<link wikidata="Q3025798" start="1409" end="1424" title="Henry Clay Work" label="Henry Clay Work"/>
<link wikidata="Q451495" start="1447" end="1461" title="Elfrida Andrée" label="Elfrida Andrée"/>
<link wikidata="Q461296" start="1490" end="1505" title="Antonio Bazzini" label="Antonio Bazzini"/>
<link wikidata="Q7294" start="1535" end="1550" title="Johannes Brahms" label="Johannes Brahms"/>
<link wikidata="Q2482539" start="1576" end="1602" title="String Sextet No. 2 (Brahms)" label="String Sextet No. 2 Op. 36"/>
<link wikidata="Q3132924" start="1605" end="1630" title="Cello Sonata No. 1 (Brahms)" label="Cello Sonata No. 1 Op. 38"/>
<link wikidata="Q3477975" start="1633" end="1656" title="Sixteen Waltzes, Op. 39 (Brahms)" label="Sixteen Waltzes, Op. 39"/>
<link wikidata="Q2613456" start="1659" end="1697" title="Horn Trio (Brahms)" label="Trio for violin, horn and piano Op. 40"/>
<link wikidata="Q81752" start="1699" end="1713" title="Anton Bruckner" label="Anton Bruckner"/>
<link wikidata="Q18663796" start="1759" end="1800" title="Trauungschor, WAB 49" label="Trauungschor (&amp;quot;Wedding chorus&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q155540" start="1802" end="1816" title="Hans von Bülow" label="Hans von Bulow"/>
<link wikidata="Q505062" start="1853" end="1867" title="Felix Draeseke" label="Felix Draeseke"/>
<link wikidata="Q7298" start="1893" end="1907" title="Antonín Dvořák" label="Antonín Dvořák"/>
<link wikidata="Q2882314" start="1910" end="1941" title="Cello Concerto in A major (Dvořák)" label="Cello concerto No. 1 in A major"/>
<link wikidata="Q542279" start="1966" end="1980" title="Günter Raphael" label="Günter Raphael"/>
<link wikidata="Q163532" start="1984" end="2033" title="Symphony No. 1 (Dvořák)" label="Symphony No. 1 (&amp;quot;The Bells of Zlonice&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378596" start="2047" end="2064" title="Jarmil Burghauser" label="Jarmil Burghauser"/>
<link wikidata="Q210504" start="2068" end="2082" title="Symphony No. 2 (Dvořák)" label="Symphony No. 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q104919" start="2084" end="2097" title="Gabriel Fauré" label="Gabriel Fauré"/>
<link wikidata="Q2653917" start="2100" end="2123" title="Cantique de Jean Racine" label="Cantique de Jean Racine"/>
<link wikidata="Q50187" start="2125" end="2137" title="César Franck" label="César Franck"/>
<link wikidata="Q61841" start="2165" end="2177" title="Hermann Goetz" label="Herman Goetz"/>
<link wikidata="Q239214" start="2218" end="2231" title="Karl Goldmark" label="Carl Goldmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q80621" start="2252" end="2264" title="Edvard Grieg" label="Edvard Grieg"/>
<link wikidata="Q3490117" start="2267" end="2296" title="Piano Sonata (Grieg)" label="Piano sonata Op. 7 in E minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q54412929" start="2299" end="2324" title="Violin Sonatas (Grieg)" label="Violin sonata No. 1 Op. 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q41309" start="2326" end="2337" title="Franz Liszt" label="Franz Liszt"/>
<link wikidata="Q194436" start="2368" end="2382" title="Jules Massenet" label="Jules Massenet"/>
<link wikidata="Q132682" start="2404" end="2421" title="Modest Mussorgsky" label="Modest Mussorgsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q93227" start="2484" end="2507" title="Nikolai Rimsky-Korsakov" label="Nikolai Rimsky-Korsakov"/>
<link wikidata="Q25591" start="2510" end="2524" title="Symphony No. 1 (Rimsky-Korsakov)" label="Symphony No. 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q150445" start="2526" end="2545" title="Camille Saint-Saëns" label="Camille Saint-Saëns"/>
<link wikidata="Q18163714" start="2548" end="2580" title="Serenade in E-flat major (Saint-Saëns)" label="Serenade in E flat major, Op. 15"/>
<link wikidata="Q204503" start="2582" end="2599" title="Pablo de Sarasate" label="Pablo de Sarasate"/>
<link wikidata="Q336668" start="2622" end="2636" title="Johan Svendsen" label="Johan Svendsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315" start="2693" end="2717" title="Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky" label="Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q4428774" start="2742" end="2771" title="Piano Sonata in C-sharp minor (Tchaikovsky)" label="Piano Sonata in C-sharp minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3413767" start="2774" end="2806" title="Quartet Movement in B-flat major (Tchaikovsky)" label="Quartet Movement in B-flat major"/>
<link wikidata="Q272184" start="2808" end="2824" title="Henryk Wieniawski" label="Henri Wieniawski"/>
<link wikidata="Q633817" start="2888" end="2902" title="François Bazin (composer)" label="François Bazin"/>
<link wikidata="Q105237" start="2937" end="2954" title="Giacomo Meyerbeer" label="Giacomo Meyerbeer"/>
<link wikidata="Q784719" start="2963" end="2979" title="L&amp;#x27;Africaine" label="L&amp;#x27;Africaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q217613" start="2987" end="3006" title="Stanislaw Moniuszko" label="Stanislaw Moniuszko"/>
<link wikidata="Q468161" start="3015" end="3032" title="The Haunted Manor" label="The Haunted Manor"/>
<link wikidata="Q150445" start="3040" end="3059" title="Camille Saint-Saëns" label="Camille Saint-Saëns"/>
<link wikidata="Q961875" start="3068" end="3091" title="Le timbre d&amp;#x27;argent" label="Le timbre d&amp;#x27;argent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511" start="3099" end="3113" title="Richard Wagner" label="Richard Wagner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324254" start="3122" end="3140" title="Tristan und Isolde" label="Tristan und Isolde"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137065" start="3176" end="3201" title="Orpheus in the Underworld" label="Orpheus In The Underworld"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359589" start="3209" end="3215" title="West End theatre" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155331" start="3237" end="3263" title="Her Majesty&amp;#x27;s Theatre" label="Her Majesty&amp;#x27;s Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2761" start="3267" end="3278" title="December 26" label="December 26"/>
<link wikidata="Q2556" start="3321" end="3326" title="May 9" label="May 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q705971" start="3329" end="3344" title="August de Boeck" label="August de Boeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="3346" end="3353" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q36834" start="3354" end="3362" title="Composer" label="Composer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2618" start="3375" end="3381" title="June 9" label="June 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q205139" start="3384" end="3396" title="Carl Nielsen" label="Carl Nielsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q982192" start="3419" end="3434" title="Albéric Magnard" label="Albéric Magnard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2614" start="3456" end="3463" title="June 13" label="June 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q40213" start="3466" end="3486" title="W. B. Yeats" label="William Butler Yeats"/>
<link wikidata="Q2612" start="3510" end="3517" title="June 14" label="June 14"/>
<link wikidata="Q2871410" start="3520" end="3535" title="Auguste Sérieyx" label="Auguste Sérieyx"/>
<link wikidata="Q2692" start="3559" end="3565" title="July 8" label="July 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q3433260" start="3568" end="3579" title="Rita Strohl" label="Rita Strohl"/>
<link wikidata="Q2727" start="3604" end="3611" title="July 21" label="July 21"/>
<link wikidata="Q214129" start="3614" end="3625" title="Robert Kahn (composer)" label="Robert Kahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2779" start="3648" end="3657" title="August 10" label="August 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q25872" start="3660" end="3678" title="Alexander Glazunov" label="Alexander Glazunov"/>
<link wikidata="Q2913" start="3701" end="3710" title="October 1" label="October 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q215556" start="3713" end="3723" title="Paul Dukas" label="Paul Dukas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2925" start="3746" end="3756" title="October 13" label="October 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q121030664" start="3759" end="3769" title="Jón Laxdal (composer)" label="Jón Laxdal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919" start="3802" end="3812" title="October 15" label="October 15"/>
<link wikidata="Q14036136" start="3815" end="3831" title="Charles W. Clark" label="Charles W. Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q2298" start="3863" end="3873" title="December 3" label="December 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q315150" start="3876" end="3889" title="Gustav Jenner" label="Gustav Jenner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2301" start="3912" end="3922" title="December 8" label="December 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q45682" start="3925" end="3938" title="Jean Sibelius" label="Jean Sibelius"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745" start="3961" end="3972" title="December 25" label="December 25"/>
<link wikidata="Q5438941" start="3975" end="3988" title="Fay Templeton" label="Fay Templeton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2276" start="4025" end="4035" title="January 23" label="January 23"/>
<link wikidata="Q1705143" start="4038" end="4058" title="Josef Leopold Zvonař" label="Josef Leopold Zvonař"/>
<link wikidata="Q2284" start="4097" end="4107" title="January 27" label="January 27"/>
<link wikidata="Q3771335" start="4110" end="4124" title="Giuseppe Rocca" label="Giuseppe Rocca"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285" start="4150" end="4160" title="January 28" label="January 28"/>
<link wikidata="Q350103" start="4163" end="4176" title="Felice Romani" label="Felice Romani"/>
<link wikidata="Q2344" start="4226" end="4237" title="February 20" label="February 20"/>
<link wikidata="Q361734" start="4240" end="4260" title="Pierre-Louis Dietsch" label="Pierre-Louis Dietsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2510" start="4303" end="4310" title="April 1" label="April 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q240963" start="4313" end="4327" title="Giuditta Pasta" label="Giuditta Pasta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2511" start="4357" end="4364" title="April 2" label="April 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q12054363" start="4367" end="4379" title="John Cassell" label="John Cassell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2788" start="4410" end="4418" title="August 1" label="August 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q5493446" start="4421" end="4442" title="François Xavier Bazin" label="François Xavier Bazin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2853" start="4475" end="4487" title="September 10" label="September 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q5541748" start="4490" end="4503" title="George Linley" label="George Linley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2924" start="4534" end="4543" title="October 8" label="October 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q528748" start="4546" end="4568" title="Heinrich Wilhelm Ernst" label="Heinrich Wilhelm Ernst"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920" start="4604" end="4614" title="October 12" label="October 12"/>
<link wikidata="Q2245188" start="4617" end="4640" title="William Vincent Wallace" label="William Vincent Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q2303" start="4662" end="4672" title="December 6" label="December 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q954019" start="4675" end="4692" title="Sebastián Iradier" label="Sebastián Iradier"/>
<link wikidata="Q2438" start="4714" end="4725" title="December 18" label="December 18"/>
<link wikidata="Q504512" start="4728" end="4753" title="Francisco Manuel da Silva" label="Francisco Manuel da Silva"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="187870" wikidata="Q1342400" url="?curid=187870" title="1866 in music">
<text>==Events==
*January – Gabriel Fauré becomes organist at the Church of Saint-Sauveur, at Rennes in Brittany.
*March–December – Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky writes his Symphony No. 1, &quot;Winter Daydreams&quot;.
*May 30 – Bedřich Smetana&#x27;s opera &quot;The Bartered Bride&quot; (&quot;Prodana Nevesta&quot;) debuts at the Provisional Theatre (Prague).
*August – Sir William Sterndale Bennett becomes Principal of the Royal Academy of Music in London.
*August 4 – First performance of Gabriel Fauré&#x27;s &quot;Cantique de Jean Racine&quot;.
*August 9 – Marie Trautmann marries fellow musician Alfred Jaëll.
*October 21 – Jacques Offenbach&#x27;s operetta &quot;La Vie parisienne&quot; debuts in Paris at the Théâtre du Palais Royale.
*November 17 – Ambroise Thomas&#x27;s opera &quot;Mignon&quot; debuts in Paris at the Opéra-Comique.
*Theodore Thomas conducts the New York Philharmonic in the American premiere of the Prelude to Act 1 of Wagner&#x27;s &quot;Tristan und Isolde&quot;.
*Mily Balakirev publishes his &quot;Collection of Russian Folksongs&quot;, including &quot;The Song of the Volga Boatmen&quot;.
*Georges Bizet completes the opera &quot;La jolie fille de Perth&quot;; it is premiered the following year.
*Brahms completes all but the fifth movement of the A German Requiem

==Published popular music==
* &quot;Beautiful River&quot;
* &quot;Come Back To Erin&quot; w.m. Claribel
* &quot;Father&#x27;s a Drunkard and Mother Is Dead&quot; w. Stella m. Mrs. E. A. Parkhurst
* &quot;We Parted By The River&quot; w.m. William Shakespeare Hays
*&quot;When You and I Were Young, Maggie&quot; by James A. Butterfield &amp; George Washington Johnson
* &quot;Write Me A Letter Home&quot;     w.m. Will S. Hays
* &quot;You Naughty, Naughty Men&quot; (in &quot;The Black Crook&quot;) w. T. Kennick m. G. Bickwell

==Classical music==
*Felix Draeseke – &quot;Fantasie on Themes from Boieldieus &quot;Weisse Dame&quot;&quot;
*Johann Gottfried Piefke – &quot;Königgrätzer Marsch&quot;
*Amilcare Ponchielli – Concerto for Trumpet in F major
*Arthur Sullivan – &quot;Irish&quot; Symphony
*Franz von Suppé - Light Cavalry Overture
*Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky - Symphony No. 1 &quot;Winter Dreams&quot;

==Opera==
*Karel Miry
** (opera in 4 acts, libretto by N. Destanberg, premiered on August 28 in Ghent)
** (opera in 1 act, libretto by N. Destanberg, premiered on October 29 in Ghent)
** (opera in 1 act, libretto by N. Destanberg, premiered on December 24 in Ghent)
*Bedřich Smetana- The Bartered Bride
*Franz von Suppé – &quot;Leichte Kavallerie&quot;

==Musical theater==
*&quot;La Belle Hélène&quot; (Lyrics: Henri Meilhac &amp; Ludovic Halévy Music: Jacques Offenbach) London production opened at the Adelphi Theatre on June 30
* &quot;The Black Crook&quot; – the first &quot;book musical&quot;. Broadway production opened at Niblo&#x27;s Garden on September 12 and ran for 474 performances

==Births==
*January 13 – Vasily Kalinnikov, composer (d. 1901)
*March 10 – Amanda Aldridge, opera singer, teacher and composer (d. 1956)
*April 1 – Ferruccio Busoni, pianist, composer (d. 1924)
*April 13 – Carl Valentin Wunderle, violinist (d. 1944)
*May 17 – Erik Satie, composer (d. 1925)
*June 15 – Charles Wood, composer (d. 1926)
*June 29 – George Frederick Boyle, composer (d. 1948)
*July 13 – La Goulue, can-can dancer (d. 1929)
*July 23 – Francesco Cilea, composer (d. 1950)
*September 26 – George H. Clutsam, pianist, composer and writer (d. 1951)
*November 7 – Paul Lincke, composer (d. 1946)
*&quot;date unknown&quot;
**Annibale Fagnola, violin maker (d. 1939)
**Dorothea Ruggles-Brise, née Stewart-Murray, collector of traditional Scottish music (d. 1937)

==Deaths==
*January 25 – Minna Wagner, estranged wife of Richard Wagner, 56 (heart attack)
*February 6 – Anna Liszt, pianist and mother of Franz Liszt, 77
*March 20 – Rikard Nordraak, composer, 21 (tuberculosis)
*July 25 – Aloys Schmitt, composer, pianist and music teacher, 77
*October 2 – Adam Darr, guitarist, singer and composer, 55 (suicide by drowning)
*November 26 – Adrien-Francois Servais, cellist, 59
*November 29 – Sophie Löwe, operatic soprano, 51
*December 1 – Jules Demersseman, flautist and composer, 33 (tuberculosis)
*December 3 – Jan Kalivoda, violinist, conductor and composer, 65

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q104919" start="22" end="35" title="Gabriel Fauré" label="Gabriel Fauré"/>
<link wikidata="Q647" start="88" end="94" title="Rennes" label="Rennes"/>
<link wikidata="Q327" start="98" end="106" title="Brittany" label="Brittany"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315" start="126" end="150" title="Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky" label="Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q163606" start="162" end="206" title="Symphony No. 1 (Tchaikovsky)" label="Symphony No. 1, &amp;quot;Winter Daydreams&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2590" start="209" end="215" title="May 30" label="May 30"/>
<link wikidata="Q48173" start="218" end="233" title="Bedřich Smetana" label="Bedřich Smetana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344" start="241" end="246" title="opera" label="opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q907745" start="253" end="271" title="The Bartered Bride" label="The Bartered Bride"/>
<link wikidata="Q1763605" start="322" end="350" title="Provisional Theatre (Prague)" label="Provisional Theatre (Prague)"/>
<link wikidata="Q201164" start="366" end="391" title="William Sterndale Bennett" label="William Sterndale Bennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144673" start="417" end="439" title="Royal Academy of Music" label="Royal Academy of Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q2784" start="452" end="460" title="August 4" label="August 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q104919" start="484" end="497" title="Gabriel Fauré" label="Gabriel Fauré"/>
<link wikidata="Q2653917" start="511" end="534" title="Cantique de Jean Racine (Fauré)" label="Cantique de Jean Racine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2782" start="543" end="551" title="August 9" label="August 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q2706282" start="554" end="569" title="Marie Jaëll" label="Marie Trautmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q330244" start="594" end="606" title="Alfred Jaëll" label="Alfred Jaëll"/>
<link wikidata="Q2960" start="609" end="619" title="October 21" label="October 21"/>
<link wikidata="Q41555" start="622" end="639" title="Jacques Offenbach" label="Jacques Offenbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q170384" start="647" end="655" title="operetta" label="operetta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1807287" start="662" end="679" title="La Vie parisienne (operetta)" label="La Vie parisienne"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="696" end="701" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q3028" start="736" end="747" title="November 17" label="November 17"/>
<link wikidata="Q297717" start="750" end="765" title="Ambroise Thomas" label="Ambroise Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q657595" start="785" end="791" title="Mignon" label="Mignon"/>
<link wikidata="Q872222" start="821" end="834" title="Opéra-Comique" label="Opéra-Comique"/>
<link wikidata="Q62613" start="837" end="852" title="Theodore Thomas (conductor)" label="Theodore Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q471154" start="866" end="887" title="New York Philharmonic" label="New York Philharmonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511" start="940" end="946" title="Wagner" label="Wagner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324254" start="960" end="978" title="Tristan und Isolde" label="Tristan und Isolde"/>
<link wikidata="Q185040" start="987" end="1001" title="Mily Balakirev" label="Mily Balakirev"/>
<link wikidata="Q1555383" start="1077" end="1106" title="The Song of the Volga Boatmen" label="The Song of the Volga Boatmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q56158" start="1115" end="1128" title="Georges Bizet" label="Georges Bizet"/>
<link wikidata="Q471784" start="1155" end="1178" title="La jolie fille de Perth" label="La jolie fille de Perth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7294" start="1223" end="1229" title="Brahms" label="Brahms"/>
<link wikidata="Q756299" start="1274" end="1290" title="A German Requiem (Brahms)" label="A German Requiem"/>
<link wikidata="Q5085825" start="1387" end="1395" title="Charlotte Alington Barnard" label="Claribel"/>
<link wikidata="Q15497470" start="1530" end="1554" title="William Shakespeare Hays" label="William Shakespeare Hays"/>
<link wikidata="Q7992905" start="1562" end="1595" title="When You and I Were Young, Maggie" label="When You and I Were Young, Maggie"/>
<link wikidata="Q16062443" start="1605" end="1625" title="James Austin Butterfield" label="James A. Butterfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q15497470" start="1704" end="1716" title="Will S. Hays" label="Will S. Hays"/>
<link wikidata="Q152444" start="1766" end="1781" title="The Black Crook" label="The Black Crook"/>
<link wikidata="Q505062" start="1840" end="1854" title="Felix Draeseke" label="Felix Draeseke"/>
<link wikidata="Q686422" start="1929" end="1952" title="Johann Gottfried Piefke" label="Johann Gottfried Piefke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1796010" start="1961" end="1980" title="Königgrätzer Marsch" label="Königgrätzer Marsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q207390" start="1988" end="2007" title="Amilcare Ponchielli" label="Amilcare Ponchielli"/>
<link wikidata="Q212692" start="2043" end="2058" title="Arthur Sullivan" label="Arthur Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7661671" start="2061" end="2087" title="Irish Symphony" label="&amp;quot;Irish&amp;quot; Symphony"/>
<link wikidata="Q310431" start="2089" end="2104" title="Franz von Suppé" label="Franz von Suppé"/>
<link wikidata="Q6545989" start="2107" end="2129" title="Light Cavalry Overture" label="Light Cavalry Overture"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315" start="2131" end="2155" title="Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky" label="Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q163606" start="2158" end="2198" title="Symphony No. 1 (Tchaikovsky)" label="Symphony No. 1 &amp;quot;Winter Dreams&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344" start="2202" end="2207" title="Opera" label="Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q3076542" start="2211" end="2221" title="Karel Miry" label="Karel Miry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1296" start="2296" end="2301" title="Ghent" label="Ghent"/>
<link wikidata="Q48173" start="2467" end="2482" title="Bedřich Smetana" label="Bedřich Smetana"/>
<link wikidata="Q907745" start="2484" end="2502" title="The Bartered Bride" label="The Bartered Bride"/>
<link wikidata="Q310431" start="2504" end="2519" title="Franz von Suppé" label="Franz von Suppé"/>
<link wikidata="Q1814636" start="2528" end="2546" title="Leichte Kavallerie" label="Leichte Kavallerie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2743" start="2556" end="2571" title="Musical theater" label="Musical theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q1219408" start="2581" end="2596" title="La Belle Hélène" label="La Belle Hélène"/>
<link wikidata="Q723648" start="2612" end="2625" title="Henri Meilhac" label="Henri Meilhac"/>
<link wikidata="Q723585" start="2632" end="2646" title="Ludovic Halévy" label="Ludovic Halévy"/>
<link wikidata="Q41555" start="2654" end="2671" title="Jacques Offenbach" label="Jacques Offenbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359589" start="2673" end="2679" title="West End theatre" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q355319" start="2705" end="2720" title="Adelphi Theatre" label="Adelphi Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2657" start="2724" end="2731" title="June 30" label="June 30"/>
<link wikidata="Q152444" start="2740" end="2755" title="The Black Crook" label="The Black Crook"/>
<link wikidata="Q2743" start="2785" end="2792" title="musical theatre" label="musical"/>
<link wikidata="Q3875796" start="2830" end="2849" title="Niblo&amp;#x27;s Garden" label="Niblo&amp;#x27;s Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2849" start="2853" end="2865" title="September 12" label="September 12"/>
<link wikidata="Q2255" start="2908" end="2918" title="January 13" label="January 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q368147" start="2921" end="2938" title="Vasily Kalinnikov" label="Vasily Kalinnikov"/>
<link wikidata="Q36834" start="2940" end="2948" title="composer" label="composer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2397" start="2960" end="2968" title="March 10" label="March 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q4739591" start="2971" end="2986" title="Amanda Aldridge" label="Amanda Aldridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2510" start="3034" end="3041" title="April 1" label="April 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q219551" start="3044" end="3060" title="Ferruccio Busoni" label="Ferruccio Busoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q486748" start="3062" end="3069" title="pianist" label="pianist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2498" start="3091" end="3099" title="April 13" label="April 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q5040901" start="3102" end="3124" title="Carl Valentin Wunderle" label="Carl Valentin Wunderle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2575" start="3147" end="3153" title="May 17" label="May 17"/>
<link wikidata="Q187192" start="3156" end="3166" title="Erik Satie" label="Erik Satie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2613" start="3188" end="3195" title="June 15" label="June 15"/>
<link wikidata="Q246913" start="3198" end="3210" title="Charles Wood (composer)" label="Charles Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q2659" start="3232" end="3239" title="June 29" label="June 29"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507375" start="3242" end="3264" title="George Frederick Boyle" label="George Frederick Boyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2687" start="3286" end="3293" title="July 13" label="July 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q258975" start="3296" end="3305" title="La Goulue" label="La Goulue"/>
<link wikidata="Q2722" start="3333" end="3340" title="July 23" label="July 23"/>
<link wikidata="Q250952" start="3343" end="3358" title="Francesco Cilea" label="Francesco Cilea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2885" start="3380" end="3392" title="September 26" label="September 26"/>
<link wikidata="Q5540016" start="3395" end="3412" title="George H. Clutsam" label="George H. Clutsam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2989" start="3454" end="3464" title="November 7" label="November 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q712729" start="3467" end="3478" title="Paul Lincke" label="Paul Lincke"/>
<link wikidata="Q4769181" start="3527" end="3543" title="Annibale Fagnola" label="Annibale Fagnola"/>
<link wikidata="Q22017929" start="3570" end="3592" title="Dorothea Ruggles-Brise" label="Dorothea Ruggles-Brise"/>
<link wikidata="Q2279" start="3677" end="3687" title="January 25" label="January 25"/>
<link wikidata="Q78230" start="3690" end="3702" title="Minna Planer" label="Minna Wagner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511" start="3722" end="3736" title="Richard Wagner" label="Richard Wagner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2320" start="3757" end="3767" title="February 6" label="February 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q41309" start="3770" end="3780" title="Anna Liszt" label="Anna Liszt"/>
<link wikidata="Q41309" start="3804" end="3815" title="Franz Liszt" label="Franz Liszt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2427" start="3821" end="3829" title="March 20" label="March 20"/>
<link wikidata="Q366629" start="3832" end="3847" title="Rikard Nordraak" label="Rikard Nordraak"/>
<link wikidata="Q2720" start="3878" end="3885" title="July 25" label="July 25"/>
<link wikidata="Q527514" start="3888" end="3901" title="Aloys Schmitt" label="Aloys Schmitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2932" start="3944" end="3953" title="October 2" label="October 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q349104" start="3956" end="3965" title="Adam Darr" label="Adam Darr"/>
<link wikidata="Q3019" start="4025" end="4036" title="November 26" label="November 26"/>
<link wikidata="Q376633" start="4039" end="4062" title="Adrien-Francois Servais" label="Adrien-Francois Servais"/>
<link wikidata="Q3016" start="4077" end="4088" title="November 29" label="November 29"/>
<link wikidata="Q435157" start="4091" end="4102" title="Sophie Löwe" label="Sophie Löwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297" start="4126" end="4136" title="December 1" label="December 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q721362" start="4139" end="4156" title="Jules Demersseman" label="Jules Demersseman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2298" start="4200" end="4210" title="December 3" label="December 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q642243" start="4213" end="4225" title="Jan Kalivoda" label="Jan Kalivoda"/>
</links>
</doc>
