<doc id="192748" wikidata="Q631489" url="?curid=192748" title="Klondike Gold Rush">
<text>The Klondike Gold Rush was a migration by an estimated 100,000 prospectors to the Klondike region of Yukon in northwestern Canada, between 1896 and 1899. Gold was discovered there by local miners on August 16, 1896; when news reached Seattle and San Francisco the following year, it triggered a stampede of prospectors. Some became wealthy, but the majority went in vain. It has been immortalized in films, literature, and photographs.

To reach the gold fields, most prospectors took the route through the ports of Dyea and Skagway in southeast Alaska. Here, the &quot;Klondikers&quot; could follow either the Chilkoot or White Pass trail to the Yukon River and sail down to the Klondike. The Canadian authorities required each person to bring a year&#x27;s supply of food in order to prevent starvation. In all, the Klondikers&#x27; equipment weighed close to a ton, which most carried themselves in stages. Performing this task and contending with the mountainous terrain and cold climate meant that most of those who persisted did not arrive until the summer of 1898. Once there, they found few opportunities, and many left disappointed.

To accommodate the prospectors, boom towns sprang up along the routes. At their terminus, Dawson City was founded at the confluence of the Klondike and Yukon rivers. From a population of 500 in 1896, the town grew to house approximately 17,000 people by summer 1898. Built of wood, isolated, and unsanitary, Dawson suffered from fires, high prices, and epidemics. Despite this, the wealthiest prospectors spent extravagantly, gambling and drinking in the saloons. The indigenous Hän, on the other hand, suffered from the rush; they were forcibly moved into a reserve to make way for the Klondikers, and many died.

Beginning in 1898, the newspapers that had encouraged so many to travel to the Klondike lost interest in it. In the summer of 1899, gold was discovered around Nome in west Alaska, and many prospectors left the Klondike for the new goldfields, marking the end of the Klondike Rush. The boom towns declined, and the population of Dawson City fell. Gold mining production in the Klondike peaked in 1903 after heavier equipment was brought in. Since then, the Klondike has been mined on and off, and its legacy continues to draw tourists to the region and contribute to its prosperity.

== Background ==
The indigenous peoples in north-west America had traded in copper nuggets prior to European expansion. Most of the tribes were aware that gold existed in the region, but the metal was not valued by them. The Russians and the Hudson&#x27;s Bay Company had both explored the Yukon in the first half of the 19th century, but ignored the rumours of gold in favour of fur trading, which offered more immediate profits.

In the second half of the 19th century, American prospectors began to spread into the area. Making deals with the Native Tlingit and Tagish tribes, the early prospectors opened the important routes of Chilkoot and White Pass and reached the Yukon valley between 1870 and 1890. Here, they encountered the Hän people, semi-nomadic hunters and fishermen who lived along the Yukon and Klondike Rivers. The Hän did not appear to know about the extent of the gold deposits in the region.

In 1883, Ed Schieffelin identified gold deposits along the Yukon River, and an expedition up the Fortymile River in 1886 discovered considerable amounts of it and founded Fortymile City. The same year gold had been found on the banks of the Klondike River, but in small amounts and with no claims being made. By late 1886, several hundred miners were working their way along the Yukon valley, living in small mining camps and trading with the Hän. On the Alaskan side of the border, Circle City, a logtown, was established in 1893 on the Yukon River. In three years it grew to become &quot;the Paris of Alaska&quot;, with about 1,200 inhabitants, saloons, opera houses, schools, and libraries. In 1896, it was so well-known that a correspondent from the Chicago &quot;Daily Record&quot; came to visit. At the end of the year, it became a ghost town, when large gold deposits were found upstream on the Klondike.

== Discovery (1896) ==

On August 16, 1896, an American prospector named George Carmack and two Tagish men, Skookum Jim (Keish), and Tagish Charlie (K̲áa Goox̱) were travelling south of the Klondike River. Following a suggestion from Robert Henderson, a Canadian prospector, they began looking for gold on Bonanza Creek, then called Rabbit Creek, one of the Klondike&#x27;s tributaries. It is not clear who discovered the gold: George Carmack or Skookum Jim, but the group agreed to let George Carmack appear as the official discoverer because they feared that authorities would not recognize an indigenous claimant.

In any event, gold was present along the river in huge quantities. Carmack measured out four strips of ground for mining along the river - two for himself as the discoverer and one each for Jim and Charlie. These claims were registered the next day at the police post at the mouth of the Fortymile River and news spread rapidly from there to other mining camps in the Yukon River valley.

By the end of August, all of Bonanza Creek had been claimed by miners. A prospector then advanced up into one of the creeks feeding into Bonanza, later to be named Eldorado Creek. He discovered new sources of gold there, which would prove to be even richer than those on Bonanza. Claims began to be sold between miners and speculators for considerable sums. Just before Christmas, word of the gold reached Circle City. Despite the winter, many prospectors immediately left for the Klondike by dog-sled, eager to reach the region before the best claims were taken. The outside world was still largely unaware of the news, and although Canadian officials had managed to send a message to their superiors in Ottawa about the finds and influx of prospectors, the government did not give it much attention. The winter prevented river traffic, and it was not until June 1897 that the first boats left the area, carrying the freshly mined gold and the full story of the discoveries.

== Beginning of the stampede (July 1897)==

In the resulting Klondike stampede, an estimated 100,000 people tried to reach the Klondike goldfields, of whom only around 30,000 to 40,000 eventually did. It formed the height of the Klondike gold rush from the summer of 1897 until the summer of 1898.

It began on July 14, 1897, in San Francisco and was spurred further three days later in Seattle, when the first of the early prospectors returned from the Klondike, bringing with them large amounts of gold on the ships &quot;Excelsior&quot; and &quot;Portland&quot;. The press reported that a total of $1,139,000 (equivalent to $1 billion at 2010 prices) had been brought in by these ships, although this proved to be an underestimate. The migration of prospectors caught so much attention that it was joined by outfitters, writers and photographers.

Various factors lay behind this sudden mass response. Economically, the news had reached the US at the height of a series of financial recessions and bank failures in the 1890s. The gold standard of the time tied paper money to the production of gold and shortages towards the end of the 19th century meant that gold dollars were rapidly increasing in value ahead of paper currencies and being hoarded. This had contributed to the Panic of 1893 and Panic of 1896, which caused unemployment and financial uncertainty. There was a huge, unresolved demand for gold across the developed world that the Klondike promised to fulfil and, for individuals, the region promised higher wages or financial security.

Psychologically, the Klondike, as historian Pierre Berton describes, was &quot;just far enough away to be romantic and just close enough to be accessible&quot;. Furthermore, the Pacific ports closest to the gold strikes were desperate to encourage trade and travel to the region. The mass journalism of the period promoted the event and the human interest stories that lay behind it. A worldwide publicity campaign engineered largely by Erastus Brainerd, a Seattle newspaperman, helped establish that city as the premier supply centre and the departure point for the gold fields.

The prospectors came from many nations, although an estimated majority of 60 to 80 percent were Americans or recent immigrants to America. Most had no experience in the mining industry, being clerks or salesmen. Mass resignations of staff to join the gold rush became notorious. In Seattle, this included the mayor, twelve policemen, and a significant percentage of the city&#x27;s streetcar drivers.

Some stampeders were famous: John McGraw, the former governor of Washington, joined, together with the prominent lawyer and sportsman A. Balliot. Frederick Burnham, a well-known American scout and explorer, arrived from Africa, only to be called back to take part in the Second Boer War. Among those who documented the rush was the Swedish-born photographer Eric Hegg, who took some of the iconic pictures of Chilkoot Pass, and reporter Tappan Adney, who afterwards wrote a first-hand history of the stampede. Jack London, later a famous American writer, left to seek for gold but made his money during the rush mostly by working for prospectors.

Seattle and San Francisco competed fiercely for business during the rush, with Seattle winning the larger share of trade. Indeed, one of the first to join the gold rush was William D. Wood, the mayor of Seattle, who resigned and formed a company to transport prospectors to the Klondike. 
The publicity around the gold rush led to a flurry of equipment adding &quot;Klondike&quot; to the name, allegedly designed for the northwest. Guidebooks offered advice about routes, equipment, mining, and capital necessary for the enterprise. The newspapers of the time termed this phenomenon &quot;Klondicitis&quot;.

== Routes to the Klondike ==

The Klondike could be reached only by the Yukon River, either upstream from its delta, downstream from its head, or from somewhere in the middle through its tributaries. River boats could navigate the Yukon in the summer from the delta until a point called Whitehorse, above the Klondike. Travel, in general, was made difficult by both terrain and climate. The region was mountainous, the rivers winding and sometimes impassable; summers, albeit short, still brought heat, while during the long winters, temperatures could drop below −50 °C (−58 °F).

Aids for the travellers to carry their supplies varied; some had brought dogs, horses, mules, or oxen, whereas others had to rely on carrying their equipment on their backs or on sleds pulled by hand. Shortly after the stampede began in 1897, the Canadian authorities had introduced rules requiring anyone entering Yukon Territory to bring with them a year&#x27;s supply of food; typically this weighed around . By the time camping equipment, tools and other essentials were included, a typical traveller was transporting as much as a ton in weight. Unsurprisingly, the price of draft animals soared; at Dyea, even poor quality horses could sell for as much as $700 ($19,000), or be rented out for $40 ($1,100) a day.

From Seattle or San Francisco, prospectors could travel by sea up the coast to the ports of Alaska. The route following the coast is now referred to as the Inside Passage. It led to the ports of Dyea and Skagway plus ports of nearby trails. The sudden increase in demand encouraged a range of vessels to be pressed into service including old paddle wheelers, fishing boats, barges, and coal ships still full of coal dust. All were overloaded and many sank.

=== All water routes ===

It was possible to sail all the way to the Klondike, first from Seattle across the northern Pacific to the Alaskan coast. From St. Michael, at the Yukon River delta, a river boat could then take the prospectors the rest of the way up the river to Dawson, often guided by one of the Native Koyukon people who lived near St. Michael. Although this all-water route, also called &quot;the rich man&#x27;s route&quot;, was expensive and long – in total – it had the attraction of speed and avoiding overland travel. At the beginning of the stampede a ticket could be bought for $150 ($4,050) while during the winter 1897–98 the fare settled at $1,000 ($27,000).

In 1897, some 1,800 travellers attempted this route but the vast majority were caught along the river when the region iced over in October. Only 43 reached the Klondike before winter and of those 35 had to return, having thrown away their equipment en route to reach their destination in time. The remainder mostly found themselves stranded in isolated camps and settlements along the ice-covered river often in desperate circumstances.

=== Dyea/Skagway routes ===

Most of the prospectors landed at the southeast Alaskan towns of Dyea and Skagway, both located at the head of the natural Lynn Canal at the end of the Inside Passage. From there, they needed to travel over the mountain ranges into Canada&#x27;s Yukon Territory, and then down the river network to the Klondike. Along the trails, tent camps sprung up at places where prospectors had to stop to eat or sleep or at obstacles such as the icy lakes at the head of the Yukon. At the start of the rush, a ticket from Seattle to the port of Dyea cost $40 ($1,100) for a cabin. Premiums of $100 ($2,700), however, were soon paid and the steamship companies hesitated to post their rates in advance since they could increase on a daily basis.

====White Pass trail====
Those who landed at Skagway made their way over the White Pass before cutting across to Bennett Lake. Although the trail began gently, it progressed over several mountains with paths as narrow as and in wider parts covered with boulders and sharp rocks. Under these conditions horses died in huge numbers, giving the route the informal name of Dead Horse Trail. The volumes of travellers and the wet weather made the trail impassable and, by late 1897, it was closed until further notice, leaving around 5,000 stranded in Skagway.

An alternative toll road suitable for wagons was eventually constructed and this, combined with colder weather that froze the muddy ground, allowed the White Pass to reopen, and prospectors began to make their way into Canada. Moving supplies and equipment over the pass had to be done in stages. Most divided their belongings into packages that could be carried on a man&#x27;s back, or heavier loads that could be pulled by hand on a sled. Ferrying packages forwards and walking back for more, a prospector would need about thirty round trips, a distance of at least , before they had moved all of their supplies to the end of the trail. Even using a heavy sled, a strong man would be covering and need around 90 days to reach Lake Bennett.

====Chilkoot trail====
Those who landed at Dyea, Skagway&#x27;s neighbour town, travelled the Chilkoot Trail and crossed its pass to reach Lake Lindeman, which fed into Lake Bennett at the head of the Yukon River. The Chilkoot Pass was higher than the White Pass, but more used it: around 22,000 during the gold rush. The trail passed up through camps until it reached a flat ledge, just before the main ascent, which was too steep for animals. This location was known as the Scales, and was where goods were weighed before travellers officially entered Canada. The cold, the steepness and the weight of equipment made the climb extremely arduous and it could take a day to get to the top of the high slope.

As on the White Pass trail, supplies needed to be broken down into smaller packages and carried in relay. Packers, prepared to carry supplies for cash, were available along the route but would charge up to $1 ($27) per lb (0.45 kg) on the later stages; many of these packers were natives: Tlingits or, less commonly, Tagish. Avalanches were common in the mountains and, on April 3, 1898, one claimed the lives of more than 60 people travelling over Chilkoot Pass.

Entrepreneurs began to provide solutions as the winter progressed. Steps were cut into the ice at the Chilkoot Pass which could be used for a daily fee, this 1,500 step staircase becoming known as the &quot;Golden Steps&quot;. By December 1897, Archie Burns built a tramway up the final parts of the Chilkoot Pass. A horse at the bottom turned a wheel, which pulled a rope running to the top and back; freight was loaded on sledges pulled by the rope. Five more tramways soon followed, one powered by a steam engine, charging between 8 and 30 cents ($2 and $8) per . An aerial tramway was built in the spring of 1898, able to move 9 tonnes of goods an hour up to the summit.

====Head of Yukon River====

At Lakes Bennett and Lindeman, the prospectors camped to build rafts or boats that would take them the final down the Yukon to Dawson City in the spring. 7,124 boats of varying size and quality left in May 1898; by that time, the forests around the lakes had been largely cut down for timber. The river posed a new problem. Above Whitehorse, it was dangerous, with several rapids along the Miles Canyon through to the White Horse Rapids.

After many boats were wrecked and several hundred people died, the North-West Mounted Police (NWMP) introduced safety rules, vetting the boats carefully and forbidding women and children to travel through the rapids. Additional rules stated that any boat carrying passengers required a licensed pilot, typically costing $25 ($680), although some prospectors simply unpacked their boats and let them drift unmanned through the rapids with the intent of walking down to collect them on the other side. During the summer, a horse-powered rail-tramway was built by Norman Macaulay, capable of carrying boats and equipment through the canyon at $25 ($680) a time, removing the need for prospectors to navigate the rapids.

====Parallel trails====

There were a few more trails established during 1898 from South-east Alaska to the Yukon River. One was the Dalton trail: starting from Pyramid Harbour, close to Dyea, it went across the Chilkat Pass some miles west of Chilkoot and turned north to the Yukon River, a distance of about . This was created by Jack Dalton as a summer route, intended for cattle and horses, and Dalton charged a toll of $250 ($6,800) for its use.

The Takou route started from Juneau and went north-east to Teslin Lake. From here, it followed a river to the Yukon, where it met the Dyea and Skagway route at a point halfway to the Klondike. It meant dragging and poling canoes up-river and through mud together with crossing a mountain along a narrow trail.

Finally, there was the Stikine route starting from the port of Wrangell further south-east of Skagway. This route went up the uneasy Stikine River to Glenora, the . From Glenora, prospectors would have to carry their supplies to Teslin Lake where it, like the Takou route, met the Yukon River system.

=== All-Canadian routes ===

An alternative to the South-east Alaskan ports were the All-Canadian routes, so-called because they mostly stayed on Canadian soil throughout their journey. These were popular with British and Canadians for patriotic reasons and because they avoided American customs. The first of these, around in length, started from Ashcroft in British Columbia and crossed swamps, river gorges, and mountains until it met with the Stikine River route at Glenora. From Glenora, prospectors would face the same difficulties as those who came from Wrangell. At least 1,500 men attempted to travel along the Ashcroft route and 5,000 along the Stikine. The mud and the slushy ice of the two routes proved exhausting, killing or incapacitating the pack animals and creating chaos amongst the travellers.

Three more routes started from Edmonton, Alberta; these were not much better – barely trails at all – despite being advertised as &quot;the inside track&quot; and the &quot;back door to the Klondike&quot;. One, the &quot;overland route&quot;, headed north-west from Edmonton, ultimately meeting the Peace River and then continuing on overland to the Klondike, crossing the Liard River en route. To encourage travel via Edmonton, the government hired T.W. Chalmers to build a trail, which became known as the Klondike Trail or Chalmers Trail. The other two trails, known as the &quot;water routes&quot;, involved more river travel. One went by boat along rivers and overland to the Yukon River system at Pelly River and from there to Dawson. Another went north of Dawson by the Mackenzie River to Fort McPherson, before entering Alaska and meeting the Yukon River at Fort Yukon, downstream to the Klondike. From here, the boat and equipment had to be pulled up the Yukon about . An estimated 1,660 travellers took these three routes, of whom only 685 arrived, some taking up to 18 months to make the journey.

==== &quot;All-American&quot; route ====

An equivalent to the All-Canadian routes was the &quot;All-American route&quot;, which aimed to reach the Yukon from the port of Valdez, which lay further along the Alaskan coast from Skagway. This, it was hoped, would evade the Canadian customs posts and provide an American-controlled route into the interior. From late 1897 onwards 3,500 men and women attempted it; delayed by the winter snows, fresh efforts were made in the spring.

In practice, the huge Valdez glacier that stood between the port and the Alaskan interior proved almost insurmountable and only 200 managed to climb it; by 1899, the cold and scurvy was causing many deaths amongst the rest. Other prospectors attempted an alternative route across the Malaspina Glacier just to the east, suffering even greater hardships. Those who did manage to cross it found themselves having to negotiate miles of wilderness before they could reach Dawson. Their expedition was forced to turn back the same way they had come, with only four men surviving.

=== Border control ===

The borders in South-east Alaska were disputed between the US, Canada and Britain since the American purchase of Alaska from Russia in 1867. The US and Canada both claimed the ports of Dyea and Skagway. This, combined with the numbers of American prospectors, the quantities of gold being mined and the difficulties in exercising government authority in such a remote area, made the control of the borders a sensitive issue.

Early on in the gold rush, the US Army sent a small detachment to Circle City, in case intervention was required in the Klondike, while the Canadian government considered excluding all American prospectors from the Yukon Territory. Neither eventuality took place and instead the US agreed to make Dyea a sub-port of entry for Canadians, allowing British ships to land Canadian passengers and goods freely there, while Canada agreed to permit American miners to operate in the Klondike. Both decisions were unpopular among their domestic publics: American businessmen complained that their right to a monopoly on regional trade was being undermined, while the Canadian public demanded action against the American miners.

The North-West Mounted Police set up control posts at the borders of the Yukon Territory or, where that was disputed, at easily controlled points such as the Chilkoot and White Passes. These units were armed with Maxim guns. Their tasks included enforcing the rules requiring that travellers bring a year&#x27;s supply of food with them to be allowed into the Yukon Territory, checking for illegal weapons, preventing the entry of criminals and enforcing customs duties.

This last task was particularly unpopular with American prospectors, who faced paying an average of 25 percent of the value of their goods and supplies. The Mounties had a reputation for running these posts honestly, although accusations were made that they took bribes. Prospectors, on the other hand, tried to smuggle prize items like silk and whiskey across the pass in tins and bales of hay: the former item for the ladies, the latter for the saloons.

== Mining ==
Of the estimated 30,000 to 40,000 people who reached Dawson City during the gold rush, only around 15,000 to 20,000 finally became prospectors. Of these, no more than 4,000 struck gold and only a few hundred became rich. By the time most of the stampeders arrived in 1898, the best creeks had all been claimed, either by the long-term miners in the region or by the first arrivals of the year before. The Bonanza, Eldorado, Hunker, and Dominion Creeks were all taken, with almost 10,000 claims recorded by the authorities by July 1898; a new prospector would have to look further afield to find a claim of his own.

Geologically, the region was permeated with veins of gold, forced to the surface by volcanic action and then worn away by the action of rivers and streams, leaving nuggets and gold dust in deposits known as placer gold. Some ores lay along the creek beds in lines of soil, typically to beneath the surface. Others, formed by even older streams, lay along the hilltops; these deposits were called &quot;bench gold&quot;. Finding the gold was challenging. Initially, miners had assumed that all the gold would be along the existing creeks, and it was not until late in 1897 that the hilltops began to be mined. Gold was also unevenly distributed, which made the prediction of good mining sites uncertain without exploratory digging.

=== Methods ===

Mining began with clearing the ground of vegetation and debris. Prospect holes were then dug in an attempt to find the ore or &quot;pay streak&quot;. If these holes looked productive, proper digging could commence, aiming down to the bedrock, where the majority of the gold was found. The digging would be carefully monitored in case the operation needed to be shifted to allow for changes in the flow.

In the sub-Arctic climate of the Klondike, a layer of hard permafrost lay only below the surface. Traditionally, this had meant that mining in the region only occurred during the summer months, but the pressure of the gold rush made such a delay unacceptable. Late 19th-century technology existed for dealing with this problem, including hydraulic mining and stripping, and dredging. Still, the heavy equipment required for this could not be brought into the Klondike during the gold rush.

Instead, the miners relied on wood fires to soften the ground to a depth of about and then remove the resulting gravel. The process was repeated until the gold was reached. In theory, no support of the shaft was necessary because of the permafrost although in practice sometimes the fire melted the permafrost and caused collapses. Fires could also produce harmful gases, which had to be removed by bellows or other tools. The resulting &quot;dirt&quot; brought out of the mines froze quickly in winter and could be processed only during the warmer summer months. An alternative, more efficient, approach called steam thawing was devised between 1897 and 1898; this used a furnace to pump steam directly into the ground, but since it required additional equipment it was not a widespread technique during the years of the rush.
In the summer, water would sluice and pan the dirt, separating the heavier gold from gravel. This required miners to construct sluices, which were sequences of wooden boxes long, through which the dirt would be washed; up to 20 of these might be needed for each mining operation. The sluices in turn required much water, usually produced by creating a dam and ditches or crude pipes. &quot;Bench gold&quot; mining on the hill sides could not use sluice lines because water could not be pumped that high up. Instead, these mines used rockers, boxes that moved back and forth like a cradle, to create the motion needed for separation. Finally, the resulting gold dust could be exported out of the Klondike; exchanged for paper money at the rate of $16 ($430) per troy ounce (ozt)() through one of the major banks that opened in Dawson City, or simply used as money when dealing with local traders.

=== Business ===

Successful mining took time and capital, particularly once most of the timber around the Klondike had been cut down. A realistic mining operation required $1,500 ($42,000) for wood to be burned to melt the ground, along with around $1,000 ($28,000) to construct a dam, $1,500 ($42,000) for ditches and up to $600 ($16,800) for sluice boxes, a total of $4,600 ($128,800). The attraction of the Klondike to a prospector, however, was that when gold was found, it was often highly concentrated. Some of the creeks in the Klondike were fifteen times richer in gold than those in California, and richer still than those in South Africa. In just two years, for example, $230,000 ($6,440,000) worth of gold was brought up from claim 29 on the Eldorado Creek.

Under Canadian law, miners first had to get a licence, either when they arrived at Dawson or en route from Victoria in Canada. They could then prospect for gold and when they had found a suitable location, lay a claim to mining rights over it. To stake a claim, a prospector would drive stakes into the ground a measured distance apart and then return to Dawson to register the claim for $15 ($410). This normally had to be done within three days, and by 1897 only one claim per person at a time was allowed in a district, although married couples could exploit a loophole that allowed the wife to register a claim in her own name, doubling their amount of land.

The claim could be mined freely for a year, after which a $100 ($2,800) fee had to be paid annually. Should the prospector leave the claim for more than three days without good reason, another miner could make a claim on the land. The Canadian government also charged a royalty of between 10 and 20 percent on the value of gold taken from a claim.

Traditionally, a mining claim had been granted over a long stretch of a creek, including the land from one side of the valley to another. The Canadian authorities had tried to reduce this length to , but under pressure from miners had been forced to agree to . The only exception to this was a &quot;Discovery&quot; claim, the first to be made on a creek, which could be long. The exact lengths of claims were often challenged and when the government surveyor William Ogilvie conducted surveys to settle disputes, he found some claims exceeded the official limit. The excess fractions of land then became available as claims and were sometimes quite valuable.

Claims could be bought. However, their price depended on whether they had been yet proved to contain gold. A prospector with capital might consider taking a risk on an &quot;unproved&quot; claim on one of the better creeks for $5,000 ($140,000); a wealthier miner could buy a &quot;proved&quot; mine for $50,000 ($1,400,000). The well known claim eight on Eldorado Creek was sold for as much as $350,000 ($9,800,000). Prospectors were also allowed to hire others to work for them. Enterprising miners such as Alex McDonald set about amassing mines and employees. Leveraging his acquisitions with short-term loans, by the autumn of 1897 McDonald had purchased 28 claims, estimated to be worth millions. Swiftwater Bill famously borrowed heavily against his claim on the Eldorado creek, relying on hired hands to mine the gold to keep up his interest payments.

The less fortunate prospectors soon found themselves destitute. Some sold their equipment and return south while others took manual jobs, either in mines or in Dawson. The typical daily pay of $15 ($410) was high by external standards, but low compared to the local cost of living. The possibility that a new creek might produce gold, however, continued to tempt poorer prospectors and caused small stampedes around the Klondike throughout the gold rush.

== Life in the Klondike ==
The massive influx of prospectors drove the formation of boom towns along the routes of the stampede, with Dawson City in the Klondike the largest. The new towns were crowded, often chaotic and many disappeared just as soon as they came. Most stampeders were men but women also travelled to the region, typically as the wife of a prospector. Some women entertained in gambling and dance halls built by business men and women who were encouraged by the lavish spending of successful miners.

Dawson remained relatively lawful, protected by the Canadian NWMP, which meant that gambling and prostitution were accepted while robbery and murder were kept low. By contrast, especially the port of Skagway under US jurisdiction in Southeast Alaska became infamous for its criminal underworld. The extreme climate and remoteness of the region in general meant that supplies and communication with the outside world including news and mail were scarce.

=== Boomtowns ===
The ports of Dyea and Skagway, through which most of the prospectors entered, were tiny settlements before the gold rush, Skagway consisting of only a single log cabin, and Dyea comprising a handful of Tlingit houses and the Healy &amp; Wilson trading store. Because there were no docking facilities, ships had to unload their cargo directly onto the beach, where people tried to move their goods before high tide. Inevitably cargos were lost in the process. Some travellers had arrived intending to supply goods and services to the would-be miners; some of these in turn, realizing how difficult it would be to reach Dawson, chose to do the same. Within weeks, storehouses, saloons, and offices lined the muddy streets of Dyea and Skagway, surrounded by tents and .

Skagway became famous in international media; the author John Muir described the town as &quot;a nest of ants taken into a strange country and stirred up by a stick&quot;. While Dyea remained a transit point throughout the winter, Skagway began to take on a more permanent character. Skagway also built wharves out into the bay in order to attract a greater share of the prospectors. The town was effectively lawless, dominated by drinking, gunfire and prostitution. The visiting NWMP Superintendent Sam Steele noted that it was &quot;little better than a hell on earth ... about the roughest place in the world&quot;. Nonetheless, by the summer of 1898, with a population—including migrants—of between 15,000 and 20,000, Skagway was the largest city in Alaska.

In early 1898 Skagway fell under the control of Jefferson Randolph &quot;Soapy&quot; Smith and his men, who arrived from Seattle shortly after Skagway began to expand. He was an American confidence man whose gang, 200 to 300 strong, cheated and stole from the prospectors travelling through the region. He maintained the illusion of being an upstanding member of the community, opening three saloons as well as creating fake businesses to assist in his operations. One of his scams was a fake telegraph office charging to send messages all over the US and Canada, often pretending to receive a reply. Opposition to Smith steadily grew and, after weeks of vigilante activity, he was killed in Skagway during the shootout on Juneau Wharf on July 8, 1898.

Other towns also boomed. Wrangell, port of the Stikine route and boom town from earlier gold rushes, increased in size again, with robberies, gambling and nude female dancing commonplace. Valdez, formed on the Gulf of Alaska during the attempt to create the &quot;All-American&quot; route to the Klondike during the winter of 1897–1898, became a tent city of people who stayed behind to supply the ill-fated attempts to reach the interior. Edmonton, Alberta (at that time, the District of Alberta in the Northwest Territories), Canada, increased from a population of 1,200 before the gold rush to 4,000 during 1898. Beyond the immediate region, cities such as San Francisco, Seattle, Tacoma, Portland, Vancouver and Victoria all saw their populations soar as a result of the stampede and the trade it brought along.

=== Dawson City ===
Dawson City was founded in the early years of the Klondike goldrush, when prospector Joe Ladue and shopkeeper Arthur Harper decided to 
make a profit from the influx to the Klondike. The two men bought of the mudflats at the junction of the Klondike and Yukon rivers from the government and laid out the street plan for a new town, bringing in timber and other supplies to sell to the migrants. The Hän village of Tr&#x27;ochëk along Deer Creek was considered to be too close to the new town, and the NWMP Superintendent Charles Constantine moved its inhabitants down-river to a small reserve. The town, in the beginning simply known as &quot;Harper and Ladue town site&quot;, was named Dawson City after the director of Canada&#x27;s Geographical Survey. It grew rapidly to hold 500 people by the winter of 1896, with plots of land selling for $500 ($14,000) each.

In the spring of 1898, the Dawson area population, including the surrounding gold fields, rose further to 30,000 as stampeders arrived over the passes. The centre of the town, Front Street, was lined with hastily built buildings and warehouses, together with log cabins and tents spreading out across the rest of the settlement. There was no running water or sewerage, and only two springs for drinking water to supplement the increasingly polluted river. In spring, the unpaved streets were churned into thick mud and in summer the settlement reeked of human effluent and was plagued by flies and mosquitoes. Land in Dawson was now scarce, and plots sold for up to $10,000 ($280,000) each; prime locations on Front Street could reach $20,000 ($560,000) while a small log cabin might rent for $100 ($2,800) a month. As a result, Dawson&#x27;s population spread south into the empty Hän village, renaming it Klondike City. Other communities emerged closer to the mines, such as Granville on Dominion Creek and Grand Forks on Bonanza Creek.

The newly built town proved highly vulnerable to fire. Houses were made of wood, heated with stoves and lit by candles and oil lamps; water for emergencies was wanting, especially in the frozen winters. The first major fire occurred on November 25, 1897, started accidentally by dance-hall girl Belle Mitchell. She also accidentally started a second major fire on October 14, 1898, which, in the absence of a fire brigade in Dawson, destroyed two major saloons, the post-office building and the Bank of British North America at a cost of $500,000 ($14,000,000). The worst fire occurred on April 26, 1899, when a saloon caught fire in the middle of a strike by the newly established fire brigade. Most of the major landmarks in the town were burned to the ground: 117 buildings were destroyed, with the damage estimated at over $1 million ($28,000,000).

==== Logistics ====

The remoteness of Dawson proved an ongoing problem for the supply of food, and as the population grew to 5,000 in 1897, this became critical. When the rivers iced over, it became clear that there would not be enough food for that winter. The NWMP evacuated some prospectors without supplies to Fort Yukon in Alaska from September 30 onwards, while others made their way out of the Klondike in search of food and shelter for the winter.

Prices remained high in Dawson and supply fluctuated according to the season. During the winter of 1897 salt became worth its weight in gold, while nails, vital for construction work, rose in price to $28 ($784) per lb (0.45 kg). Cans of butter sold for $5 ($140) each. The only eight horses in Dawson were slaughtered for dog food as they could not be kept alive over the winter. The first fresh goods arriving in the spring of 1898 sold for record prices, eggs reaching $3 ($84) each and apples $1 ($28).

Scurvy, a potentially fatal illness caused by the lack of vitamin C, became a problem, particularly during the winter where fresh food was unavailable. English prospectors gave it the telling name of &quot;Canadian black leg&quot;. It struck, among others, writer Jack London and, although not fatal in his case, brought an end to his mining career. Dysentery and malaria were also common in Dawson, and an epidemic of typhoid broke out in July and ran rampant throughout the summer. Up to 140 patients were taken into the newly constructed St Mary&#x27;s Hospital and thousands were affected. Measures were taken by the following year to prevent further outbreaks, including the introduction of better sewage management and the piping in of water from further upstream. These gave improvements in 1899, although typhoid remained a problem. The new Hän reserve, however, lay downstream from Dawson City, and here the badly contaminated river continued to contribute to epidemics of typhoid and diphtheria throughout the gold rush.

==== Conspicuous consumption ====
Despite these challenges, the huge quantities of gold coming through Dawson City encouraged a lavish lifestyle amongst the richer prospectors. Saloons were typically open 24 hours a day, with whiskey the standard drink. Gambling was popular, with the major saloons each running their own rooms; a culture of high stakes evolved, with rich prospectors routinely betting $1,000 ($28,000) at dice or playing for a $5,000 ($140,000) poker pot. The establishments around Front Street had grand façades in a Parisian style, mirrors and plate-glass windows and, from late 1898, were lit by electric light. The dance halls in Dawson were particularly prestigious and major status symbols, both for customers and their owners. Wealthy prospectors were expected to drink champagne at $60 ($1,660) a bottle, and the Pavilion dancehall cost its owner, Charlie Kimball, as much as $100,000 ($2,800,000) to construct and decorate. Elaborate opera houses were built, bringing singers and specialty acts to Dawson.

Tales abounded of prospectors spending huge sums on entertainment — Jimmy McMahon once spent $28,000 ($784,000) in a single evening, for example. Most payments were made in gold dust and in places like saloons, there was so much spilled gold that a profit could be made just by sweeping the floor. Some of the richest prospectors lived flamboyantly in Dawson. Swiftwater Bill, a gambler who rarely went anywhere without wearing silk and diamonds, was one of them. When he discovered the woman he was in love with (who liked eggs, an expensive luxury) was dining with another man, he allegedly bought all the eggs in Dawson, had them boiled and fed them to dogs. Another miner, Frank Conrad, threw a sequence of gold objects onto a ship as tokens of his esteem when his favourite singer left Dawson City. The wealthiest dance-hall girls followed suit: Daisy D&#x27;Avara had a belt made for herself from $340 ($9,520) in gold dollar coins; another, Gertie Lovejoy, had a diamond inserted between her two front teeth. The miner and businessman Alex McDonald, despite being styled the &quot;King of the Klondike&quot;, was unusual amongst his peers for his lack of grandiose spending.

==== Law and order ====
Unlike its American equivalents, Dawson City was a law-abiding town. By 1897, 96 members of the NWMP had been sent to the district and by 1898, this had increased to 288, an expensive commitment by the Canadian government. By June 1898, the force was headed by Colonel Sam Steele, an officer with a reputation for firm discipline. In 1898, there were no murders and only a few major thefts; in all, only about 150 arrests were made in the Yukon for serious offences that year. Of these arrests, over half were for prostitution and resulted from an attempt by the NWMP to regulate the sex industry in Dawson: regular monthly arrests, $50 ($1,400) fines and medical inspections were imposed, with the proceeds being used to fund the local hospitals. The so-called blue laws were strictly enforced. Saloons and other establishments closed promptly at midnight on Saturday, and anyone caught working on Sunday was liable to be fined or set to chopping firewood for the NWMP. The NWMP are generally regarded by historians to have been an efficient and honest force during the period, although their task was helped by the geography of the Klondike which made it relatively easy to bar entry to undesirables or prevent suspects from leaving the region.

In contrast to the NWMP, the early civil authorities were criticized by the prospectors for being inept and potentially corrupt. Thomas Fawcett was the gold commissioner and temporary head of the Klondike administration at the start of the gold rush; he was accused of keeping the details of new claims secret and allowing what historian Kathryn Winslow termed &quot;carelessness, ignorance and partiality&quot; to reign in the mine recorder&#x27;s office. Following campaigns against him by prospectors, who were backed by the local press, Fawcett was relieved by the Canadian government. His successor, Major James Morrow Walsh, was considered a stronger character and arrived in May 1898, but fell ill and returned east in July. It was left to his replacement, William Ogilvie, supported by a Royal Commission, to conduct reforms. The Commission, in lack of evidence, cleared Fawcett of all charges, which meant that he was not punished further than being relieved. Ogilvie proved a much stronger administrator and subsequently revisited many of the mining surveys of his predecessors.

=== News and mail ===
In the remote Klondike, there was great demand for news and contact with the world outside. During the first months of the stampede in 1897, it was said that no news was too old to be read. In the lack of newspapers, some prospectors would read can labels until they knew them by heart. The following year, two teams fought their way over the passes to reach Dawson City first, complete with printing-presses, with the aim of gaining control of the newspaper market. Gene Kelly, the editor of the &quot;Klondike Nugget&quot; arrived first, but without his equipment, and it was the team behind the &quot;Midnight Sun&quot; who produced the first daily newspaper in Dawson. The &quot;Dawson Miner&quot; followed shortly after, bringing the number of daily newspapers in the town during the gold rush up to three. The &quot;Nugget&quot; sold for $24 ($680) as an annual subscription, and became well known for championing miners and for its lucid coverage of scandals. Paper was often hard to find and during the winter of 1898–99, the &quot;Nugget&quot; had to be printed on butcher&#x27;s wrapping paper. News could also be told. In June, 1898, a prospector bought an edition of the Seattle Post-Intelligencer at an auction and charged spectators a dollar each to have it read aloud in one of Dawson&#x27;s halls.

Mail service was chaotic during the stampede. Apart from the number of prospectors, two major obstacles stood in its way. To begin with, any mail from America to Dawson City was sent to Juneau in South-east Alaska before being sent through Dawson and then down the Yukon to Circle City. From here it was then distributed by the US Post Office back up to Dawson. The huge distances involved resulted in delays of several months and frequently the loss of protective envelopes and their addresses. The second problem was in Dawson itself, which initially lacked a post office and therefore relied on two stores and a saloon to act as informal delivery points. The NWMP were tasked to run the mail system by October 1897, but they were ill-trained to do so. Up to 5,700 letters might arrive in a single shipment, all of which had to be collected in person from the post office. This resulted in huge queues, with claimants lining up outside the office for up to three days. Those who had no time and could afford it would pay others to stand in line for them, preferably a woman since they were allowed to get ahead in line out of politeness. Postage stamps, like paper in general, were scarce and rationed to two per customer. By 1899, trained postal staff took over mail delivery and relieved the NWMP of this task.

=== Role of women ===

In 1898 eight percent of those living in the Klondike territory were women, and in towns like Dawson this rose to 12 percent. Many women arrived with their husbands or families, but others travelled alone. Most came to the Klondike for similar economic and social reasons as male prospectors, but they attracted particular media interest. The gender imbalance in the Klondike encouraged business proposals to ship young, single women into the region to marry newly wealthy miners; few, if any, of these marriages ever took place, but some single women appear to have travelled on their own in the hope of finding prosperous husbands. Guidebooks gave recommendations for what practical clothes women should take to the Klondike: the female dress code of the time was formal, emphasising long skirts and corsets, but most women adapted this for the conditions of the trails. Regardless of experience, women in a party were typically expected to cook for the group. Few mothers brought their children with them due to the risks of the travel.

Once in the Klondike, very few women—less than one percent—actually worked as miners. Many were married to miners; however, their lives as partners on the gold fields were still hard and often lonely. They had extensive domestic duties, including thawing ice and snow for water, breaking up frozen food, chopping wood and collecting wild foods. In Dawson and other towns, some women took in laundry to make money. This was a physically demanding job but could be relatively easily combined with child care duties. Others took jobs in the service industry, for example as waitresses or seamstresses, which could pay well, but were often punctuated by periods of unemployment. Both men and women opened roadhouses, but women were considered to be better at running them. A few women worked in the packing trade, carrying goods on their backs, or became domestic servants.
Wealthier women with capital might invest in mines and other businesses. One of the most prominent businesswomen in the Klondike was Belinda Mulrooney. She brought a consignment of cloth and hot water bottles with her when she arrived in the Klondike in early 1897, and with the proceeds of those sales she first built a roadhouse at Grand Forks and later a grand hotel in Dawson. She invested widely, including acquiring her own mining company, and was reputed to be the richest woman of the Klondike. The wealthy Martha Black was abandoned by her husband early in the journey to the Klondike but continued on without him, reaching Dawson City where she became a prominent citizen, investing in various mining and business ventures with her brother.

A relatively small number of women worked in the entertainment and sex industries. The elite of these women were the highly paid actresses and courtesans of Dawson; beneath them were chorus line dancers, who usually doubled as hostesses and other dance hall workers. While still better paid than white-collar male workers, these women worked very long hours and had significant expenses. The entertainment industry merged into the sex industry, where women made a living as prostitutes. The sex industry in the Klondike was concentrated in Klondike City and in a backstreet area of Dawson. A hierarchy of sexual employment existed, with brothels and parlour houses at the top, small independent &quot;cigar shops&quot; in the middle, and, at the bottom, the prostitutes who worked out of small huts called &quot;hutches&quot;. Life for these workers was a continual struggle and the suicide rate was high.

The degree of involvement between Indigenous women and the stampeders varied. Many Tlingit women worked as packers for the prospectors, for example, carrying supplies and equipment, sometimes also transporting their babies as well. Hän women had relatively little contact with the white immigrants, however, and there was a significant social divide between local Hän women and white women. Although before 1897 there had been a number of Indigenous women who married western men, including Kate Carmack, the Tagish wife of one of the discoverers, this practice did not survive into the stampede. Very few stampeders married Hän women, and very few Hän women worked as prostitutes. &quot;Respectable&quot; white women would avoid associating with Indigenous women or prostitutes: those who did risked scandal.

== End of the gold rush ==
By 1899 telegraphy stretched from Skagway, Alaska, to Dawson City, Yukon, allowing instant international contact. In 1898, the White Pass and Yukon Route railway began to be built between Skagway and the head of navigation on the Yukon. When it was completed in 1900, the Chilkoot trail and its tramways became obsolete. Despite these improvements in communication and transport, the rush faltered from 1898 on. It began in the summer of 1898, when many of the prospectors arriving in Dawson City found themselves unable to make a living and left for home. For those who stayed, the wages of casual work, depressed by the number of men, fell to $100 ($2,700) a month by 1899. 

The world&#x27;s newspapers began to turn against the Klondike gold rush as well. In the spring of 1898, the Spanish–American War removed Klondike from the headlines. &quot;Ah, go to the Klondike!&quot; became a popular phrase of disgust. Klondike-branded goods had to be disposed of at special rates in Seattle.

Another factor in the decline was the change in Dawson City, which had developed throughout 1898, metamorphosing from a ramshackle, if wealthy, boom town into a more sedate, conservative municipality. Modern luxuries were introduced, including &quot;zinc bath tubs, pianos, billiard tables, Brussels carpets in hotel dining rooms, menus printed in French and invitational balls&quot; as noted by historian Kathryn Winslow. Visiting Senator Jerry Lynch likened the newly paved streets with their smartly dressed inhabitants to the Strand in London. It was no longer attractive for prospectors used to a wilder way of living. Even the formerly lawless town of Skagway had become respectable by 1899.

The final trigger, however, was the discovery of gold elsewhere in Canada and Alaska, prompting a new stampede, this time away from the Klondike. In August 1898, gold had been found at Atlin Lake at the head of the Yukon River, generating a flurry of interest, but during the winter of 1898–99 much larger quantities were found at Nome. In 1899, a flood of prospectors from across the region left for Nome, about 2,500 from Dawson alone during August and September. The Klondike gold rush was over.

== Legacy ==

=== People ===
Only a few hundred of the 100,000 people who left for the Klondike during the gold rush became rich, and only a handful managed to maintain their wealth. They typically spent $1,000 ($27,000) each reaching the region, which when combined exceeded what was produced from the gold fields between 1897 and 1901. Those who did find gold often lost their fortunes in the subsequent years and died penniless attempting to reproduce their earlier good fortune. Businessman and miner Alex McDonald, for example, continued to accumulate land after the boom until his money ran out; he died in poverty, still prospecting. Antoine Stander, who discovered gold on Eldorado Creek, abused alcohol, dissipated his fortune and ended working in a ship&#x27;s kitchen to pay his way. The three discoverers had mixed fates. George Carmack left his wife Kate—who had found it difficult to adapt to their new lifestyle—remarried and lived in relative prosperity; Skookum Jim had a huge income from his mining royalties but refused to settle and continued to prospect until his death in 1916; Dawson Charlie spent lavishly and died in an alcohol-related accident.

The richest of the Klondike saloon owners, businessmen and gamblers also typically lost their fortunes and died in poverty. Gene Allen, for example, the editor of the &quot;Klondike Nugget&quot;, became bankrupt and spent the rest of his career in smaller newspapers; the prominent gambler and saloon owner Sam Bonnifield suffered a nervous breakdown and died in extreme poverty. Nonetheless, some of those who joined the gold rush prospered. Kathleen Rockwell, for example, became a famous dancer in Dawson and remained popular in America until her death. Rockwell&#x27;s tales from the North invigorated readers and audience members across the United States and Canada. Becoming known as &#x27;Klondike Kate&#x27; to those who read about her adventures, Rockwell became a star. However, her tall tales and catchy nickname were plagiarized from New Brunswicker Katherine Ryan&quot;, The Real Klondike Kate&quot;&quot;,&quot; and one of the first individuals to arrive in the Klondike not long after gold was discovered in the area. Katherine Ryan may not have received deserving recognition in the public eye, but she is remembered as one of the first women to walk the Stikine Trail, as an early suffragette, and as an integral piece of Dawson City&#x27;s culture. Dawson City was also where Alexander Pantages, her business partner and lover, started his career, going on to become one of America&#x27;s greatest theatre and movie tycoons. The businesswoman Martha Black, who had been abandoned by her husband on the way to the Klondike, remarried and ultimately became the second female member of the Parliament of Canada.

The impact of the gold rush on the Native peoples of the region was considerable. The Tlingit and the Koyukon peoples prospered in the short term from their work as guides, packers and from selling food and supplies to the prospectors. In the longer term, however, especially the Hän people living in the Klondike region suffered from the environmental damage of the gold mining on the rivers and forests. Their population had already begun to decline after the discovery of gold along Fortymile River in the 1880s but dropped catastrophically after their move to the reserve, a result of the contaminated water supply and smallpox. The Hän found only few ways to benefit economically from the gold rush and their fishing and hunting grounds were largely destroyed. By 1904 they needed aid from the NWMP to prevent famine.

===Places===
Dawson City declined after the gold rush. When journalist Laura Berton (future mother of Pierre Berton) moved to Dawson in 1907 it was still thriving, but away from Front Street, the town had become increasingly deserted, jammed, as she put it, &quot;with the refuse of the gold rush: stoves, furniture, gold-pans, sets of dishes, double-belled seltzer bottles ... piles of rusting mining machinery—boilers, winches, wheelbarrows and pumps&quot;. By 1912, only around 2,000 inhabitants remained, compared to the 30,000 of the boom years, and the site was becoming a ghost town. By 1972, 500 people were living in Dawson, while the nearby settlements created during the gold rush had been entirely abandoned. The population has grown since the 1970s, with 1,300 recorded in 2006.

During the gold rush, transport improvements meant that heavier mining equipment could be brought in and larger, more modern mines established in the Klondike, revolutionising the gold industry. Gold production increased until 1903 as a result of the dredging and hydraulic mining, but then declined; by 2005, approximately had been recovered from the Klondike area. In the 21st century, Dawson City still has a small gold mining industry, which together with tourism, taking advantage of the legacy of the gold rush, plays a role in the local economy. Many buildings in the centre of the town reflect the style of the era. The Klondike River valley was affected by the gold rush by the heavy dredging that occurred after it.

The port of Skagway also shrank after the rush, but remains a well-preserved period town, centred on the tourist industry and sightseeing trips from visiting cruise ships. The National Park Service restored Jeff Smith&#x27;s Parlor, from which the famous con man &quot;Soapy&quot; Smith once operated, during 2010–2016. Skagway also has one of the two visitor centres forming the Klondike Gold Rush National Historical Park; the other is located in Seattle, and both focus on the human interest stories behind the gold rush. By contrast, Dyea, Skagway&#x27;s neighbour and former rival, was abandoned after the gold rush and is now a ghost town. The railway built for prospectors through White Pass in the last year of the rush reopened in 1988 and is today only used by tourists, closely linked to the Chilkoot trail which is a popular hiking route.

The Tr’ondëk-Klondike World Heritage Site, a UNESCO World Heritage Site in Canada, protects a series of eight properties that attest to the effects of the rapid colonization of the area, including the Gold Rush, on the Tr’ondëk Hwëch’in people. The World Heritage Site was designated in 2023.

=== Culture === 

The events of the Klondike gold rush rapidly became embedded in North American culture, being captured in poems, stories, photographs and promotional campaigns long after the end of the stampede. In the Yukon, Discovery Day is celebrated on the third Monday in August as a holiday, and the events of the gold rush are promoted by the regional tourist industries. The events of the gold rush were frequently exaggerated at the time and modern works on the subject similarly often focus on the most dramatic and exciting events of the stampede, not always accurately. Historian Ken Coates describes the gold rush as &quot;a resilient, pliable myth&quot;, which continues to fascinate and appeal.

Several novels, books and poems were generated as a consequence of the Klondike gold rush. The writer Jack London incorporated scenes from the gold rush into his novels and short stories set in the Klondike, including &quot;The Call of the Wild&quot;, a 1903 novel about a sled dog. His colleague, poet Robert W. Service, did not join the rush himself, although he made his home in Dawson City in 1908. Service created well-known poems about the gold rush, among them &quot;Songs of a Sourdough&quot;, one of the bestselling books of poetry in the first decade of the 20th century, along with his novel, &quot;The Trail of &#x27;98&quot;, which was written by hand on wallpaper in one of Dawson&#x27;s log cabins. The Canadian historian Pierre Berton grew up in Dawson where his father had been a prospector, and wrote several historical books about the gold rush, such as &quot;The Last Great Gold Rush&quot;. The experiences of the Irish Micí Mac Gabhann resulted the posthumous work &quot;Rotha Mór an tSaoil&quot; (translated into English as &quot;The Hard Road to Klondike&quot; in 1962), a vivid description of the period.

Some terminology from the stampede made its way into North American English like &quot;&quot;, referring to newly arrived miners, and &quot;&quot;, experienced miners.
The photographs taken during the Klondike gold rush heavily influenced later cultural approaches to the stampede. The gold rush was vividly recorded by several early photographers, for instance Eric A. Hegg; these stark, black-and-white photographs showing the ascent of the Chilkoot pass rapidly became iconic images and were widely distributed. These pictures, in turn, inspired Charlie Chaplin to make &quot;The Gold Rush&quot;, a silent movie, which uses the background of the Klondike to combine physical comedy with its character&#x27;s desperate battle for survival in the harsh conditions of the stampede. The photographs reappear in the documentary &quot;City of Gold&quot; from 1957 which, narrated by Pierre Berton, won prizes for pioneering the incorporation of still images into documentary film-making. The Klondike gold rush, however, has not been widely covered in later fictional films; even &quot;The Far Country&quot;, a Western from 1955 set in the Klondike, largely ignores the unique features of the gold rush in favour of a traditional Western plot. Indeed, much of the popular literature on the gold rush approaches the stampede simply as a final phase of the expansion of the American West, a perception critiqued by modern historians such as Charlene Porsild.
== Charts and tables ==

===Maps of routes and goldfields===
====Dyea/Skagway routes and Dalton trail====
====Takou, Stikine and Edmonton routes====

====Goldfields====
===Gold production in Yukon, 1892–1912===
===Population growth of west coast cities, 1890–1900===
===Klondikers supply list===
The list was a suggestion of equipment and supplies sufficient to support a prospector for one year, generated by the Northern Pacific Railroad company in 1897. The total weight is approximately 1 ton, and the estimated cost amounted to $140 ($3,800).

===Timeline===
1896
* August 16: Gold is discovered on Bonanza Creek by George Carmack and Skookum Jim.
* August 31: First claim on Eldorado Creek is made by Antone Stander.

1897
* January 21: William Ogilvie sends news of the Klondike gold discovery to Ottawa.
* July 14: &quot;Excelsior&quot; arrives at San Francisco with the first gold from the Klondike and starts stampede.
* July 15: &quot;Portland&quot; arrives at Seattle.
* July 19: First ship leaves for Klondike 
* August 16: Ex-mayor Wood from Seattle leaves San Francisco on his ship &quot;Humboldt&quot; with prospectors for Klondike (reaches St. Michael on August 29, but is forced to spend the winter on the Yukon River).
* September 11: 10% royalty is established on gold mined in Yukon.
* September 27: People without supplies for the winter leave Dawson in search of food.
* November 8: Work begins on Brackett wagon road through White Pass.

1898
* February 25: Troops arrive at Skagway to maintain order. Collection of customs begins at Chilkoot summit.
* March 8: Vigilante activity against Soapy Smith starts at Skagway.
* April 3: Avalanche kills more than 60 at Chilkoot Pass.
* April 24: Spanish–American War begins.
* May 1: Soapy Smith stages a military parade in Skagway.
* May 27: Klondike Nugget begins publication in Dawson.
* May 29: Ice goes out on Yukon River and flotilla of boats sets out for Dawson.
* June 8: First boat with stampeeders reaches Dawson.
* June 24: Sam Steele (NWMP) arrives at Dawson.
* July 8: Soapy Smith is shot to death in Skagway. 
* September 22: Gold found at Nome, Alaska

1899
* January 27: The remnants of a relief expedition send out in winter 1897 finally reaches Dawson.
* February 16: First train from Skagway reaches the White Pass summit.
* April 26: Fire destroys business district in Dawson.
* August: 8000 prospectors leave Dawson for Nome, ending the Klondike Gold Rush.

Source:

== See also ==
* Australian gold rushes
* Cariboo Gold Rush
* Colorado Gold Rush

== Notes ==
== References ==
== Bibliography ==
* 
* 
* 
* 
*
* 
*
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
*
* 
* 

==External links==

=== Archives ===
* Library and Archives Canada, images
* University of Washington Library, Digital Collections; Alaska and Western Canada Collection
* University of Washington Library, Eric A. Hegg Gold Rush Photography Collection
* University of Washington Library, Frank La Roche Photography; including images of the Klondike Gold Rush
* University of Washington Library, William E. Meed Photography
* University of Washington Library. Henry M. Sarvant Photography – Documents his adventures in the Klondike Gold Rush from August 1897 to November 1901
* Alaska Digital Archives
* Klondike Gold Rush Photo Albums at Dartmouth College Library
* Orville Herning Collection on the Klondike and Boston Gold Mining and Manufacturing Company at Dartmouth College Library
* . Yale Collection of Western Americana, Beinecke Rare Book and Manuscript Library.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q631489" start="4" end="22" title="Klondike Gold Rush" label="Klondike Gold Rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650350" start="63" end="74" title="Prospecting" label="prospectors"/>
<link wikidata="Q602965" start="82" end="97" title="Klondike, Yukon" label="Klondike region"/>
<link wikidata="Q2009" start="101" end="106" title="Yukon" label="Yukon"/>
<link wikidata="Q897" start="154" end="158" title="Gold" label="Gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q5083" start="234" end="241" title="Seattle" label="Seattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="246" end="259" title="San Francisco" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q273182" start="295" end="318" title="Gold rush" label="stampede of prospectors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1014914" start="516" end="520" title="Dyea, Alaska" label="Dyea"/>
<link wikidata="Q615975" start="525" end="532" title="Skagway, Alaska" label="Skagway"/>
<link wikidata="Q198710" start="536" end="552" title="southeast Alaska" label="southeast Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q3389258" start="611" end="619" title="Chilkoot Trail" label="Chilkoot"/>
<link wikidata="Q631365" start="623" end="633" title="White Pass Trail" label="White Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q104437" start="647" end="658" title="Yukon River" label="Yukon River"/>
<link wikidata="Q474164" start="1175" end="1185" title="Boomtown" label="boom towns"/>
<link wikidata="Q372324" start="1233" end="1244" title="Dawson City" label="Dawson City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422401" start="1598" end="1605" title="Western saloon" label="saloons"/>
<link wikidata="Q26862" start="1622" end="1625" title="Hän" label="Hän"/>
<link wikidata="Q155239" start="1702" end="1709" title="Indian reserve" label="reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q7048516" start="1890" end="1921" title="Nome Gold Rush" label="gold was discovered around Nome"/>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="1930" end="1936" title="Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q210561" start="2362" end="2402" title="Indigenous peoples of the Pacific Northwest Coast" label="indigenous peoples in north-west America"/>
<link wikidata="Q753" start="2417" end="2423" title="copper" label="copper"/>
<link wikidata="Q133641" start="2441" end="2459" title="Age of Discovery" label="European expansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="2566" end="2574" title="Russian Empire" label="Russians"/>
<link wikidata="Q76039" start="2583" end="2608" title="Hudson&amp;#x27;s Bay Company" label="Hudson&amp;#x27;s Bay Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q878138" start="2721" end="2732" title="fur trade" label="fur trading"/>
<link wikidata="Q536129" start="2894" end="2901" title="Tlingit people" label="Tlingit"/>
<link wikidata="Q495767" start="2906" end="2912" title="Tagish people" label="Tagish"/>
<link wikidata="Q3389258" start="2974" end="2982" title="Chilkoot Trail" label="Chilkoot"/>
<link wikidata="Q2009" start="3014" end="3019" title="Yukon" label="Yukon"/>
<link wikidata="Q957824" start="3265" end="3279" title="Ed Schieffelin" label="Ed Schieffelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439158" start="3353" end="3368" title="Fortymile River" label="Fortymile River"/>
<link wikidata="Q974350" start="3739" end="3750" title="Circle, Alaska" label="Circle City"/>
<link wikidata="Q695207" start="3754" end="3761" title="Log cabin" label="logtown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155838" start="3987" end="4000" title="correspondent" label="correspondent"/>
<link wikidata="Q74047" start="4094" end="4104" title="ghost town" label="ghost town"/>
<link wikidata="Q720659" start="4242" end="4256" title="George Carmack" label="George Carmack"/>
<link wikidata="Q981428" start="4277" end="4288" title="Skookum Jim" label="Skookum Jim"/>
<link wikidata="Q3892534" start="4302" end="4316" title="Tagish Charlie" label="Tagish Charlie"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4403" end="4419" title="Robert Henderson (prospector)" label="Robert Henderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2213604" start="4475" end="4488" title="Bonanza Creek" label="Bonanza Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q103817" start="4765" end="4775" title="Indigenous peoples" label="indigenous"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5340" end="5354" title="Eldorado Creek" label="Eldorado Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930" start="5881" end="5887" title="Ottawa" label="Ottawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="6482" end="6495" title="San Francisco" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6540" end="6547" title="Seattle#Gold Rush, World War I, and the Great Depression" label="Seattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q173509" start="7186" end="7199" title="gold standard" label="gold standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2418422" start="7435" end="7448" title="Panic of 1893" label="Panic of 1893"/>
<link wikidata="Q7131106" start="7453" end="7466" title="Panic of 1896" label="Panic of 1896"/>
<link wikidata="Q606553" start="7753" end="7766" title="Pierre Berton" label="Pierre Berton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5385002" start="8146" end="8162" title="Erastus Brainerd" label="Erastus Brainerd"/>
<link wikidata="Q371421" start="8721" end="8732" title="John McGraw (governor)" label="John McGraw"/>
<link wikidata="Q458036" start="8838" end="8855" title="Frederick Russell Burnham" label="Frederick Burnham"/>
<link wikidata="Q215112" start="8963" end="8978" title="Second Boer War" label="Second Boer War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5385972" start="9050" end="9059" title="Eric A. Hegg" label="Eric Hegg"/>
<link wikidata="Q7684752" start="9129" end="9141" title="Tappan Adney" label="Tappan Adney"/>
<link wikidata="Q45765" start="9202" end="9213" title="Jack London" label="Jack London"/>
<link wikidata="Q41692" start="10618" end="10622" title="mule" label="mule"/>
<link wikidata="Q1664546" start="11406" end="11420" title="Inside Passage" label="Inside Passage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121471" start="11592" end="11607" title="Paddle steamer" label="paddle wheelers"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11861" end="11872" title="St. Michael, Alaska#History" label="St. Michael"/>
<link wikidata="Q1389123" start="12023" end="12037" title="Koyukon people" label="Koyukon people"/>
<link wikidata="Q422243" start="12982" end="12992" title="Lynn Canal" label="Lynn Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q317231" start="13707" end="13719" title="Bennett Lake" label="Bennett Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q3389258" start="14989" end="15003" title="Chilkoot Trail" label="Chilkoot Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q7935" start="15929" end="15938" title="Avalanche" label="Avalanche"/>
<link wikidata="Q7833250" start="16335" end="16342" title="Tramway (industrial)" label="tramway"/>
<link wikidata="Q12760" start="16572" end="16584" title="steam engine" label="steam engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5098984" start="16639" end="16653" title="Chilkoot Trail tramways" label="aerial tramway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2055" start="17104" end="17114" title="Whitehorse, Yukon" label="Whitehorse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2506428" start="17280" end="17305" title="North-West Mounted Police" label="North-West Mounted Police"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17338" end="17345" title="vetting#Ships" label="vetting"/>
<link wikidata="Q475604" start="17499" end="17513" title="Maritime pilot" label="licensed pilot"/>
<link wikidata="Q5098974" start="18143" end="18155" title="Chilkat Pass" label="Chilkat Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739451" start="19344" end="19352" title="Ashcroft, British Columbia" label="Ashcroft"/>
<link wikidata="Q150784" start="19399" end="19405" title="Canyon" label="gorges"/>
<link wikidata="Q2096" start="19842" end="19850" title="Edmonton" label="Edmonton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1951" start="19852" end="19859" title="Alberta" label="Alberta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2220" start="20110" end="20121" title="Peace River (Canada)" label="Peace River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2249" start="20184" end="20195" title="Liard River" label="Liard River"/>
<link wikidata="Q24062033" start="20319" end="20333" title="Klondike Trail" label="Klondike Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898456" start="20514" end="20525" title="Pelly River" label="Pelly River"/>
<link wikidata="Q3411" start="20588" end="20603" title="Mackenzie River" label="Mackenzie River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1014119" start="20607" end="20621" title="Fort McPherson, Northwest Territories" label="Fort McPherson"/>
<link wikidata="Q79408" start="20677" end="20687" title="Fort Yukon, Alaska" label="Fort Yukon"/>
<link wikidata="Q80037" start="21091" end="21097" title="Valdez, Alaska" label="Valdez"/>
<link wikidata="Q163865" start="21575" end="21581" title="scurvy" label="scurvy"/>
<link wikidata="Q617835" start="21684" end="21701" title="Malaspina Glacier" label="Malaspina Glacier"/>
<link wikidata="Q576036" start="22033" end="22046" title="Alaska boundary dispute" label="were disputed"/>
<link wikidata="Q309029" start="22101" end="22119" title="Alaska Purchase" label="purchase of Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201097" start="22478" end="22488" title="Detachment (military)" label="detachment"/>
<link wikidata="Q43637" start="23026" end="23034" title="monopoly" label="monopoly"/>
<link wikidata="Q282352" start="23360" end="23369" title="Maxim gun" label="Maxim gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q37681" start="23956" end="23960" title="silk" label="silk"/>
<link wikidata="Q281" start="23965" end="23972" title="whiskey" label="whiskey"/>
<link wikidata="Q8072" start="24789" end="24797" title="volcano" label="volcanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q12148490" start="24912" end="24923" title="placer gold" label="placer gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q1534709" start="26232" end="26240" title="Gold dredge" label="dredging"/>
<link wikidata="Q17550" start="28667" end="28677" title="California Gold Rush" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q2604396" start="28710" end="28722" title="Witwatersrand Gold Rush" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2132" start="28952" end="28960" title="Victoria, British Columbia" label="Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q728265" start="29779" end="29786" title="Royalties" label="royalty"/>
<link wikidata="Q816425" start="30309" end="30317" title="Surveying" label="surveyor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2070973" start="30318" end="30333" title="William Ogilvie (surveyor)" label="William Ogilvie"/>
<link wikidata="Q4717459" start="31028" end="31041" title="Alex McDonald (prospector)" label="Alex McDonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148384" start="31082" end="31092" title="Leverage (finance)" label="Leveraging"/>
<link wikidata="Q4909106" start="31221" end="31236" title="Swiftwater Bill" label="Swiftwater Bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q828909" start="33106" end="33124" title="wharf" label="docking facilities"/>
<link wikidata="Q319224" start="33251" end="33257" title="cargos" label="cargos"/>
<link wikidata="Q379580" start="33650" end="33659" title="John Muir" label="John Muir"/>
<link wikidata="Q2219427" start="34093" end="34103" title="Sam Steele" label="Sam Steele"/>
<link wikidata="Q162160" start="34404" end="34446" title="Soapy Smith" label="Jefferson Randolph &amp;quot;Soapy&amp;quot; Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q7023752" start="34543" end="34557" title="Confidence trick" label="confidence man"/>
<link wikidata="Q721587" start="34849" end="34865" title="Telegraphy" label="telegraph office"/>
<link wikidata="Q124653834" start="35011" end="35020" title="vigilante" label="vigilante"/>
<link wikidata="Q7501074" start="35067" end="35091" title="shootout on Juneau Wharf" label="shootout on Juneau Wharf"/>
<link wikidata="Q43983" start="35135" end="35143" title="Wrangell, Alaska" label="Wrangell"/>
<link wikidata="Q80037" start="35298" end="35304" title="Valdez, Alaska" label="Valdez"/>
<link wikidata="Q180531" start="35320" end="35334" title="Gulf of Alaska" label="Gulf of Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q199797" start="35794" end="35800" title="Tacoma, Washington" label="Tacoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q6106" start="35802" end="35810" title="Portland, Oregon" label="Portland"/>
<link wikidata="Q24639" start="35812" end="35821" title="Vancouver" label="Vancouver"/>
<link wikidata="Q372324" start="35947" end="35958" title="Dawson City" label="Dawson City"/>
<link wikidata="Q6284779" start="36032" end="36041" title="Joseph Ladue" label="Joe Ladue"/>
<link wikidata="Q31796" start="36156" end="36163" title="mudflat" label="mudflat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2457306" start="36361" end="36374" title="Tr&amp;#x27;ochëk" label="Tr&amp;#x27;ochëk"/>
<link wikidata="Q5076428" start="36468" end="36487" title="Charles Constantine" label="Charles Constantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q155239" start="36532" end="36539" title="Indian reserve" label="reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q934867" start="36652" end="36701" title="George Mercer Dawson" label="the director of Canada&amp;#x27;s Geographical Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q124714" start="37196" end="37202" title="Spring (hydrosphere)" label="spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q17332337" start="37823" end="37834" title="Grand Forks, Yukon" label="Grand Forks"/>
<link wikidata="Q215628" start="37977" end="37986" title="Kerosene lamp" label="oil lamps"/>
<link wikidata="Q6498663" start="38263" end="38275" title="Fire department" label="fire brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q49776" start="38504" end="38510" title="Strike action" label="strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q79408" start="39023" end="39033" title="Fort Yukon, Alaska" label="Fort Yukon"/>
<link wikidata="Q163865" start="39674" end="39680" title="Scurvy" label="Scurvy"/>
<link wikidata="Q129279" start="40024" end="40033" title="Dysentery" label="Dysentery"/>
<link wikidata="Q12156" start="40038" end="40045" title="malaria" label="malaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q83319" start="40093" end="40100" title="typhoid" label="typhoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q134649" start="40668" end="40678" title="diphtheria" label="diphtheria"/>
<link wikidata="Q869499" start="41129" end="41133" title="Craps" label="dice"/>
<link wikidata="Q80131" start="41169" end="41174" title="poker" label="poker"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="41242" end="41247" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q134862" start="41501" end="41510" title="Champagne (wine)" label="champagne"/>
<link wikidata="Q4909106" start="42100" end="42115" title="Swiftwater Bill" label="Swiftwater Bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q40889997" start="43043" end="43077" title="North-West Mounted Police in the Canadian north" label="NWMP had been sent to the district"/>
<link wikidata="Q2219427" start="43216" end="43226" title="Sam Steele" label="Sam Steele"/>
<link wikidata="Q2907261" start="43709" end="43717" title="blue law" label="blue law"/>
<link wikidata="Q2070749" start="44806" end="44824" title="James Morrow Walsh" label="James Morrow Walsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986735" start="44991" end="45007" title="Royal Commission" label="Royal Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q144334" start="45699" end="45713" title="printing-press" label="printing-press"/>
<link wikidata="Q286261" start="46490" end="46516" title="Seattle Post-Intelligencer" label="Seattle Post-Intelligencer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3109672" start="46950" end="46964" title="United States Post Office Department" label="US Post Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q180225" start="48763" end="48769" title="corset" label="corset"/>
<link wikidata="Q951791" start="49703" end="49713" title="Roadhouse (facility)" label="roadhouses"/>
<link wikidata="Q4882897" start="50005" end="50022" title="Belinda Mulrooney" label="Belinda Mulrooney"/>
<link wikidata="Q15222014" start="50191" end="50217" title="Grand Forks Hotel" label="a roadhouse at Grand Forks"/>
<link wikidata="Q6774342" start="50387" end="50399" title="Martha Black" label="Martha Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q852857" start="50691" end="50705" title="sex worker" label="sex industries"/>
<link wikidata="Q192797" start="50711" end="50716" title="elite" label="elite"/>
<link wikidata="Q3917621" start="50807" end="50818" title="chorus line" label="chorus line"/>
<link wikidata="Q615975" start="52403" end="52410" title="Skagway, Alaska" label="Skagway"/>
<link wikidata="Q632324" start="52496" end="52522" title="White Pass and Yukon Route" label="White Pass and Yukon Route"/>
<link wikidata="Q2055" start="52573" end="52604" title="Whitehorse, Yukon" label="head of navigation on the Yukon"/>
<link wikidata="Q12583" start="53156" end="53176" title="Spanish–American War" label="Spanish–American War"/>
<link wikidata="Q756819" start="53887" end="53897" title="Strand, London" label="the Strand"/>
<link wikidata="Q2623078" start="54245" end="54255" title="Atlin, British Columbia" label="Atlin Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q7048516" start="54388" end="54395" title="Nome Gold Rush" label="at Nome"/>
<link wikidata="Q152074" start="55935" end="55943" title="bankrupt" label="bankrupt"/>
<link wikidata="Q12135" start="56065" end="56082" title="Mental breakdown" label="nervous breakdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1735706" start="56175" end="56192" title="Kathleen Rockwell" label="Kathleen Rockwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2642809" start="57026" end="57044" title="Alexander Pantages" label="Alexander Pantages"/>
<link wikidata="Q911554" start="57166" end="57173" title="Business magnate" label="tycoons"/>
<link wikidata="Q475689" start="57337" end="57357" title="Parliament of Canada" label="Parliament of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q12214" start="57983" end="57991" title="smallpox" label="smallpox"/>
<link wikidata="Q2506428" start="58159" end="58163" title="North-West Mounted Police" label="NWMP"/>
<link wikidata="Q606553" start="58286" end="58299" title="Pierre Berton" label="Pierre Berton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2061094" start="58542" end="58556" title="seltzer bottle" label="seltzer bottle"/>
<link wikidata="Q74047" start="58763" end="58773" title="ghost town" label="ghost town"/>
<link wikidata="Q39804" start="59862" end="59873" title="cruise ship" label="cruise ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q308439" start="59880" end="59901" title="National Park Service" label="National Park Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774856" start="60084" end="60127" title="Klondike Gold Rush National Historical Park" label="Klondike Gold Rush National Historical Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q12014035" start="60541" end="60547" title="hiking" label="hiking"/>
<link wikidata="Q602965" start="60560" end="60597" title="Tr’ondëk-Klondike World Heritage Site" label="Tr’ondëk-Klondike World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q2514186" start="60601" end="60637" title="List of World Heritage Sites in Canada" label="UNESCO World Heritage Site in Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1468698" start="60775" end="60792" title="Tr’ondëk Hwëch’in" label="Tr’ondëk Hwëch’in"/>
<link wikidata="Q6387463" start="61444" end="61454" title="Ken Coates (historian)" label="Ken Coates"/>
<link wikidata="Q476871" start="61787" end="61807" title="The Call of the Wild" label="The Call of the Wild"/>
<link wikidata="Q1392250" start="61866" end="61883" title="Robert W. Service" label="Robert W. Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q7561586" start="62037" end="62057" title="Songs of a Sourdough" label="Songs of a Sourdough"/>
<link wikidata="Q606553" start="62300" end="62313" title="Pierre Berton" label="Pierre Berton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6840577" start="62503" end="62519" title="Micí Mac Gabhann" label="Micí Mac Gabhann"/>
<link wikidata="Q5385972" start="63055" end="63067" title="Eric A. Hegg" label="Eric A. Hegg"/>
<link wikidata="Q882" start="63242" end="63257" title="Charlie Chaplin" label="Charlie Chaplin"/>
<link wikidata="Q214723" start="63272" end="63285" title="The Gold Rush" label="The Gold Rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q5123702" start="63525" end="63537" title="City of Gold (1957 film)" label="City of Gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q606553" start="63573" end="63586" title="Pierre Berton" label="Pierre Berton"/>
<link wikidata="Q331039" start="63776" end="63791" title="The Far Country (film)" label="The Far Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q21590660" start="63801" end="63808" title="Western (genre)" label="Western"/>
<link wikidata="Q14947899" start="64062" end="64075" title="American frontier" label="American West"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914928" start="66620" end="66642" title="Australian gold rushes" label="Australian gold rushes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036104" start="66645" end="66662" title="Cariboo Gold Rush" label="Cariboo Gold Rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q331895" start="66665" end="66683" title="Colorado Gold Rush" label="Colorado Gold Rush"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="192753" wikidata="Q33100" url="?curid=192753" title="Seven Bridges of Königsberg">
<text>The Seven Bridges of Königsberg is a historically notable problem in mathematics. Its negative resolution by Leonhard Euler, in 1736, laid the foundations of graph theory and prefigured the idea of topology.

The city of Königsberg in Prussia (now Kaliningrad, Russia) was set on both sides of the Pregel River, and included two large islands—Kneiphof and Lomse—which were connected to each other, and to the two mainland portions of the city, by seven bridges. The problem was to devise a walk through the city that would cross each of those bridges once and only once.

By way of specifying the logical task unambiguously, solutions involving either
# reaching an island or mainland bank other than via one of the bridges, or
# accessing any bridge without crossing to its other end 
are explicitly unacceptable.

Euler proved that the problem has no solution. The difficulty he faced was the development of a suitable technique of analysis, and of subsequent tests that established this assertion with mathematical rigor.

==Euler&#x27;s analysis==
Euler first pointed out that the choice of route inside each land mass is irrelevant and that the only important feature of a route is the sequence of bridges crossed. This allowed him to reformulate the problem in abstract terms (laying the foundations of graph theory), eliminating all features except the list of land masses and the bridges connecting them. In modern terms, one replaces each land masses with an abstract &quot;vertex&quot; or node, and each bridge with an abstract connection, an &quot;edge&quot;, which only serves to record which pair of vertices (land masses) is connected by that bridge. The resulting mathematical structure is a graph.
 →

Since only the connection information is relevant, the shape of pictorial representations of a graph may be distorted in any way, without changing the graph itself. Only the number of edges (possibly zero) between each pair of nodes is significant. It does not, for instance, matter whether the edges drawn are straight or curved, or whether one node is to the left or right of another.

Next, Euler observed that (except at the endpoints of the walk), whenever one enters a vertex by a bridge, one leaves the vertex by a bridge. In other words, during any walk in the graph, the number of times one enters a non-terminal vertex equals the number of times one leaves it. Now, if every bridge has been traversed exactly once, it follows that, for each land mass (except for the ones chosen for the start and finish), the number of bridges touching that land mass must be &quot;even&quot; (half of them, in the particular traversal, will be traversed &quot;toward&quot; the landmass; the other half, &quot;away&quot; from it). However, all four of the land masses in the original problem are touched by an &quot;odd&quot; number of bridges (one is touched by 5 bridges, and each of the other three is touched by 3). Since, at most, two land masses can serve as the endpoints of a walk, the proposition of a walk traversing each bridge once leads to a contradiction.

In modern language, Euler shows that the possibility of a walk through a graph, traversing each edge exactly once, depends on the degrees of the nodes. The degree of a node is the number of edges touching it. Euler&#x27;s argument shows that a necessary condition for the walk of the desired form is that the graph be connected and have exactly zero or two nodes of odd degree. This condition turns out also to be sufficient—a result stated by Euler and later proved by Carl Hierholzer. Such a walk is now called an &quot;Eulerian trail&quot; or &quot;Euler walk&quot; in his honor. Further, if there are nodes of odd degree, then any Eulerian path will start at one of them and end at the other. Since the graph corresponding to historical Königsberg has four nodes of odd degree, it cannot have an Eulerian path.

An alternative form of the problem asks for a path that traverses all bridges and also has the same starting and ending point. Such a walk is called an &quot;Eulerian circuit&quot; or an &quot;Euler tour&quot;. Such a circuit exists if, and only if, the graph is connected and all nodes have even degree. All Eulerian circuits are also Eulerian paths, but not all Eulerian paths are Eulerian circuits.

Euler&#x27;s work was presented to the St. Petersburg Academy on 26 August 1735, and published as &quot;Solutio problematis ad geometriam situs pertinentis&quot; (The solution of a problem relating to the geometry of position) in the journal &quot;Commentarii academiae scientiarum Petropolitanae&quot; in 1741. It is available in English translation in &quot;The World of Mathematics&quot; by James R. Newman.

==Significance in the history and philosophy of mathematics==
In the history of mathematics, Euler&#x27;s solution of the Königsberg bridge problem is considered to be the first theorem of graph theory and the first true proof in the theory of networks, a subject now generally regarded as a branch of combinatorics. Combinatorial problems of other types such as the enumeration of permutations and combinations had been considered since antiquity.

Euler&#x27;s recognition that the key information was the number of bridges and the list of their endpoints (rather than their exact positions) presaged the development of topology. The difference between the actual layout and the graph schematic is a good example of the idea that topology is not concerned with the rigid shape of objects.

Hence, as Euler recognized, the &quot;geometry of position&quot; is not about &quot;measurements and calculations&quot; but about something more general. That called in question the traditional Aristotelian view that mathematics is the &quot;science of quantity&quot;. Though that view fits arithmetic and Euclidean geometry, it did not fit topology and the more abstract structural features studied in modern mathematics.

Philosophers have noted that Euler&#x27;s proof is not about an abstraction or a model of reality, but directly about the real arrangement of bridges. Hence the certainty of mathematical proof can apply directly to reality. The proof is also explanatory, giving insight into why the result must be true.

==Present state of the bridges==

Two of the seven original bridges did not survive the bombing of Königsberg in World War II. Two others were later demolished and replaced by a highway. The three other bridges remain, although only two of them are from Euler&#x27;s time (one was rebuilt in 1935). These changes leave five bridges existing at the same sites that were involved in Euler&#x27;s problem. In terms of graph theory, two of the nodes now have degree 2, and the other two have degree 3. Therefore, an Eulerian path is now possible, but it must begin on one island and end on the other.

The University of Canterbury in Christchurch has incorporated a model of the bridges into a grass area between the old Physical Sciences Library and the Erskine Building, housing the Departments of Mathematics, Statistics and Computer Science. The rivers are replaced with short bushes and the central island sports a stone tōrō. Rochester Institute of Technology has incorporated the puzzle into the pavement in front of the Gene Polisseni Center, an ice hockey arena that opened in 2014, and the Georgia Institute of Technology also installed a landscape art model of the seven bridges in 2018.

A popular variant of the puzzle is the Bristol Bridges Walk. Like historical Königsberg, Bristol occupies two river banks and two river islands. However, the configuration of the 45 major bridges in Bristol is such that an Eulerian circuit exists. This cycle has been popularized by a book and news coverage and has featured in different charity events. 


==See also==
* Eulerian path
* Five room puzzle
* Glossary of graph theory
* Hamiltonian path
* Icosian game
* Travelling salesman problem
* Three utilities problem

==References==
==External links==

* Kaliningrad and the Konigsberg Bridge Problem at Convergence
*Euler&#x27;s original publication (in Latin)
* The Bridges of Königsberg
* How the bridges of Königsberg help to understand the brain
* Euler&#x27;s Königsberg&#x27;s Bridges Problem at Math Dept. Contra Costa College
* Pregel – A Google graphing tool named after this problem
* Present day Graph Problem
* Li, Wenda. The Königsberg Bridge Problem and the Friendship Theorem (Formal Proof Development in Isabelle/HOL, Archive of Formal Proofs) </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q33100" start="4" end="31" title="Seven Bridges of Königsberg" label="Seven Bridges of Königsberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q17163436" start="86" end="105" title="Proof of impossibility" label="negative resolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7604" start="109" end="123" title="Leonhard Euler" label="Leonhard Euler"/>
<link wikidata="Q131476" start="158" end="170" title="graph theory" label="graph theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q42989" start="198" end="206" title="topology" label="topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q4120832" start="221" end="231" title="Königsberg" label="Königsberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q27306" start="235" end="242" title="Kingdom of Prussia" label="Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1829" start="248" end="259" title="Kaliningrad" label="Kaliningrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="261" end="267" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5611" start="298" end="310" title="Pregolya" label="Pregel River"/>
<link wikidata="Q940206" start="343" end="351" title="Kneiphof" label="Kneiphof"/>
<link wikidata="Q30594271" start="356" end="361" title="Oktyabrsky Island" label="Lomse"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="895" end="942" title="Topology#Motivation" label="development of a suitable technique of analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q131476" start="1309" end="1321" title="graph theory" label="graph theory"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1483" end="1489" title=":vertex (graph theory)" label="vertex"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1559" end="1563" title=":edge (graph theory)" label="edge"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1707" end="1712" title=":graph (discrete mathematics)" label="graph"/>
<link wikidata="Q230967" start="2594" end="2598" title="Parity (mathematics)" label="even"/>
<link wikidata="Q230967" start="2828" end="2831" title="Parity (mathematics)" label="odd"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3213" end="3219" title=":degree (graph theory)" label="degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q72897900" start="3401" end="3410" title="Connectivity (graph theory)" label="connected"/>
<link wikidata="Q72985" start="3553" end="3568" title="Carl Hierholzer" label="Carl Hierholzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q624580" start="3605" end="3619" title="Eulerian trail" label="Eulerian trail"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4057" end="4073" title="Eulerian path#Definition" label="Eulerian circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3806708" start="4662" end="4686" title="The World of Mathematics" label="The World of Mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3806708" start="4696" end="4711" title="James R. Newman" label="James R. Newman"/>
<link wikidata="Q185264" start="4783" end="4805" title="history of mathematics" label="history of mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q131476" start="4903" end="4915" title="graph theory" label="graph theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q76592" start="5016" end="5029" title="combinatorics" label="combinatorics"/>
<link wikidata="Q336787" start="5081" end="5092" title="combinatorial enumeration" label="enumeration"/>
<link wikidata="Q161519" start="5096" end="5107" title="permutation" label="permutation"/>
<link wikidata="Q202805" start="5113" end="5124" title="combination" label="combination"/>
<link wikidata="Q42989" start="5336" end="5344" title="topology" label="topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q107556510" start="5700" end="5712" title="Aristotelian realist philosophy of mathematics" label="Aristotelian"/>
<link wikidata="Q309314" start="5759" end="5767" title="quantity" label="quantity"/>
<link wikidata="Q671511" start="6323" end="6360" title="bombing of Königsberg in World War II" label="bombing of Königsberg in World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q432475" start="6837" end="6861" title="University of Canterbury" label="University of Canterbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q79990" start="6865" end="6877" title="Christchurch" label="Christchurch"/>
<link wikidata="Q12012294" start="7157" end="7161" title="tōrō" label="tōrō"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140778" start="7163" end="7196" title="Rochester Institute of Technology" label="Rochester Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q5531393" start="7259" end="7280" title="Gene Polisseni Center" label="Gene Polisseni Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q864855" start="7331" end="7362" title="Georgia Institute of Technology" label="Georgia Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q123700152" start="7470" end="7490" title="Bristol Bridges Walk" label="Bristol Bridges Walk"/>
<link wikidata="Q23154" start="7520" end="7527" title="Bristol" label="Bristol"/>
<link wikidata="Q624580" start="7803" end="7816" title="Eulerian path" label="Eulerian path"/>
<link wikidata="Q7963212" start="7819" end="7835" title="Five room puzzle" label="Five room puzzle"/>
<link wikidata="Q166507" start="7838" end="7862" title="Glossary of graph theory" label="Glossary of graph theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q273037" start="7865" end="7881" title="Hamiltonian path" label="Hamiltonian path"/>
<link wikidata="Q4302650" start="7884" end="7896" title="Icosian game" label="Icosian game"/>
<link wikidata="Q322212" start="7899" end="7926" title="Travelling salesman problem" label="Travelling salesman problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q32918" start="7929" end="7952" title="Three utilities problem" label="Three utilities problem"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="192754" wikidata="Q389256" url="?curid=192754" title="Reserve power">
<text>In a parliamentary or semi-presidential system of government, a reserve power, also known as discretionary power, is a power that may be exercised by the head of state (or their representative) without the approval of another branch or part of the government. Unlike in a presidential system of government, the head of state (or their representative) is generally constrained by the cabinet or the legislature in a parliamentary system, and most reserve powers are usable only in certain exceptional circumstances.

==Constitutional monarchies==
In monarchies with either an uncodified or partly unwritten constitution (such as the United Kingdom or Canada) or a wholly written constitution that consists of a text augmented by additional conventions, traditions, letters patent, etc., the monarch generally possesses reserve powers.

Typically these powers are: to grant pardon; to dismiss a prime minister; to refuse to dissolve parliament; and to refuse or delay royal assent to legislation (to &quot;withhold&quot; royal assent amounts to a veto of a bill, while to &quot;reserve&quot; royal assent, in effect, amounts to a decision to neither grant nor refuse assent, but to delay taking a decision for an undetermined period). There are usually strict constitutional conventions concerning when these powers may be used, and these conventions are enforced by public pressure. Using these powers in contravention of tradition would generally provoke a constitutional crisis.

Most constitutional monarchies employ a system that includes the principle of responsible government. In such an order, the reserve powers are thought to be the means by which the monarch and his or her viceregal representatives can legitimately exist as &quot;constitutional guardians&quot; or &quot;umpires&quot;, tasked with guaranteeing that Cabinet and parliament adhere to the fundamental constitutional principles of the rule of law and responsible government itself. Some constitutional scholars, such as George Winterton, have stated that reserve powers are a good thing in that they allow for a head of state to handle an unforeseen crisis and that the use of convention to limit the use of reserve powers allows for more gradual and subtle constitutional evolution than is possible through formal amendment of a written constitution. Others, such as Herbert Evatt, believe or believed that reserve powers are vestigial and potentially open to abuse. Evatt felt that the reserve powers could be codified and still serve their intended function in a responsible government system, as they do in Ireland, Japan, and Sweden.

===Belgium===
In Belgium a constitutional provision explicitly states that no act of the monarch is valid without the signature of a member or members of the government, which thereby becomes solely responsible, hence excluding any reserve power for the crown. In legal terminology, a competence vested in &#x27;the King&#x27; thus very often means the government, as opposed to formal laws which require a (sometimes qualified) parliamentary majority.

Constitutional precedence has even established the unwritten but binding rule that the Monarch must give assent to any parliamentary decision, regardless of any other considerations (which can only be advanced in private audience with government members, not imposed), as soon as the government presents it for royal signature and thus assumes full political responsibility.

In 1990, when a law liberalising Belgium&#x27;s abortion laws was approved by parliament, King Baudouin refused to give his royal assent, only the second time in Belgium&#x27;s history the monarch elected to do so. Instead, he requested that the cabinet declare him unable to reign for a day, which it did, thereby assuming the king&#x27;s constitutional powers. All members of the government then signed the bill, passing it into law. The bicameral legislature approved a proposition that Baudouin was capable of reigning again the next day.

===Commonwealth realms===
Within the Dominions, until the 1920s, most reserve powers were exercised by a governor-general on the advice of either the local or the British government, though the latter took precedence. After the Balfour Declaration was produced by the 1926 Imperial Conference, formally establishing the autonomy and equal status of Commonwealth governments, governors-general ceased to be advised in any way by the British government. For example, the first Governor-General of the Irish Free State, Tim Healy, was instructed by the British Dominions Office in 1922 to withhold the royal assent on any bill passed by the two houses of the Oireachtas (the Irish parliament) that attempted to change or abolish the Oath of Allegiance. However, no such bill was introduced during Healy&#x27;s period in office. By the time the oath was abolished by the Irish Parliament in 1933, the Irish governor-general was formally advised exclusively by the Irish government.

====Australia====
While the reserve power to dismiss a government has not been used in the United Kingdom since 1834, this power has been exercised more recently in Australia, on two occasions:
# On 13 May 1932, when the Governor of New South Wales Sir Philip Game dismissed the Government of New South Wales.
# On 11 November 1975, when the Governor-General of Australia Sir John Kerr dismissed the Commonwealth Government.

In both cases an election was held very soon afterwards and, again in both cases, the dismissed government was massively defeated by popular vote.

In Queensland in 1987, during a tense period of leadership succession, the Governor of Queensland, Sir Walter Campbell, exercised reserve power in declining to follow the advice of the Premier, Sir Joh Bjelke-Petersen. Campbell initially refused to redistribute ministerial portfolios on the sole advice of the premier, who lacked the confidence of his cabinet. Subsequently, during a period when Queensland had a &quot;Premier who is not leader&quot; and the governing party had a &quot;Leader who is not Premier&quot;, there was speculation on the potential exercise of vice-regal reserve power by Campbell, in dismissing the premier in the absence of a parliamentary motion of no confidence. Ultimately, Campbell was praised for his handling of the undesirable situation.

These are among several exercises of the reserve powers in Australia in the 20th century at state and federal levels.

====Canada====
The reserve powers in Canada fall within the royal prerogative and belong specifically to the monarch, as the Constitution Act, 1867, vests all executive power in the country&#x27;s sovereign. King George VI in 1947 issued Letters Patent permitting the governor general &quot;to exercise all powers and authorities lawfully belonging to Us [the monarch] in respect of Canada.&quot;

The reserve power of dismissal has never been used in Canada, although other reserve powers have been employed to force the prime minister to resign on two occasions: The first took place in 1896, when the Prime Minister, Sir Charles Tupper, refused to step down after his party did not win a majority in the House of Commons during that year&#x27;s election, leading Governor General the Earl of Aberdeen to no longer recognize Tupper as prime minister and disapprove of several appointments Tupper had recommended. On the second occasion, which took place in 1925 and came to be known as the King–Byng affair, Prime Minister William Lyon Mackenzie King, facing a non-confidence motion in the House of Commons, advised the Governor General, the Viscount Byng of Vimy, to dissolve the new parliament, but Byng refused.

At the provincial level, on 29 June 2017 Lieutenant Governor of British Columbia Judith Guichon used her reserve powers to deny the request of Premier Christy Clark to dissolve the legislature and call a new election only 51 days after the recent provincial election. Clark had advised Guichon to dissolve the legislature as, in her view, the appointment of a Speaker would have resulted in frequent tie votes and an untenable position. Guichon refused this advice and instead asked John Horgan to form a government, becoming the new premier.

No modern governor general has disallowed a bill, though provincial lieutenant governors have.

Peter Hogg, a constitutional scholar, has opined that &quot;a system of responsible government cannot work without a formal head of state who is possessed of certain reserve powers.&quot; Further, Eugene Forsey stated &quot;the reserve power is indeed, under our Constitution, an absolutely
essential safeguard of democracy. It takes the place of the legal and judicial safeguards provided in the United States by written Constitutions, enforceable in the courts.&quot;

====New Zealand====
New Zealand&#x27;s early governors, the predecessors of today&#x27;s governors-general, exercised considerable power, with exclusive authority over some matters such as foreign and Māori affairs. They also had a real choice in selecting premiers – parliaments of the period being composed of independent members who formed loose and shifting factions – and were not always obliged to act on the advice of their ministers. As New Zealand&#x27;s political system matured, the Colonial Office increasingly instructed the governors to follow the advice of local ministers, and the powers of the office have continually shrunk. Important remnants of these early powers remain. The governor-general has a number of reserve powers, which may be used on behalf of King Charles III. Sir Kenneth Keith describes the use of these powers as based on the principle that &quot;The Queen reigns, but the government rules, so long as it has the support of the House of Representatives&quot;.

The most visible reserve powers are the power to appoint a prime minister and the related power to accept a prime minister&#x27;s resignation. This power is exercised every time a general election results in a change of government, most recently in 2023. It may also be exercised if a prime minister loses the confidence of Parliament and resigns instead of advising a dissolution of Parliament; the last such occasion was in 1911. Finally, it may happen if a Prime Minister is maneuvered out of their position by their own party, retires or resigns for personal reasons, or dies in office. Though the power of appointment is listed among the reserve powers, in fact the governor-general abides by strict conventions, and has always appointed the leader of the dominant faction in the House of Representatives. The governor-general retains the theoretical power to appoint as prime minister a member of the House of Representatives who clearly does not have the support of a majority of MPs, but no governor-general has sought to use this power since New Zealand gained responsible government, though some cabinets in the 19th century proved extremely short-lived. In earlier times, if a prime minister died, became incapacitated, or resigned unexpectedly, a governor-general might be able to choose a temporary prime minister from among several senior ministers, while the governing party decided on a new leader who would then be duly appointed prime minister. Today, however, the practice of appointing – on prime-ministerial advice – a permanent deputy prime minister, who becomes acting prime minister when needed, has largely removed even this discretion from the governor-general.

The governor-general has a number of other legal powers. They may dismiss an incumbent prime minister and Cabinet, an individual minister, or any other official who holds office &quot;during the King&#x27;s pleasure&quot; or &quot;during the Governor-General&#x27;s pleasure&quot;. Conventionally, the governor-general follows the advice of the prime minister or another appropriate minister in matters of appointment and dismissal. Likewise, by convention, the Government as a whole remains in office as long as it keeps the confidence of the House.

The governor-general can also dissolve Parliament and call elections without prime-ministerial advice. Dissolving Parliament and calling for elections is part of the governor-general&#x27;s normal duties; every parliamentary dissolution and subsequent general election in New Zealand&#x27;s history has been called by the governor or governor-general. However, all elections since responsible government was introduced, including snap elections, have been requested by the incumbent premier or prime minister, and are accordingly not examples of use of the reserve powers. A prime minister who has lost the confidence of the House will conventionally either advise a dissolution of Parliament and new elections, or tender their resignation. If a defeated prime minister refuses to do either of these two things, the governor-general could use the reserve powers to either dismiss the prime minister (see above), or dissolve Parliament without the prime minister&#x27;s advice. Likewise, if the prime minister tenders their resignation, the governor-general could theoretically refuse to accept it, and dissolve Parliament against the Prime Minister&#x27;s advice.

A governor-general can also refuse a prime minister&#x27;s request to dissolve Parliament and hold elections. If a prime minister has been defeated by a vote of no confidence, a refusal by the governor-general to dissolve Parliament would, in effect, force the prime minister to resign and make way for a successor. See the Lascelles Principles for factors which might guide the governor-general in making a decision on whether or not to grant a dissolution in those circumstances. A governor-general could also legally refuse a request for a snap election from a prime minister in whom the House has confidence, but such a refusal would be extremely unlikely.

The power to withhold royal assent to Bills is controversial. Many constitutional commentators believe that the governor-general (or the sovereign) no longer has the power to refuse royal assent to any bill properly passed by the House of Representatives – former law professor and Prime Minister Sir Geoffrey Palmer and Professor Matthew Palmer argue any refusal of royal assent would lead to a constitutional crisis. Others, such as Professor Philip Joseph, believe the Governor-General does retain the power to refuse royal assent to Bills in exceptional circumstances - such as the abolition of democracy. A similar controversial power is the ability to refuse to make Orders and regulations advised by the Government or by individual Ministers.

There have been a handful of occasions when reserve powers were used, or at least considered.

In the 1890s, Premier John Ballance advised the Governor to make several new appointments to the (since abolished) Legislative Council. Two successive Governors, the Earl of Onslow and the Earl of Glasgow, refused to make the appointments, until the Colonial Office intervened in Ballance&#x27;s favour. This incident markedly reduced the discretionary powers of the Governor. Though these remained the same in law for the time being, later Governors and governments considered that there would be far fewer scenarios in which their use would be appropriate.

Almost a century later, in 1984, there was a brief constitutional crisis. The outgoing Prime Minister, Sir Rob Muldoon, had just lost an election, but refused to advise the Governor-General, Sir David Beattie, to make urgent regulations desired not only by the incoming Prime Minister, David Lange, but also by many in Muldoon&#x27;s own party and cabinet. At the time, the option of Beattie dismissing Muldoon and replacing him, without waiting for Muldoon&#x27;s resignation, was reportedly discussed. Muldoon eventually relented under pressure from his own cabinet, making the use of Beattie&#x27;s reserve powers unnecessary.

====Saint Kitts and Nevis====
A constitutional crisis occurred in Saint Kitts and Nevis in 1981, when the governor, Sir Probyn Inniss, used his reserve powers to refuse assent to a bill passed by the government of Sir Kennedy Simmonds, the country&#x27;s premier. Inniss believed that the bill was unconstitutional, and would soon be struck down by the West Indies Associated States Supreme Court. The situation was resolved when Queen Elizabeth II, at the request of Simmonds, terminated Inniss&#x27;s commission as governor.

====Tuvalu====

The Constitution of Tuvalu provides, in article 52, that the Governor-General exercises his powers &quot;only in accordance with the advice of (a) the Cabinet; or (b) the Prime Minister [...] except where he is required to act (c) in accordance with the advice of any other person or authority [...] or
(e) in his own deliberate judgment (in which case he shall exercise an independent discretion)&quot;.

In 2013, Governor-General Sir Iakoba Italeli was requested by the Opposition to act without (and indeed against) the Prime Minister&#x27;s advice. On 28 June, Prime Minister Willy Telavi&#x27;s government had lost a crucial by-election, which gave the Opposition a majority of one in Parliament. The Opposition immediately called for the government to reconvene Parliament, so that a motion of no confidence could be introduced, and a new government formed. Prime Minister Telavi responded that, under the Constitution, he was only required to convene Parliament once a year (for a vote on the budget), and was thus under no obligation to summon it until December. The Opposition turned to the Governor-General. On 3 July, Italeli exercised his reserve powers in ordering Parliament to convene, against the Prime Minister&#x27;s wishes, on 30 July.

In the end, the Governor-General dismissed the Prime Minister from office.

====United Kingdom====
In the UK, the monarch has numerous theoretical &quot;personal prerogatives&quot;, but beyond the appointment of a prime minister, there are in practice few circumstances in modern British government where these prerogatives could be justifiably exercised; they have rarely been exercised in the last century. In October 2003 the Government made public the following prerogatives but it said at the time that a comprehensive catalogue of prerogative powers could not be supplied:
* To refuse to dissolve Parliament when requested by the prime minister. This was last reputedly considered in 1910, but George V later changed his mind. Harold Wilson, leading a minority government in 1974, was told that Elizabeth II might refuse to dissolve Parliament if she could identify an alternative prime minister able to command a cross-party majority. See Lascelles Principles.
* To appoint a prime minister of his [her] own choosing. This was last done in Britain in 1963 when Elizabeth II appointed Sir Alec Douglas-Home as prime minister, on the advice of outgoing Harold Macmillan.
* To dismiss a prime minister and his or her government on the monarch&#x27;s own authority. This was last done in Britain in 1834 by King William IV.
* To summon and prorogue Parliament
* To command the armed forces
* To dismiss and appoint ministers
* To commission officers in the armed forces
* To appoint King&#x27;s Counsel
* To issue and withdraw passports
* To create corporations via royal charter
* To appoint bishops and archbishops of the Church of England
* To grant honours
* To grant the prerogative of mercy
* To delay a bill&#x27;s assent through the use of his or her reserve powers in near-revolutionary situations, thereby vetoing the bill
* To refuse the royal assent of a parliamentary bill on the advice of ministers, last exercised by Queen Anne when she withheld royal assent from the Scottish Militia Bill 1708
* To declare war and peace
* To deploy the armed forces overseas
* To ratify and make treaties
* To refuse the &quot;King&#x27;s Consent&quot;, where direct monarchical assent is required for a bill affecting, directly or by implication, the prerogative, hereditary revenues—including &quot;ultimus haeres&quot;, treasure trove, and &quot;bona vacantia&quot;—or the personal property or interests of the Crown to be heard in Parliament. In 1999, Queen Elizabeth II, acting on the advice of the government, refused to signify her consent to the Military Action Against Iraq (Parliamentary Approval) Bill, which sought to transfer from the monarch to Parliament the power to authorise military strikes against Iraq.

These powers could be exercised in an emergency such as a constitutional crisis (such as surrounded the People&#x27;s Budget of 1909) or in wartime. They would also be very relevant in the event of a hung parliament.

For example, in the hung parliament in 1974, the serving Prime Minister, Edward Heath, attempted to remain in power but was unable to form a working majority. The Queen then asked Harold Wilson, leader of the Labour Party, which had the largest number of seats in the Commons but not an overall majority, to attempt to form a government. Subsequently, Wilson asked that if the government were defeated on the floor of the House of Commons, the Queen would grant a dissolution, which she agreed to.

===Japan===
Unlike most other constitutional monarchs, the Emperor of Japan has no reserve powers. Following Japan&#x27;s defeat in World War II, the Emperor&#x27;s role is defined in Chapter I of the 1947 Constitution of Japan, as decided by the foreign powers that had defeated the country. It states that sovereignty rests with the Japanese citizenry, not the Emperor who is merely the symbol of the State and the unity of the people.

===Malaysia===
The Yang di-Pertuan Agong (the elected supreme federal ruler, commonly glossed as “King”) has no reserve powers. Article 40 of the Malaysian constitution specifies only three powers of the Agong: to reject a request to dissolve Parliament, to convene a meeting of the Conference of Rulers; and to appoint the Prime Minister, whom he has no power to dismiss.

===Spain===
The Spanish Constitution of 1978 does not specifically grant emergency powers to the government, though does state in Article 56 that the monarch &quot;arbitrates and moderates the regular functioning of the institutions&quot;, and invests the monarch with the responsibility of overseeing that the forms of the constitution are observed. It is through this constitutional language that wider &quot;reserve powers&quot; are granted to the monarch. It is through this clause and his position as commander-in-chief of the Spanish Armed Forces that King Juan Carlos I undermined the attempted 23-F military coup in 1981.
Title II, Articles 56
&quot;The King is Head of State, the symbol of its unity and permanence. He arbitrates and moderates the regular functioning of the institutions, assumes the highest representation of the Spanish State in international relations, especially with the nations of its historical community, and exercises the functions expressly conferred on him by the Constitution and the laws&quot;.
The Spanish Constitution of 1978, Title II &quot;The Crown&quot;, Article 62, delineates the powers of the monarch, while Title IV &quot;Government and Administration&quot;, Article 99, defines the monarch&#x27;s role in government. Title VI &quot;Judicial Power&quot;, Article 117, Articles 122 through 124, outlines the monarch&#x27;s role in the country&#x27;s independent judiciary. However, by constitutional convention established by Juan Carlos I, the monarch exercises prerogatives after having solicited government advice, while remaining politically non-partisan and independent. Receiving government advice does not necessarily bind the monarch into executing said advice, except where prescribed by the Constitution.
&quot;It is incumbent upon the King&quot;:
*&quot;a. To Sanction and promulgate the laws&quot;
*&quot;b. To summon and dissolve the &quot;Cortes Generales&quot; and to call for elections under the terms provided for in the Constitution.&quot;
*&quot;c. To Call for a referendum in the cases provided for in the Constitution&quot;.
*&quot;e. To appoint and dismiss members of the Government on the President of the Government&#x27;s proposal.&quot;
*&quot;f. To issue the decrees approved in the Council of Ministers, to confer civil and military honours and distinctions in conformity with the law.&quot;
*&quot;g. To be informed of the affairs of State and, for this purpose, to preside over the meetings of the Council of Ministers whenever, he sees fit, at the President of the Government&#x27;s request.&quot;
*&quot;h. To exercise supreme command of the Armed Forces&quot;
*&quot;i. To exercise the right of clemency in accordance with the law, which may not authorize general pardons.&quot;
*&quot;j. To exercise the High Patronage of the Royal Academies.&quot;
Once a General Election has been announced by the monarch, political parties nominate their candidates to stand for the presidency of the government.

Following the General Election of the Cortes Generales (&quot;Cortes&quot;), and other circumstances provided for in the Constitution, the monarch meets with and interviews the political party leaders represented in the Congress of Deputies, and then consults with the Speaker of the Congress of Deputies (officially, &quot; Presidente de Congreso de los Diputados de España&quot;, who, in this instance, represents the whole Cortes Generales) before nominating his candidate for the presidency, according to Section 99 of Title IV. Often minor parties form part of a larger major party, and through that membership it can be said that the monarch fulfills the constitutional mandate of consulting with party representatives with Congressional representation.
Title IV Government and Administration
Section 99(1) &amp; (2)
*(1) &quot;After each renewal of the Congress and the other cases provided for under the Constitution, the King shall, after consultation with the representatives appointed by the political groups with parliamentary representation, and through the Speaker of the Congress, nominate for the Presidency of the Government.&quot;
*(2) &quot;The candidate nominated in accordance with the provisions of the foregoing subsection shall submit to the Congress the political program of the Government he or she intends to form and shall seek the confidence of the House.&quot;
The Spanish Constitution of 1978 explicitly says that the monarch is not subject to any responsibility but for his acts to be valid must be endorsed by the Government and will not be valid without such an endorsement. The only exception is that the monarch is free to appoint and remove the members of private and military advisors (&quot;Casa Real&quot;).

Title IV of the Constitution invests the monarch with sanction (Royal Assent) and promulgation (publication) of laws, while Title III &quot;The Cortes Generals&quot;, Chapter 2 &quot;Drafting of Bills&quot; outlines the method by which bills are passed. According to Article 91, within fifteen days that a bill has been passed by the Cortes Generales, the monarch shall give assent and publish the new law. Article 92 invests the monarch with the right to call for a referendum on the advice of the president and the previous authorization of Congress.

No provision within the Constitution invests the monarch with the ability to veto legislation directly, however no provision forbids the denial of royal assent – effectively a veto. When the media asked King Juan Carlos if he would endorse the bill legalizing gay marriages, he answered &quot;Soy el Rey de España y no el de Bélgica&quot; (&quot;I am the King of Spain, and not that of Belgium&quot;)a reference to King Baudouin I of Belgium who had refused to sign the Belgian law legalising abortion. The King gave his royal assent to Law 13/2005 on 1 July 2005; the law was gazetted in the &quot;Boletín Oficial del Estado&quot; on 2 July, and came into effect on 3 July 2005.

=== Sweden ===
Much like the Emperor of Japan, the King of Sweden does not have any constitutional responsibility for the governance of the Realm, with strictly ceremonial and representative functions remaining. Under the 1974 Instrument of Government, the supreme executive authority is the Government (composed of the Prime Minister and other cabinet ministers), which is responsible to the Riksdag. The King, however, is not subordinate to the Government and thus could play an independent role as moral authority, but the prevailing convention, expressed in the preparatory works of the 1974 Instrument of Government, is that the King should stay away from anything which could reasonably be interpreted as partisan politics or criticism of the Government in office.

== Republics ==
Reserve powers can also be written into a republican constitution that separates the offices of head of state and head of government. This was the case in Germany under the Weimar Republic and is still the case in the French Fifth Republic, the Italian republic, and the Republic of Ireland. Reserve powers may include, for instance, the right to issue emergency legislation or regulation bypassing the normal processes. In most states, the head of state&#x27;s ability to exercise reserve powers is explicitly defined and regulated by the text of the constitution.

===Bangladesh===
The President of Bangladesh must consult with the Prime Minister for all decisions except the appointment of the Prime Minister and the Chief Justice. However, the President has the authority to dissolve the government or parliament, grant pardon to criminals, block bills/budgets by the legislature or declare an emergency.

During the regime of the caretaker government, the President&#x27;s power expanded dramatically; effectively (s)he is no longer a ceremonial head of state.

===France===
Article 16 of the Constitution of France allows the President of the Republic to exercise exceptional powers in case of a national emergency. During this time, the President may not use his prerogative to dissolve the National Assembly and call early elections. He must still consult the Prime Minister, the leaders of both houses of Parliament and the Constitutional Council.

The inspiration for this disposition in the Constitution was the institutional chaos and lack of government authority which contributed to the French debacle in the Battle of France in 1940. On a larger scale, this is consistent with a tradition of the Roman Republic (which has always been an inspiration for the successive French Republics), to give six months of dictatorial power to a citizen in case of an imminent danger of invasion.

Article 16 rule has only been exercised once, in 1961, during a crisis related to the Algerian War in which Charles de Gaulle needed those emergency powers to foil a military plot to take over the government. In 1962, the Council of State ruled itself incompetent to judge measures of a legislative nature issued by the President under Article 16.

In his book, &quot;Le Coup d&#x27;État permanent&quot; (The Permanent Coup), François Mitterrand criticized Article 16 for allowing an ambitious politician the opportunity to become a dictator. However, he made no move to put away his reserve powers after he himself became president.

=== Germany ===
The German constitution limits the powers available to the President to prevent a situation in which the executive could effectively rule without legislative approval, which was the case in the Weimar Republic. In particular, the president cannot rule by decree. However, in case of a &quot;legislative emergency&quot; the German President can accept legislation without approval of the &quot;Bundestag&quot; (parliament). Article 81 of the German constitution states the possibility that the President can by this means keep a government capable of action even in case of loss of a constructive majority in the Bundestag.

Furthermore, the German President can dissolve the &quot;Bundestag&quot; (parliament) if the Chancellor loses a motion of confidence and asks the President to do so. The German President has exercised this right four times since the founding of the Federal Republic in 1949. President Gustav Heinemann dissolved the &quot;Bundestag&quot; at the request of Chancellor Willy Brandt in 1972, and in 1982 President Karl Carstens did so at the request of Chancellor Helmut Kohl. Both Brandt and Kohl were reelected with larger majorities. On 1 July 2005, President Horst Köhler dissolved the &quot;Bundestag&quot; at the request of Chancellor Gerhard Schröder. Schröder unexpectedly lost the election that followed. Most recently, on 27 Dec 2024, President Frank-Walter Steinmeier dissolved the &quot;Bundestag&quot; after the Traffic light coalition collapsed, and chancellor Olaf Scholz lost the motion of confidence according to plans to call for an early election. 

The President has the right to refuse his signature to laws passed by the parliament (veto) in certain circumstances. These may be formal errors in the law-making process or violations of the Basic Law inherent to the new law. This reserve power has been used 8 times as of May 2013.

The President nominates the first candidate for Chancellor put to vote in the &quot;Bundestag&quot;. The president can also dissolve the Bundestag if no candidate won the absolute majority of the members of parliament after three votes.

The President has the right to pardon criminals for federal crimes with the countersignature of a member of the cabinet. The refusal of a pardon does not need a countersignature.

===India===
===Ireland===
The President of Ireland does not possess executive powers: executive powers are held by the Government, which is headed by a Taoiseach (Prime Minister), who is chosen by and accountable to Dáil Éireann (House of Representatives).

The President&#x27;s powers are principally defined by Article 13 of the Constitution of Ireland. For the most part, these ceremonial duties may be performed only on the authority, and with the binding advice, of the Government.

However, the President has certain reserve powers, also known as &quot;discretionary powers&quot; in Ireland, which can be exercised by the President at his or her discretion – without, or even contrary to, the Government&#x27;s advice.

The two most politically important discretionary powers are:

# Refusing to dissolve the Dáil on the advice of a Taoiseach who has lost the confidence of the Dáil.
# Referring legislation to the Supreme Court.

The first of these means that a Taoiseach who has been defeated by a vote of no-confidence cannot automatically expect to appeal to the people by calling a general election. The question of whether or not the Taoiseach has lost the confidence of the Dáil could be a discretionary matter for the President to decide – in principle, the President could refuse to dissolve the Dáil on the advice of a Taoiseach who has not yet been defeated in a vote of no-confidence, but who appears likely to be defeated were such a vote to be held. This power has not so far been used, but it could be a crucial power in the event of the collapse of a governing coalition.

By the second of these powers, the President may refuse to assent to legislation passed by Parliament when he or she considers it to be unconstitutional. The President refers the matter to the Supreme Court, which makes the final decision. This power has been used several times by various Presidents.

In addition to these powers, the President has various other discretionary powers in the Constitution, which are of lesser political significance (in normal circumstances). The President may decide to call a referendum on legislation &quot;of great national significance&quot;. This power, granted by Article 27 of the Constitution, has not so far been used. The President cannot initiate a referendum, but must wait for an application by a majority of the Seanad (Senate) and one-third of the Dáil. Generally, owing to the way in which the Seanad is elected, the Government&#x27;s coalition controls a majority of the seats, and strong party discipline means that Senators rarely go against their own party, so getting Seanad support for a referendum is difficult. If the Seanad were to be reformed, this power could potentially become much more significant. Similarly, the President has a latent role in resolving disputes between the Dáil and the Seanad. The President may convene a special committee to resolve questions of privilege between the Dáil and the Seanad with regard to Money Bills, and with regard to speeding the passage of urgent bills through the Seanad. Again, owing to the method by which the Seanad is elected, disputes of this nature tend not to emerge in practice.

The exercise of these powers is entirely at the President&#x27;s discretion, for which the President is neither legally nor politically responsible. However, prior to their exercise, the President is bound, in most cases, to consult the Council of State, an advisory body consisting of a mixture of senior ex-officio and nominated members.

=== Italy ===
The President of the Italian Republic&#x27;s powers are defined by articles 87 through 90 of the Constitution of Italy. The President of the Republic:
* can send official messages to the chambers of Parliament;
* appoints the President of the Council of Ministers;
* may appoint up to five senators for life;
* appoints a third of the judges of the Constitutional Court;
* can grant pardons and commutations of sentences;
* can call for new elections for both or only one of the chambers, except during the last six months of his term.

The President of the Republic can refuse to sign laws he deems clearly against the Constitution, while less obvious cases are dealt with later on by the Constitutional Court. If the rejected law is passed again by a majority in the Parliament, however, the President must sign it.

Given his monocratic nature, this organ joins in itself prerogatives that in all other collegial organs are attributed collectively.

==See also==
* Separation of powers of state into separate branches, normally an executive, a legislature, and a judiciary
* Westminster system
* Donald Markwell
* Eugene Forsey
* George Winterton
* H. V. Evatt

== Notes ==
== References ==
&#x27;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q166747" start="5" end="18" title="parliamentary system" label="parliamentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q49890" start="22" end="46" title="semi-presidential system" label="semi-presidential system"/>
<link wikidata="Q7188" start="50" end="60" title="government" label="government"/>
<link wikidata="Q389256" start="64" end="77" title="Reserve power" label="reserve power"/>
<link wikidata="Q389256" start="93" end="112" title="Reserve power" label="discretionary power"/>
<link wikidata="Q48352" start="154" end="167" title="head of state" label="head of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q49892" start="272" end="291" title="presidential system" label="presidential system"/>
<link wikidata="Q640506" start="383" end="390" title="Cabinet (government)" label="cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q11204" start="398" end="409" title="legislature" label="legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q41614" start="549" end="559" title="constitutional monarchy" label="monarchies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135084" start="575" end="585" title="Uncodified constitution" label="uncodified"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="632" end="646" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="650" end="656" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511010" start="764" end="778" title="letters patent" label="letters patent"/>
<link wikidata="Q537151" start="872" end="878" title="pardon" label="pardon"/>
<link wikidata="Q741182" start="922" end="930" title="Dissolution of parliament" label="dissolve"/>
<link wikidata="Q35749" start="931" end="941" title="parliament" label="parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070654" start="966" end="978" title="royal assent" label="royal assent"/>
<link wikidata="Q178074" start="1045" end="1049" title="veto" label="veto"/>
<link wikidata="Q380552" start="1457" end="1478" title="constitutional crisis" label="constitutional crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2665071" start="1559" end="1581" title="responsible government" label="responsible government"/>
<link wikidata="Q44918" start="1909" end="1920" title="rule of law" label="rule of law"/>
<link wikidata="Q5546455" start="1994" end="2010" title="George Winterton" label="George Winterton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1388459" start="2342" end="2355" title="H. V. Evatt" label="Herbert Evatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="3477" end="3484" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q12976" start="3539" end="3547" title="Baudouin of Belgium" label="Baudouin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3548" end="3555" title="Baudouin_of_Belgium#Religious_influences" label="refused"/>
<link wikidata="Q223832" start="4025" end="4033" title="Dominion" label="Dominion"/>
<link wikidata="Q382844" start="4093" end="4109" title="governor-general" label="governor-general"/>
<link wikidata="Q6063" start="4151" end="4169" title="British government" label="British government"/>
<link wikidata="Q195559" start="4216" end="4235" title="Balfour Declaration of 1926" label="Balfour Declaration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1869142" start="4256" end="4280" title="1926 Imperial Conference" label="1926 Imperial Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q2558541" start="4463" end="4503" title="Governor-General of the Irish Free State" label="Governor-General of the Irish Free State"/>
<link wikidata="Q333199" start="4505" end="4514" title="Timothy Michael Healy" label="Tim Healy"/>
<link wikidata="Q129821" start="4644" end="4654" title="Oireachtas" label="Oireachtas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7074466" start="4718" end="4736" title="Oath of Allegiance (Ireland)" label="Oath of Allegiance"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4825" end="4871" title="Oath of Allegiance (Ireland)#De Valera and abolition" label="the oath was abolished by the Irish Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1528895" start="5188" end="5215" title="Governor of New South Wales" label="Governor of New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q3379015" start="5216" end="5231" title="Philip Game" label="Sir Philip Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q6485596" start="5232" end="5275" title="Lang Dismissal Crisis" label="dismissed the Government of New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q610669" start="5309" end="5338" title="Governor-General of Australia" label="Governor-General of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354851" start="5339" end="5352" title="John Kerr (governor-general)" label="Sir John Kerr"/>
<link wikidata="Q575834" start="5353" end="5390" title="1975 Australian constitutional crisis" label="dismissed the Commonwealth Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196727" start="5526" end="5538" title="Direct election" label="popular vote"/>
<link wikidata="Q1467097" start="5616" end="5638" title="Governor of Queensland" label="Governor of Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q465245" start="5640" end="5659" title="Walter Campbell (judge)" label="Sir Walter Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q13526082" start="5726" end="5733" title="Premier of Queensland" label="Premier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1528405" start="5739" end="5758" title="Joh Bjelke-Petersen" label="Joh Bjelke-Petersen"/>
<link wikidata="Q329547" start="6211" end="6234" title="motion of no confidence" label="motion of no confidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q3042529" start="6496" end="6513" title="royal prerogative" label="royal prerogative"/>
<link wikidata="Q508840" start="6541" end="6552" title="Monarchy of Canada" label="the monarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q868884" start="6561" end="6583" title="Constitution Act, 1867" label="Constitution Act, 1867"/>
<link wikidata="Q280856" start="6649" end="6658" title="George VI" label="George VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q10843879" start="6674" end="6688" title="Letters Patent, 1947" label="Letters Patent"/>
<link wikidata="Q390776" start="6704" end="6720" title="Governor General of Canada" label="governor general"/>
<link wikidata="Q839078" start="6958" end="6972" title="Prime Minister of Canada" label="prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q128672" start="7060" end="7074" title="Charles Tupper" label="Charles Tupper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1723524" start="7167" end="7192" title="1896 Canadian federal election" label="that year&amp;#x27;s election"/>
<link wikidata="Q335981" start="7219" end="7239" title="John Hamilton-Gordon, 1st Marquess of Aberdeen and Temair" label="the Earl of Aberdeen"/>
<link wikidata="Q183174" start="7428" end="7444" title="King–Byng affair" label="King–Byng affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q128633" start="7461" end="7488" title="William Lyon Mackenzie King" label="William Lyon Mackenzie King"/>
<link wikidata="Q329547" start="7499" end="7520" title="Motion of no confidence" label="non-confidence motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308979" start="7546" end="7553" title="Advice (constitutional)" label="advised"/>
<link wikidata="Q334974" start="7576" end="7601" title="Julian Byng, 1st Viscount Byng of Vimy" label="the Viscount Byng of Vimy"/>
<link wikidata="Q741182" start="7606" end="7614" title="dissolution of parliament" label="dissolve"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516453" start="7695" end="7714" title="Lieutenant Governor" label="Lieutenant Governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973" start="7718" end="7734" title="British Columbia" label="British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6303437" start="7735" end="7749" title="Judith Guichon" label="Judith Guichon"/>
<link wikidata="Q460064" start="7805" end="7818" title="Christy Clark" label="Christy Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q6239861" start="8137" end="8148" title="John Horgan" label="John Horgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q111956136" start="8229" end="8239" title="Disallowance and reservation in Canada" label="disallowed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1970061" start="8255" end="8286" title="Lieutenant Governor (Canada)" label="provincial lieutenant governors"/>
<link wikidata="Q2075771" start="8294" end="8304" title="Peter Hogg" label="Peter Hogg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2665071" start="8366" end="8388" title="responsible government" label="responsible government"/>
<link wikidata="Q5407255" start="8491" end="8504" title="Eugene Forsey" label="Eugene Forsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q455690" start="8854" end="8871" title="Governor-General of New Zealand" label="governors-general"/>
<link wikidata="Q6122670" start="8966" end="8971" title="Māori people" label="Māori"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110907" start="9259" end="9274" title="Colonial Office" label="Colonial Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q43274" start="9546" end="9557" title="Charles III" label="Charles III"/>
<link wikidata="Q991547" start="9563" end="9576" title="Kenneth Keith" label="Kenneth Keith"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="9652" end="9657" title="Elizabeth II" label="Queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071117" start="9821" end="9835" title="Prime Minister of New Zealand" label="prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q100718706" start="10008" end="10015" title="2023 New Zealand general election" label="in 2023"/>
<link wikidata="Q329547" start="10062" end="10096" title="motion of no confidence" label="loses the confidence of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q7016115" start="10185" end="10192" title="1911 New Zealand general election" label="in 1911"/>
<link wikidata="Q2034424" start="10547" end="10571" title="New Zealand House of Representatives" label="House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q2665071" start="10832" end="10854" title="responsible government" label="responsible government"/>
<link wikidata="Q2932373" start="11557" end="11564" title="Cabinet of New Zealand" label="Cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q6866528" start="11580" end="11588" title="Ministers in the New Zealand Government" label="minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q752940" start="11646" end="11666" title="At His Majesty&amp;#x27;s pleasure" label="King&amp;#x27;s pleasure"/>
<link wikidata="Q741182" start="12670" end="12695" title="dissolution of Parliament" label="dissolution of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q6492865" start="13492" end="13512" title="Lascelles Principles" label="Lascelles Principles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333366" start="13711" end="13724" title="snap election" label="snap election"/>
<link wikidata="Q4296" start="13967" end="13976" title="Monarchy of New Zealand" label="sovereign"/>
<link wikidata="Q1385100" start="14131" end="14146" title="Geoffrey Palmer (politician)" label="Geoffrey Palmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6791051" start="14161" end="14175" title="Matthew Palmer" label="Matthew Palmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q980417" start="14698" end="14711" title="John Ballance" label="John Ballance"/>
<link wikidata="Q206569" start="14791" end="14810" title="New Zealand Legislative Council" label="Legislative Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q335657" start="14838" end="14856" title="William Onslow, 4th Earl of Onslow" label="the Earl of Onslow"/>
<link wikidata="Q335705" start="14861" end="14880" title="David Boyle, 7th Earl of Glasgow" label="the Earl of Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q4581800" start="15287" end="15308" title="1984 New Zealand constitutional crisis" label="constitutional crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q737739" start="15343" end="15354" title="Rob Muldoon" label="Rob Muldoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3017475" start="15427" end="15444" title="David Beattie" label="Sir David Beattie"/>
<link wikidata="Q367589" start="15522" end="15533" title="David Lange" label="David Lange"/>
<link wikidata="Q763" start="15933" end="15954" title="Saint Kitts and Nevis" label="Saint Kitts and Nevis"/>
<link wikidata="Q35918814" start="15973" end="15981" title="Governor-General of Saint Kitts and Nevis" label="governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q24006352" start="15987" end="16000" title="Probyn Inniss" label="Probyn Inniss"/>
<link wikidata="Q953225" start="16085" end="16101" title="Kennedy Simmonds" label="Kennedy Simmonds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1826842" start="16122" end="16129" title="Prime Minister of Saint Kitts and Nevis" label="premier"/>
<link wikidata="Q3001122" start="16220" end="16263" title="Eastern Caribbean Supreme Court" label="West Indies Associated States Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q17002848" start="16415" end="16437" title="Constitution of Tuvalu" label="Constitution of Tuvalu"/>
<link wikidata="Q644809" start="16472" end="16488" title="Governor-General of Tuvalu" label="Governor-General"/>
<link wikidata="Q3147210" start="16847" end="16861" title="Iakoba Italeli" label="Iakoba Italeli"/>
<link wikidata="Q561559" start="16991" end="17003" title="Willy Telavi" label="Willy Telavi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7068892" start="17031" end="17052" title="2013 Nukufetau by-election" label="a crucial by-election"/>
<link wikidata="Q329547" start="17201" end="17224" title="motion of no confidence" label="motion of no confidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q269412" start="18367" end="18375" title="George V of the United Kingdom" label="George V"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="18468" end="18480" title="Elizabeth II" label="Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q6492865" start="18613" end="18633" title="Lascelles Principles" label="Lascelles Principles"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="18735" end="18747" title="Elizabeth II" label="Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q128976" start="18758" end="18779" title="Sir Alec Douglas-Home" label="Sir Alec Douglas-Home"/>
<link wikidata="Q128985" start="18825" end="18841" title="Harold Macmillan" label="Harold Macmillan"/>
<link wikidata="Q130822" start="18977" end="18992" title="King William IV" label="King William IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1533366" start="19153" end="19172" title="King&amp;#x27;s Counsel" label="King&amp;#x27;s Counsel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7240694" start="19346" end="19366" title="Royal prerogative of mercy" label="prerogative of mercy"/>
<link wikidata="Q119702" start="19602" end="19612" title="Anne, Queen of Great Britain" label="Queen Anne"/>
<link wikidata="Q7437859" start="19653" end="19679" title="Scottish Militia Bill 1708" label="Scottish Militia Bill 1708"/>
<link wikidata="Q7269961" start="19797" end="19816" title="King&amp;#x27;s Consent" label="King&amp;#x27;s Consent"/>
<link wikidata="Q7880307" start="19971" end="19985" title="ultimus haeres" label="ultimus haeres"/>
<link wikidata="Q4922985" start="19993" end="20007" title="treasure trove" label="treasure trove"/>
<link wikidata="Q46273" start="20019" end="20032" title="bona vacantia" label="bona vacantia"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="20126" end="20144" title="Queen Elizabeth II" label="Queen Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q6851953" start="20224" end="20282" title="Military Action Against Iraq (Parliamentary Approval) Bill" label="Military Action Against Iraq (Parliamentary Approval) Bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q3374979" start="20499" end="20519" title="People&amp;#x27;s Budget" label="People&amp;#x27;s Budget"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394879" start="20595" end="20610" title="hung parliament" label="hung parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q128967" start="20686" end="20698" title="Edward Heath" label="Edward Heath"/>
<link wikidata="Q2455328" start="20754" end="20770" title="working majority" label="working majority"/>
<link wikidata="Q128956" start="20793" end="20806" title="Harold Wilson" label="Harold Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q208233" start="21171" end="21187" title="Emperor of Japan" label="Emperor of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="21221" end="21226" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="21244" end="21256" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q237082" start="21318" end="21339" title="Constitution of Japan" label="Constitution of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q696251" start="21359" end="21373" title="Occupation of Japan" label="foreign powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q174156" start="21570" end="21591" title="Yang di-Pertuan Agong" label="Yang di-Pertuan Agong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003080" start="21697" end="21719" title="Constitution of Malaysia" label="Malaysian constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986392" start="21794" end="21804" title="Parliament of Malaysia" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q5159925" start="21834" end="21854" title="Conference of Rulers" label="Conference of Rulers"/>
<link wikidata="Q862559" start="21875" end="21889" title="Prime Minister of Malaysia" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q847664" start="21941" end="21969" title="Constitution of Spain" label="Spanish Constitution of 1978"/>
<link wikidata="Q216227" start="21998" end="22014" title="state of emergency" label="emergency powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q889833" start="22075" end="22082" title="Monarchy of Spain" label="monarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q326991" start="22457" end="22477" title="Spanish Armed Forces" label="Spanish Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q19943" start="22483" end="22501" title="Juan Carlos I" label="King Juan Carlos I"/>
<link wikidata="Q215337" start="22527" end="22531" title="23-F" label="23-F"/>
<link wikidata="Q45382" start="22541" end="22545" title="Coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="coup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322765" start="23335" end="23344" title="Judiciary of Spain" label="judiciary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2720142" start="23358" end="23383" title="Constitutional convention (political custom)" label="constitutional convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q7049542" start="23519" end="23531" title="nonpartisanism" label="non-partisan"/>
<link wikidata="Q219692" start="23826" end="23842" title="Cortes Generales" label="Cortes Generales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194749" start="24067" end="24077" title="Government of Spain" label="Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q844587" start="24085" end="24112" title="Prime Minister of Spain" label="President of the Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q3058576" start="24183" end="24203" title="Council of Ministers of Spain" label="Council of Ministers"/>
<link wikidata="Q326991" start="24547" end="24559" title="Spanish Armed Forces" label="Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q2540467" start="24763" end="24779" title="Elections in Spain" label="General Election"/>
<link wikidata="Q219692" start="24945" end="24961" title="Cortes Generales" label="Cortes Generales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208246" start="25084" end="25107" title="List of political parties in Spain" label="political party leaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q539149" start="25176" end="25211" title="Congress of Deputies (Spain)" label="Speaker of the Congress of Deputies"/>
<link wikidata="Q847664" start="26302" end="26330" title="Constitution of Spain" label="Spanish Constitution of 1978"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070654" start="26720" end="26732" title="royal assent" label="Royal Assent"/>
<link wikidata="Q19943" start="27418" end="27429" title="Juan Carlos I of Spain" label="Juan Carlos"/>
<link wikidata="Q17423" start="27470" end="27483" title="Same-sex marriage in Spain" label="gay marriages"/>
<link wikidata="Q12976" start="27630" end="27651" title="Baudouin I of Belgium" label="Baudouin I of Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q8452" start="27703" end="27711" title="abortion" label="abortion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3186812" start="27787" end="27794" title="gazette" label="gazette"/>
<link wikidata="Q2029273" start="27809" end="27835" title="Boletín Oficial del Estado" label="Boletín Oficial del Estado"/>
<link wikidata="Q26796319" start="27942" end="27956" title="Monarchy of Sweden" label="King of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503325" start="28113" end="28142" title="Constitution of Sweden" label="1974 Instrument of Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q930729" start="28183" end="28193" title="Government of Sweden" label="Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q687075" start="28211" end="28225" title="Prime Minister of Sweden" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q272930" start="28284" end="28291" title="Riksdag" label="Riksdag"/>
<link wikidata="Q1796473" start="28602" end="28660" title="Courtyard Speech" label="partisan politics or criticism of the Government in office"/>
<link wikidata="Q48352" start="28775" end="28788" title="head of state" label="head of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285706" start="28793" end="28811" title="head of government" label="head of government"/>
<link wikidata="Q41304" start="28852" end="28867" title="Weimar Republic" label="Weimar Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q200686" start="28897" end="28918" title="French Fifth Republic" label="French Fifth Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="28924" end="28931" title="Italy" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q27" start="28950" end="28969" title="Republic of Ireland" label="Republic of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29032" end="29053" title="emergency legislation" label="emergency legislation"/>
<link wikidata="Q596123" start="29267" end="29290" title="President of Bangladesh" label="President of Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q14565638" start="29313" end="29327" title="Prime Minister of Bangladesh" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112663" start="29614" end="29634" title="caretaker government" label="caretaker government"/>
<link wikidata="Q832508" start="29777" end="29799" title="Constitution of France" label="Constitution of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q191954" start="29811" end="29836" title="President of France" label="President of the Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q193582" start="29977" end="29994" title="French National Assembly" label="National Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127218" start="30112" end="30134" title="Constitutional Council of France" label="Constitutional Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q151340" start="30302" end="30318" title="Battle of France" label="Battle of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q17167" start="30390" end="30404" title="Roman Republic" label="Roman Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q200790" start="30664" end="30676" title="Algerian War" label="Algerian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2042" start="30686" end="30703" title="Charles de Gaulle" label="Charles de Gaulle"/>
<link wikidata="Q769657" start="30800" end="30816" title="Council of State (France)" label="Council of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q45382" start="30997" end="31001" title="Coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="Coup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2038" start="31004" end="31023" title="François Mitterrand" label="François Mitterrand"/>
<link wikidata="Q56045" start="31233" end="31252" title="Basic Law for the Federal Republic of Germany" label="German constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q25223" start="31288" end="31297" title="President of Germany" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q41304" start="31423" end="31438" title="Weimar Republic" label="Weimar Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q17146145" start="31476" end="31490" title="rule by decree" label="rule by decree"/>
<link wikidata="Q154797" start="31622" end="31631" title="Bundestag" label="Bundestag"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31965" end="31985" title="Motion of Confidence#Germany" label="motion of confidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2573" start="32138" end="32154" title="Gustav Heinemann" label="Gustav Heinemann"/>
<link wikidata="Q2514" start="32220" end="32232" title="Willy Brandt" label="Willy Brandt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2569" start="32264" end="32277" title="Karl Carstens" label="Karl Carstens"/>
<link wikidata="Q2518" start="32314" end="32325" title="Helmut Kohl" label="Helmut Kohl"/>
<link wikidata="Q2542" start="32413" end="32425" title="Horst Köhler" label="Horst Köhler"/>
<link wikidata="Q2530" start="32491" end="32507" title="Gerhard Schröder" label="Gerhard Schröder"/>
<link wikidata="Q165999" start="32540" end="32548" title="2005 German federal election" label="election"/>
<link wikidata="Q76658" start="32605" end="32628" title="Frank-Walter Steinmeier" label="Frank-Walter Steinmeier"/>
<link wikidata="Q474455" start="32675" end="32698" title="Traffic light coalition" label="Traffic light coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q61053" start="32725" end="32736" title="Olaf Scholz" label="Olaf Scholz"/>
<link wikidata="Q56045" start="33011" end="33020" title="Basic Law for the Federal Republic of Germany" label="Basic Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q154797" start="33188" end="33197" title="Bundestag" label="Bundestag"/>
<link wikidata="Q213702" start="33552" end="33572" title="President of Ireland" label="President of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q191827" start="33674" end="33683" title="Taoiseach" label="Taoiseach"/>
<link wikidata="Q651981" start="33738" end="33750" title="Dáil Éireann" label="Dáil Éireann"/>
<link wikidata="Q733272" start="33853" end="33876" title="Constitution of Ireland" label="Constitution of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q329547" start="34528" end="34549" title="vote of no-confidence" label="vote of no-confidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q10857741" start="36505" end="36516" title="Money Bills" label="Money Bills"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152244" start="36947" end="36963" title="Council of State (Ireland)" label="Council of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q332711" start="37069" end="37102" title="President of the Italian Republic" label="President of the Italian Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q719967" start="37162" end="37183" title="Constitution of Italy" label="Constitution of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1117578" start="37264" end="37274" title="Parliament of Italy" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q796897" start="37291" end="37328" title="Prime Minister of Italy" label="President of the Council of Ministers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2786200" start="37355" end="37372" title="Senator for life" label="senators for life"/>
<link wikidata="Q981005" start="37414" end="37434" title="Constitutional Court of Italy" label="Constitutional Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q537151" start="37448" end="37454" title="pardon" label="pardon"/>
<link wikidata="Q16176775" start="37460" end="37485" title="Commutation of sentence" label="commutations of sentences"/>
<link wikidata="Q1117578" start="37834" end="37844" title="Parliament of Italy" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q79896" start="38033" end="38053" title="Separation of powers" label="Separation of powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q35798" start="38099" end="38108" title="executive (government)" label="executive"/>
<link wikidata="Q11204" start="38112" end="38123" title="legislature" label="legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q105985" start="38131" end="38140" title="judiciary" label="judiciary"/>
<link wikidata="Q720477" start="38143" end="38161" title="Westminster system" label="Westminster system"/>
<link wikidata="Q3036060" start="38164" end="38179" title="Donald Markwell" label="Donald Markwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5407255" start="38182" end="38195" title="Eugene Forsey" label="Eugene Forsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5546455" start="38198" end="38214" title="George Winterton" label="George Winterton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1388459" start="38217" end="38228" title="H. V. Evatt" label="H. V. Evatt"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="192755" wikidata="Q635990" url="?curid=192755" title="Yokosuka MXY-7 Ohka">
<text>The Yokosuka MXY-7 is a purpose-built, rocket-powered human-guided &quot;kamikaze&quot; attack-aircraft deployed by Japan against Allied ships in the Pacific Ocean theater toward the end of World War II. Although extremely fast, the &quot;Ohka&quot; had a very short range, so it had to be carried into action as a parasite aircraft by a much larger bomber that was vulnerable to carrier-borne fighters. In action during the Battle of Okinawa in 1945, &quot;Ohka&quot;s succeeded in sinking or damaging some escort-vessels and transport ships, but never sank any major warships. The Japanese developed improved versions in an attempt to overcome the aircraft&#x27;s shortcomings, but they came too late for deployment.

Allied personnel referred to the aircraft as &quot;Baka Bombs&quot; (&quot;baka&quot; being a Japanese pejorative term meaning &quot;fool&quot; or &quot;idiot&quot;).

==Design and development==
The MXY-7 Navy Suicide Attacker &quot;Ohka&quot; was a manned flying bomb that was usually carried underneath a Mitsubishi G4M2e Model 24J &quot;Betty&quot; bomber to within range of its target. On release, the pilot would first glide towards the target and when close enough he would fire the &quot;Ohka&quot;″s three solid-fuel rockets, one at a time or in unison, and fly the missile towards the ship that he intended to destroy.

The design was conceived by Ensign Mitsuo Ohta of the 405th Kōkūtai, aided by students of the Aeronautical Research Institute at the University of Tokyo. Ohta submitted his plans to the Yokosuka research facility. While Ohta had started work on the design in 1943 the authorities would not take an interest until the following year. The Imperial Japanese Navy decided the idea had merit and Yokosuka engineers of the Yokosuka Naval Air Technical Arsenal (Dai-Ichi Kaigun Koku Gijitsusho, or in short &quot;Kugisho&quot;) created formal blueprints for what was to be the MXY-7. The only variant which saw service was the Model 11, and it was powered by three Type 4 Mark 1 Model 20 rockets. 155 &quot;Ohka&quot; Model 11s were built at Yokosuka, and another 600 were built at the Kasumigaura Naval Air Arsenal.

The final approach was difficult for a defender to stop because the aircraft gained high speed ( in level flight and or even in a dive. Later versions were designed to be launched from coastal air bases and caves, and even from submarines equipped with aircraft catapults, although none were actually used in this way. The was the first Allied ship to be sunk by &quot;Ohka&quot; aircraft, near Okinawa on 12 April 1945. Over the course of the war, &quot;Ohka&quot;s sank or damaged beyond repair three ships and significantly damaged three more ships, with a total of seven U.S. ships damaged or sunk by &quot;Ohka&quot;s.

The &quot;Ohka&quot; pilots, members of the &quot;Jinrai Butai&quot; (Thunder Gods Corps), are honored in Japan at &quot;Ohka&quot; Park in Kashima City, the &quot;Ohka&quot; Monument in Kanoya City, the Kamakura &quot;Ohka&quot; Monument at Kenchō-ji Zen temple in Kamakura, Kanagawa, and the Yasukuni Shrine in Tokyo.


The only operational &quot;Ohka&quot; was the Model 11. Essentially a bomb with wooden wings, powered by three Type 4 Model 1 Mark 20 solid-fuel rocket motors, the Model 11 achieved great speed, but with limited range. This was problematic, as it required the slow, heavily laden mother aircraft to approach within of the target, making it very vulnerable to defending fighters. There was one experimental variant of the Model 11, the Model 21, which had thin steel wings manufactured by Nakajima. It had the engine of the Model 11 and the airframe of the Model 22.

The &quot;Ohka&quot; K-1 was an unpowered trainer version with water ballast instead of warhead and engines, that was used to provide pilots with handling experience. Unlike the combat aircraft, it was also fitted with flaps and a landing skid. The water ballast was dumped before landing but it remained a challenging aircraft to fly, with a landing speed of . Forty-five were built by Dai-Ichi Kaigun Koku Gijitsusho.

The Model 22 was designed to overcome the short standoff distance problem by using a Campini-type motorjet engine, the Ishikawajima Tsu-11, giving a level speed of only 276 mph at but extending the range to . This engine was successfully tested, and 50 Model 22 &quot;Ohka&quot;s were built at Yokosuka to accept this engine. The Model 22 was to be launched by the more agile Yokosuka P1Y3 &quot;Ginga&quot; &quot;Frances&quot; bomber, necessitating a shorter wing span and much smaller warhead. The first flight of a Model 22 &quot;Ohka&quot; took place in June 1945; none appear to have been used operationally, and only approximately 20 of the experimental Tsu-11 engines are known to have been produced.

The Model 33 was a larger version of the Model 22 powered by an Ishikawajima Ne-20 turbojet with an warhead. The mothership was to be the Nakajima G8N &quot;Renzan&quot;. The Model 33 was cancelled due to the likelihood that the &quot;Renzan&quot; would not be available.

Other unbuilt planned variants were the Model 43A with folding wings, to be launched from submarines, and the Model 43B, a catapult/rocket-assisted version, also with folding wings so that it could be hidden in caves. A trainer version was also under development for this version, the two-seat Model 43 K-1 Kai Wakazakura (Young Cherry), fitted with a single rocket motor. In place of the warhead, a second seat was installed for the student pilot. Two of this version were built. Finally, the Model 53 would also use the Ne-20 turbojet, but was to be towed like a glider and released near its target.

==Operational history==
The Yokosuka MXY-7 &quot;Ohka&quot; was used mostly against U.S. ships invading Okinawa, and if launched from its mothership, could be effective because of its high speed in the dive. In the first two attempts to transport the &quot;Ohka&quot;s to Leyte Gulf using aircraft carriers, the carriers and were sunk by the U.S. submarines and .

Attacks intensified in April 1945. On 1 April 1945 six G4Ms attacked the U.S. fleet off Okinawa. At least one made a successful attack; its &quot;Ohka&quot; was thought to have hit one of the 406 mm (16 in) turrets on the battleship , causing moderate damage. Postwar analysis indicated that no hits were recorded and that a near-miss took place. The transports , , and were also hit by &quot;kamikaze&quot; aircraft, but it is unclear whether any of these were &quot;Ohka&quot;s from the other G4Ms. None of the G4Ms returned.

The U.S. military quickly realized the danger and concentrated on extending their &quot;defensive rings&quot; outward to intercept the G4M/&quot;Ohka&quot; combination aircraft before the suicide mission could be launched. On 12 April 1945 nine G4Ms attacked the U.S. fleet off Okinawa. The destroyer was hit, broke in two, and sank. destroyed an &quot;Ohka&quot; with AA fire 45 m (50 yd) from the ship, but the resulting explosion was still powerful enough to cause extensive damage, forcing &quot;Jeffers&quot; to withdraw. The destroyer was attacked by two &quot;Ohka&quot;s. One struck above the waterline just behind the ship&#x27;s bow, its charge passing completely through the hull and splashing into the sea, where it detonated underwater, causing little damage to the ship. The other &quot;Ohka&quot; narrowly missed (its pilot probably killed by anti-aircraft fire) and crashed into the sea, knocking off the &quot;Stanly&quot;″s ensign in the process. One Betty returned. On 14 April 1945 seven G4Ms attacked the U.S. fleet off Okinawa. None returned. None of the &quot;Ohka&quot;s appeared to have been launched. Two days later, six G4Ms attacked the U.S. fleet off Okinawa. Two returned, but no &quot;Ohka&quot;s had hit their targets. Later, on 28 April 1945, four G4Ms attacked the U.S. fleet off Okinawa at night. One returned. No hits were recorded.

May 1945 saw another series of attacks. On 4 May 1945 seven G4Ms attacked the U.S. fleet off Okinawa. One &quot;Ohka&quot; hit the bridge of a destroyer, , causing extensive damage and casualties. was also damaged by an &quot;Ohka&quot;″s near miss. One G4M returned. On 11 May 1945 four G4Ms attacked the U.S. fleet off Okinawa. The destroyer was hit and suffered extensive damage and flooding. The vessel was judged beyond repair. On 25 May 1945 11 G4Ms attacked the fleet off Okinawa. Bad weather forced most of the aircraft to turn back, and none of the others hit targets.

On 22 June 1945 six G4Ms attacked the fleet. Two returned, but no hits were recorded. Postwar analysis concluded that the &quot;Ohka&quot;″s impact was negligible, since no U.S. Navy capital ships had been hit during the attacks because of the effective defensive tactics that were employed. In total, of the 300 &quot;Ohka&quot; available for the Okinawa campaign, 74 actually undertook operations, of which 56 were either destroyed with their parent aircraft or in making attacks. The Allied nickname for the aircraft was &quot;&quot;, a Japanese word meaning &quot;foolish&quot; or &quot;idiotic&quot;.

==Variants==
;MXY-7: Rocket powered suicide attacker, unpowered glider prototypes; ten built

;Navy Suicide Attacker &quot;Ohka&quot; Model 11: Long designation of the operational attacker

;&quot;Ohka&quot; Model 11: Suicide attacker powered by 3 × Navy Type 4 Mark 1 Model 20 solid-fueled rocket motors, firing for 8–10 seconds; 755 built

;&quot;Ohka&quot; Model 21: Suicide attacker, fitted with steel-built wings built by Nakajima; one built

;&quot;Ohka&quot; Model 22: Suicide attacker, powered by an Ishikawajima Tsu-11 thermo-jet engine with reduced span wings and warhead, to be carried by Yokosuka P1Y1 Ginga bombers. 50 built by the 
;&quot;Ohka&quot; Model 33: Suicide attacker, powered by an Ishikawajima Ne-20 turbojet engine, with an warhead, to be carried by the Nakajima G8N1 Renzan bomber

;&quot;Ohka&quot; Model 43A &quot;Ko&quot;: Suicide attacker, powered by a Ne-20 turbojet engine, with folding wings, to be catapult launched from submarines - unbuilt

;&quot;Ohka&quot; Model 43B &quot;Otsu&quot;: Suicide attacker similar to the Model 43A for catapult launching from caves - unbuilt

;&quot;Ohka&quot; Model 53: Suicide attacker for aerotow launch, powered by a Ne-20 turbojet engine

;&quot;Ohka&quot; K-1: Suicide attack training glider

;&quot;Ohka&quot; Model 43 K-1 : Two-seat suicide attack glider trainer with flaps and retractable skid undercarriage, fitted with a single Type 4 Mark 1 Model 20 rocket motor, for limited powered flight

;&quot;Suzuka-24&quot; (Japanese designation unknown): Alleged interceptor version with warhead replaced by a fuel tank for a Ne-20 jet engine and two 20 mm autocannon (Unknown Ho-5 or Type 99 with 60 / 150 rounds per gun) mounted on top. Supposedly employed at least twice against B-29 formations in April 1945

==Surviving aircraft==



===India===
;On display
* Model 11 on static display at the Indian Air Force Museum in Palam, New Delhi.

===Japan===
;On display
* Model 11 on static display at Iruma Air Force Base in Iruma, Saitama.
* On static display at the Kawaguchiko Motor Museum in Narusawa, Yamanashi.

===United Kingdom===
;On display
* Model 11 on static display at the Fleet Air Arm Museum in Yeovilton, Somerset.
* Model 11 on static display at the Imperial War Museum in London.
* Model 11 on static display at the Royal Air Force Museum Cosford in Cosford, Shropshire.
* Model 11 on static display at the Science and Industry Museum in Manchester.

===United States===
;On display
* Model 11 on static display at the National Museum of the Marine Corps in Triangle, Virginia.
* Model 11 on static display at the Planes of Fame Air Museum in Chino, California.
* Model 11 on static display at the Yanks Air Museum in Chino, California.
* Model 22 on static display at the Steven F. Udvar-Hazy Center of the National Air and Space Museum in Chantilly, Virginia, the only surviving Model 22.
* Model 43B K-1 Kai Wakazakura on static display at the Pima Air &amp; Space Museum in Tucson, Arizona. It is on loan from the National Air and Space Museum.
* K-1 on static display at the National Museum of the United States Air Force in Dayton, Ohio.
* K-1 on static display at the National Museum of the U.S. Navy in Washington, D.C.

==Replicas on display==

===Japan===
* Model 11 on static display at the Yūshūkan of the Yasukuni Shrine in Tokyo.
* Model 11 on static display at Usashi Heiwa Museum in Usa, Oita.

===United States===
* Model 11 on static display at the National Warplane Museum in Geneseo, New York.

==Specifications (&quot;Ohka&quot; 11)==
==See also==
==References==
===Bibliography===
* Ellis, Ken. &quot;Wreck &amp; Relics, 23rd Edition&quot; Manchester: Crecy Publishing Ltd, 2012. 
* 
* Maloney, Edward T. and the Aeronautical Staff of Aero Publishers, Inc. &quot;Kamikaze (Aero Series 7)&quot;. Fallbrook, California: Aero Publishers, Inc., 1966.
* 
* Sheftall, M.G. &quot;Blossoms in the Wind: Human Legacies of the Kamikaze&quot;. New York: New American Library, 2005. .
* Stafford, Edward P. &quot;Little Ship, Big War: The Saga of DE343.&quot; Annapolis, Maryland: Naval Institute Press, 2000. .


==External links==

* &quot;Baka... Flying Warhead&quot;, &quot;C.I.C. (Combat Information Center)&quot;, U.S. Office of the Chief of Naval Operations, June 1945.
* USS LSM(R)-193
* &quot;Popular Science&quot;,August 1945, &quot;Japanese Gamble On Human Bombs&quot;
* The History of Kamikaze &quot;Ohka&quot; 桜花 
* The Mysterious Second Seat – Air &amp; Space Magazine</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q635990" start="4" end="18" title="Yokosuka MXY-7 Ohka" label="Yokosuka MXY-7"/>
<link wikidata="Q849237" start="39" end="53" title="rocket-powered aircraft" label="rocket-powered"/>
<link wikidata="Q133194" start="73" end="81" title="kamikaze" label="kamikaze"/>
<link wikidata="Q188712" start="116" end="121" title="Empire of Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="130" end="136" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allied"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920892" start="150" end="171" title="Pacific Ocean theater of World War II" label="Pacific Ocean theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="190" end="202" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065322" start="315" end="332" title="parasite aircraft" label="parasite aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261534" start="380" end="401" title="Carrier-based aircraft" label="carrier-borne fighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q192660" start="425" end="442" title="Battle of Okinawa" label="Battle of Okinawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q225098" start="789" end="805" title="Baka (Japanese word)" label="&amp;quot;baka&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3268741" start="977" end="988" title="flying bomb" label="flying bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q697583" start="1027" end="1041" title="Mitsubishi G4M" label="Mitsubishi G4M"/>
<link wikidata="Q170877" start="1072" end="1078" title="bomber" label="bomber"/>
<link wikidata="Q280602" start="1234" end="1251" title="solid-fuel rocket" label="solid-fuel rocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q14595679" start="1377" end="1383" title="Ensign (rank)" label="Ensign"/>
<link wikidata="Q3198418" start="1409" end="1416" title="Kōkūtai" label="Kōkūtai"/>
<link wikidata="Q7842" start="1482" end="1501" title="University of Tokyo" label="University of Tokyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q219712" start="1686" end="1708" title="Imperial Japanese Navy" label="Imperial Japanese Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q158797" start="1749" end="1758" title="Military engineer" label="engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q649833" start="1766" end="1802" title="Yokosuka Naval Air Technical Arsenal" label="Yokosuka Naval Air Technical Arsenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q772817" start="2128" end="2139" title="Kasumigaura, Ibaraki" label="Kasumigaura"/>
<link wikidata="Q2811" start="2388" end="2397" title="submarine" label="submarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031873" start="2413" end="2430" title="aircraft catapult" label="aircraft catapult"/>
<link wikidata="Q766445" start="2555" end="2562" title="Okinawa Prefecture" label="Okinawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396078" start="3027" end="3036" title="Kenchō-ji" label="Kenchō-ji"/>
<link wikidata="Q200267" start="3037" end="3059" title="Kamakura" label="Zen temple in Kamakura"/>
<link wikidata="Q242803" start="3079" end="3094" title="Yasukuni Shrine" label="Yasukuni Shrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q127771" start="3476" end="3483" title="Fighter aircraft" label="fighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476227" start="3595" end="3603" title="Nakajima Aircraft Company" label="Nakajima"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738643" start="4180" end="4187" title="Secondo Campini" label="Campini"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545302" start="4193" end="4201" title="motorjet" label="motorjet"/>
<link wikidata="Q938992" start="4214" end="4233" title="Ishikawajima Tsu-11" label="Ishikawajima Tsu-11"/>
<link wikidata="Q391456" start="4471" end="4484" title="Yokosuka P1Y" label="Yokosuka P1Y3"/>
<link wikidata="Q512439" start="4868" end="4886" title="Ishikawajima Ne-20" label="Ishikawajima Ne-20"/>
<link wikidata="Q723916" start="4887" end="4895" title="turbojet" label="turbojet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1441390" start="4942" end="4954" title="Nakajima G8N" label="Nakajima G8N"/>
<link wikidata="Q2827941" start="5132" end="5144" title="folding wing" label="folding wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q41426" start="5297" end="5304" title="Trainer (aircraft)" label="trainer"/>
<link wikidata="Q86739852" start="6943" end="6945" title="Anti-aircraft" label="AA"/>
<link wikidata="Q301897" start="7213" end="7216" title="bow (ship)" label="bow"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9380" end="9407" title="Navy Type 4 Mark 1 Model 20" label="Navy Type 4 Mark 1 Model 20"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476227" start="9557" end="9565" title="Nakajima Aircraft Company" label="Nakajima"/>
<link wikidata="Q938992" start="9638" end="9657" title="Ishikawajima Tsu-11" label="Ishikawajima Tsu-11"/>
<link wikidata="Q391456" start="9730" end="9749" title="Yokosuka P1Y1 Ginga" label="Yokosuka P1Y1 Ginga"/>
<link wikidata="Q512439" start="9836" end="9854" title="Ishikawajima Ne-20" label="Ishikawajima Ne-20"/>
<link wikidata="Q1441390" start="9910" end="9930" title="Nakajima G8N1 Renzan" label="Nakajima G8N1 Renzan"/>
<link wikidata="Q512439" start="10728" end="10733" title="Ishikawajima Ne-20" label="Ne-20"/>
<link wikidata="Q15228644" start="11001" end="11024" title="Indian Air Force Museum, Palam" label="Indian Air Force Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q15265131" start="11028" end="11044" title="Palam" label="Palam, New Delhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3015843" start="11103" end="11123" title="Iruma Air Force Base" label="Iruma Air Force Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q696925" start="11127" end="11141" title="Iruma, Saitama" label="Iruma, Saitama"/>
<link wikidata="Q27628135" start="11170" end="11194" title="Kawaguchiko Motor Museum" label="Kawaguchiko Motor Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204384" start="11198" end="11217" title="Narusawa, Yamanashi" label="Narusawa, Yamanashi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5458381" start="11289" end="11309" title="Fleet Air Arm Museum" label="Fleet Air Arm Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2289892" start="11313" end="11332" title="Yeovilton, Somerset" label="Yeovilton, Somerset"/>
<link wikidata="Q749808" start="11370" end="11389" title="Imperial War Museum" label="Imperial War Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="11393" end="11399" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q7373617" start="11437" end="11467" title="Royal Air Force Museum Cosford" label="Royal Air Force Museum Cosford"/>
<link wikidata="Q3811765" start="11471" end="11490" title="Cosford, Shropshire" label="Cosford, Shropshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2638616" start="11528" end="11555" title="Science and Industry Museum" label="Science and Industry Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q18125" start="11559" end="11569" title="Manchester" label="Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q6974515" start="11640" end="11675" title="National Museum of the Marine Corps" label="National Museum of the Marine Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378358" start="11679" end="11697" title="Triangle, Virginia" label="Triangle, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3391415" start="11735" end="11760" title="Planes of Fame Air Museum" label="Planes of Fame Air Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q506395" start="11764" end="11781" title="Chino, California" label="Chino, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q8048823" start="11819" end="11835" title="Yanks Air Museum" label="Yanks Air Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055100" start="11894" end="11921" title="Steven F. Udvar-Hazy Center" label="Steven F. Udvar-Hazy Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q752669" start="11929" end="11958" title="National Air and Space Museum" label="National Air and Space Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q328451" start="11962" end="11981" title="Chantilly, Virginia" label="Chantilly, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3062422" start="12068" end="12095" title="Pima Air &amp;amp; Space Museum" label="Pima Air &amp;amp; Space Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q18575" start="12099" end="12114" title="Tucson, Arizona" label="Tucson, Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q752669" start="12139" end="12168" title="National Air and Space Museum" label="National Air and Space Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422977" start="12201" end="12247" title="National Museum of the United States Air Force" label="National Museum of the United States Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q34739" start="12251" end="12263" title="Dayton, Ohio" label="Dayton, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2790860" start="12296" end="12328" title="National Museum of the U.S. Navy" label="National Museum of the U.S. Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="12332" end="12348" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q2855971" start="12423" end="12431" title="Yūshūkan" label="Yūshūkan"/>
<link wikidata="Q242803" start="12439" end="12454" title="Yasukuni Shrine" label="Yasukuni Shrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1490" start="12458" end="12463" title="Tokyo" label="Tokyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q133924" start="12525" end="12529" title="Ōita Prefecture" label="Oita"/>
<link wikidata="Q4564908" start="12588" end="12612" title="National Warplane Museum" label="National Warplane Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3100558" start="12616" end="12633" title="Geneseo, New York" label="Geneseo, New York"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="192756" wikidata="Q2467600" url="?curid=192756" title="UNIVAC 1102">
<text>The UNIVAC 1102 or ERA 1102 was designed by Engineering Research Associates for the United States Air Force&#x27;s Arnold Engineering Development Center in Tullahoma, Tennessee in response to a request for proposal issued in 1950. The Air Force needed three computers to do data reduction for two wind tunnels and an engine test facility. 

The 1102 was a variant of the UNIVAC 1101, using its 24-bit word and a smaller (only 8,192 words) drum memory. The machine had 2,700 vacuum tubes, weighed , and occupied of floor area.

The computers were connected to data channels coming from the wind tunnels and the engine facility. There were five typewriters for printed output, five paper tape punches, and four pen plotters to produce graphs.

The three computers and related peripherals were delivered between July 1954 and July 1956 at a total price of $1,400,000. Software for the computers was developed entirely at the Arnold Engineering Development center. All programming was done in machine code (assemblers and compilers were never developed).

==See also==
*List of UNIVAC products
*History of computing hardware
*List of vacuum-tube computers

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2467600" start="4" end="15" title="UNIVAC 1102" label="UNIVAC 1102"/>
<link wikidata="Q2467600" start="19" end="27" title="UNIVAC 1102" label="ERA 1102"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258746" start="44" end="75" title="Engineering Research Associates" label="Engineering Research Associates"/>
<link wikidata="Q11223" start="84" end="107" title="United States Air Force" label="United States Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q4795040" start="115" end="152" title="Arnold Engineering Development Center" label="Arnold Engineering Development Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q3292530" start="156" end="176" title="Tullahoma, Tennessee" label="Tullahoma, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q193010" start="297" end="308" title="wind tunnel" label="wind tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q532714" start="371" end="382" title="UNIVAC 1101" label="UNIVAC 1101"/>
<link wikidata="Q908463" start="439" end="450" title="drum memory" label="drum memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q3574371" start="474" end="485" title="vacuum tube" label="vacuum tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q46335" start="643" end="653" title="typewriter" label="typewriter"/>
<link wikidata="Q66241" start="680" end="698" title="punched tape" label="paper tape punches"/>
<link wikidata="Q193255" start="709" end="720" title="Plotter (printer)" label="pen plotter"/>
<link wikidata="Q55813" start="989" end="1001" title="machine code" label="machine code"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1003" end="1013" title="Assembly language#Assembler" label="assemblers"/>
<link wikidata="Q47506" start="1018" end="1026" title="compiler" label="compiler"/>
<link wikidata="Q4436308" start="1066" end="1089" title="List of UNIVAC products" label="List of UNIVAC products"/>
<link wikidata="Q186148" start="1091" end="1120" title="History of computing hardware" label="History of computing hardware"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137429" start="1122" end="1151" title="List of vacuum-tube computers" label="List of vacuum-tube computers"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="192762" wikidata="Q504775" url="?curid=192762" title="Bladder cancer">
<text>Bladder cancer is the abnormal growth of cells in the bladder. These cells can grow to form a tumor, which eventually spreads, damaging the bladder and other organs. Most people with bladder cancer are diagnosed after noticing blood in their urine. Those suspected of having bladder cancer typically have their bladder inspected by a thin medical camera, a procedure called cystoscopy. Suspected tumors are removed and examined to determine if they are cancerous. Based on how far the tumor has spread, the cancer case is assigned a stage 0 to 4; a higher stage indicates a more widespread and dangerous disease. 

Those whose bladder tumors have not spread outside the bladder have the best prognoses. These tumors are typically surgically removed, and the person is treated with chemotherapy or one of several immune-stimulating therapies. Those whose tumors continue to grow, or whose tumors have penetrated the bladder muscle, often have their bladder surgically removed (radical cystectomy). People whose tumors have spread beyond the bladder have the worst prognoses; on average they survive a year from diagnosis. These people are treated with chemotherapy and immune checkpoint inhibitors, followed by enfortumab vedotin.

Around 500,000 people are diagnosed with bladder cancer each year, and 200,000 die of the disease. The risk of bladder cancer increases with age and the average age at diagnosis is 73. Tobacco smoking is the greatest contributor to bladder cancer risk, and causes around half of bladder cancer cases. Exposure to certain toxic chemicals or the tropical bladder infection schistosomiasis also increases the risk.

==Signs and symptoms==

The most common symptom of bladder cancer is visible blood in the urine (haematuria) despite painless urination. This affects around 75% of people eventually diagnosed with the disease. Some instead have &quot;microscopic haematuria&quot; – small amounts of blood in the urine that can only be seen under a microscope during urinalysis – pain while urinating, or no symptoms at all (their tumors are detected during unrelated medical imaging). Less commonly, a tumor can block the flow of urine into the bladder; backed up urine can cause the kidneys to swell resulting in pain along the flank of the body between the ribs and the hips. Most people with blood in the urine do not have bladder cancer; up to 22% of those with visible haematuria and 5% with microscopic haematuria are diagnosed with the disease. Women with bladder cancer and haematuria are often misdiagnosed with urinary tract infections, delaying appropriate diagnosis and treatment. 

Around 3% of people with bladder cancer have tumors that have already spread (metastasized) outside the bladder at the time of diagnosis. Bladder cancer most commonly spreads to the bones, lungs, liver, and nearby lymph nodes. Tumors cause different symptoms in each location. People whose cancer has metastasized to the bones most often experience bone pain or bone weakness that increases the risk of fractures. Lung tumors can cause persistent cough, coughing up blood, breathlessness, or recurrent chest infections. Cancer that has spread to the liver can cause general malaise, loss of appetite, weight loss, abdominal pain or swelling, jaundice (yellowing of the skin and eyes), and skin itch. Spreading to nearby lymph nodes can cause pain and swelling around the affected lymph nodes, typically in the abdomen or groin.

==Diagnosis==

Those suspected of having bladder cancer undergo several tests to assess the presence and extent of any tumors. The gold standard is cystoscopy, wherein a flexible camera is threaded through the urethra and into the bladder to visually inspect for cancerous tissue. Cystoscopy is most efficient at detecting papillary tumors (tumors with a finger-like shape that grow into the urine-holding part of the bladder); it is less efficient with small, low-lying carcinoma in situ (CIS). CIS detection is improved by blue light cystoscopy, where a dye (hexaminolevulinate) that accumulates in cancer cells is injected into the bladder during cystoscopy. The dye fluoresces when the cystoscope shines blue light on it, allowing for more accurate detection of small tumors.

Suspected tumors are removed during cystoscopy in a procedure called &quot;transurethral resection of bladder tumor&quot; (TURBT). All tumors are removed, as well as a piece of the underlying bladder muscle. Removed tissue is examined by a pathologist to determine if it is cancerous. If the tumor is removed incompletely, or is determined to be particularly high risk, a repeat TURBT is performed 4 to 6 weeks later to detect and remove any additional tumors.

Several non-invasive tests are available to support the diagnosis. First, many undergo a physical examination that can involve a digital rectal exam and pelvic exam, where a doctor feels the pelvic area for unusual masses that could be tumors. Severe bladder tumors often shed cells into the urine; these can be detected by urine cytology, where cells are collected from a urine sample, and viewed under a microscope. Cytology can detect around two thirds of high-grade tumors, but detects just 1 in 8 low-grade tumors. Additional urine tests can be used to detect molecules associated with bladder cancer. Some detect the bladder tumor antigen (BTA) protein, or NMP22 that tend to be elevated in the urine of those with bladder cancer; some detect the mRNA of tumor-associated genes; some use fluorescence microscopy to detect cancerous cells, which is more sensitive than regular microscopy.

The upper urinary tract (ureters and kidney) is also imaged for tumors that could cause blood in the urine. This is typically done by injecting a dye into the blood that the kidneys will filter into the urinary tract, then imaging by CT scanning. Those whose kidneys are not functioning well enough to filter the dye may instead be scanned by MRI. Alternatively, the upper urinary tract can be imaged with ultrasound.

===Classification===

Bladder tumors are classified by their appearance under the microscope, and by their cell type of origin. Over 90% of bladder tumors arise from the cells that form the bladder&#x27;s inner lining, called urothelial cells or transitional cells; the tumor is then classified as urothelial cancer or transitional cell cancer. Around 5% of cases are squamous cell cancer (from a rarer cell in the bladder lining), which are less rare in countries where schistosomiasis occurs. Up to 2% of cases are adenocarcinoma (from mucus-producing gland cells). The remaining cases are sarcomas (from the bladder muscle) or small-cell cancer (from neuroendocrine cells), both of which are relatively rare.

The pathologist also grades the tumor sample based on how distinct the cancerous cells look from healthy cells. Bladder cancer is divided into either low-grade (more similar to healthy cells) or high-grade (less similar).

===Staging===
A bladder cancer case is assigned a stage based on the TNM system. A tumor is assigned three scores based on the extent of the primary tumor (T), its spread to nearby lymph nodes (N), and metastasis to distant sites (M). 

The T score represents the extent of the original tumor. Tumors confined to the innermost layer of the bladder are designated Tis (for CIS tumors) or Ta (all others). Otherwise they are assigned a numerical score based on how far they have spread: into the bladder&#x27;s connective tissue (T1), bladder muscle (T2), surrounding fatty tissue (T3) or extension fully outside the bladder (T4). The N score represents spread to nearby lymph nodes: N0 for no spread; N1 for spread to a single nearby lymph node; N2 for spread to several nearby lymph nodes; N3 for spread to more distant lymph nodes outside the pelvis. The M score designates spread to distant organs: M0 for a tumor that has not spread; M1 for one that has. The TNM scores are combined to determine the cancer case&#x27;s stage on a scale of 0 to 4. A higher stage means a more extensive cancer with a poorer prognosis.

Around 75% of cases are confined to the bladder at the time of diagnosis (T scores: Tis, Ta, or T1), and are called non-muscle-invasive bladder cancer (NMIBC). Around 18% have tumors that have spread into the bladder muscle (T2, T3, or T4), and are called muscle-invasive bladder cancer (MIBC). Around 3% have tumors that have spread to organs far from the bladder, and are called metastatic bladder cancer. Those with more extensive tumor spread tend to have a poorer prognosis.

==Treatment==

===Non-muscle-invasive bladder cancer===

NMIBC is primarily treated by surgically removing all tumors by TURBT in the same procedure used to collect biopsy tissue for diagnosis. For those with a relatively low risk of tumors recurring, a single bladder injection of chemotherapy (mitomycin C, epirubicin, or gemcitabine) reduces the risk of tumors regrowing by about 40%. Those with higher risk are instead treated with bladder injections of the BCG vaccine (a live bacterial vaccine, traditionally used for tuberculosis), administered weekly for six weeks. This nearly halves the rate of tumor recurrence. Recurrence risk is further reduced by a series of &quot;maintenance&quot; BCG injections, given regularly for at least a year. Tumors that do not respond to BCG may be treated with the alternative immune stimulants nadofaragene firadenovec (sold as &quot;Adstiladrin&quot;, a gene therapy that makes bladder cells produce an immunostimulant protein), nogapendekin alfa inbakicept (&quot;Anktiva&quot;, a combination of immunostimulant proteins), or pembrolizumab (&quot;Keytruda&quot;, an immune checkpoint inhibitor).

People whose tumors continue to grow are often treated with surgery to remove the bladder and surrounding organs, called radical cystectomy. The bladder, several adjacent lymph nodes, the lower ureters, and nearby internal genital organs – in men the prostate and seminal vesicles; in women the womb and part of the vaginal wall – are all removed. 

Surgeons then construct a new way for urine to leave the body. The most common method is by ileal conduit, where a piece of the ileum (part of the small intestine) is removed and used to transport urine from the ureters to a new surgical opening (stoma) in the abdomen. Urine drains passively into an ostomy bag worn outside the body, which can be emptied regularly by the wearer. Alternatively, one can have a continent urinary diversion, where the ureters are attached to a piece of ileum that includes the valve between the small and large intestine; this valve naturally closes, allowing urine to be retained in the body rather than in an ostomy bag. The affected person empties the new urine reservoir several times each day by self-catheterization – passing a narrow tube through the stoma. Some can instead have the piece of ileum attached directly to the urethra, allowing the affected person to urinate through the urethra as they would pre-surgery – although without the original bladder nerves, they will no longer have the urge to urinate when the urine reservoir is full.

Those not well enough or unwilling to undergo radical cystectomy may instead benefit from further bladder injections of chemotherapy – mitomycin C, gemcitabine, docetaxel, or valrubicin – or intravenous injection of pembrolizumab. Around 1 in 5 people with NMIBC will eventually progress to MIBC.
Most people with muscle-invasive bladder cancer are treated with radical cystectomy, which cures around half of those affected. Treating with chemotherapy prior to surgery (called &quot;neoadjuvant therapy&quot;) using a cisplatin-containing drug combination (gemcitabine plus cisplatin; or methotrexate, vinblastine, doxorubicin, and cisplatin) improves survival an addition 5 to 10%.

Those with certain types of lower-risk disease may instead receive bladder-sparing therapy. People with just a single tumor at the back of the bladder can undergo partial cystectomy, with the tumor and surrounding area removed, and the bladder repaired. Those with no CIS or urinary blockage may undergo TURBT to remove visible tumors, followed by chemotherapy and radiotherapy, known as &quot;trimodality therapy&quot;. Around two thirds of these people are cured. After treatment, surveillance tests – urine and blood tests, and MRI or CT scans – are done every three to six months to look for evidence that tumors may be recurring. Those who have retained their bladder also receive cystoscopies to look for additional bladder tumors. If cancer is found in lymph nodes removed during surgery, or there is high risk of recurrence, radiotherapy may be given after surgery. Recurrent bladder tumors are treated with radical cystectomy. Tumor recurrences elsewhere are treated as metastatic bladder cancer.

===Metastatic disease===
Stage IV bladder cancer that has reached the pelvic or abdominal wall (T4b), spread to distant lymph nodes (M1a) or other parts of the body (M1b) is difficult to completely remove surgically, the initial treatment usually being chemotherapy.

The 2022 standard of care for metastatic bladder cancer is combination treatment with the chemotherapy drugs cisplatin and gemcitabine. The average person on this combination survives around a year, though 15% experience remission, with survival over five years. Around half of those with metastatic bladder cancer are in too poor health to receive cisplatin. They instead receive the related drug carboplatin along with gemcitabine; the average person on this regimen survives around 9 months. Those whose disease responds to chemotherapy benefit from switching to immune checkpoint inhibitors pembrolizumab or atezolizumab (&quot;Tecentriq&quot;) for long-term maintenance therapy. Immune checkpoint inhibitors are also commonly given to those whose tumors do not respond to chemotherapy, as well as those in too poor health to receive chemotherapy.

Alternate treatment options might include:
* the immunotherapy drug pembrolizumab (Keytruda) combined with the antibody-drug conjugate (ADC) enfortumab vedotin (Padcev). This combination has also been recommended as a first-line therapy in place of chemotherapy.
* the immunotherapy drug nivolumab (Opdivo) in conjunction with chemotherapy
* chemotherapy, followed by the immunotherapy drug avelumab (Bavencio)

Those whose tumors continue to grow after platinum chemotherapy and immune checkpoint inhibitors can receive the ADC enfortumab vedotin (&quot;Padcev&quot;, targets tumor cells with the protein nectin-4). Those with genetic alterations that activate the proteins FGFR2 or FGFR3 (around 20% of those with metastatic bladder cancer) can also benefit from the FGFR inhibitor erdafitinib (&quot;Balversa&quot;).

Bladder cancer that continues growing can be treated with second-line chemotherapies. Vinflunine is used in Europe, while paclitaxel, docetaxel, and pemetrexed are used in the United States; only a minority of those treated improve on these therapies.

If medicines are no longer controlling the cancer, other treatments may still be helpful, e.g., palliative care that focuses on preventing or relieving problems the cancer may cause.

Because metastatic bladder cancers are rarely cured by current treatment methods, many experts suggest considering clinical trials evaluating alternative treatments.

===Treatment adverse effects===
Radical cystectomy has both immediate and lifelong side effects. It is common for those recovering from surgery to experience gastrointestinal problems (29% of those who underwent radical cystectomy), infections (25%), and other issues with the surgical wound (15%). Around 25% of those who undergo the surgery end up readmitted to the hospital within 30 days; up to 2% die within 30 days of the surgery.

Rerouting the ureters, urinary diversions, can cause permanent metabolic issues. The piece of ileum used to reroute urine flow can absorb more ions from the urine than the original bladder would, resulting in metabolic acidosis (blood becoming too acidic), which can be treated with sodium bicarbonate.

Shortening the small intestine can result in reduced vitamin B12 absorption, which can be treated with oral vitamin B12 supplementation. Issues with the new urine system can cause urinary retention, which can damage the ureters and kidneys and increase one&#x27;s risk of urinary tract infection.

Chemotherapy common side effects include; hair loss, mouth sores, loss of appetite, diarrhea, nausea and vomiting, premature menopause, infertility, and damage to the blood-forming cells within bone marrow. Most acute side effects are temporary, dissipating when treatment ceases, but some can be long-lasting or permanent. Long-term chemotherapy side effects include changes in the menstrual cycle, neuropathy, and nephrotoxicity.

Checkpoint inhibitor (immunotherapy) side effects commonly include injection site pain, soreness, itchiness or rash. Additional flu-like symptoms may occur like fever, weakness, dizziness, nausea or vomiting, headache, fatigue, or blood pressure changes. More serious side effects might include heart palpitations, diarrhea, infection and organ inflammation. Some people might have allergic reactions with wheezing or breathing problems. Autoimmune reactions are possible because checkpoint inhibitors function by altering or removing immune system safeguards which can cause serious or even life-threatening problems.

Antibody-drug conjugate side effects frequently include diarrhea and liver problems. Other side effects might include issues with blood clotting and wound healing, high blood pressure, fatigue, mouth sores, nail changes, loss of hair color, skin rash, or dry skin. Very rarely, a hole might form through the wall of the esophagus, stomach, small intestine, large bowel, rectum, or gallbladder.

Radiotherapy acute side effects involve the gastrointestinal system, e.g., diarrhea and constipation; the urinary tract; and may cause cervicitis. Common late effects include: premature ovarian failure; telangiectasias, and subsequent hemorrhage; and progressive myelopathy. Pelvic radiotherapy late effects (with occurrence rates) include osteonecrosis (8-20%), vaginal stenosis (&gt;2.5%) and chronic pelvic radiation disease (1-10%), e.g., lumbosacral plexopathy. Radiation also induces secondary malignancies such as leukemia, lymphoma, bone and soft-tissue sarcoma with occurrence rates between 0.2-1.0% per year for each. See also: Radiation therapy#Side effects.

==Causes==

Bladder cancer is caused by changes to the DNA of bladder cells that result in those cells growing uncontrollably. These changes can be random, or can be induced by exposure to toxic substances such as those from consuming tobacco. Genetic damage accumulates over many years, eventually disrupting the normal functioning of bladder cells and causing them to grow uncontrollably into a lump of cells called a tumor. Cancers cells accumulate further DNA changes as they multiply, which can allow the tumor to evade the immune system, resist regular cell death pathways, and eventually spread to distant body sites. The new tumors that form in various organs damage those organs, eventually causing the death of the affected person.

===Smoking===

Tobacco smoking is the main contributor to bladder cancer risk; around half of bladder cancer cases are estimated to be caused by smoking. Tobacco smoke contains carcinogenic molecules that enter the blood and are filtered by the kidneys into the urine. There they can cause damage to the DNA of bladder cells, eventually leading to cancer. Bladder cancer risk rises both with number of cigarettes smoked per day, and with duration of smoking habit. Those who smoke also tend to have an increased risk of treatment failure, metastasis, and death. The risk of developing bladder cancer decreases in those who quit smoking, falling by 30% after five years of smoking abstention. However, the risk will remain higher than those who have never smoked before. Because development of bladder cancer takes many years, it is not yet known if use of electronic cigarettes carries the same risk as smoking tobacco; however, those who use electronic cigarettes have higher levels of some urinary carcinogens than those who do not.

===Occupational exposure===

Up to 10% of bladder cancer cases are caused by workplace exposure to toxic chemicals. Exposure to certain aromatic amines, namely benzidine, beta-naphthylamine, and ortho-toluidine used in the metalworking and dye industries, can increase the risk of bladder cancer in metalworkers, dye producers, painters, printers, hairdressers, and textiles workers. The International Agency for Research on Cancer further classifies rubber processing, aluminum production, and firefighting as occupations that increase one&#x27;s risk of developing bladder cancer. Exposure to arsenic – either through workplace exposure or through drinking water in places where arsenic naturally contaminates groundwater – is also commonly linked to bladder cancer risk. 

===Medical conditions===

Chronic bladder infections can increase one&#x27;s risk of developing bladder cancer. Most prominent is schistosomiasis, in which the eggs of the flatworm &quot;Schistosoma haematobium&quot; can become lodged in the bladder wall, causing chronic bladder inflammation and repeated bladder infections. In places with endemic schistosomiasis, up to 16% of bladder cancer cases are caused by prior Schistosoma infection. Worms can be cleared by treatment with praziquantel, which reduces bladder cancer cases in schistosomiasis endemic areas. Similarly, those with long-term indwelling catheters are at risk for repeated urinary tract infections, and have increased risk of developing bladder cancer.

Some medical treatments are also known to increase bladder cancer risk. As many as 16% of those treated with the chemotherapeutic cyclophosphamide go on to develop bladder cancer within 15 years of their treatment. Similarly, those treated with pelvic radiation (typically for prostate or cervical cancer) are at increased risk of developing bladder cancer five to 15 years after treatment. Long-term use of the medication pioglitazone for type 2 diabetes may increase bladder cancer risk.

===Genetics===
Bladder cancer does not typically run in families. Only 4% of those diagnosed with bladder cancer have a parent or sibling with the disease, potentially inheriting a gene syndrome associated with bladder cancer, for example:
* Mutations of the RB1 gene, while associated with 95% of Retinoblastoma cases, are also linked with bladder cancer.
* Cowden disease is caused by mutations in the PTEN gene; see Cowden syndrome#Genetics. People with this syndrome have increased risk of developing several cancers, including bladder cancer.
* Lynch syndrome is caused by mutations in DNA mismatch repair genes MLH1, MSH2, MSH6 or PMS2; see main article Hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC). People with this syndrome have increased risk of developing several cancers, including bladder and urinary tract cancers.

Large population studies have identified additional gene variants that each slightly increase bladder cancer risk. Most of these are variants in genes involved in metabolism of carcinogens (NAT2, GSTM1, and UGT1A6), controlling cell growth (TP63, CCNE1, MYC, and FGFR3), or repairing DNA damage (NBN, XRCC1 and 3, and ERCC2, 4, and 5).

===Diet and lifestyle===

Several studies have examined the impact of lifestyle factors on the risk of developing bladder cancer. A 2018 summary of evidence from the World Cancer Research Fund and American Institute for Cancer Research concluded that there is &quot;limited, suggestive evidence&quot; that consumption of tea, and a diet high in fruits and vegetables reduce a person&#x27;s risk of developing bladder cancer. They also considered available data on exercise, body fat, and consumption of dairy, red meat, fish, grains, legumes, eggs, fats, soft drinks, alcohol, juices, caffeine, sweeteners, and various vitamins and minerals; for each they found insufficient data to link the lifestyle factor to bladder cancer risk. Other studies have indicated a slight increased risk of developing bladder cancer in those who are overweight or obese, as well as a slight decrease in risk for those who undertake high levels of physical activity.

==Pathophysiology==

Bladder tumors typically arise from the urothelium, the cell layer that lines the urine-storing part of the bladder. Parts of the urothelium can accumulate DNA mutations over years, making these areas more likely to give rise to tumors. This effect, called field cancerization, can allow several tumors to arise in the same area, or tumors to re-emerge from a given area after a first tumor was removed. Additionally, a cell that becomes cancerous can grow to give rise to several tumors – nearby and recurrent tumors are often monoclonal (descended from the same cancerous cell).

Despite arising from the same tissue, NMIBC and MIBC develop along distinct pathways and bear distinct genetic mutations. Most NMIBC tumors start as low-grade papillary (finger-like, projecting into the bladder) tumors. Mutations in cell growth pathways are common. Most common are mutations that activate FGFR3 (present in up to 80% of NMIBC tumors). Mutations activating the growth pathway PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway are also common, including mutations in PIK3CA (in around 30% of tumors) and ERBB2/ERBB3 (up to 15% of tumors), and loss of TSC1 (50% of tumors). Major regulators of chromatin (influences the expression of different genes) are inactivated in over 65% of NMIBC tumors. 

MIBC often starts with low-lying, flat, high-grade tumors, that quickly spread beyond the bladder. These tumors have more genetic mutations and chromosomal abnormalities overall, with mutations more frequent than in any cancer but lung cancer and melanoma. Mutations that inactivate the tumor suppressor genes TP53 and RB are common, as are mutations in CDH1 (involved in metastasis) and VEGFR2 (involved in cell growth and metastasis).

Some genetic abnormalities are common to NMIBC and MIBC tumors. Around half of each have lost all or part of chromosome 9, which contains several regulators of tumor suppressor genes. Up to 80% of tumors have mutations in the gene TERT, which extends cells&#x27; telomeres to allow for extended replication.

==Prognosis==
Bladder cancer prognosis varies based on how widespread the cancer is at the time of diagnosis. For those with tumors confined to the innermost layer of the bladder (stage 0 disease), 96% are still alive five years from diagnosis. Those whose tumors have spread to nearby lymph nodes (stage 3 disease) have worse prognoses; 36% survive at least five years from diagnosis. Those with metastatic bladder cancer (stage 4 disease) have the most severe prognosis, with 5% alive five years from diagnosis.

==Epidemiology==
Around 500,000 people are diagnosed with bladder cancer each year, and 200,000 die of the disease. This makes bladder cancer the tenth most commonly diagnosed cancer, and the thirteenth cause of cancer deaths. Bladder cancer is most common in wealthier regions of the world, where exposure to certain carcinogens is highest. It is also common in places where schistosome infection is common, such as North Africa.

Bladder cancer is much more common in men than women; around 1.1% of men and 0.27% of women develop bladder cancer. This makes bladder cancer the sixth most common cancer in men, and the seventeenth in women. When women are diagnosed with bladder cancer, they tend to have more advanced disease and consequently a poorer prognosis. This difference in outcomes is attributed to numerous factors such as difference in carcinogen exposure, genetics, social factors and quality of care. 

As with most cancers, bladder cancer is more common in older people; the average person with bladder cancer is diagnosed at age 73. 80% of those diagnosed with bladder cancer are 65 or older; 20% are 85 or older.

== Veterinary medicine ==
Bladder cancer is relatively rare in domestic dogs and cats. In dogs, around 1% of diagnosed cancers are bladder cancer. Shetland sheepdogs, beagles, and various terriers are at increased risk relative to other breeds. Signs of a bladder tumor – blood in the urine, frequent urination, or trouble urinating – are common to other canine urinary conditions, and so diagnosis is often delayed. Urine tests can aid in diagnosis; they test for the protein bladder tumor antigen (high in bladder tumors) or mutations in the BRAF gene (present in around 80% of dogs with bladder or prostate cancer). Dogs with confirmed cancer are treated with COX-2 inhibitor drugs, such as piroxicam, deracoxib, and meloxicam. These drugs halt disease progression in around 50% of dogs, shrink tumors in around 12%, and eliminate tumors in around 6%. COX-2 inhibitors are often combined with chemotherapy drugs, most commonly mitoxantrone, vinblastine, or chlorambucil. Bladder cancer is much less common in cats than in dogs; treatment is similar to that of canine bladder cancer, with chemotherapy and COX-2 inhibitors commonly used.

== References ==
=== Works cited ===
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q504775" start="0" end="14" title="Bladder cancer" label="Bladder cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216998" start="22" end="46" title="neoplasm" label="abnormal growth of cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q9382" start="54" end="61" title="bladder" label="bladder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216998" start="94" end="99" title="tumor" label="tumor"/>
<link wikidata="Q373597" start="227" end="247" title="hematuria" label="blood in their urine"/>
<link wikidata="Q246090" start="374" end="384" title="cystoscopy" label="cystoscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752284" start="533" end="538" title="cancer staging" label="stage"/>
<link wikidata="Q974135" start="781" end="793" title="chemotherapy" label="chemotherapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q245995" start="976" end="994" title="radical cystectomy" label="radical cystectomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2012719" start="1168" end="1195" title="immune checkpoint inhibitor" label="immune checkpoint inhibitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q19904068" start="1210" end="1228" title="enfortumab vedotin" label="enfortumab vedotin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7212330" start="1416" end="1431" title="Tobacco smoking" label="Tobacco smoking"/>
<link wikidata="Q221159" start="1602" end="1617" title="schistosomiasis" label="schistosomiasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q373597" start="1721" end="1739" title="blood in the urine" label="blood in the urine"/>
<link wikidata="Q842424" start="1993" end="2003" title="urinalysis" label="urinalysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q931309" start="2094" end="2109" title="medical imaging" label="medical imaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q730877" start="2211" end="2227" title="Hydronephrosis" label="kidneys to swell"/>
<link wikidata="Q221668" start="2548" end="2571" title="urinary tract infection" label="urinary tract infection"/>
<link wikidata="Q170758" start="2836" end="2846" title="lymph node" label="lymph node"/>
<link wikidata="Q68833" start="3025" end="3034" title="bone fracture" label="fractures"/>
<link wikidata="Q647099" start="3076" end="3093" title="hemoptysis" label="coughing up blood"/>
<link wikidata="Q2673323" start="3196" end="3203" title="malaise" label="malaise"/>
<link wikidata="Q193889" start="3254" end="3262" title="Ascites" label="swelling"/>
<link wikidata="Q133244" start="3264" end="3272" title="jaundice" label="jaundice"/>
<link wikidata="Q514654" start="3582" end="3595" title="Gold standard (test)" label="gold standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q246090" start="3599" end="3609" title="cystoscopy" label="cystoscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9386" start="3661" end="3668" title="urethra" label="urethra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035645" start="3922" end="3939" title="carcinoma in situ" label="carcinoma in situ"/>
<link wikidata="Q246090" start="3976" end="3997" title="blue light cystoscopy" label="blue light cystoscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5749089" start="4012" end="4030" title="hexaminolevulinate" label="hexaminolevulinate"/>
<link wikidata="Q594341" start="4823" end="4842" title="digital rectal exam" label="digital rectal exam"/>
<link wikidata="Q763803" start="4847" end="4858" title="pelvic exam" label="pelvic exam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7900629" start="5018" end="5032" title="urine cytology" label="urine cytology"/>
<link wikidata="Q196538" start="5100" end="5110" title="microscope" label="microscope"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541222" start="5153" end="5163" title="grading (tumors)" label="high-grade"/>
<link wikidata="Q131764994" start="5317" end="5338" title="bladder tumor antigen" label="bladder tumor antigen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3869592" start="5357" end="5362" title="NMP22" label="NMP22"/>
<link wikidata="Q188928" start="5447" end="5451" title="mRNA" label="mRNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q840211" start="5488" end="5511" title="fluorescence microscopy" label="fluorescence microscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3808900" start="5553" end="5562" title="Sensitivity and specificity" label="sensitive"/>
<link wikidata="Q9385" start="5614" end="5620" title="ureter" label="ureter"/>
<link wikidata="Q9377" start="5626" end="5632" title="kidney" label="kidney"/>
<link wikidata="Q97278476" start="5823" end="5834" title="Computed tomography urography" label="CT scanning"/>
<link wikidata="Q161238" start="5932" end="5935" title="magnetic resonance imaging" label="MRI"/>
<link wikidata="Q234904" start="5995" end="6005" title="Medical ultrasound" label="ultrasound"/>
<link wikidata="Q2501186" start="6327" end="6351" title="transitional cell cancer" label="transitional cell cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q681817" start="6376" end="6396" title="squamous cell cancer" label="squamous cell cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q221159" start="6479" end="6494" title="schistosomiasis" label="schistosomiasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q356033" start="6525" end="6539" title="adenocarcinoma" label="adenocarcinoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q3649349" start="6546" end="6551" title="mucus" label="mucus"/>
<link wikidata="Q223911" start="6600" end="6607" title="sarcoma" label="sarcoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q738170" start="6638" end="6655" title="small-cell cancer" label="small-cell cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q10599959" start="6662" end="6681" title="neuroendocrine cell" label="neuroendocrine cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541222" start="6742" end="6748" title="cancer grading" label="grades"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752284" start="6994" end="6999" title="cancer staging" label="stage"/>
<link wikidata="Q668115" start="7013" end="7023" title="TNM system" label="TNM system"/>
<link wikidata="Q19856779" start="8842" end="8853" title="mitomycin C" label="mitomycin C"/>
<link wikidata="Q425122" start="8855" end="8865" title="epirubicin" label="epirubicin"/>
<link wikidata="Q414143" start="8870" end="8881" title="gemcitabine" label="gemcitabine"/>
<link wikidata="Q798309" start="9008" end="9019" title="BCG vaccine" label="BCG vaccine"/>
<link wikidata="Q12204" start="9070" end="9082" title="tuberculosis" label="tuberculosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q115779373" start="9384" end="9408" title="nadofaragene firadenovec" label="nadofaragene firadenovec"/>
<link wikidata="Q213901" start="9445" end="9457" title="gene therapy" label="gene therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q901656" start="9494" end="9509" title="immunostimulant" label="immunostimulant"/>
<link wikidata="Q125693729" start="9520" end="9548" title="nogapendekin alfa inbakicept" label="nogapendekin alfa inbakicept"/>
<link wikidata="Q13896859" start="9618" end="9631" title="pembrolizumab" label="pembrolizumab"/>
<link wikidata="Q2012719" start="9658" end="9685" title="immune checkpoint inhibitor" label="immune checkpoint inhibitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q245995" start="9810" end="9828" title="radical cystectomy" label="radical cystectomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q170758" start="9860" end="9870" title="lymph node" label="lymph node"/>
<link wikidata="Q9385" start="9883" end="9889" title="ureter" label="ureter"/>
<link wikidata="Q9625" start="9940" end="9948" title="prostate" label="prostate"/>
<link wikidata="Q217259" start="9953" end="9969" title="seminal vesicles" label="seminal vesicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q9612" start="9984" end="9988" title="womb" label="womb"/>
<link wikidata="Q5880" start="10005" end="10011" title="vagina" label="vagina"/>
<link wikidata="Q17126526" start="10131" end="10144" title="ileal conduit urinary diversion" label="ileal conduit"/>
<link wikidata="Q233345" start="10167" end="10172" title="ileum" label="ileum"/>
<link wikidata="Q216635" start="10286" end="10291" title="stoma" label="stoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q4210298" start="10340" end="10350" title="ostomy bag" label="ostomy bag"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10450" end="10477" title="continent urinary diversion" label="continent urinary diversion"/>
<link wikidata="Q652297" start="10777" end="10792" title="catheterization" label="catheterization"/>
<link wikidata="Q19856779" start="11260" end="11271" title="mitomycin C" label="mitomycin C"/>
<link wikidata="Q414143" start="11273" end="11284" title="gemcitabine" label="gemcitabine"/>
<link wikidata="Q420436" start="11286" end="11295" title="docetaxel" label="docetaxel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7912593" start="11300" end="11310" title="valrubicin" label="valrubicin"/>
<link wikidata="Q640448" start="11316" end="11337" title="intravenous injection" label="intravenous injection"/>
<link wikidata="Q13896859" start="11341" end="11354" title="pembrolizumab" label="pembrolizumab"/>
<link wikidata="Q6991934" start="11608" end="11627" title="neoadjuvant therapy" label="neoadjuvant therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q412415" start="11643" end="11652" title="cisplatin" label="cisplatin"/>
<link wikidata="Q422232" start="11713" end="11725" title="methotrexate" label="methotrexate"/>
<link wikidata="Q18936" start="11740" end="11751" title="doxorubicin" label="doxorubicin"/>
<link wikidata="Q245995" start="11972" end="11990" title="partial cystectomy" label="partial cystectomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q180507" start="12174" end="12186" title="radiotherapy" label="radiotherapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7598360" start="13093" end="13109" title="standard of care" label="standard of care"/>
<link wikidata="Q412415" start="13193" end="13202" title="cisplatin" label="cisplatin"/>
<link wikidata="Q414143" start="13207" end="13218" title="gemcitabine" label="gemcitabine"/>
<link wikidata="Q415588" start="13482" end="13493" title="carboplatin" label="carboplatin"/>
<link wikidata="Q13896859" start="13679" end="13692" title="pembrolizumab" label="pembrolizumab"/>
<link wikidata="Q20707748" start="13696" end="13708" title="atezolizumab" label="atezolizumab"/>
<link wikidata="Q6736822" start="13747" end="13766" title="maintenance therapy" label="maintenance therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069596" start="14048" end="14077" title="Antibody–drug conjugate" label="antibody-drug conjugate (ADC)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7041828" start="14225" end="14234" title="nivolumab" label="nivolumab"/>
<link wikidata="Q21083261" start="14328" end="14336" title="avelumab" label="avelumab"/>
<link wikidata="Q19904068" start="14466" end="14484" title="enfortumab vedotin" label="enfortumab vedotin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6985829" start="14543" end="14551" title="nectin-4" label="nectin-4"/>
<link wikidata="Q24780051" start="14612" end="14626" title="FGFR" label="FGFR2 or FGFR3"/>
<link wikidata="Q27077213" start="14721" end="14732" title="erdafitinib" label="erdafitinib"/>
<link wikidata="Q2195393" start="14844" end="14854" title="Vinflunine" label="Vinflunine"/>
<link wikidata="Q423762" start="14880" end="14890" title="paclitaxel" label="paclitaxel"/>
<link wikidata="Q420436" start="14892" end="14901" title="docetaxel" label="docetaxel"/>
<link wikidata="Q415220" start="14907" end="14917" title="pemetrexed" label="pemetrexed"/>
<link wikidata="Q29483" start="15107" end="15122" title="palliative care" label="palliative care"/>
<link wikidata="Q30612" start="15310" end="15324" title="clinical trial" label="clinical trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q36496" start="15943" end="15946" title="ion" label="ion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1598200" start="16009" end="16027" title="metabolic acidosis" label="metabolic acidosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q179731" start="16083" end="16101" title="sodium bicarbonate" label="sodium bicarbonate"/>
<link wikidata="Q187706" start="16157" end="16168" title="vitamin B12" label="vitamin B12"/>
<link wikidata="Q730877" start="16313" end="16343" title="hydronephrosis" label="damage the ureters and kidneys"/>
<link wikidata="Q1468324" start="16818" end="16832" title="nephrotoxicity" label="nephrotoxicity"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17217" end="17235" title="Intravenous therapy#Adverse effects" label="allergic reactions"/>
<link wikidata="Q2463884" start="17985" end="17995" title="cervicitis" label="cervicitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q647630" start="18026" end="18051" title="Primary ovarian insufficiency" label="premature ovarian failure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1634800" start="18053" end="18068" title="telangiectasias" label="telangiectasias"/>
<link wikidata="Q2303951" start="18101" end="18123" title="myelopathy" label="progressive myelopathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q503629" start="18190" end="18203" title="osteonecrosis" label="osteonecrosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q55636901" start="18213" end="18229" title="vaginal stenosis" label="vaginal stenosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7280350" start="18253" end="18277" title="Radiation enteropathy" label="pelvic radiation disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q55631042" start="18293" end="18315" title="Radiation-induced lumbar plexopathy" label="lumbosacral plexopathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q29496" start="18371" end="18379" title="leukemia" label="leukemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q208414" start="18381" end="18389" title="lymphoma" label="lymphoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q720020" start="18400" end="18419" title="soft-tissue sarcoma" label="soft-tissue sarcoma"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18488" end="18518" title="Radiation therapy#Side effects" label="Radiation therapy#Side effects"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430" start="18576" end="18579" title="DNA" label="DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q42918" start="18981" end="18992" title="mutation" label="DNA changes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059" start="19050" end="19063" title="immune system" label="immune system"/>
<link wikidata="Q304484" start="19080" end="19098" title="cell death pathway" label="cell death pathway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7212330" start="19279" end="19294" title="Tobacco smoking" label="Tobacco smoking"/>
<link wikidata="Q187661" start="19441" end="19451" title="carcinogen" label="carcinogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2462253" start="19887" end="19899" title="smoking cessation" label="quit smoking"/>
<link wikidata="Q189511" start="20120" end="20140" title="electronic cigarette" label="electronic cigarette"/>
<link wikidata="Q584276" start="20436" end="20450" title="aromatic amine" label="aromatic amine"/>
<link wikidata="Q410066" start="20460" end="20469" title="benzidine" label="benzidine"/>
<link wikidata="Q209450" start="20471" end="20489" title="beta-naphthylamine" label="beta-naphthylamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q311695" start="20495" end="20510" title="ortho-toluidine" label="ortho-toluidine"/>
<link wikidata="Q552168" start="20688" end="20731" title="International Agency for Research on Cancer" label="International Agency for Research on Cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q871" start="20895" end="20902" title="arsenic" label="arsenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4796457" start="20981" end="21023" title="Arsenic contamination of groundwater" label="arsenic naturally contaminates groundwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q221159" start="21206" end="21221" title="schistosomiasis" label="schistosomiasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q134582" start="21263" end="21286" title="Schistosoma haematobium" label="Schistosoma haematobium"/>
<link wikidata="Q123452" start="21417" end="21424" title="endemic" label="endemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q424145" start="21558" end="21570" title="praziquantel" label="praziquantel"/>
<link wikidata="Q652297" start="21673" end="21692" title="indwelling catheter" label="indwelling catheter"/>
<link wikidata="Q408524" start="21930" end="21946" title="cyclophosphamide" label="cyclophosphamide"/>
<link wikidata="Q417765" start="22223" end="22235" title="pioglitazone" label="pioglitazone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3025883" start="22240" end="22255" title="type 2 diabetes" label="type 2 diabetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q21111463" start="22550" end="22558" title="Retinoblastoma protein" label="RB1 gene"/>
<link wikidata="Q500695" start="22589" end="22603" title="Retinoblastoma" label="Retinoblastoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138188" start="22650" end="22664" title="Cowden disease" label="Cowden disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q416356" start="22695" end="22704" title="PTEN (gene)" label="PTEN gene"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22710" end="22734" title="Cowden syndrome#Genetics" label="Cowden syndrome#Genetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q783644" start="22841" end="22855" title="Lynch syndrome" label="Lynch syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984243" start="22882" end="22901" title="DNA mismatch repair" label="DNA mismatch repair"/>
<link wikidata="Q14911708" start="22908" end="22912" title="MLH1" label="MLH1"/>
<link wikidata="Q14911688" start="22914" end="22918" title="MSH2" label="MSH2"/>
<link wikidata="Q14911717" start="22920" end="22924" title="MSH6" label="MSH6"/>
<link wikidata="Q18030629" start="22928" end="22932" title="PMS2" label="PMS2"/>
<link wikidata="Q783644" start="22951" end="22992" title="Hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer" label="Hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q349856" start="23177" end="23189" title="gene variant" label="gene variant"/>
<link wikidata="Q17680081" start="23315" end="23319" title="NAT2" label="NAT2"/>
<link wikidata="Q18026580" start="23321" end="23326" title="GSTM1" label="GSTM1"/>
<link wikidata="Q18041117" start="23332" end="23338" title="UGT1A6" label="UGT1A6"/>
<link wikidata="Q15313986" start="23366" end="23370" title="TP63" label="TP63"/>
<link wikidata="Q5198275" start="23372" end="23377" title="CCNE1" label="CCNE1"/>
<link wikidata="Q20969939" start="23379" end="23382" title="MYC" label="MYC"/>
<link wikidata="Q14914358" start="23388" end="23393" title="FGFR3" label="FGFR3"/>
<link wikidata="Q210538" start="23409" end="23419" title="DNA damage" label="DNA damage"/>
<link wikidata="Q14912001" start="23421" end="23424" title="NBN (gene)" label="NBN"/>
<link wikidata="Q14911899" start="23426" end="23431" title="XRCC1" label="XRCC1"/>
<link wikidata="Q18032395" start="23436" end="23437" title="XRCC3" label="3"/>
<link wikidata="Q426168" start="23443" end="23448" title="ERCC2" label="ERCC2"/>
<link wikidata="Q17917469" start="23450" end="23451" title="ERCC4" label="4"/>
<link wikidata="Q17917470" start="23457" end="23458" title="ERCC5" label="5"/>
<link wikidata="Q8035469" start="23628" end="23654" title="World Cancer Research Fund" label="World Cancer Research Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q4744135" start="23659" end="23697" title="American Institute for Cancer Research" label="American Institute for Cancer Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q145909" start="23996" end="24003" title="Legume" label="legumes"/>
<link wikidata="Q12174" start="24308" end="24313" title="obese" label="obese"/>
<link wikidata="Q17119253" start="24689" end="24708" title="field cancerization" label="field cancerization"/>
<link wikidata="Q6901461" start="24960" end="24970" title="monoclonal" label="monoclonal"/>
<link wikidata="Q14914358" start="25320" end="25325" title="FGFR3" label="FGFR3"/>
<link wikidata="Q7119288" start="25406" end="25427" title="PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway" label="PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway"/>
<link wikidata="Q14887700" start="25468" end="25474" title="PIK3CA" label="PIK3CA"/>
<link wikidata="Q415271" start="25505" end="25510" title="ERBB2" label="ERBB2"/>
<link wikidata="Q17917132" start="25511" end="25516" title="ERBB3" label="ERBB3"/>
<link wikidata="Q898669" start="25552" end="25556" title="TSC1" label="TSC1"/>
<link wikidata="Q180951" start="25594" end="25603" title="chromatin" label="chromatin"/>
<link wikidata="Q47912" start="25929" end="25940" title="lung cancer" label="lung cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q180614" start="25945" end="25953" title="melanoma" label="melanoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q422445" start="25985" end="26001" title="tumor suppressor" label="tumor suppressor"/>
<link wikidata="Q283350" start="26008" end="26012" title="TP53" label="TP53"/>
<link wikidata="Q21111463" start="26017" end="26019" title="Retinoblastoma protein" label="RB"/>
<link wikidata="Q17859787" start="26052" end="26056" title="CDH1 (gene)" label="CDH1"/>
<link wikidata="Q18028241" start="26086" end="26092" title="VEGFR2" label="VEGFR2"/>
<link wikidata="Q840604" start="26245" end="26257" title="chromosome 9" label="chromosome 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q422445" start="26296" end="26312" title="tumor suppressor" label="tumor suppressor"/>
<link wikidata="Q15315135" start="26367" end="26371" title="TERT" label="TERT"/>
<link wikidata="Q14872779" start="26399" end="26407" title="telomere" label="telomere"/>
<link wikidata="Q2716347" start="26663" end="26688" title="five-year survival" label="five years from diagnosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1457418" start="27336" end="27347" title="schistosome" label="schistosome"/>
<link wikidata="Q7162" start="27829" end="27837" title="genetics" label="genetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q39058" start="28238" end="28255" title="Shetland sheepdog" label="Shetland sheepdog"/>
<link wikidata="Q21102" start="28258" end="28264" title="beagle" label="beagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q38984" start="28279" end="28286" title="terrier" label="terrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q131764994" start="28568" end="28589" title="bladder tumor antigen" label="bladder tumor antigen"/>
<link wikidata="Q17853226" start="28635" end="28639" title="BRAF (gene)" label="BRAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q377458" start="28754" end="28769" title="Cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitor" label="COX-2 inhibitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q408676" start="28785" end="28794" title="piroxicam" label="piroxicam"/>
<link wikidata="Q5261287" start="28796" end="28805" title="deracoxib" label="deracoxib"/>
<link wikidata="Q414028" start="28811" end="28820" title="meloxicam" label="meloxicam"/>
<link wikidata="Q239426" start="29021" end="29033" title="mitoxantrone" label="mitoxantrone"/>
<link wikidata="Q282629" start="29035" end="29046" title="vinblastine" label="vinblastine"/>
<link wikidata="Q415939" start="29051" end="29063" title="chlorambucil" label="chlorambucil"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="192764" wikidata="Q14705894" url="?curid=192764" title="Union County Magnet High School">
<text>The Union County Magnet High School (UCMHS) is a magnet public high school located in Scotch Plains on the Union County Vocational Technical Schools Campus, serving the vocational and technical educational needs of students in ninth through twelfth grades throughout Union County, in the U.S. state of New Jersey. The school&#x27;s goal is to prepare students for college/vocational training utilizing technology through problem solving, project-based learning, and interdisciplinary education. Students must apply to enter the school and the school accepts one-thirds of applicants. The school is accredited until July 2031 and has been accredited by the Middle States Association of Colleges and Schools Commission on Elementary and Secondary Schools since 2001.

As of the 2023–24 school year, the school had an enrollment of 311 students and 14.9 classroom teachers (on an FTE basis), for a student–teacher ratio of 20.9:1. There were 15 students (4.8% of enrollment) eligible for free lunch and 5 (1.6% of students) eligible for reduced-cost lunch.

==History==
The concept of a magnet high school for Union County was first proposed by Superintendent Thomas Bistocchi in December 1995. After originally rejecting the proposal in August 1996, the Union County Board of Chosen Freeholders approved $5.1 million in funding for the school in February 1997. The school opened to students in September 1997, with the first class of 51 students graduating in June 2001. The building was dedicated in honor of Board of Education president Charles Mancuso in March 1998.

==Awards, recognition and rankings==
Union County Magnet High School was recognized by Governor Jim McGreevey in 2003 as one of 25 schools selected statewide for the First Annual Governor&#x27;s School of Excellence award.

Union County Magnet High School was awarded the Blue Ribbon School Award of Excellence by the United States Department of Education, the highest award an American school can receive, during the 2004–05 school year. In September 2013, the school was honored for a second time when it was one of 15 in New Jersey to be recognized by the Department of Education as part of the National Blue Ribbon Schools Program, an award called the &quot;most prestigious honor in the United States&#x27; education system&quot; and which Education Secretary Arne Duncan described as honoring schools that &quot;represent examples of educational excellence&quot;.

Union County Magnet High School was cited as a &quot;Public Elite&quot;, one of 22 such schools recognized nationwide in &quot;Newsweek&quot; magazine&#x27;s listing of &quot;America&#x27;s Best High Schools&quot; in the May 8, 2006, issue. Newsweek described that the school&#x27;s &quot;Focus is on science, math and technology&quot;.

In &quot;Newsweek&#x27;s&quot; May 22, 2007 issue, ranking the country&#x27;s top high schools, Union County Magnet High School was listed in 598th place, the 12th-highest ranked school in New Jersey.

In 2005–06, the school averaged a 1922 combined SAT score, fourth highest of all public high schools statewide.

In 2008, Magnet High School, along with the Academy for Allied Health Sciences, was named #1 youth per capita in the entire nation by the American Cancer Society for their Relay for Life. In total, the schools raised over $73,000.

In 2009, Magnet High School, along with the other UCVTS schools, was named #1 youth per capita in the entire nation by the American Cancer Society for their Relay For Life program. In total, the schools raised over $115,000.

Schooldigger.com ranked the school as one of 16 schools tied for first out of 381 public high schools statewide in its 2011 rankings (unchanged from the 2010 ranking) which were based on the combined percentage of students classified as proficient or above proficient on the language arts literacy (100.0%) and mathematics (100.0%) components of the High School Proficiency Assessment (HSPA).

In 2011, Magnet High School was named a Silver Medal School and ranked #70 in the Nation as one of the best math and science high school according to &quot;U.S. News &amp; World Report&quot;.

In its 2013 report on &quot;America&#x27;s Best High Schools&quot;, &quot;The Daily Beast&quot; ranked the school 65th in the nation among participating public high schools and 5th among schools in New Jersey. The school was ranked 102nd in the nation and fifth in New Jersey on the list of &quot;America&#x27;s Best High Schools 2012&quot; prepared by &quot;The Daily Beast&quot; / &quot;Newsweek&quot;, with rankings based 25% each on graduation rate, matriculation rate for college and number of Advanced Placement / International Baccalaureate courses taken per student, with 10% based on average scores on the SAT / ACT, 10% on AP/IB scores and an additional 5% based on the number of AP/IB courses available to students.

In Newsweek&#x27;s 2014 &quot;America&#x27;s Best High Schools&quot;, Magnet was ranked 2nd in the nation.

In its listing of &quot;America&#x27;s Best High Schools 2016&quot;, the school was ranked 4th out of 500 best high schools in the country; it was ranked 2nd among all high schools in New Jersey.

==Admissions==
Applicants to the high school proceed through the admission process as follows:
*Attendance at an information session 
*Submission of an application to the Principal&#x27;s office
*Admissions examination
*Notification of acceptance

The following criteria will be considered for admission:
*Final Grades for the 7th-grade year.
*First marking period grades for the 8th-grade year.
*Admissions test exam.

==Schedule==
Magnet classes run on a block scheduling system. Two revolving days (A/B) are broken up into five blocks (1/2, 3/4, 5/6, 7/8, 9/10). Each block is 83 minutes in length, with the exception of 5/6. Depending on the student&#x27;s grade level, periods 5 and 6 are Co-Curricular and the Lunch period, in some order.

==Graduation Requirements==
In order to graduate from the Union County Magnet High School, a student is required to have taken:
*Four years of English
**Freshmen: English I - World Literature
**Sophomore: English II - Early American Literature
**Junior: English III - Modern American Literature
**Senior: English IV: Choice of several different courses (British Literature, AP English Language and Composition, AP English Literature and Composition, etc.)
*Four years of Mathematics. Mathematics courses depend on an individual&#x27;s skill level, which is determined based on an initial assessment in the 8th grade year. Students are placed into one of the following classes each year:
** Combined Algebra (Algebra 1 &amp; 2)
** Geometry/Trigonometry
** Math Analysis (Pre-Calculus)
** AP Calculus AB
** AP Calculus BC
** Multivariable Calculus 
** Mathematical Statistics and Data Sciences
*Four years of Science
**Freshmen: Biology I, Scientific Inquiry &amp; Analysis
**Sophomore: Chemistry I, choice of Physics I
**Junior: Physics I (if not taken yet), AP Physics C: Mechanics (if Physics I taken)
**Senior: Choice of: AP Biology, AP Chemistry, AP Physics C: Mechanics, AP Physics C: Electricity and Magnetism, Bioinformatics, Microbiology, Environmental Engineering, etc.
*Four Years of Fitness/Health
*Four Years of Technology
**Freshmen: Technology &amp; Design
**Sophomore: Introduction to Engineering and Digital Modeling 
**Junior: Introduction to Programming/Advanced Manufacturing and Product Management
**Senior: Introduction to Architecture/Architectural CAD Design or Internship
*Three Years of Social Studies
**Freshmen: World History
**Sophomore: US History I
**Junior: US History II
*Three Years of a World Language
** Spanish I - Spanish IV
** AP Spanish Language and Culture
** AP Spanish Literature and Culture
** Linguistics
*One year of Visual and Performing Arts
**Integrated into Fitness
*One half year of Career Education
**This requirement is integrated into other courses and does not impact scheduling.
*One half year of Financial Literacy
**Course is taken online

==Culture and extracurricular activities==

Magnet is accepting and open to new cultures and tries to recognize and celebrate these cultures through the Multicultural Club and the French Club. In addition to these clubs, there is also drama club, Science Olympiad, and math league for those interested in science and math competitions, FIRST Robotics Competition, chess club, yearbook committee, class councils (one for each grade), and student council (whole school). Most clubs meet during lunch.

The school holds dances about once a month and annually, Magnet hosts a talent show and the Coffee House, which is put together by the drama club. In Spring 2006, the drama club put on its first full-length production since 2003. Since 2006, the drama club included a musical group, and in 2007, musicals and singing acts were included in the annual &quot;Coffeehouse&quot; production.

The second largest club within the school district is the 1257 Robotics Team. Because the school is oriented to math and science, the FIRST robotics team receives a lot of support. Although disbanded in 2006 due to loss of the founding members, the 1257 robotics team was reformed in the 2008–09 school year and is going strong once again.

Being enrolled in an engineering school, a few Magnet students also compete in the annual Union County College bridge building competition, which consists of teams of about five people each from all over the county. Teams are divided into novice and advanced categories, and each team must build a bridge with the given specifications (they change every year).

A new club at Magnet, which began in the 2007–08 school year, is the SMAC (Student Movement Against Cancer) club. The club was started by two students, and its main objective is to schedule, plan, and organize the annual Relay For Life held at the school.

Magnet does not offer any varsity sports, but students are allowed to join sports teams in their home districts, provided they do not pose any scheduling conflicts. The Union County Vocational Technical School district offers after school intramurals.

Clubs offered to students through both Magnet and the UCVTS district include Art Club, Bridge Building Club, Chess Club, Class Councils (Freshman, Sophomore, Junior, and Senior), SMAC, Dance Club, Drama Club (and Tech Crew), Future Business Leaders of America, Intramurals, Marine Corps, Math League, Multicultural Club, National Honor Society, News Club, Newspaper Club, Peer Mediation, Physics Club, Robotics Club, Science Olympiad, Spanish Club, Spanish National Honor Society, Student Council, and Yearbook Club.

==Building==
The building that houses UCMHS was constructed in the 1960s and housed a portion of Union County College (UCC) through the 1970s. It was abandoned through the mid-1990s when the UCVTSD had the building gutted and renovated. UCMHS opened in 1997 and since then the building has seen minor renovations and the addition of a glass atrium to the fitness center. Following the major renovations in the mid-1990s, the building was named Mancuso Hall after the Chairman of the Union County Board of Education at the time.

The facade of the building features faux-stone over the staircases, which project from the building, and a series of white and brown gravel coated concrete panels, each containing a trapezoidal window.

Magnet is located in Scotch Plains on a campus which is home to Union County Vocational-Technical School, the Academy for Information Technology, the Academy for Allied Health Sciences, and the Union County (or John H. Stamler) Police Academy. The campus also has a NJ Transit bus stop and a soccer field.

In 2008, construction began on an addition to the Magnet building. This addition serves as the site of the Performing Arts school. The plans included a bridge linking the building with the addition, which will be located in one of the last free patches of ground on campus, over a frequently used path leading from a parking lot to the front door of the Magnet High School. These plans were finished in 2010. The Union County Vocational-Technical Schools (UCVTS) has now changed from an open, spacious environment into a more urban environment.

==Legal issues==
There are 21 municipal school districts that are contained within the Union County Vocational Technical Schools District (UCVTSD). Following the creation of this school in 1997, a number of these districts filed suit against UCMHS. Scotch Plains petitioned the New Jersey Department of Education to force the exclusion of students from their district from the Magnet School. Rahway, New Jersey refused to allow Rahway students attending Magnet to participate in Rahway extracurricular programs. Their argument was that Magnet was taking the best students away from the home districts and that Magnet was drawing funds away from the home districts.

The final case against UCMHS was the case launched by the City of Linden. It was resolved late in 2002 in favor of UCMHS. Linden ran a science school within its own district where it sent its gifted and talented students. They argued that their program was comparable to UCMHS and they should not, therefore, be required to pay tuition for students attending the county school. The UCMHS argued that the programs were not comparable, as evidenced by Linden students desiring to leave their home district in favor of Magnet.

Magnet won each of these suits because it is, legally, a Vocational-Technical school (a school which offers a vocational education) and offers vocational certifications. State law requires local school districts pay tuition for students who attend the county vocational school.

Recently, as a result of extensive state budget cuts, the Board of Education of the Springfield Public Schools announced its plan in 2010 to refuse to pay tuition for students attending several of the schools on the UCVTS campus, on the grounds that it has comparable programs in engineering, performing arts, and health-care training. The Springfield Board of Education believes that, in the absence of any state funding to offset the cost of sending students to the Magnet, Performing Arts, and Allied Health high schools, it should not be obligated to pay to send its students to these schools.

==Notable alumni==
* Anastasia Bogdanovski, swimmer who represented Macedonia in the 2016 Summer Olympics
* Griffin Maxwell Brooks (born 2000), college diver, TikTok influencer, and self-described &quot;digital club kid&quot; and socialite

==References==
==External links==
*Union County Magnet High School&#x27;s website
*Data for Union County Magnet High School, National Center for Education Statistics
*FRC Team 1257/Parallel Universe
*Article in newspaper on the proposal of the Magnet school
*September 22, 2000 Decision by State Commissioner of Education Concerning the Magnet School (the Scotch Plains-Fanwood decision)
*July 12, 1999 Decision by State Commissioner of Education regarding refusal of Roselle Park Board of Education to pay tuition for students attending Union County Magnet High School</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q14705894" start="4" end="35" title="Union County Magnet High School" label="Union County Magnet High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q14705894" start="37" end="42" title="Union County Magnet High School" label="UCMHS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1703577" start="49" end="55" title="magnet school" label="magnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1080794" start="56" end="62" title="state school" label="public"/>
<link wikidata="Q3054793" start="63" end="74" title="Secondary education in the United States" label="high school"/>
<link wikidata="Q262609" start="86" end="99" title="Scotch Plains, New Jersey" label="Scotch Plains"/>
<link wikidata="Q7885628" start="107" end="155" title="Union County Vocational Technical Schools Campus" label="Union County Vocational Technical Schools Campus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7039258" start="227" end="232" title="ninth grade" label="ninth"/>
<link wikidata="Q986388" start="241" end="254" title="twelfth grade" label="twelfth grade"/>
<link wikidata="Q502459" start="267" end="279" title="Union County, New Jersey" label="Union County"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="288" end="298" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="302" end="312" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q6841600" start="656" end="705" title="Middle States Association of Colleges and Schools" label="Middle States Association of Colleges and Schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543700" start="877" end="880" title="full-time equivalent" label="FTE"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595370" start="895" end="916" title="student–teacher ratio" label="student–teacher ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q620475" start="985" end="995" title="National School Lunch Act" label="free lunch"/>
<link wikidata="Q248668" start="1665" end="1678" title="Jim McGreevey" label="Jim McGreevey"/>
<link wikidata="Q6971043" start="1841" end="1879" title="National Blue Ribbon Schools Program" label="Blue Ribbon School Award of Excellence"/>
<link wikidata="Q861556" start="1887" end="1924" title="United States Department of Education" label="United States Department of Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q349922" start="2334" end="2345" title="Arne Duncan" label="Arne Duncan"/>
<link wikidata="Q188413" start="2567" end="2575" title="Newsweek" label="Newsweek"/>
<link wikidata="Q188413" start="2787" end="2795" title="Newsweek" label="Newsweek"/>
<link wikidata="Q463665" start="3448" end="3471" title="American Cancer Society" label="American Cancer Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q4532835" start="3482" end="3496" title="Relay For Life" label="Relay For Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q5756555" start="3901" end="3935" title="High School Proficiency Assessment" label="High School Proficiency Assessment"/>
<link wikidata="Q848629" start="4101" end="4129" title="U.S. News &amp;amp; World Report" label="U.S. News &amp;amp; World Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q1308139" start="4212" end="4227" title="The Daily Beast" label="The Daily Beast"/>
<link wikidata="Q188413" start="4527" end="4535" title="Newsweek" label="Newsweek"/>
<link wikidata="Q379676" start="4637" end="4655" title="Advanced Placement" label="Advanced Placement"/>
<link wikidata="Q56404208" start="4658" end="4685" title="International Baccalaureate" label="International Baccalaureate"/>
<link wikidata="Q334113" start="4753" end="4756" title="SAT" label="SAT"/>
<link wikidata="Q288826" start="4759" end="4762" title="ACT (test)" label="ACT"/>
<link wikidata="Q13410440" start="6704" end="6718" title="AP Calculus AB" label="AP Calculus AB"/>
<link wikidata="Q13410440" start="6722" end="6736" title="AP Calculus BC" label="AP Calculus BC"/>
<link wikidata="" start="6975" end="6998" title="AP Physics C: Mechanics" label="AP Physics C: Mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q16240736" start="7041" end="7051" title="AP Biology" label="AP Biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q13412119" start="7053" end="7065" title="AP Chemistry" label="AP Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="" start="7067" end="7090" title="AP Physics C: Mechanics" label="AP Physics C: Mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="" start="7092" end="7131" title="AP Physics C: Electricity and Magnetism" label="AP Physics C: Electricity and Magnetism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4653496" start="7681" end="7712" title="AP Spanish Language and Culture" label="AP Spanish Language and Culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q4653499" start="7716" end="7749" title="AP Spanish Literature and Culture" label="AP Spanish Literature and Culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q675510" start="8260" end="8276" title="Science Olympiad" label="Science Olympiad"/>
<link wikidata="Q444706" start="8349" end="8375" title="FIRST Robotics Competition" label="FIRST Robotics Competition"/>
<link wikidata="Q7885602" start="9331" end="9351" title="Union County College" label="Union County College"/>
<link wikidata="Q4532835" start="9824" end="9838" title="Relay For Life" label="Relay For Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q5424641" start="10338" end="10372" title="FBLA-PBL" label="Future Business Leaders of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q10335734" start="10434" end="10456" title="National Honor Society" label="National Honor Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q675510" start="10530" end="10546" title="Science Olympiad" label="Science Olympiad"/>
<link wikidata="Q7573253" start="10562" end="10592" title="Spanish National Honor Society" label="Spanish National Honor Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q7885602" start="10728" end="10748" title="Union County College" label="Union County College"/>
<link wikidata="Q4671401" start="11473" end="11507" title="Academy for Information Technology" label="Academy for Information Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7885598" start="11513" end="11547" title="Union County Academy for Allied Health Sciences" label="Academy for Allied Health Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q498553" start="11629" end="11639" title="NJ Transit" label="NJ Transit"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12243" end="12272" title="List of school districts in New Jersey#Union County" label="21 municipal school districts"/>
<link wikidata="Q8075780" start="12303" end="12344" title="Union County Vocational Technical Schools" label="Union County Vocational Technical Schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q17109693" start="12494" end="12528" title="New Jersey Department of Education" label="New Jersey Department of Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003082" start="12608" end="12626" title="Rahway, New Jersey" label="Rahway, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1004712" start="12948" end="12954" title="Linden, New Jersey" label="Linden"/>
<link wikidata="Q6869278" start="13517" end="13537" title="vocational education" label="vocational education"/>
<link wikidata="Q7581032" start="13770" end="13796" title="Springfield Public Schools (New Jersey)" label="Springfield Public Schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q26238016" start="14306" end="14327" title="Anastasia Bogdanovski" label="Anastasia Bogdanovski"/>
<link wikidata="Q221" start="14353" end="14362" title="North Macedonia" label="Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8613" start="14370" end="14390" title="2016 Summer Olympics" label="2016 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q117310402" start="14393" end="14415" title="Griffin Maxwell Brooks" label="Griffin Maxwell Brooks"/>
<link wikidata="Q7735" start="14437" end="14442" title="Diving (sport)" label="diver"/>
<link wikidata="Q48938223" start="14444" end="14450" title="TikTok" label="TikTok"/>
<link wikidata="Q2979942" start="14496" end="14504" title="Club Kids" label="club kid"/>
<link wikidata="Q512314" start="14515" end="14524" title="socialite" label="socialite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1966994" start="14651" end="14691" title="National Center for Education Statistics" label="National Center for Education Statistics"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="192777" wikidata="Q5546876" url="?curid=192777" title="Georges Rey">
<text>Georges Leon Rey (born 1945) is an American philosopher. He is a professor of philosophy at the University of Maryland.

==Biography==
Rey received a doctoral degree in philosophy from Harvard University in 1978. His thesis was titled &quot;The possibility of psychology: some preliminary issues&quot;, and was completed under Hilary Putnam.

His book &quot;Contemporary Philosophy of Mind&quot; discusses the topic of philosophy of mind. One major focus of Rey&#x27;s exposition relates to eliminativism and instrumentalism, particularly with respect to the mental states that we are subjectively aware of by way of introspection. Rey is the author of the current article on philosophy of mind at Encyclopædia Britannica Online.

==Books==


==References==
==External links==
* faculty profile page at the University of Maryland
* The Language of Thought Hypothesis entry at the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy includes mention of how Rey&#x27;s Computational/Representational Theory of Thought relates to language of thought.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5546876" start="0" end="16" title="Georges Rey" label="Georges Leon Rey"/>
<link wikidata="Q503415" start="96" end="118" title="University of Maryland, College Park" label="University of Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="185" end="203" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q221697" start="327" end="340" title="Hilary Putnam" label="Hilary Putnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q23407" start="419" end="437" title="philosophy of mind" label="philosophy of mind"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329497" start="491" end="504" title="eliminativism" label="eliminativism"/>
<link wikidata="Q856063" start="509" end="524" title="instrumentalism" label="instrumentalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q210501" start="617" end="630" title="introspection" label="introspection"/>
<link wikidata="Q455" start="698" end="728" title="Encyclopædia Britannica Online" label="Encyclopædia Britannica Online"/>
<link wikidata="Q824553" start="880" end="915" title="Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy" label="Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q279161" start="1011" end="1030" title="language of thought" label="language of thought"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="192785" wikidata="Q618537" url="?curid=192785" title="Aphrodite's Child">
<text>Aphrodite&#x27;s Child was a Greek rock and pop band formed in 1967, by Evangelos Papathanassiou, later known professionally as Vangelis (keyboards, flutes), Demis Roussos (bass, acoustic and electric guitar, vocals), Loukas Sideras (drums and vocals), and Silver Koulouris (guitar). They initially found success in Europe with hit singles like &quot;Rain and Tears&quot;, &quot;End of the World&quot;, &quot;I Want to Live&quot;, and &quot;It&#x27;s Five O&#x27;Clock&quot;, before pivoting to progressive rock with their third and final album, &quot;666&quot; (1972). An ambitious concept album inspired by the Book of Revelation, it later gained critical acclaim and has appeared on a number of lists of the top progressive and psychedelic albums of all time.

==History==
===Origins===
Papathanassiou and Roussos had already been successful in Greece, playing in the bands The Forminx and Idols respectively, when they got together with Sideras and Koulouris to form a new band. Their band&#x27;s name was derived from the title of a track from another Mercury act, Dick Campbell, from his &quot;Sings Where It&#x27;s At&quot; album.

Their first recording as a band was for George Romanos&#x27; album &quot;In Concert and in Studio&quot; where they played on four songs and were credited as &quot;Vangelis and his Orchestra&quot;. In the same year, they recorded a two-song demo and submitted it to Philips Records. It was probably Vangelis&#x27;s idea that the still-anonymous band should be relocated to London, which would be a more suitable environment for their music, as their country had entered a right-wing dictatorship in 1967. This decision, however, was not problem-free. Koulouris had to stay in Greece to fulfill his military service, while the band, on their way to London, got stuck in Paris partly because they did not have the correct work permits and partly because of the strikes associated with the May 1968 events.

===Paris, and first album===
In Paris the band signed to Mercury Records and were christened &quot;Aphrodite&#x27;s Child&quot; by Lou Reizner, releasing their second single &quot;Rain and Tears&quot;, a reworking of Pachelbel&#x27;s Canon in D major. With this song the band became an overnight sensation in France and several other European countries in which the single charted well, despite the song being sung in English. It sold over one million copies, and was awarded a gold disc. In October of the same year, the band released their first album &quot;End of the World&quot;. The album contained equal amounts of psychedelic pop songs and ballads in the vein of Procol Harum or The Moody Blues.

The band began touring around Europe, and in January 1969 they recorded a single in Italian for the Sanremo Festival, in which they did not participate. Their next hit single was &quot;I Want to Live&quot;, an arrangement of the song &quot;Plaisir d&#x27;amour&quot;.

===Recording in London and second album===
For their second album, the band traveled to London to record at the Trident Studios. The first single from the album, &quot;Let Me Love, Let Me Live&quot; was released in November, while the album &quot;It&#x27;s Five O&#x27;Clock&quot; came out in January 1970. It featured more successful ballads (like the title song), but also songs that crossed many musical genres including country rock.

After their second album, the band began touring again, this time without Vangelis who preferred to stay in Paris and record the music for Henry Chapier&#x27;s film, &quot;Sex Power&quot;. Vangelis was replaced on stage by Harris Halkitis. The year 1970 went by with the band promoting their latest album and Vangelis working on his first film project. To keep the steady flow of hits, the band released another single in August 1970, &quot;Spring, Summer, Winter and Fall&quot;.

===Third album – &quot;666&quot;, and breakup===

In late 1970, the band began to record a musical adaptation of the biblical Book of Revelation, entitled &quot;666&quot;. Koulouris, having finished his Greek army duty, rejoined the band. However, relations between the band members were declining, and things continued to worsen during the methodically slow recording process.

Essentially, the ambitious double album was Vangelis&#x27;s concept, created with an outside lyricist, Costas Ferris. The music Vangelis composed was much more psychedelic- and progressive rock-oriented than anything the band had done before. This did not sit well with the other band members, who wished to continue in the pop direction that had brought them success. Furthermore, Roussos was being groomed for a solo career, having recorded and released his first solo single &quot;We Shall Dance&quot; (with Sideras on drums) and his first solo album &quot;On the Greek Side of My Mind&quot;.

Meanwhile, Vangelis turned his attention to recording the score for the 1970 French TV documentary &quot;L&#x27;Apocalypse des animaux&quot;, and worked on a single with his then-girlfriend Vilma Ladopoulou, performing with Koulouris under the pseudonym &quot;Alpha Beta&quot;. By the time &quot;666&quot; was finally released almost two years later in June 1972, the band had already split up, despite having sold over 20 million records and remaining popular throughout Europe.

Both Vangelis and Roussos pursued successful solo careers: Roussos had a thriving solo career as a pop singer, and Vangelis went on to become a highly regarded electronic music artist. Vangelis&#x27;s work composing movie soundtracks brought him much success for the next three decades, including an Oscar for &quot;Chariots of Fire&quot;. Vangelis&#x27;s other soundtracks include Ridley Scott&#x27;s &quot;Blade Runner&quot; (1982), to which Roussos contributed vocals, &quot;1492: Conquest of Paradise&quot; (1992) and Oliver Stone&#x27;s &quot;Alexander&quot; (2004). Roussos died in 2015.

Koulouris worked with both Roussos and Vangelis on occasion, while Sideras pursued a less successful solo career, releasing two albums and four singles after the break-up. As of 2017, Sideras still lived in Greece and performed with his band. Vangelis died in 2022.

==Influence and legacy==
Despite their short existence and lack of hit singles outside of Europe, the band is still regarded as a cult band. Their album &quot;666&quot; is often considered their masterpiece, in addition to being one of rock music&#x27;s first concept albums. The album caught the attention of many musicians in the progressive rock field, including Yes frontman Jon Anderson, who would later collaborate with Vangelis (as Jon and Vangelis). Contemporary progressive rock acts such as Astra have also cited the band as an influence.

==Covers and samples==
===Covers===
*In 2001, German heavy metal band Axxis released a cover of &quot;The Four Horsemen&quot; on their album &quot;Eyes of Darkness&quot;.
*In 2004, Gregorian released a cover of &quot;The Four Horsemen&quot; on their album &quot;The Dark Side&quot;.
*In 2005, German dance group Scooter released a Techno version of &quot;The Four Horsemen&quot; called &quot;The Leading Horse&quot; on their album &quot;Who&#x27;s Got The Last Laugh Now?&quot;.
*In 2015, the Greek band Cyanna Mercury (formerly known as Cyanna) covered &quot;The Four Horsemen&quot; on the Death Roots Syndicate compilation &quot;The End&quot;.
*In 2022, American artist Brandon Boyd of Incubus released a cover of &quot;End of The World&quot; from the album &quot;End of the World album&quot; on his solo album &quot;Echoes &amp; Cocoons&quot;.
*&quot;The Four Horsemen&quot; has proven an especially popular cover among European heavy metal bands. Bands that have covered the song include the Italian band Death SS (on their 2006 album &quot;The 7th Seal&quot;), the Swedish doom metal band Griftegård (on an EP released through Ván Records in 2015), and the Greek black metal band Rotting Christ (on their 2016 album &quot;Rituals&quot;).
*On their 2022 tour, Opeth covered the chant &quot;Seven Bowls&quot; (666).

===Samples===
*In 1990, several tracks from the &quot;666&quot; album were sampled for the first Enigma album, &quot;MCMXC a.D.&quot;.
*The P-Model song &quot;Biiig Eye&quot; (from 1993&#x27;s &quot;Big Body&quot;) features a sample of the track &#x27;Loud, Loud, Loud&#x27;.
*The Verve&#x27;s song &quot;The Rolling People&quot; (from their 1997 album &quot;Urban Hymns&quot;) borrows its title from &quot;Altamont&quot;, while also containing musical elements of &quot;The Four Horsemen&quot;. Frontman Richard Ashcroft reportedly mentioned &quot;666&quot; as a strong influence on his music.
*Deltron 3030 sampled the opening lyrics of &#x27;Loud, Loud, Loud&#x27; in the track &#x27;Mastermind&#x27;.
*Beck&#x27;s song &quot;Chemtrails&quot; (from his 2008 album &quot;Modern Guilt&quot;) also resembles &quot;The Four Horsemen&quot;.
*Daniel Lopatin&#x27;s song &quot;A7&quot; (from the album &quot;Chuck Person&#x27;s Eccojams Vol. 1&quot;) under the alias Chuck Person also samples the track &quot;The Four Horsemen&quot;.

==Discography==

===Albums===

==== Studio albums ====
* &quot;End of the World&quot; (October 1968)
* &quot;It&#x27;s Five O&#x27;Clock&quot; (November 1969) – FRA #1, IT #6
* &quot;666&quot; (June 1972) – IT #23

==== Compilation albums ====
* &quot;Best of Aphrodite&#x27;s Child&quot; (1971) – SPA #8
*&quot;Reflection&quot; (1971)
*&quot;Rain and Tears – The Best of Aphrodite&#x27;s Child&quot; (1975)
* &quot;Aphrodite&#x27;s Child&#x27;s Greatest Hits&quot; (1995)
* &quot;The Singles&quot; (1995)
* &quot;The Complete Collection&quot; (1996)
* &quot;Babylon the Great：An Introduction to Aphrodite&#x27;s Child&quot; (2002)
* &quot;The Singles+&quot; (2003)

===Singles===
== Bibliography ==
* Dinos Dimatatis, &quot;Get That Beat: To Elliniko Rock, 1960s–1970s&quot;. Thessaloniki: Katsanos, 1998.

==References==
==External links==
* &quot;Aphrodite&#x27;s Child World Discography&quot; at www.demisroussos.org</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q618537" start="0" end="22" title="Aphrodite&amp;#x27;s Child" label="Aphrodite&amp;#x27;s Child"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="29" end="34" title="Greece" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q11399" start="35" end="39" title="rock music" label="rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q37073" start="44" end="47" title="pop music" label="pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q153172" start="72" end="96" title="Vangelis" label="Evangelos Papathanassiou"/>
<link wikidata="Q487882" start="158" end="171" title="Demis Roussos" label="Demis Roussos"/>
<link wikidata="Q3265073" start="218" end="232" title="Loukas Sideras" label="Loukas Sideras"/>
<link wikidata="Q3483993" start="257" end="273" title="Silver Koulouris" label="Silver Koulouris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1867079" start="351" end="365" title="Rain and Tears" label="Rain and Tears"/>
<link wikidata="Q2123439" start="441" end="468" title="It&amp;#x27;s Five O&amp;#x27;Clock" label="It&amp;#x27;s Five O&amp;#x27;Clock"/>
<link wikidata="Q49451" start="495" end="511" title="progressive rock" label="progressive rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031398" start="546" end="561" title="666 (Aphrodite&amp;#x27;s Child album)" label="&amp;quot;666&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q207393" start="583" end="596" title="concept album" label="concept album"/>
<link wikidata="Q42040" start="613" end="631" title="Book of Revelation" label="Book of Revelation"/>
<link wikidata="Q165745" start="1057" end="1064" title="Mercury Records" label="Mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q5272743" start="1070" end="1083" title="Dick Campbell (singer-songwriter)" label="Dick Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q220935" start="1379" end="1383" title="demo (music)" label="demo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536003" start="1404" end="1419" title="Philips Records" label="Philips Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="1511" end="1517" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q504081" start="1621" end="1633" title="Greek military junta of 1967–1974" label="dictatorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="1807" end="1812" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q6743" start="1925" end="1940" title="May 1968 protests in France" label="May 1968 events"/>
<link wikidata="Q165745" start="2000" end="2015" title="Mercury Records" label="Mercury Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q6685712" start="2074" end="2085" title="Lou Reizner" label="Lou Reizner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1867079" start="2123" end="2137" title="Rain and Tears" label="Rain and Tears"/>
<link wikidata="Q76485" start="2160" end="2169" title="Johann Pachelbel" label="Pachelbel"/>
<link wikidata="Q689519" start="2177" end="2193" title="Pachelbel&amp;#x27;s Canon" label="Canon in D major"/>
<link wikidata="Q241365" start="2421" end="2430" title="music recording sales certification" label="gold disc"/>
<link wikidata="Q1837993" start="2503" end="2519" title="End of the World (album)" label="End of the World"/>
<link wikidata="Q383982" start="2564" end="2579" title="psychedelic pop" label="psychedelic pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q214486" start="2613" end="2625" title="Procol Harum" label="Procol Harum"/>
<link wikidata="Q211965" start="2629" end="2644" title="The Moody Blues" label="The Moody Blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q652" start="2731" end="2738" title="Italian language" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q206959" start="2747" end="2763" title="Sanremo Festival" label="Sanremo Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997853" start="2811" end="2821" title="hit single" label="hit single"/>
<link wikidata="Q379755" start="2857" end="2868" title="arrangement" label="arrangement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1853373" start="2887" end="2907" title="Plaisir d&amp;#x27;amour" label="Plaisir d&amp;#x27;amour"/>
<link wikidata="Q907523" start="3028" end="3043" title="Trident Studios" label="Trident Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q2123439" start="3163" end="3190" title="It&amp;#x27;s Five O&amp;#x27;Clock" label="It&amp;#x27;s Five O&amp;#x27;Clock"/>
<link wikidata="Q613408" start="3340" end="3352" title="country rock" label="country rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q3132685" start="3494" end="3507" title="Henry Chapier" label="Henry Chapier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845" start="3953" end="3961" title="Bible" label="biblical"/>
<link wikidata="Q42040" start="3962" end="3980" title="Book of Revelation" label="Book of Revelation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031398" start="3997" end="4000" title="666 (Aphrodite&amp;#x27;s Child album)" label="666"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546449" start="4039" end="4049" title="Greek army" label="Greek army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1242743" start="4242" end="4254" title="double album" label="double album"/>
<link wikidata="Q2998436" start="4318" end="4331" title="Costas Ferris" label="Costas Ferris"/>
<link wikidata="Q846119" start="4375" end="4386" title="Psychedelic music" label="psychedelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q49451" start="4392" end="4408" title="progressive rock" label="progressive rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q37073" start="4539" end="4542" title="Pop music" label="pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q19978469" start="4699" end="4713" title="We Shall Dance" label="We Shall Dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q6582831" start="4775" end="4803" title="On the Greek Side of My Mind" label="On the Greek Side of My Mind"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342343" start="4917" end="4946" title="L&amp;#x27;Apocalypse des animaux (album)" label="L&amp;#x27;Apocalypse des animaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q9778" start="5453" end="5469" title="electronic music" label="electronic music"/>
<link wikidata="Q492264" start="5509" end="5526" title="Film score" label="movie soundtracks"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="5593" end="5598" title="Academy Award" label="Oscar"/>
<link wikidata="Q922474" start="5609" end="5625" title="Chariots of Fire (album)" label="Chariots of Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q56005" start="5675" end="5687" title="Ridley Scott" label="Ridley Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187341" start="5701" end="5713" title="Blade Runner (soundtrack)" label="Blade Runner"/>
<link wikidata="" start="5771" end="5797" title="1492: Conquest of Paradise (album)" label="1492: Conquest of Paradise"/>
<link wikidata="Q179497" start="5815" end="5827" title="Oliver Stone" label="Oliver Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136266" start="5841" end="5850" title="Alexander (soundtrack)" label="Alexander"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="6245" end="6251" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373485" start="6285" end="6294" title="underground music" label="cult band"/>
<link wikidata="Q207393" start="6415" end="6428" title="concept album" label="concept album"/>
<link wikidata="Q49451" start="6487" end="6503" title="progressive rock" label="progressive rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q184386" start="6521" end="6524" title="Yes (band)" label="Yes"/>
<link wikidata="Q313749" start="6534" end="6546" title="Jon Anderson" label="Jon Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538236" start="6594" end="6610" title="Jon and Vangelis" label="Jon and Vangelis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4272332" start="6656" end="6661" title="Astra (band)" label="Astra"/>
<link wikidata="Q311718" start="6775" end="6780" title="Axxis" label="Axxis"/>
<link wikidata="Q85847700" start="6807" end="6824" title="The Four Horsemen (Aphrodite&amp;#x27;s Child song)" label="The Four Horsemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q161552" start="6886" end="6895" title="Gregorian (band)" label="Gregorian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2546171" start="6967" end="6980" title="The Dark Side (Gregorian album)" label="The Dark Side"/>
<link wikidata="Q156255" start="7017" end="7024" title="Scooter (band)" label="Scooter"/>
<link wikidata="Q170611" start="7036" end="7042" title="Techno" label="Techno"/>
<link wikidata="Q5197444" start="7243" end="7249" title="Cyanna" label="Cyanna"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7296" end="7317" title="Death Roots Syndicate" label="Death Roots Syndicate"/>
<link wikidata="Q446586" start="7377" end="7389" title="Brandon Boyd" label="Brandon Boyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q1837993" start="7471" end="7493" title="End_of_the_World_(album)" label="End of the World album"/>
<link wikidata="Q1181257" start="7714" end="7722" title="Death SS" label="Death SS"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7799" end="7809" title="Griftegård" label="Griftegård"/>
<link wikidata="Q938889" start="7890" end="7904" title="Rotting Christ" label="Rotting Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q25096857" start="7932" end="7939" title="Rituals (Rotting Christ album)" label="Rituals"/>
<link wikidata="Q18557" start="7969" end="7974" title="Opeth" label="Opeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q485512" start="8122" end="8128" title="Enigma (German band)" label="Enigma"/>
<link wikidata="Q322611" start="8142" end="8152" title="MCMXC a.D." label="MCMXC a.D."/>
<link wikidata="Q1127374" start="8165" end="8172" title="P-Model" label="P-Model"/>
<link wikidata="Q11733507" start="8224" end="8232" title="Big Body (P-Model album)" label="Big Body"/>
<link wikidata="Q488916" start="8302" end="8311" title="The Verve" label="The Verve"/>
<link wikidata="Q371855" start="8384" end="8395" title="Urban Hymns" label="Urban Hymns"/>
<link wikidata="Q368354" start="8530" end="8546" title="Richard Ashcroft" label="Richard Ashcroft"/>
<link wikidata="Q2366718" start="8621" end="8633" title="Deltron 3030" label="Deltron 3030"/>
<link wikidata="Q11901" start="8731" end="8735" title="Beck" label="Beck"/>
<link wikidata="Q2354566" start="8798" end="8810" title="Modern Guilt" label="Modern Guilt"/>
<link wikidata="Q286346" start="8865" end="8879" title="Daniel Lopatin" label="Daniel Lopatin"/>
<link wikidata="Q21130146" start="8929" end="8964" title="Chuck Person&amp;#x27;s Eccojams Vol. 1" label="Chuck Person&amp;#x27;s Eccojams Vol. 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1837993" start="9119" end="9135" title="End of the World (album)" label="End of the World"/>
<link wikidata="Q2123439" start="9165" end="9192" title="It&amp;#x27;s Five O&amp;#x27;Clock" label="It&amp;#x27;s Five O&amp;#x27;Clock"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031398" start="9239" end="9242" title="666 (Aphrodite&amp;#x27;s Child album)" label="666"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="192786" wikidata="Q92826" url="?curid=192786" title="Terry Winograd">
<text>Terry Allen Winograd (born February 24, 1946) is an American computer scientist. He is a professor at Stanford University, and co-director of the Stanford Human–Computer Interaction Group. He is known within the philosophy of mind and artificial intelligence fields for his work on natural language using the SHRDLU program.

==Education==
Winograd grew up in Colorado and graduated from Colorado College in 1966. He wrote SHRDLU as a PhD thesis at MIT in the years from 1968–70. In making the program Winograd was concerned with the problem of providing a computer with sufficient &quot;understanding&quot; to be able to use natural language. Winograd built a blocks world, restricting the program&#x27;s intellectual world to a simulated &quot;world of toy blocks&quot;. The program could accept commands such as, &quot;Find a block which is taller than the one you are holding and put it into the box&quot; and carry out the requested action using a simulated block-moving arm. The program could also respond verbally, for example, &quot;I do not know which block you mean.&quot; The SHRDLU program can be viewed historically as one of the classic examples of how difficult it is for a programmer to build up a computer&#x27;s semantic memory by hand and how limited or &quot;brittle&quot; such programs are.

==Research==
In 1973, Winograd moved to Stanford University and developed an AI-based framework for understanding natural language which was to give rise to a series of books. But only the first volume (Syntax) was ever published. &quot;What I came to realize is that the success of the communication depends on the real intelligence on the part of the listener, and that there are many other ways of communicating with a computer that can be more effective, given that it doesn’t have the intelligence.&quot;

His approach shifted away from classical Artificial Intelligence after encountering the critique of cognitivism by Hubert Dreyfus and meeting with the Chilean philosopher Fernando Flores. They published a critical appraisal from a perspective based in phenomenology as &quot;Understanding Computers and Cognition: a new foundation for design&quot; in 1986. In the latter part of the 1980s, Winograd worked with Flores on an early form of groupware. Their approach was based on conversation-for-action analysis.

In the early 1980s, Winograd was a founding member and national president of Computer Professionals for Social Responsibility, a group of computer scientists concerned about nuclear weapons, SDI, and increasing participation by the U.S. Department of Defense in the field of computer science.

In general, Winograd&#x27;s work at Stanford has focused on software design in a broader sense than software engineering. In 1991 he founded the &quot;Project on People, Computers and Design&quot; in order to promote teaching and research into software design. The book &quot;Bringing Design to Software&quot; describes some of this work. His thesis is that software design is a distinct activity from both analysis and programming, but it should be informed by both, as well as by design practices in other professions (textile design, industrial design, etc.).

Starting in 1995, Winograd served as adviser to Stanford PhD student Larry Page, who was working on a research project involving web search. In 1998, Page took a leave of absence from Stanford to co-found Google. In 2002, Winograd took a sabbatical from teaching and spent some time at Google as a visiting researcher. There, he studied the intersection of theory and practice of human–computer interaction.

Recently, Winograd has continued to research collaborative computing, including uses of ubiquitous computing in collaborative work.
Winograd continues to do research at Stanford and teach classes and seminars in human–computer interaction. In addition to the Computer Science Dept., Winograd is associated with the Hasso Plattner Institute of Design at Stanford, also known as the &quot;d.school&quot;, which he helped found.

==Awards==
He is a Fellow of the Association for Computing Machinery (2009) and received the SIGCHI Lifetime Research Award in 2011.

==Publications==
Books by Terry Winograd
* 1972. &quot;Understanding Natural Language&quot; Academic Press, New York.
* 1982. &quot;Language As A Cognitive Process, Volume 1, Syntax&quot; Addison-Wesley.
* 1986. &quot;Understanding Computers and Cognition: A New Foundation for Design&quot; (with Fernando Flores) Ablex Publ Corp.
* 1992. &quot;Usability: Turning Technologies into Tools&quot; (with Paul S. Adler) Oxford University Press.
* 1996. &quot;Bringing Design to Software&quot; ACM Press.

==See also==
* Winograd schema challenge

==References==
==External links==
* Oral history interview with Terry Allen Winograd Charles Babbage Institute, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis—65-page interview describes his education, first in liberal arts at Colorado College and then in computer science and introduction to linguistics at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT). He discusses the work of Marvin Minsky and others in artificial intelligence. He describes his move to the Stanford Artificial Intelligence Laboratory and his additional linguistic research at Xerox-PARC. Winograd compares the approach to artificial intelligence at MIT and Stanford. He describes his involvement with obtaining funding from the Information Processing Techniques Office of the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency.
* Stanford HCI Group
* Terry Winograd&#x27;s faculty page
* Interviewed by Morten Thanning Vendelø
* Siri, Who is Terry Winograd, a 2017 &quot;strategy+business&quot; magazine &quot;creative mind&quot; profile of Winograd&#x27;s remarkably fruitful 40-year career as a pioneer of the fraught and vital labor of human–computer interaction.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q92826" start="0" end="20" title="Terry Winograd" label="Terry Allen Winograd"/>
<link wikidata="Q82594" start="61" end="79" title="computer scientist" label="computer scientist"/>
<link wikidata="Q41506" start="102" end="121" title="Stanford University" label="Stanford University"/>
<link wikidata="Q207434" start="155" end="181" title="Human–Computer Interaction" label="Human–Computer Interaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q23407" start="212" end="230" title="philosophy of mind" label="philosophy of mind"/>
<link wikidata="Q11660" start="235" end="258" title="artificial intelligence" label="artificial intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q33742" start="282" end="298" title="natural language" label="natural language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778029" start="309" end="315" title="SHRDLU" label="SHRDLU"/>
<link wikidata="Q1111261" start="388" end="404" title="Colorado College" label="Colorado College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778029" start="423" end="429" title="SHRDLU" label="SHRDLU"/>
<link wikidata="Q49108" start="449" end="452" title="MIT" label="MIT"/>
<link wikidata="Q4927302" start="661" end="673" title="blocks world" label="blocks world"/>
<link wikidata="Q971585" start="1939" end="1953" title="Hubert Dreyfus" label="Hubert Dreyfus"/>
<link wikidata="Q504346" start="1995" end="2010" title="Fernando Flores" label="Fernando Flores"/>
<link wikidata="Q179235" start="2076" end="2089" title="Phenomenology (philosophy)" label="phenomenology"/>
<link wikidata="Q474157" start="2262" end="2271" title="groupware" label="groupware"/>
<link wikidata="Q487148" start="2413" end="2461" title="Computer Professionals for Social Responsibility" label="Computer Professionals for Social Responsibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q211031" start="2527" end="2530" title="Strategic Defense Initiative" label="SDI"/>
<link wikidata="Q11209" start="2568" end="2594" title="U.S. Department of Defense" label="U.S. Department of Defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q857102" start="2690" end="2705" title="software design" label="software design"/>
<link wikidata="Q80993" start="2730" end="2750" title="software engineering" label="software engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q4934" start="3263" end="3273" title="Lawrence E. Page" label="Larry Page"/>
<link wikidata="Q95" start="3399" end="3405" title="Google" label="Google"/>
<link wikidata="Q207434" start="3574" end="3600" title="human–computer interaction" label="human–computer interaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q541265" start="3691" end="3711" title="ubiquitous computing" label="ubiquitous computing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588733" start="3918" end="3952" title="Hasso Plattner Institute of Design" label="Hasso Plattner Institute of Design"/>
<link wikidata="Q127992" start="4063" end="4098" title="Association for Computing Machinery" label="Association for Computing Machinery"/>
<link wikidata="Q504346" start="4461" end="4476" title="Fernando Flores" label="Fernando Flores"/>
<link wikidata="Q23679940" start="4679" end="4704" title="Winograd schema challenge" label="Winograd schema challenge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5975167" start="4791" end="4816" title="Charles Babbage Institute" label="Charles Babbage Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q204815" start="5078" end="5091" title="Marvin Minsky" label="Marvin Minsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q2931153" start="5160" end="5203" title="Stanford Artificial Intelligence Laboratory" label="Stanford Artificial Intelligence Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q750428" start="5246" end="5256" title="PARC (company)" label="Xerox-PARC"/>
<link wikidata="Q6030770" start="5398" end="5438" title="Information Processing Techniques Office" label="Information Processing Techniques Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q207361" start="5446" end="5487" title="Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency" label="Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q7621879" start="5632" end="5649" title="Strategy+Business" label="strategy+business"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="192790" wikidata="Q14388" url="?curid=192790" title="Stegosaurus">
<text>Stegosaurus (; ) is a genus of herbivorous, four-legged, armored dinosaur from the Late Jurassic, characterized by the distinctive kite-shaped upright plates along their backs and spikes on their tails. Fossils of the genus have been found in the western United States and in Portugal, where they are found in Kimmeridgian- to Tithonian-aged strata, dating to between 155 and 145 million years ago. Of the species that have been classified in the upper Morrison Formation of the western US, only three are universally recognized: S. stenops, S. ungulatus and S. sulcatus. The remains of over 80 individual animals of this genus have been found. &quot;Stegosaurus&quot; would have lived alongside dinosaurs such as &quot;Apatosaurus&quot;, &quot;Diplodocus&quot;, &quot;Camarasaurus&quot; and &quot;Allosaurus&quot;, the latter of which may have preyed on it.

They were large, heavily built, herbivorous quadrupeds with rounded backs, short fore limbs, long hind limbs, and tails held high in the air. Due to their distinctive combination of broad, upright plates and tail tipped with spikes, &quot;Stegosaurus&quot; is one of the most recognizable kinds of dinosaurs. The function of this array of plates and spikes has been the subject of much speculation among scientists. Today, it is generally agreed that their spiked tails were most likely used for defense against predators, while their plates may have been used primarily for display, and secondarily for thermoregulatory functions. &quot;Stegosaurus&quot; had a relatively low brain-to-body mass ratio. It had a short neck and a small head, meaning it most likely ate low-lying bushes and shrubs. One species, &quot;Stegosaurus ungulatus&quot;, is one of the largest known of all the stegosaurians, with the largest known specimens measuring about long and weighing over .

&quot;Stegosaurus&quot; remains were first identified during the &quot;Bone Wars&quot; by Othniel Charles Marsh at Dinosaur Ridge National Landmark. The first known skeletons were fragmentary and the bones were scattered, and it would be many years before the true appearance of these animals, including their posture and plate arrangement, became well understood. Despite its popularity in books and film, mounted skeletons of &quot;Stegosaurus&quot; did not become a staple of major natural history museums until the mid-20th century, and many museums have had to assemble composite displays from several different specimens due to a lack of complete skeletons. &quot;Stegosaurus&quot; is one of the better-known dinosaurs and has been featured in film, on postal stamps, and in many other types of media.

==History and naming==

=== Bone Wars and &quot;Stegosaurus armatus&quot; ===
&quot;Stegosaurus&quot;, one of the many dinosaurs described in the Bone Wars, was first collected by Arthur Lakes and consisted of several caudal vertebrae, a dermal plate, and several additional postcranial elements that were collected north of Morrison, Colorado at Lakes&#x27; YPM Quarry 5. These first, fragmented bones (YPM 1850) became the holotype of &quot;Stegosaurus armatus&quot; when Yale paleontologist Othniel Charles Marsh described them in 1877. Marsh initially believed the remains were from an aquatic turtle-like animal, and the basis for its scientific name, &#x27;roof(ed) lizard&#x27; was due to his early belief that the plates lay flat over the animal&#x27;s back, overlapping like the shingles (tiles) on a roof. Though several more complete specimens have been attributed to &quot;Stegosaurus armatus&quot;, preparation of the bones and analysis has discovered that this type specimen is actually dubious, which is not an ideal situation for the type species of a well-known genus like &quot;Stegosaurus&quot;. Because of this, the International Commission on Zoological Nomenclature decided to replace the type species with the more well known species &quot;Stegosaurus stenops&quot;. Marsh also incorrectly referred several fossils to &quot;S. armatus&quot;, including the dentary and teeth of the sauropod &quot;Diplodocus&quot; and putting sauropod limb bones and an &quot;Allosaurus&quot; tibia under YPM 1850.
On the other side of the Bone Wars, Edward Drinker Cope named &quot;Hypsirhophus discurus&quot; as another stegosaurian based on fragmentary fossils from Cope&#x27;s Quarry 3 near the &quot;Cope&#x27;s Nipple&quot; site in Garden Park, Colorado in 1878. Many later researchers have considered &quot;Hypsirhophus&quot; to be a synonym of &quot;Stegosaurus&quot;, though Peter Galton (2010) suggested that it is distinct based on differences in the vertebrae. F. F. Hubbell, a collector for Cope, also found a partial &quot;Stegosaurus&quot; skeleton while digging at Como Bluff in 1877 or &#x27;78 that are now part of the &quot;Stegosaurus&quot; mount (AMNH 5752) at the American Museum of Natural History.

Arthur Lakes made another discovery later in 1879 at Como Bluff in Albany County, Wyoming, the site also dating to the Upper Jurassic of the Morrison Formation, when he found several large &quot;Stegosaurus&quot; fossils in August of that year. The majority of the fossils came from Quarry 13, including the type specimen of &quot;Stegosaurus ungulatus (&quot;YPM 1853), which was collected by Lakes and William Harlow Reed the same year and named by Marsh. The specimen was one of many found at the quarry, the specimen consisting of a partial skull, several vertebrae, an ischium, partial limbs, several plates, and four thagomizers, though eight thagomizers were referred based on a specimen preserved alongside the type. The type specimen also preserved the pes, which was the namesake of the species, meaning &quot;hoofed roofed lizard&quot;. In 1881, he named a third species &quot;Stegosaurus&quot; &quot;affinis&quot;, based only on a hip bone, though the fossil has since been lost and the species declared a nomen nudum. Later in 1887, Marsh described two more species of &quot;Stegosaurus&quot; from Como Bluff, &quot;Stegosaurus duplex,&quot; based on a partial vertebral column, partial pelvis, and partial left hindlimb (YPM 1858) from Reed&#x27;s Quarry 11, though the species is now seen as synonymous with &quot;Stegosaurus ungulatus&quot;. The other, &quot;Stegosaurus sulcatus&quot;, was named based on a left forelimb, scapula, left femur, several vertebrae, and several plates and dermal armor elements (USNM V 4937) collected in 1883. &quot;Stegosaurus sulcatus&quot; most notably preserves a large spike that has been speculated to have been a shoulder spike that is used to diagnose the species.

The greatest &quot;Stegosaurus&quot; discovery came in 1885 with the discovery of a nearly complete, articulated skeleton of a subadult that included previously undiscovered elements like a complete skull, throat ossicles, and articulated plates. Marshall P. Felch collected the skeleton throughout 1885 and 1886 from Morrison Formation strata at his quarry in Garden Park, a town near Cañon City, Colorado. The skeleton was expertly unearthed by Felch, who first divided the skeleton into labeled blocks and prepared them separately. The skeleton was shipped to Marsh in 1887, who named it &quot;Stegosaurus stenops&quot; ( &quot;narrow-faced roof lizard&quot;) that year. Though it had not yet been completely prepared, the nearly complete and articulated type specimen of &quot;Stegosaurus stenops&quot; allowed Marsh to complete the first attempt at a reconstructed &quot;Stegosaurus&quot; skeleton. This first reconstruction, of &quot;S. ungulatus&quot; with missing parts filled in from &quot;S. stenops&quot;, was published by Marsh in 1891. (In 1893, Richard Lydekker mistakenly re-published Marsh&#x27;s drawing under the label &quot;Hypsirhophus&quot;.)

=== Early skeletal mounts and plate interpretation ===

The skeleton of &quot;S. stenops&quot; has since been deposited at the National Museum of Natural History in Washington D. C., where it has been on display since 1915. Another mount was made for the NMNH in the form of a mounted composite skeleton consisting of several specimens referred to &quot;S. stenops&quot; that were collected at Quarry 13 at Como Bluff in 1887, the most complete being USNM 6531. The type specimen of &quot;S. ungulatus&quot; (YPM 1853) was incorporated into the first ever mounted skeleton of a stegosaur at the Peabody Museum of Natural History in 1910 by Richard Swann Lull. It was initially mounted with paired plates set wide, above the base of the ribs, but was remounted in 1924 with two staggered rows of plates along the midline of the back. Additional specimens recovered from the same quarry by the United States National Museum of Natural History, including tail vertebrae and an additional large plate (USNM 7414), belong to the same individual as YPM 1853.

The next species of &quot;Stegosaurus&quot; to be named was &quot;S. marshi&quot; by Frederick Lucas in 1901. Lucas reclassified this species in the new genus &quot;Hoplitosaurus&quot; later that year. Lucas also re-examined the issue of the life appearance of &quot;Stegosaurus&quot;, coming to the conclusion that the plates were arranged in pairs in two rows along the back, arranged above the bases of the ribs. Lucas commissioned Charles R. Knight to produce a life restoration of &quot;S. ungulatus&quot; based on his new interpretation. However, the following year, Lucas wrote that he now believed the plates were probably attached in staggered rows. In 1910, Richard Swann Lull wrote that the alternating pattern seen in &quot;S. stenops&quot; was probably due to shifting of the skeleton after death. He led the construction of the first ever &quot;Stegosaurus&quot; skeletal mount at the Peabody Museum of Natural History, which was depicted with paired plates. In 1914, Charles Gilmore argued against Lull&#x27;s interpretation, noting that several specimens of &quot;S. stenops&quot;, including the now-completely prepared holotype, preserved the plates in alternating rows near the peak of the back, and that there was no evidence of the plates having shifted relative to the body during fossilization. Gilmore and Lucas&#x27; interpretation became the generally accepted standard, and Lull&#x27;s mount at the Peabody Museum was changed to reflect this in 1924.

Though considered one of the most distinctive types of dinosaur, &quot;Stegosaurus&quot; displays were missing from a majority of museums during the first half of the 20th century, due largely to the disarticulated nature of most fossil specimens. Until 1918, the only mounted skeleton of &quot;Stegosaurus&quot; in the world was O. C. Marsh&#x27;s type specimen of &quot;S. ungulatus&quot; at the Peabody Museum of Natural History, which was put on display in 1910. However, this mount was dismantled in 1917 when the old Peabody Museum building was demolished. This historically significant specimen was re-mounted ahead of the opening of the new Peabody Museum building in 1925. 1918 saw the completion of the second &quot;Stegosaurus&quot; mount, and the first depicting &quot;S. stenops&quot;. This mount was created under the direction of Charles Gilmore at the U.S. National Museum of Natural History. It was a composite of several skeletons, primarily USNM 6531, with proportions designed to closely follow the &quot;S. stenops&quot; type specimen, which had been on display in relief nearby since 1918. The aging mount was dismantled in 2003 and replaced with a cast in an updated pose in 2004. A third mounted skeleton of &quot;Stegosaurus&quot;, referred to &quot;S. stenops&quot;, was put on display at the American Museum of Natural History in 1932. Mounted under the direction of Charles J. Long, the American Museum mount was a composite consisting of partial remains filled in with replicas based on other specimens. In his article about the new mount for the museum&#x27;s journal, Barnum Brown described (and disputed) the popular misconception that the &quot;Stegosaurus&quot; had a &quot;second brain&quot; in its hips. Another composite mount, using specimens referred to &quot;S. ungulatus&quot; collected from Dinosaur National Monument between 1920 and 1922, was put on display at the Carnegie Museum of Natural History in 1940.

==== Plate arrangement ====

One of the major subjects of books and articles about &quot;Stegosaurus&quot; is the plate arrangement. The argument has been a major one in the history of dinosaur reconstruction. Four possible plate arrangements have been proposed over the years:
* The plates lie flat along the back, as a shingle-like armor. This was Marsh&#x27;s initial interpretation, which led to the name &#x27;roof lizard&#x27;. As further and complete plates were found, their form showed they stood on edge, rather than lying flat.
* By 1891, Marsh published a more familiar view of &quot;Stegosaurus&quot;, with a single row of plates. This was dropped fairly early on (apparently because it was poorly understood how the plates were embedded in the skin and they were thought to overlap too much in this arrangement). It was revived, in somewhat modified form, in the 1980s, by Stephen Czerkas, based on the arrangement of iguana dorsal spines.
* The plates were paired in a double row along the back, such as in Knight&#x27;s 1901 reconstruction and the 1933 film &quot;King Kong&quot;.
* Two rows of alternating plates. By the early 1960s, this had become (and remains) the prevalent idea, mainly because some &quot;S. stenops&quot; fossils in which the plates are still partially articulated show this arrangement. This arrangement is chiral and so demands that a specimen be distinguished from its distinct, hypothetical mirror-image form.

=== Second dinosaur rush ===
After the end of the Bone Wars, many major institutions in the eastern United States were inspired by the depictions and finds by Marsh and Cope to assemble their own dinosaur fossil collections. The competition was foremost started by the American Museum of Natural History, the Carnegie Museum of Natural History, and the Field Museum of Natural History which all sent expeditions to the west to make their own dinosaur collections and mount skeletons in their fossil halls. The American Museum of Natural History was the first to launch an expedition in 1897, finding several assorted, but incomplete, &quot;Stegosaurus&quot; specimens at Bone Cabin Quarry in Como Bluff. These remains haven&#x27;t been described and were mounted in 1932, the mount being a composite primarily of specimens AMNH 650 &amp; 470 from Bone Cabin Quarry. The AMNH mount is cast and on display at the Field Museum, which didn&#x27;t collect any &quot;Stegosaurus&quot; skeletons during the Second Dinosaur Rush. The Carnegie Museum in Pittsburgh on the other hand collected many &quot;Stegosaurus&quot; specimens, first at Freezout Hills in Carbon County, Wyoming in 1902–03. The fossils included only a couple postcranial remains, though in the 1900s-1920s Carnegie crews at Dinosaur National Monument discovered dozens of &quot;Stegosaurus&quot; specimens in one of the greatest single sites for the taxon. CM 11341, the most complete skeleton found at the quarry, was used for the basis of a composite &quot;Stegosaurus&quot; mount in 1940 along with several other specimens to finish the mount. A cranium (CM 12000) was also found by Carnegie crews, one of the few known. Both the AMNH and CM material has been referred to &quot;Stegosaurus ungulatus&quot;.

=== Resurgent discoveries ===

As part of the Dinosaur Renaissance and the resurgent interest in dinosaurs by museums and the public, fossils of &quot;Stegosaurus&quot; were once again being collected, though few have been fully described. An important discovery came in 1937 again at Garden Park by a high school teacher named Frank Kessler in while leading a nature hike. Kessler contacted the Denver Museum of Nature and Science, who sent paleontologist Robert Landberg. Landberg excavated the skeleton with the DMNS crews, recovering a 70% complete &quot;Stegosaurus&quot; skeleton along with turtles, crocodiles, and isolated dinosaur fossils at the quarry that would be nicknamed &quot;The Kessler Site&quot;. Phillip Reinheimer, a steel worker, mounted the &quot;Stegosaurus&quot; skeleton at the DMNS in 1938. The skeleton remained mounted until 1989 when the museum curator of the DMNS began a revision of the museum&#x27;s fossil hall and dispatched an expedition to find additional &quot;Stegosaurus&quot; remains. The expedition was successful in finding a nearly complete &quot;Stegosaurus&quot; near the Kessler site by Bryan Small, who would become the eponym of the new site. The &quot;Small Quarry&quot; &quot;Stegosaurus&quot;&#x27; articulation and completeness clarified the position of plates and spikes on the back of &quot;Stegosaurus&quot; and the position and size of the throat ossicles found earlier first by Felch with the &quot;Stegosaurus stenops&quot; holotype, though like the &quot;S. stenops&quot; type, the fossils were flattened in a &quot;roadkill&quot; condition. The &quot;Stegosaurus&quot; skeletons have been mounted alongside an &quot;Allosaurus&quot; skeleton collected in Moffat County, Colorado originally in 1979.

1987 saw the discovery of a 40% complete &quot;Stegosaurus&quot; skeleton in Rabbit Valley in Mesa County, Colorado by Harold Bollan near the Dinosaur Journey Museum. The skeleton was nicknamed the &quot;Bollan &quot;Stegosaurus&quot;&quot; and is in the collections of the Dinosaur Journey Museum. At Jensen-Jensen Quarry, an articulated torso including several dorsal plates from a small individual were collected and briefly described in 2014, though the specimen was collected years before and is still in preparation at Brigham Young University. 2007 saw the description of a &quot;Stegosaurus&quot; specimen from the Upper Jurassic Lourinha Formation of Portugal, the specimen was placed as &quot;Stegosaurus&quot; cf. &quot;ungulatus&quot; by the describers. The specimen is one of the few associated &quot;Stegosaurus&quot; skeletons known, though it only contains a tooth, 13 vertebrae, partial limbs, a cervical plate, and several assorted postcranial elements.

Sophie the &quot;Stegosaurus&quot; is the best preserved &quot;Stegosaurus&quot; specimen, being 85% intact and containing 360 bones. Sophie was first discovered by Bob Simon in 2003 at a quarry on the Red Canyon Ranch near Shell, Wyoming, and was excavated by crews from the Swiss Sauriermuseum in 2004 and later prepared by museum staff, who gave it the nickname Sarah after the landowner&#x27;s daughter. The skeleton had been excavated on private land and was available for purchase. The Natural History Museum, London worked with private donors, most notably Jeremy Herrmann, to find the funding and then arranged to purchase the specimen, which was given the new official museum collection specimen designation NHMUK PV R36730 and re-nicknamed Sophie after Jeremy Herrmann&#x27;s daughter. The mounted skeleton went on display in December 2014 and was scientifically described in 2015. It is a young adult of undetermined sex, 5.8 m (19 ft) long and 2.9 m (9.5 ft) tall. The Sauriermuseum found several partial Stegosaurid skeletons throughout their excavations at Howe Quarry, Wyoming in the 1990s, though only Sophie has been described in detail. One skeleton collected at the site known as &quot;Victoria&quot; is very well preserved including many of the vertebrae preserved in semi-articulation and next to an &quot;Allosaurus&quot; skeleton found nicknamed &quot;Big Al II&quot;.

On July 17, 2024, a nearly complete, 27-foot (8.2m) long &quot;Stegosaurus&quot; skeleton, nicknamed &quot;Apex&quot;, fetched $44.6m (£34m) at a Sotheby&#x27;s auction in New York City–the most ever paid for a fossil. The specimen had been discovered in 2022 on private land in Colorado and so could be sold to a private owner. The current owner has made &quot;Apex&quot; available for scientific research, but private ownership of important fossil specimens is controversial, with many researchers insisting that fossils be permanently curated at a formal institution for universal scientific access.

== Description ==

The quadrupedal &quot;Stegosaurus&quot; is one of the most easily identifiable dinosaur genera, due to the distinctive double row of kite-shaped plates rising vertically along the rounded back and the two pairs of long spikes extending horizontally near the end of the tail. &quot;S. stenops&quot; reached in length and in body mass, while &quot;S. ungulatus&quot; reached in length and in body mass. Some large individuals may have reached in length and in body mass.

Most of the information known about &quot;Stegosaurus&quot; comes from the remains of mature animals; more recently, though, juvenile remains of &quot;Stegosaurus&quot; have been found. One subadult specimen, discovered in 1994 in Wyoming, is long and high, and is estimated to have weighed 1.5-2.2 metric tons (1.6-2.4 short tons) while alive. It is on display in the University of Wyoming Geological Museum.

===Skull===

The long and narrow skull was small in proportion to the body. It had a small antorbital fenestra, the hole between the nose and eye common to most archosaurs, including modern birds, though lost in extant crocodylians. The skull&#x27;s low position suggests that &quot;Stegosaurus&quot; may have been a browser of low-growing vegetation. This interpretation is supported by the absence of front teeth and their likely replacement by a horny beak or rhamphotheca. The lower jaw had flat downward and upward extensions that would have completely hidden the teeth when viewed from the side, and these probably supported a turtle-like beak in life. The presence of a beak extended along much of the jaws may have precluded the presence of cheeks in these species. Such an extensive beak was probably unique to &quot;Stegosaurus&quot; and some other advanced stegosaurids among ornithischians, which usually had beaks restricted to the jaw tips. Other researchers have interpreted these ridges as modified versions of similar structures in other ornithischians which might have supported fleshy cheeks, rather than beaks. Stegosaurian teeth were small, triangular, and flat; wear facets show that they did grind their food.

Despite the animal&#x27;s overall size, the braincase of &quot;Stegosaurus&quot; was small, being no larger than that of a dog. A well-preserved &quot;Stegosaurus&quot; braincase allowed Othniel Charles Marsh to obtain, in the 1880s, a cast of the brain cavity or endocast of the animal, which gave an indication of the brain size. The endocast showed the brain was indeed very small, the smallest proportionally of all dinosaur endocasts then known. The fact that an animal weighing over 4.5 metric tons (5 short tons) could have a brain of no more than contributed to the popular old idea that all dinosaurs were unintelligent, an idea now largely rejected. Actual brain anatomy in &quot;Stegosaurus&quot; is poorly known, but the brain itself was small even for a dinosaur.

===Skeleton===
In &quot;Stegosaurus stenops&quot; there are 27 bones in the vertebral column anterior to the sacrum, a varying number of vertebrae in the sacrum, with four in most subadults, and around 46 caudal (tail) vertebrae. The presacrals are divided into cervical (neck) and dorsal (back) vertebrae, with around 10 cervicals and 17 dorsals, the total number being one greater than in &quot;Hesperosaurus&quot;, two greater than &quot;Huayangosaurus&quot;, although &quot;Miragaia&quot; preserves 17 cervicals and an unknown number of dorsals. The first cervical vertebra is the axis bone, which is connected and often fused to the atlas bone. Farther posteriorly, the proportionately larger the cervicals become, although they do not change greatly in anything other than size. Past the first few dorsals, the centrum of the bones become more elongate front-to-back, and the processes become more elevated dorsal. The sacrum of &quot;S. stenops&quot; includes four sacral vertebrae, but one of the dorsals is also incorporated into the structure. In some specimens of &quot;S. stenops&quot;, a caudal is also incorporated, as a caudosacral. In &quot;Hesperosaurus&quot; there are two dorsosacrals, and only four fused sacrals, but in &quot;Kentrosaurus&quot; there may be as many as seven vertebrae in the sacrum, with both dorsosacrals and caudosacrals. &quot;S. stenops&quot; preserves 46 caudal vertebrae, and up to 49, and along the series both the centrums and the neural spines become smaller, until the neural spines disappear at caudal 35. Around the middle of the tail, the neural spines become , meaning they are divided near the top.

With multiple well-preserved skeletons, &quot;S. stenops&quot; preserves all regions of the body, including the limbs. The scapula (shoulder blade) is sub-rectangular, with a robust blade. Though it is not always perfectly preserved, the acromion ridge is slightly larger than in &quot;Kentrosaurus&quot;. The blade is relatively straight, although it curves towards the back. There is a small bump on the back of the blade, that would have served as the base of the &quot;triceps&quot; muscle. Articulated with the scapula, the coracoid is sub-circular. The hind feet each had three short toes, while each fore foot had five toes; only the inner two toes had a blunt hoof. The phalangeal formula is 2-2-2-2-1, meaning the innermost finger of the fore limb has two bones, the next has two, etc. All four limbs were supported by pads behind the toes. The fore limbs were much shorter than the stocky hind limbs, which resulted in an unusual posture. The tail appears to have been held well clear of the ground, while the head of &quot;Stegosaurus&quot; was positioned relatively low down, probably no higher than above the ground.

===Plates===
The most recognizable features of &quot;Stegosaurus&quot; are its dermal plates, which consisted of between 17 and 22 separate plates and flat spines. These were highly modified osteoderms (bony-cored scales), similar to those seen in crocodiles and many lizards today. They were not directly attached to the animal&#x27;s skeleton, instead arising from the skin. The largest plates were found over the hips and could measure over wide and tall.

In a 2010 review of &quot;Stegosaurus&quot; species, Peter Galton suggested that the arrangement of the plates on the back may have varied between species, and that the pattern of plates as viewed in profile may have been important for species recognition. Galton noted that the plates in &quot;S. stenops&quot; have been found articulated in two staggered rows, rather than paired. Fewer &quot;S. ungulatus&quot; plates have been found, and none articulated, making the arrangement in this species more difficult to determine. However, the type specimen of &quot;S. ungulatus&quot; preserves two flattened spine-like plates from the tail that are nearly identical in shape and size, but are mirror images of each other, suggesting that at least these were arranged in pairs. Many of the plates are manifestly chiral and no two plates of the same size and shape have been found for an individual; however plates have been correlated between individuals. Well preserved integumentary impressions of the plates of &quot;Hesperosaurus&quot; show a smooth surface with long and parallel, shallow grooves. This indicates that the plates were covered in keratinous sheaths.

==Classification and species==

Like the spikes and shields of ankylosaurs, the bony plates and spines of stegosaurians evolved from the low-keeled osteoderms characteristic of basal thyreophorans. Galton (2019) interpreted plates of an armored dinosaur from the Lower Jurassic (Sinemurian-Pliensbachian) Lower Kota Formation of India as fossils of a member of Ankylosauria; the author argued that this finding indicates a probable early Early Jurassic origin for both Ankylosauria and its sister group Stegosauria.

The vast majority of stegosaurian dinosaurs thus far recovered belong to the Stegosauridae, which lived in the later part of the Jurassic and early Cretaceous, and which were defined by Paul Sereno as all stegosaurians more closely related to &quot;Stegosaurus&quot; than to &quot;Huayangosaurus&quot;. This group is widespread, with members across the Northern Hemisphere, Africa and possibly South America. &quot;Stegosaurus&quot; frequently is discovered in a clade within the Stegosauridae called Stegosaurinae, usually including the taxa &quot;Wuerhosaurus&quot; and &quot;Hesperosaurus&quot;. The cladogram below displays the results of the &quot;preferred tree&quot; phylogenetic analysis of Raven &quot;et al&quot;. (2023), showing the position of the Stegosaurinae within Stegosauria and Eurypoda.

In 2017, Raven and Maidment published a phylogenetic analysis including almost every known stegosaurian genus. Their dataset was expanded upon in the following years with additional taxa. In their 2024 description of stegosaur fossil material from China&#x27;s Hekou Group, Li &quot;et al&quot;. used a modified version of the dataset of Raven and Maidment to analyze the phylogenetic relations of the Stegosauria:

=== Species ===
Many of the species initially described have since been considered to be invalid or synonymous with earlier named species, leaving two well-known and one poorly known species. Confirmed &quot;Stegosaurus&quot; remains have been found in the Morrison Formation&#x27;s stratigraphic zones 2–6, with additional remains possibly referrable to &quot;Stegosaurus&quot; recovered from stratigraphic zone 1.
* &quot;Stegosaurus stenops&quot;, meaning &quot;narrow-faced roof lizard&quot;, was named by Marsh in 1887, with the holotype having been collected by Marshall Felch at Garden Park, north of Cañon City, Colorado, in 1886. This is the best-known species of &quot;Stegosaurus&quot;, mainly because its remains include at least one complete articulated skeleton. It had proportionately large, broad plates and rounded tail plates. Articulated specimens show that the plates were arranged alternating in a staggered double row. &quot;S. stenops&quot; is known from at least 50 partial skeletons of adults and juveniles, one complete skull, and four partial skulls. It was shorter than other species, at . Found in the Morrison Formation, Colorado, Wyoming, and Utah.
* &quot;Stegosaurus ungulatus&quot;, meaning &quot;hoofed roof lizard&quot;, was named by Marsh in 1879, from remains recovered at Como Bluff, Wyoming (Quarry 12, near Robber&#x27;s Roost). It might be synonymous with &quot;S. stenops&quot;. At , it was the longest species within the genus &quot;Stegosaurus&quot;. A fragmentary &quot;Stegosaurus&quot; specimen discovered in Portugal and dating from the upper Kimmeridgian-lower Tithonian stage has been tentatively assigned to this species. &quot;Stegosaurus ungulatus&quot; can be distinguished from &quot;S. stenops&quot; by the presence of longer hind limbs, proportionately smaller, more pointed plates with wide bases and narrow tips, and by several small, flat, spine-like plates just before the spikes on the tail. These spine-like plates appear to have been paired, due to the presence of at least one pair that are identical but mirrored. &quot;S. ungulatus&quot; also appears to have had longer legs (femora) and hip bones than other species. The type specimen of &quot;S. ungulatus&quot; was discovered with eight spikes, though they were scattered away from their original positions. These have often been interpreted as indicating that the animal had four pairs of tail spikes. No specimens have been found with complete or articulated sets of tail spikes, but no additional specimens have been found that preserve eight spikes together. It is possible the extra pair of spikes came from a different individual, and though no other extra bones were found with the specimen, these may be found if more digging were done at the original site. Specimens from other quarries (such as a tail from Quarry 13, now forming part of the composite skeleton AMNH 650 at the American Museum of Natural History), referred to &quot;S. ungulatus&quot; on the basis of their notched tail vertebrae, are preserved with only four tail spikes. The type specimen of &quot;S. ungulatus&quot; (YPM 1853) was incorporated into the first ever mounted skeleton of a stegosaur at the Peabody Museum of Natural History in 1910 by Richard Swann Lull. It was initially mounted with paired plates set wide, above the base of the ribs, but was remounted in 1924 with two staggered rows of plates along the midline of the back. Additional specimens recovered from the same quarry by the United States National Museum of Natural History, including tail vertebrae and an additional large plate (USNM 7414), belong to the same individual as YPM 1853.

* &quot;Stegosaurus sulcatus&quot;, meaning &quot;furrowed roof lizard&quot;, was described by Marsh in 1887 based on a partial skeleton. It has traditionally been considered a synonym of &quot;S. armatus&quot;, though more recent studies suggest it is not. &quot;S. sulcatus&quot; is distinguished mainly by its unusually large, furrowed spikes with very large bases. A spike associated with the type specimen, originally thought to be a tail spike, may in fact come from the shoulder or hip, since its base is much larger than the corresponding tail vertebrae. A review published by Maidment and colleagues in 2008 regarded it as an indeterminate species possibly not even belonging to &quot;Stegosaurus&quot; at all, but to a different genus. Peter Galton suggested it should be considered a valid species due to its unique spikes.
Susannah Maidment and colleagues in 2008 proposed extensive alterations to the taxonomy of &quot;Stegosaurus&quot;. They advocated synonymizing &quot;S. stenops&quot; and &quot;S. ungulatus&quot; with &quot;S. armatus&quot;, and sinking &quot;Hesperosaurus&quot; and &quot;Wuerhosaurus&quot; into &quot;Stegosaurus&quot;, with their type species becoming &quot;Stegosaurus mjosi&quot; and &quot;Stegosaurus homheni&quot;, respectively. They regarded &quot;S. longispinus&quot; as dubious. Thus, their conception of &quot;Stegosaurus&quot; would include three valid species (&quot;S. armatus&quot;, &quot;S. homheni&quot;, and &quot;S. mjosi&quot;) and would range from the Late Jurassic of North America and Europe to the Early Cretaceous of Asia. However, this classification scheme was not followed by other researchers, and a 2017 cladistic analysis co-authored by Maidment with Thomas Raven rejects the synonymy of &quot;Hesperosaurus&quot; with &quot;Stegosaurus&quot;. In 2015, Maidment &quot;et al.&quot; revised their suggestion due to the recognition by Galton of &quot;S. armatus&quot; as a &quot;nomen dubium&quot; and its replacement by &quot;S. stenops&quot; as type species.

In 2024, Li and colleagues described specimen GSAU 201201, a partial skeleton of a stegosaur from the upper Hekou Group of Gansu Province, China (discovered in ), which dates to the Aptian–Albian ages of the Early Cretaceous. The specimen consists of three articulated cervical vertebrae with associated ribs, three dorsal vertebrae, thirteen ribs, a right forelimb including a partial humerus, ulna, and radius, and one dermal plate. Although certain features of the fossil material are different when compared to &quot;Wuerhosaurus&quot; and &quot;Stegosaurus stenops&quot;, Li &quot;et al&quot;. considered the new specimen as &quot;Stegosaurus&quot; sp. Fossils of the ankylosaur &quot;Taohelong&quot; were also found in the same layers of the Hekou Group.

===Doubtful species and junior synonyms===
* &quot;Stegosaurus armatus&quot;, meaning &quot;armored roof lizard&quot;, was the first species to be found and the original type species named by O.C. Marsh in 1877. It is known from a partial skeleton, and more than 30 fragmentary specimens have been referred to it. However, the type specimen was very fragmentary, consisting only of a partial tail, hips, and leg, parts of some back vertebrae, and a single fragmentary plate (the presence of which was used to give the animal its name). No other plates or spikes were found, and the entire front half of the animal appears not to have been preserved. Because the type specimen is very fragmentary, it is extremely difficult to compare it with other species based on better specimens, and it is now generally considered to be a &quot;nomen dubium&quot;. Because of this, it was replaced by &quot;S. stenops&quot; as the type species of &quot;Stegosaurus&quot; in a ruling of the ICZN in 2013.
* &quot;Stegosaurus&quot; &quot;affinis&quot;, named by Marsh in 1881, is only known from a pubis which has since been lost. Because Marsh did not provide an adequate description of the bone with which to distinguish a new species, this name is considered a &quot;nomen nudum&quot;.
* &quot;Diracodon laticeps&quot; was described by Marsh in 1881, from some jawbone fragments. Bakker resurrected &quot;D. laticeps&quot; in 1986 as a senior synonym of &quot;S. stenops&quot;, although others note that the material is not diagnostic and is only referable to &quot;Stegosaurus&quot; sp., making it a &quot;nomen dubium&quot;.
* &quot;Stegosaurus duplex&quot;, meaning &quot;two plexus roof lizard&quot; (in allusion to the greatly enlarged neural canal of the sacrum which Marsh characterized as a &quot;posterior brain case&quot;), was named by Marsh in 1887 (including the holotype specimen). The disarticulated bones were actually collected in 1879 by Edward Ashley at Como Bluff. Marsh initially distinguished it from &quot;S. ungulatus&quot; based on the fact that each sacral (hip) vertebra bore its own rib, which he claimed was unlike the anatomy of &quot;S. ungulatus&quot;; however, the sacrum of &quot;S. ungulatus&quot; had not actually been discovered. Marsh also suggested that &quot;S. duplex&quot; may have lacked armor, since no plates or spikes were found with the specimen, though a single spike may actually have been present nearby, and re-examination of the site maps has shown that the entire specimen was found highly disarticulated and scattered. It is generally considered a synonym of &quot;S. ungulatus&quot; today, and parts of the specimen were actually incorporated into the Peabody Museum &quot;S. ungulatus&quot; skeletal mount in 1910.

===Reassigned species===
* &quot;Stegosaurus marshi&quot;, which was described by Lucas in 1901, was renamed &quot;Hoplitosaurus&quot; in 1902.
* &quot;Stegosaurus priscus&quot;, described by Nopcsa in 1911, was reassigned to &quot;Lexovisaurus&quot;, and is now the type species of &quot;Loricatosaurus&quot;.
* &quot;Stegosaurus longispinus&quot; was named by Charles W. Gilmore in 1914 based on a fragmentary postcranial skeleton that has largely been lost. It is now the type species of the genus &quot;Alcovasaurus,&quot; though it has been referred to &quot;Miragaia&quot;.
* &quot;Stegosaurus madagascariensis&quot; from Madagascar is known solely from teeth and was described by Piveteau in 1926. The teeth were variously attributed to a stegosaur, the theropod &quot;Majungasaurus&quot;, a hadrosaur or even a crocodylian, but is now considered a possible ankylosaur.
* &quot;Stegosaurus homheni&quot; is an alternative combination for the Chinese Cretaceous stegosaur &quot;Wuerhosaurus homheni&quot;, which was described based on a partial postcranial skeleton in 1973 by Dong Zhiming. It was referred to &quot;Stegosaurus&quot; in 2008 by Maidment &quot;et al&quot;, but some still consider the species to be in its own genus.
* &quot;Stegosaurus mjosi&quot; was described as &quot;Hesperosaurus mjosi&quot; by Carpenter &quot;et al&quot; in 2001 based on a partial skull and incomplete postcranial skeleton from the Morrison Formation of Johnson County, Wyoming. The species was referred to &quot;Stegosaurus&quot; mostly by Maidment &quot;et al&quot; starting in 2008, but &quot;Hesperosaurus&quot; has been the more popular combination since the discovery of more remains.

==Paleobiology==
===Posture and movement===
Soon after its discovery, Marsh considered &quot;Stegosaurus&quot; to have been bipedal, due to its short forelimbs. He had changed his mind, however, by 1891, after considering the heavy build of the animal.
Although &quot;Stegosaurus&quot; is undoubtedly now considered to have been quadrupedal, some discussion has occurred over whether it could have reared up on its hind legs, using its tail to form a tripod with its hind limbs, to browse for higher foliage. This has been proposed by Bakker and opposed by Carpenter. A study by Mallison (2010) found support for a rearing up posture in &quot;Kentrosaurus&quot;, though not for ability for the tail to act as a tripod.

&quot;Stegosaurus&quot; had short fore limbs in relation to its hind limbs. Furthermore, within the hind limbs, the lower section (comprising the tibia and fibula) was short compared with the femur. This suggests it could not walk very fast, as the stride of the back legs at speed would have overtaken the front legs, giving a maximum speed of . Tracks discovered by Matthew Mossbrucker (Morrison Natural History Museum, Colorado) suggest that &quot;Stegosaurus&quot; lived and traveled in multiple-age herds. One group of tracks is interpreted as showing four or five baby stegosaurs moving in the same direction, while another has a juvenile stegosaur track with an adult track overprinting it.

As the plates would have been obstacles during copulation, it is possible the female stegosaur laid on her side as the male entered her from above and behind. Another suggestion is that the female would stand on all fours but squat down the fore limbs and raise the tail up and out of the male&#x27;s way as he supports his fore limbs on her hips. However, their reproductive organs still could not touch as there is no evidence of muscle attachments for a mobile penis nor a baculum in male dinosaurs.

===Plate function===

The function of &quot;Stegosaurus&quot;&#x27; plates has been much debated. Marsh suggested that they functioned as some form of armor, though Davitashvili (1961) disputed this, claiming that they were too fragile and ill-placed for defensive purposes, leaving the animal&#x27;s sides unprotected. Nevertheless, others have continued to support a defensive function. Bakker suggested in 1986 that the plates were covered in horn comparing the surface of the fossilized plates to the bony cores of horns in other animals known or thought to bear horns. Christiansen and Tschopp (2010), having studied a well-preserved specimen of &quot;Hesperosaurus&quot; with skin impressions, concluded that the plates were covered in a keratin sheath which would have strengthened the plate as a whole and provided it with sharp cutting edges. Bakker stated that &quot;Stegosaurus&quot; could flip its osteoderms from one side to another to present a predator with an array of spikes and blades that would impede it from closing sufficiently to attack the &quot;Stegosaurus&quot; effectively. He contends that they had insufficient width for them to stand erect easily in such a manner as to be useful in display without continuous muscular effort. Mobility of the plates, however, has been disputed by other paleontologists.

Another possible function of the plates is they may have helped to control the body temperature of the animal, in a similar way to the sails of the pelycosaurs &quot;Dimetrodon&quot; and &quot;Edaphosaurus&quot; (and modern elephant and rabbit ears). The plates had blood vessels running through grooves and air flowing around the plates would have cooled the blood. Buffrénil, et al. (1986) found &quot;extreme vascularization of the outer layer of bone&quot;, which was seen as evidence that the plates &quot;acted as thermoregulatory devices&quot;. Likewise, 2010 structural comparisons of &quot;Stegosaurus&quot; plates to &quot;Alligator&quot; osteoderms seem to support the conclusion that the potential for a thermoregulatory role in the plates of &quot;Stegosaurus&quot; definitely exists.
The thermoregulation hypothesis has been seriously questioned, since other stegosaurs such as &quot;Kentrosaurus&quot;, had more low surface area spikes than plates, implying that cooling was not important enough to require specialized structural formations such as plates. However, it has also been suggested that the plates could have helped the animal increase heat absorption from the sun. Since a cooling trend occurred towards the end of the Jurassic, a large ectothermic reptile might have used the increased surface area afforded by the plates to absorb radiation from the sun. Christiansen and Tschopp (2010) state that the presence of a smooth, insulating keratin covering would have hampered thermoregulation, but such a function cannot be entirely ruled out as extant cattle and ducks use horns and beaks to dump excess heat despite the keratin covering. Histological surveys of plate microstructure attributed the vascularization to the need to transport nutrients for rapid plate growth.

The vascular system of the plates have been theorized to have played a role in threat displaying as &quot;Stegosaurus&quot; could have pumped blood into them, causing them to &quot;blush&quot; and give a colorful, red warning. However, the stegosaur plates were covered in horn rather than skin. The plates&#x27; large size suggests that they may have served to increase the apparent height of the animal, either to intimidate enemies or to impress other members of the same species in some form of sexual display. A 2015 study of the shapes and sizes of &quot;Hesperosaurus&quot; plates suggested that they were sexually dimorphic, with wide plates belonging to males and taller plates belonging to females. Christiansen and Tschopp (2010) proposed that the display function would have been reinforced by the horny sheath which would have increased the visible surface and such horn structures are often brightly colored. Some have suggested that plates in stegosaurs were used to allow individuals to identify members of their species. The use of exaggerated structures in dinosaurs as species identification has been questioned, as no such function exists in modern species.

===Thagomizer (tail spikes)===


There has been debate about whether the tail spikes were only used for display, as posited by Gilmore in 1914, or used as a weapon. Robert Bakker noted the tail was likely to have been much more flexible than that of other dinosaurs, as it lacked ossified tendons, thus lending credence to the idea of the tail as a weapon. However, as Carpenter has noted, the plates overlap so many tail vertebrae, movement would be limited. Bakker also observed that &quot;Stegosaurus&quot; could have maneuvered its rear easily, by keeping its large hind limbs stationary and pushing off with its very powerfully muscled but short forelimbs, allowing it to swivel deftly to deal with attack. 
More recently, a study of the tail spikes by McWhinney &quot;et al.&quot;, which showed a high incidence of trauma-related damage, lends more weight to the position that the spikes were indeed used in combat. This study showed that 9.8% of &quot;Stegosaurus&quot; specimens examined had injuries to their tail spikes. Additional support for this idea was a punctured tail vertebra of an &quot;Allosaurus&quot; into which a tail spike fits perfectly. The damage shows that the spike entered at an angle from below and displaced a piece of the process upward, remodeled bone on the underside of the process shows that an infection developed.

&quot;S. stenops&quot; had four dermal spikes, each about long. Discoveries of articulated stegosaur armor show, at least in some species, these spikes protruded horizontally from the tail, not vertically as is often depicted. Initially, Marsh described &quot;S. ungulatus&quot; as having eight spikes in its tail, unlike &quot;S. stenops&quot;. However, recent research re-examined this and concluded this species also had four.

===Growth and metabolism===
Juveniles of &quot;Stegosaurus&quot; have been preserved, probably showing the growth of the genus. The two juveniles are both relatively small, with the smaller individual being long, and the larger having a length of . The specimens can be identified as not mature because they lack the fusion of the scapula and coracoid, and the lower hind limbs. Also, the pelvic region of the specimens are similar to &quot;Kentrosaurus&quot; juveniles. One 2009 study of &quot;Stegosaurus&quot; specimens of various sizes found that the plates and spikes had slower histological growth than the skeleton at least until the dinosaur reached its mature size.
A 2013 study concluded, based on the rapid deposition of highly vascularised fibrolamellar bone, that &quot;Kentrosaurus&quot; had a quicker growth rate than &quot;Stegosaurus&quot;, contradicting the general rule that larger dinosaurs grew faster than smaller ones. 

A 2022 study by Wiemann and colleagues of various dinosaur genera including &quot;Stegosaurus&quot; suggests that it had an ectothermic (cold blooded) or gigantothermic metabolism, on par with that of modern reptiles. This was uncovered using the spectroscopy of lipoxidation signals, which are byproducts of oxidative phosphorylation and correlate with metabolic rates. They suggested that such metabolisms may have been common for ornithischian dinosaurs in general, with the group evolving towards ectothermy from an ancestor with an endothermic (warm blooded) metabolism.

===Diet===
&quot;Stegosaurus&quot; and related genera were herbivores. However, their teeth and jaws are very different from those of other herbivorous ornithischian dinosaurs, suggesting a different feeding strategy that is not yet well understood. The other ornithischians possessed teeth capable of grinding plant material and a jaw structure capable of movements in planes other than simply orthal (i.e. not only the fused up-down motion to which stegosaur jaws were likely limited). Unlike the sturdy jaws and grinding teeth common to its fellow ornithischians, &quot;Stegosaurus&quot; (and all stegosaurians) had small, peg-shaped teeth that have been observed with horizontal wear facets associated with tooth-food contact and their unusual jaws were probably capable of only orthal (up-down) movements. Their teeth were &quot;not tightly pressed together in a block for efficient grinding&quot;, and no evidence in the fossil record of stegosaurians indicates use of gastroliths—the stone(s) some dinosaurs (and some present-day bird species) ingested—to aid the grinding process, so how exactly &quot;Stegosaurus&quot; obtained and processed the amount of plant material required to sustain its size remains &quot;poorly understood&quot;.

The stegosaurians were widely distributed geographically in the late Jurassic. Palaeontologists believe it would have eaten plants such as mosses, ferns, horsetails, cycads, and conifers. One hypothesized feeding behavior strategy considers them to be low-level browsers, eating low-growing foliage of various nonflowering plants. This scenario has &quot;Stegosaurus&quot; foraging at most 1 m above the ground. Conversely, if &quot;Stegosaurus&quot; could have raised itself on two legs, as suggested by Bakker, then it could have browsed on vegetation quite high up, with adults being able to forage up to above the ground.

A detailed computer analysis of the biomechanics of &quot;Stegosaurus&quot;″s feeding behavior was performed in 2010, using two different three-dimensional models of &quot;Stegosaurus&quot; teeth given realistic physics and properties. Bite force was also calculated using these models and the known skull proportions of the animal, as well as simulated tree branches of different size and hardness. The resultant bite forces calculated for &quot;Stegosaurus&quot; were 140.1 newtons (N), 183.7 N, and 275 N (for anterior, middle and posterior teeth, respectively), which means its bite force was less than half that of a Labrador retriever. &quot;Stegosaurus&quot; could have easily bitten through smaller green branches, but would have had difficulty with anything over 12 mm in diameter. &quot;Stegosaurus&quot;, therefore, probably browsed primarily among smaller twigs and foliage, and would have been unable to handle larger plant parts unless the animal was capable of biting much more efficiently than predicted in this study. However, a 2016 study indicates that &quot;Stegosaurus&quot; bite strength was stronger than previously believed. Comparisons were made between it (represented by a specimen known as &quot;Sophie&quot; from the United Kingdom&#x27;s Natural History Museum) and two other herbivorous dinosaurs; &quot;Erlikosaurus&quot; and &quot;Plateosaurus&quot; to determine if all three had similar bite forces and similar niches. Based on the results of the study, it was revealed that the subadult &quot;Stegosaurus&quot; specimen had a bite similar in strength to that of modern herbivorous mammals, in particular, cattle and sheep. Based on this data, it is likely &quot;Stegosaurus&quot; also ate woodier, tougher plants such as cycads, perhaps even acting as a means of spreading cycad seeds.

===&quot;Second brain&quot;===

At one time, stegosaurs were described as having a &quot;second brain&quot; in their hips. Soon after describing &quot;Stegosaurus&quot;, Marsh noted a large canal in the hip region of the spinal cord, which could have accommodated a structure up to 20 times larger than the famously small brain. This has led to the influential idea that dinosaurs like &quot;Stegosaurus&quot; had a &quot;second brain&quot; in the tail, which may have been responsible for controlling reflexes in the rear portion of the body. This &quot;brain&quot; was proposed to have given a &quot;Stegosaurus&quot; a temporary boost when it was under threat from predators.

This space, however, is more likely to have served other purposes. The sacro-lumbar expansion is not unique to stegosaurs, nor even ornithischians. It is also present in birds. In their case, it contains what is called the glycogen body, a structure whose function is not definitely known, but which is postulated to facilitate the supply of glycogen to the animal&#x27;s nervous system. It also may function as a balance organ, or reservoir of compounds to support the nervous system.

==Paleoecology==

The Morrison Formation is interpreted as a semiarid environment with distinct wet and dry seasons, and flat floodplains. Vegetation varied from river-lining forests of conifers, tree ferns, and ferns (gallery forests), to fern savannas with occasional trees such as the Araucaria-like conifer &quot;Brachyphyllum&quot;. The flora of the period has been revealed by fossils of green algae, fungi, mosses, horsetails, ferns, cycads, ginkoes, and several families of conifers. Animal fossils discovered include bivalves, snails, ray-finned fishes, frogs, salamanders, turtles like &quot;Glyptops&quot;, sphenodonts, lizards, terrestrial and aquatic crocodylomorphs like &quot;Hoplosuchus&quot;, several species of pterosaurs such as &quot;Harpactognathus&quot; and &quot;Mesadactylus&quot;, numerous dinosaur species, and early mammals such as docodonts (like &quot;Docodon&quot;), multituberculates, symmetrodonts, and triconodonts.

Dinosaurs that lived alongside &quot;Stegosaurus&quot; included theropods &quot;Allosaurus&quot;, &quot;Saurophaganax&quot;, &quot;Torvosaurus&quot;, &quot;Ceratosaurus&quot;, &quot;Marshosaurus&quot;, &quot;Stokesosaurus&quot;, &quot;Ornitholestes&quot;, &quot;Coelurus&quot; and &quot;Tanycolagreus&quot;. Sauropods dominated the region, and included &quot;Brontosaurus&quot;, &quot;Brachiosaurus&quot;, &quot;Apatosaurus&quot;, &quot;Diplodocus&quot;, &quot;Camarasaurus&quot;, and &quot;Barosaurus&quot;. Other ornithischians included &quot;Camptosaurus&quot;, &quot;Gargoyleosaurus&quot;, &quot;Dryosaurus&quot;, and &quot;Nanosaurus&quot;. &quot;Stegosaurus&quot; is commonly found at the same sites as &quot;Allosaurus&quot;, &quot;Apatosaurus&quot;, &quot;Camarasaurus&quot;, and&quot; Diplodocus&quot;. &quot;Stegosaurus&quot; may have preferred drier settings than these other dinosaurs.

==Cultural significance==
One of the most recognizable of all dinosaurs, &quot;Stegosaurus&quot; has been depicted on film, in cartoons and comics and as children&#x27;s toys. Due to the fragmentary nature of most early &quot;Stegosaurus&quot; fossil finds, it took many years before reasonably accurate restorations of this dinosaur could be produced. The earliest popular image of &quot;Stegosaurus&quot; was an engraving produced by the French science illustrator Auguste-Michel Jobin, which appeared in the November 1884 issue of &quot;Scientific American&quot; and elsewhere, and which depicted the dinosaur amid a speculative Morrison age Jurassic landscape. Jobin restored the &quot;Stegosaurus&quot; as bipedal and long-necked, with the plates arranged along the tail and the back covered in spikes. This covering of spikes might have been based on a misinterpretation of the teeth, which Marsh had noted were oddly shaped, cylindrical, and found scattered, such that he thought they might turn out to be small dermal spines.

Marsh published his more accurate skeletal reconstruction of &quot;Stegosaurus&quot; in 1891, and within a decade &quot;Stegosaurus&quot; had become among the most-illustrated types of dinosaur. Artist Charles R. Knight published his first illustration of &quot;Stegosaurus ungulatus&quot; based on Marsh&#x27;s skeletal reconstruction in a November 1897 issue of &quot;The Century Magazine&quot;. This illustration would later go on to form the basis of the stop-motion puppet used in the 1933 film &quot;King Kong&quot;. Like Marsh&#x27;s reconstruction, Knight&#x27;s first restoration had a single row of large plates, though he next used a double row for his more well-known 1901 painting, produced under the direction of Frederic Lucas. Again under Lucas, Knight revised his version of &quot;Stegosaurus&quot; again two years later, producing a model with a staggered double row of plates. Knight would go on to paint a stegosaur with a staggered double plate row in 1927 for the Field Museum of Natural History, and was followed by Rudolph F. Zallinger, who painted &quot;Stegosaurus&quot; this way in his &quot;Age of Reptiles&quot; mural at the Peabody Museum in 1947.
&quot;Stegosaurus&quot; made its major public debut as a paper mache model commissioned by the U.S. National Museum of Natural History for the 1904 Louisiana Purchase Exposition. The model was based on Knight&#x27;s latest miniature with the double row of staggered plates, and was exhibited in the United States Government Building at the exposition in St. Louis before being relocated to Portland, Oregon for the Lewis and Clark Centennial Exposition in 1905. The model was moved to the Smithsonian National Museum of Natural History (now the Arts and Industries Building) in Washington, D.C. along with other prehistory displays, and to the current National Museum of Natural History building in 1911. Following renovations to the museum in the 2010s, the model was moved once again for display at the Museum of the Earth in Ithaca, New York.

==See also==

*Timeline of stegosaur research
==References==
==External links==

* . The original article in which the discovery of &quot;Stegosaurus&quot; was first published.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q59099" start="31" end="42" title="herbivorous" label="herbivorous"/>
<link wikidata="Q823931" start="57" end="73" title="armored dinosaur" label="armored dinosaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q499312" start="83" end="96" title="Late Jurassic" label="Late Jurassic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1513527" start="151" end="157" title="osteoderm" label="plates"/>
<link wikidata="Q846958" start="180" end="186" title="thagomizer" label="spikes"/>
<link wikidata="Q40614" start="203" end="209" title="Fossil" label="Fossil"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="255" end="268" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q45" start="276" end="284" title="Portugal" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q733565" start="310" end="322" title="Kimmeridgian" label="Kimmeridgian"/>
<link wikidata="Q855125" start="327" end="336" title="Tithonian" label="Tithonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q12758989" start="342" end="348" title="strata" label="strata"/>
<link wikidata="Q20764" start="380" end="397" title="Mya (unit)" label="million years ago"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195552" start="453" end="471" title="Morrison Formation" label="Morrison Formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q14326" start="720" end="731" title="Apatosaurus" label="Apatosaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q14330" start="745" end="755" title="Diplodocus" label="Diplodocus"/>
<link wikidata="Q14419" start="769" end="781" title="Camarasaurus" label="Camarasaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q14400" start="798" end="808" title="Allosaurus" label="Allosaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q21907045" start="904" end="913" title="quadruped" label="quadruped"/>
<link wikidata="Q190259" start="1464" end="1480" title="thermoregulatory" label="thermoregulatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q3773734" start="1537" end="1561" title="brain-to-body mass ratio" label="brain-to-body mass ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q131484" start="1744" end="1755" title="stegosauria" label="stegosauria"/>
<link wikidata="Q152646" start="1905" end="1914" title="Bone Wars" label="Bone Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q299756" start="1924" end="1945" title="Othniel Charles Marsh" label="Othniel Charles Marsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q5278648" start="1949" end="1963" title="Dinosaur Ridge" label="Dinosaur Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q152646" start="2789" end="2798" title="Bone Wars" label="Bone Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q4799436" start="2823" end="2835" title="Arthur Lakes" label="Arthur Lakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2275047" start="2968" end="2986" title="Morrison, Colorado" label="Morrison, Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061403" start="3068" end="3076" title="holotype" label="holotype"/>
<link wikidata="Q36642" start="3283" end="3298" title="binomial nomenclature" label="scientific name"/>
<link wikidata="Q2227106" start="3431" end="3439" title="Roof shingle" label="shingles"/>
<link wikidata="Q468402" start="3441" end="3445" title="tile" label="tile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071346" start="3779" end="3830" title="International Commission on Zoological Nomenclature" label="International Commission on Zoological Nomenclature"/>
<link wikidata="Q14330" start="4062" end="4072" title="Diplodocus" label="Diplodocus"/>
<link wikidata="Q14400" start="4124" end="4134" title="Allosaurus" label="Allosaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q298933" start="4199" end="4218" title="Edward Drinker Cope" label="Edward Drinker Cope"/>
<link wikidata="Q15723432" start="4231" end="4252" title="Hypsirhophus discurus" label="Hypsirhophus discurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3095430" start="4386" end="4407" title="Garden Park, Colorado" label="Garden Park, Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040689" start="4489" end="4496" title="Synonym (taxonomy)" label="synonym"/>
<link wikidata="Q217717" start="4834" end="4868" title="American Museum of Natural History" label="American Museum of Natural History"/>
<link wikidata="Q5155122" start="4924" end="4934" title="Como Bluff" label="Como Bluff"/>
<link wikidata="Q109442" start="4938" end="4960" title="Albany County, Wyoming" label="Albany County, Wyoming"/>
<link wikidata="Q499312" start="4990" end="5004" title="Late Jurassic" label="Upper Jurassic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195552" start="5012" end="5030" title="Morrison Formation" label="Morrison Formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q17675999" start="5275" end="5294" title="William Harlow Reed" label="William Harlow Reed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003240" start="6978" end="6988" title="Cañon City" label="Cañon City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261" start="6990" end="6998" title="Colorado" label="Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q444953" start="7651" end="7667" title="Richard Lydekker" label="Richard Lydekker"/>
<link wikidata="Q148554" start="7884" end="7918" title="National Museum of Natural History" label="National Museum of Natural History"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="7922" end="7938" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington D. C."/>
<link wikidata="Q122945" start="8352" end="8385" title="Peabody Museum of Natural History" label="Peabody Museum of Natural History"/>
<link wikidata="Q1465858" start="8397" end="8415" title="Richard Swann Lull" label="Richard Swann Lull"/>
<link wikidata="Q148554" start="8663" end="8697" title="National Museum of Natural History" label="National Museum of Natural History"/>
<link wikidata="Q139951" start="8976" end="8989" title="Hoplitosaurus" label="Hoplitosaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q725877" start="9246" end="9263" title="Charles R. Knight" label="Charles R. Knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q1465858" start="9479" end="9497" title="Richard Swann Lull" label="Richard Swann Lull"/>
<link wikidata="Q122945" start="9710" end="9743" title="Peabody Museum of Natural History" label="Peabody Museum of Natural History"/>
<link wikidata="Q122945" start="10687" end="10720" title="Peabody Museum of Natural History" label="Peabody Museum of Natural History"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206510" start="11134" end="11149" title="Charles W. Gilmore" label="Charles Gilmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q148554" start="11157" end="11196" title="National Museum of Natural History" label="U.S. National Museum of Natural History"/>
<link wikidata="Q217717" start="11608" end="11642" title="American Museum of Natural History" label="American Museum of Natural History"/>
<link wikidata="Q23139" start="11888" end="11900" title="Barnum Brown" label="Barnum Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1226698" start="12122" end="12148" title="Dinosaur National Monument" label="Dinosaur National Monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043983" start="12198" end="12232" title="Carnegie Museum of Natural History" label="Carnegie Museum of Natural History"/>
<link wikidata="Q2227106" start="12564" end="12571" title="Roof shingle" label="shingle"/>
<link wikidata="Q205531" start="13175" end="13181" title="iguana" label="iguana"/>
<link wikidata="Q309048" start="13323" end="13332" title="King Kong (1933 film)" label="King Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q3734365" start="13590" end="13596" title="Chirality" label="chiral"/>
<link wikidata="Q217717" start="13966" end="14000" title="American Museum of Natural History" label="American Museum of Natural History"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043983" start="14006" end="14040" title="Carnegie Museum of Natural History" label="Carnegie Museum of Natural History"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122595" start="14050" end="14081" title="Field Museum of Natural History" label="Field Museum of Natural History"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342" start="14742" end="14752" title="Pittsburgh" label="Pittsburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q156452" start="14848" end="14870" title="Carbon County, Wyoming" label="Carbon County, Wyoming"/>
<link wikidata="Q1226698" start="14983" end="15009" title="Dinosaur National Monument" label="Dinosaur National Monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q905734" start="15516" end="15536" title="Dinosaur renaissance" label="Dinosaur Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q3330052" start="15866" end="15901" title="Denver Museum of Nature and Science" label="Denver Museum of Nature and Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q7278627" start="17308" end="17321" title="Rabbit Valley (Colorado)" label="Rabbit Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q153251" start="17325" end="17346" title="Mesa County, Colorado" label="Mesa County, Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q60785219" start="17373" end="17396" title="Dinosaur Journey Museum" label="Dinosaur Journey Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3178850" start="17533" end="17553" title="James A. Jensen" label="Jensen-Jensen Quarry"/>
<link wikidata="Q332498" start="17756" end="17780" title="Brigham Young University" label="Brigham Young University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3077407" start="17869" end="17887" title="Lourinhã Formation" label="Lourinha Formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q45" start="17891" end="17899" title="Portugal" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q460703" start="18428" end="18442" title="Shell, Wyoming" label="Shell, Wyoming"/>
<link wikidata="Q1663690" start="18486" end="18499" title="Aathal Dinosaur Museum" label="Sauriermuseum"/>
<link wikidata="Q309388" start="18696" end="18726" title="Natural History Museum, London" label="Natural History Museum, London"/>
<link wikidata="Q14400" start="19531" end="19541" title="Allosaurus" label="Allosaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q128618576" start="19704" end="19708" title="Apex (dinosaur)" label="Apex"/>
<link wikidata="Q13147" start="21134" end="21139" title="skull" label="skull"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891220" start="21192" end="21211" title="antorbital fenestra" label="antorbital fenestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q130910" start="21262" end="21271" title="archosaur" label="archosaur"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21564" end="21576" title="beak#Anatomy" label="rhamphotheca"/>
<link wikidata="Q299756" start="22522" end="22543" title="Othniel Charles Marsh" label="Othniel Charles Marsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q191118" start="22828" end="22839" title="tonne" label="metric tons"/>
<link wikidata="Q469356" start="22843" end="22853" title="short tons" label="short tons"/>
<link wikidata="Q482853" start="23189" end="23205" title="vertebral column" label="vertebral column"/>
<link wikidata="Q488415" start="23206" end="23214" title="anterior" label="anterior"/>
<link wikidata="Q233316" start="23222" end="23228" title="sacrum" label="sacrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q134389" start="23510" end="23523" title="Hesperosaurus" label="Hesperosaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q131648" start="23554" end="23568" title="Huayangosaurus" label="Huayangosaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q133109" start="23591" end="23599" title="Miragaia longicollum" label="Miragaia"/>
<link wikidata="Q792567" start="23698" end="23707" title="axis bone" label="axis bone"/>
<link wikidata="Q655357" start="23751" end="23761" title="atlas bone" label="atlas bone"/>
<link wikidata="Q180323" start="23930" end="23937" title="vertebral centrum" label="centrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q488415" start="24026" end="24031" title="dorsa" label="dorsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q134389" start="24270" end="24283" title="Hesperosaurus" label="Hesperosaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q131094" start="24360" end="24372" title="Kentrosaurus" label="Kentrosaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q180323" start="24590" end="24603" title="neural spines" label="neural spines"/>
<link wikidata="Q16336" start="24889" end="24896" title="scapula" label="scapula"/>
<link wikidata="Q615414" start="25004" end="25012" title="acromion" label="acromion"/>
<link wikidata="Q83379" start="25239" end="25246" title="triceps" label="triceps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131838" start="25295" end="25303" title="coracoid" label="coracoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1513527" start="26088" end="26098" title="osteoderms" label="osteoderms"/>
<link wikidata="Q903478" start="27167" end="27173" title="Homochirality" label="chiral"/>
<link wikidata="Q189474" start="27505" end="27515" title="keratinous" label="keratinous"/>
<link wikidata="Q273617" start="27589" end="27599" title="ankylosaur" label="ankylosaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q25114760" start="27606" end="27616" title="bony plate" label="bony plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275593" start="27724" end="27730" title="Peter Galton" label="Galton"/>
<link wikidata="Q284787" start="27789" end="27803" title="Lower Jurassic" label="Lower Jurassic"/>
<link wikidata="Q911869" start="27805" end="27815" title="Sinemurian" label="Sinemurian"/>
<link wikidata="Q540479" start="27816" end="27829" title="Pliensbachian" label="Pliensbachian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785351" start="27837" end="27851" title="Kota Formation" label="Kota Formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="27855" end="27860" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q273617" start="27887" end="27899" title="Ankylosauria" label="Ankylosauria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567633" start="28016" end="28028" title="sister group" label="sister group"/>
<link wikidata="Q131484" start="28120" end="28133" title="Stegosauridae" label="Stegosauridae"/>
<link wikidata="Q562813" start="28229" end="28240" title="Paul Sereno" label="Paul Sereno"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="28417" end="28423" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q18" start="28437" end="28450" title="South America" label="South America"/>
<link wikidata="Q131639" start="28592" end="28604" title="Wuerhosaurus" label="Wuerhosaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q134389" start="28621" end="28634" title="Hesperosaurus" label="Hesperosaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2333562" start="28646" end="28655" title="cladogram" label="cladogram"/>
<link wikidata="Q171184" start="28717" end="28738" title="phylogenetic analysis" label="phylogenetic analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q823931" start="28840" end="28848" title="Eurypoda" label="Eurypoda"/>
<link wikidata="Q5701347" start="29112" end="29123" title="Hekou Group" label="Hekou Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003240" start="29875" end="29885" title="Cañon City, Colorado" label="Cañon City"/>
<link wikidata="Q5155122" start="30578" end="30588" title="Como Bluff" label="Como Bluff"/>
<link wikidata="Q733565" start="30859" end="30871" title="Kimmeridgian" label="Kimmeridgian"/>
<link wikidata="Q855125" start="30878" end="30887" title="Tithonian" label="Tithonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q217717" start="32175" end="32209" title="American Museum of Natural History" label="American Museum of Natural History"/>
<link wikidata="Q122945" start="32470" end="32503" title="Peabody Museum of Natural History" label="Peabody Museum of Natural History"/>
<link wikidata="Q1465858" start="32515" end="32533" title="Richard Swann Lull" label="Richard Swann Lull"/>
<link wikidata="Q148554" start="32781" end="32815" title="National Museum of Natural History" label="National Museum of Natural History"/>
<link wikidata="Q134389" start="34007" end="34020" title="Hesperosaurus" label="Hesperosaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q131639" start="34037" end="34049" title="Wuerhosaurus" label="Wuerhosaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q252730" start="34097" end="34109" title="type species" label="type species"/>
<link wikidata="Q922448" start="34244" end="34251" title="nomen dubium" label="dubious"/>
<link wikidata="Q499312" start="34437" end="34450" title="Late Jurassic" label="Late Jurassic"/>
<link wikidata="Q752187" start="34486" end="34502" title="Early Cretaceous" label="Early Cretaceous"/>
<link wikidata="Q5521505" start="35000" end="35004" title="Gansu Agricultural University" label="GSAU"/>
<link wikidata="Q5701347" start="35062" end="35073" title="Hekou Group" label="Hekou Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q42392" start="35077" end="35091" title="Gansu Province" label="Gansu Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q622265" start="35136" end="35142" title="Aptian" label="Aptian"/>
<link wikidata="Q301728" start="35143" end="35149" title="Albian" label="Albian"/>
<link wikidata="Q752187" start="35162" end="35178" title="Early Cretaceous" label="Early Cretaceous"/>
<link wikidata="Q15282397" start="35644" end="35653" title="Taohelong" label="Taohelong"/>
<link wikidata="Q3707858" start="36043" end="36056" title="type specimen" label="type specimen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071346" start="36693" end="36697" title="International Commission on Zoological Nomenclature" label="ICZN"/>
<link wikidata="Q220815" start="36799" end="36804" title="pubis (bone)" label="pubis"/>
<link wikidata="Q844326" start="36971" end="36982" title="nomen nudum" label="nomen nudum"/>
<link wikidata="Q352107" start="37084" end="37090" title="Robert Bakker" label="Bakker"/>
<link wikidata="Q139951" start="38591" end="38604" title="Hoplitosaurus" label="Hoplitosaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q133863" start="38708" end="38720" title="Lexovisaurus" label="Lexovisaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2675550" start="38765" end="38779" title="Loricatosaurus" label="Loricatosaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206510" start="38838" end="38856" title="Charles W. Gilmore" label="Charles W. Gilmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1019" start="39104" end="39114" title="Madagascar" label="Madagascar"/>
<link wikidata="Q18511009" start="39252" end="39265" title="Majungasaurus" label="Majungasaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q271841" start="39275" end="39284" title="hadrosaur" label="hadrosaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q25363" start="39295" end="39306" title="crocodylian" label="crocodylian"/>
<link wikidata="Q131639" start="39460" end="39480" title="Wuerhosaurus" label="Wuerhosaurus homheni"/>
<link wikidata="Q1241283" start="39559" end="39571" title="Dong Zhiming" label="Dong Zhiming"/>
<link wikidata="Q134389" start="39770" end="39789" title="Hesperosaurus" label="Hesperosaurus mjosi"/>
<link wikidata="Q484268" start="39927" end="39950" title="Johnson County, Wyoming" label="Johnson County, Wyoming"/>
<link wikidata="Q352107" start="40700" end="40706" title="Robert Bakker" label="Bakker"/>
<link wikidata="Q3041772" start="40722" end="40731" title="Kenneth Carpenter" label="Carpenter"/>
<link wikidata="Q178366" start="41031" end="41036" title="tibia" label="tibia"/>
<link wikidata="Q302896" start="41041" end="41047" title="fibula" label="fibula"/>
<link wikidata="Q176503" start="41077" end="41082" title="femur" label="femur"/>
<link wikidata="Q835986" start="42060" end="42067" title="baculum" label="baculum"/>
<link wikidata="Q134389" start="42745" end="42758" title="Hesperosaurus" label="Hesperosaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q319520" start="43571" end="43581" title="pelycosaur" label="pelycosaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q130869" start="43589" end="43599" title="Dimetrodon" label="Dimetrodon"/>
<link wikidata="Q131688" start="43616" end="43628" title="Edaphosaurus" label="Edaphosaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q530397" start="44056" end="44065" title="Alligator" label="Alligator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379273" start="44354" end="44366" title="surface area" label="surface area"/>
<link wikidata="Q7168" start="45088" end="45100" title="Histology" label="Histological"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338786" start="45405" end="45410" title="Blushing" label="blush"/>
<link wikidata="Q778384" start="45730" end="45737" title="Display (zoology)" label="display"/>
<link wikidata="Q181497" start="45837" end="45855" title="Sexual dimorphism" label="sexually dimorphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q619671" start="47658" end="47665" title="process (anatomy)" label="process"/>
<link wikidata="Q16336" start="48519" end="48526" title="scapula" label="scapula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131838" start="48531" end="48539" title="coracoid" label="coracoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q713102" start="48577" end="48590" title="pelvis" label="pelvic region"/>
<link wikidata="Q7168" start="48772" end="48784" title="histological" label="histological"/>
<link wikidata="Q587698" start="49256" end="49267" title="ectothermic" label="ectothermic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2714881" start="49286" end="49300" title="gigantothermic" label="gigantothermic"/>
<link wikidata="Q483666" start="49379" end="49391" title="spectroscopy" label="spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q227564" start="49441" end="49466" title="oxidative phosphorylation" label="oxidative phosphorylation"/>
<link wikidata="Q12571883" start="49669" end="49680" title="endothermic" label="endothermic"/>
<link wikidata="Q191488" start="49861" end="49874" title="ornithischian" label="ornithischian"/>
<link wikidata="Q723673" start="50684" end="50694" title="gastrolith" label="gastrolith"/>
<link wikidata="Q12438" start="52061" end="52068" title="Newton (unit)" label="newtons"/>
<link wikidata="Q38726" start="52207" end="52225" title="Labrador retriever" label="Labrador retriever"/>
<link wikidata="Q14388" start="52809" end="52815" title="Sophie the Stegosaurus" label="Sophie"/>
<link wikidata="Q132549" start="52920" end="52932" title="Erlikosaurus" label="Erlikosaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q131046" start="52949" end="52961" title="Plateosaurus" label="Plateosaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5572605" start="54310" end="54323" title="glycogen body" label="glycogen body"/>
<link wikidata="Q174936" start="54429" end="54437" title="glycogen" label="glycogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q9404" start="54459" end="54473" title="nervous system" label="nervous system"/>
<link wikidata="Q157214" start="54862" end="54871" title="Araucaria" label="Araucaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q13860841" start="54891" end="54904" title="Brachyphyllum" label="Brachyphyllum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5573640" start="55176" end="55184" title="Glyptops" label="Glyptops"/>
<link wikidata="Q5901131" start="55265" end="55276" title="Hoplosuchus" label="Hoplosuchus"/>
<link wikidata="Q179204" start="55303" end="55312" title="pterosaur" label="pterosaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q3493313" start="55328" end="55343" title="Harpactognathus" label="Harpactognathus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2540153" start="55360" end="55372" title="Mesadactylus" label="Mesadactylus"/>
<link wikidata="Q133270" start="55433" end="55442" title="Docodonta" label="docodonts"/>
<link wikidata="Q3232173" start="55455" end="55462" title="Docodon" label="Docodon"/>
<link wikidata="Q131181" start="55471" end="55488" title="Multituberculata" label="multituberculates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1938798" start="55490" end="55503" title="Symmetrodonta" label="symmetrodonts"/>
<link wikidata="Q135419" start="55509" end="55521" title="Eutriconodonta" label="triconodonts"/>
<link wikidata="Q14400" start="55604" end="55614" title="Allosaurus" label="Allosaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q131216" start="55628" end="55641" title="Saurophaganax" label="Saurophaganax"/>
<link wikidata="Q131537" start="55655" end="55666" title="Torvosaurus" label="Torvosaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q130902" start="55680" end="55692" title="Ceratosaurus" label="Ceratosaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q136872" start="55706" end="55718" title="Marshosaurus" label="Marshosaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q132366" start="55732" end="55745" title="Stokesosaurus" label="Stokesosaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q14449" start="55759" end="55772" title="Ornitholestes" label="Ornitholestes"/>
<link wikidata="Q131228" start="55786" end="55794" title="Coelurus" label="Coelurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1826774" start="55811" end="55824" title="Tanycolagreus" label="Tanycolagreus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3222766" start="55883" end="55895" title="Brontosaurus" label="Brontosaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q14397" start="55909" end="55922" title="Brachiosaurus" label="Brachiosaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q14326" start="55936" end="55947" title="Apatosaurus" label="Apatosaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q14330" start="55961" end="55971" title="Diplodocus" label="Diplodocus"/>
<link wikidata="Q14419" start="55985" end="55997" title="Camarasaurus" label="Camarasaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q309390" start="56015" end="56025" title="Barosaurus" label="Barosaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q133203" start="56069" end="56081" title="Camptosaurus" label="Camptosaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q134736" start="56095" end="56110" title="Gargoyleosaurus" label="Gargoyleosaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q131085" start="56124" end="56134" title="Dryosaurus" label="Dryosaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1827215" start="56152" end="56162" title="Nanosaurus" label="Nanosaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q39379" start="56963" end="56982" title="Scientific American" label="Scientific American"/>
<link wikidata="Q725877" start="57660" end="57677" title="Charles R. Knight" label="Charles R. Knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q2471002" start="57828" end="57848" title="The Century Magazine" label="The Century Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q309048" start="57964" end="57973" title="King Kong (1933 film)" label="King Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122595" start="58444" end="58475" title="Field Museum of Natural History" label="Field Museum of Natural History"/>
<link wikidata="Q7377412" start="58497" end="58517" title="Rudolph F. Zallinger" label="Rudolph F. Zallinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q148554" start="58736" end="58770" title="National Museum of Natural History" label="National Museum of Natural History"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520847" start="58784" end="58813" title="Louisiana Purchase Exposition" label="Louisiana Purchase Exposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q38022" start="58990" end="58999" title="St. Louis" label="St. Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6106" start="59026" end="59042" title="Portland, Oregon" label="Portland, Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6537206" start="59051" end="59088" title="Lewis and Clark Centennial Exposition" label="Lewis and Clark Centennial Exposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q131626" start="59125" end="59136" title="Smithsonian" label="Smithsonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q713932" start="59181" end="59209" title="Arts and Industries Building" label="Arts and Industries Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="59214" end="59230" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q6941080" start="59441" end="59460" title="Museum of the Earth" label="Museum of the Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q217346" start="59464" end="59480" title="Ithaca, New York" label="Ithaca, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q25348597" start="59498" end="59528" title="Timeline of stegosaur research" label="Timeline of stegosaur research"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="192793" wikidata="Q350239" url="?curid=192793" title="Thomas Nagel">
<text>Thomas Nagel (; born July 4, 1937) is an American philosopher. He is the University Professor of Philosophy and Law Emeritus at New York University, where he taught from 1980 until his retirement in 2016. His main areas of philosophical interest are political philosophy, ethics and philosophy of mind.

Nagel is known for his critique of material reductionist accounts of the mind, particularly in his essay &quot;What Is It Like to Be a Bat?&quot; (1974), and for his contributions to liberal moral and political theory in &quot;The Possibility of Altruism&quot; (1970) and subsequent writings. He continued the critique of reductionism in &quot;Mind and Cosmos&quot; (2012), in which he argues against the neo-Darwinian view of the emergence of consciousness.

==Life and career==

Nagel was born on July 4, 1937, in Belgrade, Yugoslavia (now Serbia), to German Jewish refugees Carolyn () and Walter Nagel. He arrived in the US in 1939, and was raised in and around New York. He had no religious upbringing, but regards himself as a Jew.

Nagel received a Bachelor of Arts degree in philosophy from Cornell University in 1958, where he was a member of the Telluride House and was introduced to the philosophy of Ludwig Wittgenstein. He then attended the University of Oxford on a Fulbright Scholarship and received a BPhil in philosophy in 1960; there, he studied with J. L. Austin and Paul Grice. He received his Doctor of Philosophy degree in philosophy from Harvard University in 1963. At Harvard, Nagel studied under John Rawls, whom Nagel later called &quot;the most important political philosopher of the twentieth century.&quot;

Nagel taught at the University of California, Berkeley (from 1963 to 1966) and at Princeton University (from 1966 to 1980), where he trained many well-known philosophers, including Susan Wolf, Shelly Kagan, and Samuel Scheffler, the last of whom is now his colleague at New York University.

Nagel is a fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences and a corresponding fellow of the British Academy, and in 2006 was elected a member of the American Philosophical Society. He has held fellowships from the Guggenheim Foundation, the National Science Foundation, and the National Endowment for the Humanities. In 2008 he was awarded a Rolf Schock Prize for his work in philosophy, the Balzan Prize, and the honorary degree of Doctor of Letters from the University of Oxford.

==Philosophical work==

===Overview===
Nagel began to publish philosophy at age 22; his career now spans over 60 years of publication. He thinks that each person, owing to their capacity to reason, instinctively seeks a unified world view, but if this aspiration leads one to believe that there is only one way to understand our intellectual commitments, whether about the external world, knowledge, or what our practical and moral reasons ought to be, one errs. For contingent, limited and finite creatures, no such unified world view is possible, because ways of understanding are not always better when they are more objective.

Like the British philosopher Bernard Williams, Nagel believes that the rise of modern science has permanently changed how people think of the world and our place in it. A modern scientific understanding is one way of thinking about the world and our place in it that is more objective than the commonsense view it replaces. It is more objective because it is less dependent on our peculiarities as the kinds of thinkers that people are. Our modern scientific understanding involves the mathematicized understanding of the world represented by modern physics. Understanding this bleached-out view of the world draws on our capacities as purely rational thinkers and fails to account for the specific nature of our perceptual sensibility. Nagel repeatedly returns to the distinction between &quot;primary&quot; and &quot;secondary&quot; qualities—that is, between primary qualities of objects like mass and shape, which are mathematically and structurally describable independent of our sensory apparatuses, and secondary qualities like taste and color, which depend on our sensory apparatuses.

Despite what may seem like skepticism about the objective claims of science, Nagel does not dispute that science describes the world that exists independently of us. His contention, rather, is that a given way of understanding a subject matter should not be regarded as better simply for being more objective. He argues that scientific understanding&#x27;s attempt at an objective viewpoint—a &quot;view from nowhere&quot;—necessarily leaves out something essential when applied to the mind, which inherently has a subjective point of view. As such, objective science is fundamentally unable to help people fully understand themselves. In &quot;What Is It Like to Be a Bat?&quot; and elsewhere, he writes that science cannot describe what it is like &quot;to be&quot; a thinker who conceives of the world from a particular subjective perspective.

Nagel argues that some phenomena are not best grasped from a more objective perspective. The standpoint of the thinker does not present itself to the thinker: they &quot;are&quot; that standpoint. One learns and uses mental concepts by being directly acquainted with one&#x27;s own mind, whereas any attempt to think more objectively about mentality would abstract away from this fact. It would, of its nature, leave out what it is to be a thinker, and that, Nagel believes, would be a falsely objectifying view. Being a thinker is to have a subjective perspective on the world; if one abstracts away from this perspective one leaves out what he sought to explain.

Nagel thinks that philosophers, over-impressed by the paradigm of the kind of objective understanding represented by modern science, tend to produce theories of the mind that are falsely objectifying in precisely this kind of way. They are right to be impressed—modern science really is objective—but wrong to take modern science to be the only paradigm of objectivity. The kind of understanding that science represents does not apply to everything people would like to understand.

As a philosophical rationalist, Nagel believes that a proper understanding of the place of mental properties in nature will involve a revolution in our understanding of both the physical and the mental, and that this is a reasonable prospect that people can anticipate in the near future. A plausible science of the mind will give an account of the stuff that underpins mental and physical properties in such a way that people will simply be able to see that it necessitates both of these aspects. Now, it seems to people that the mental and the physical are irreducibly distinct, but that is not a metaphysical insight, or an acknowledgment of an irreducible explanatory gap, but simply where people are at their present stage of understanding.

Nagel&#x27;s rationalism and tendency to present human nature as composite, structured around our capacity to reason, explains why he thinks that therapeutic or deflationary accounts of philosophy are complacent and that radical skepticism is, strictly speaking, irrefutable. The therapeutic or deflationary philosopher, influenced by Wittgenstein&#x27;s later philosophy, reconciles people to the dependence of our worldview on our &quot;form of life&quot;. Nagel accuses Wittgenstein and American philosopher of mind and language Donald Davidson of philosophical idealism. Both ask people to take up an interpretative perspective to making sense of other speakers in the context of a shared, objective world. This, for Nagel, elevates contingent conditions of our makeup into criteria for what is real. The result &quot;cuts the world down to size&quot; and makes what there is dependent on what there can be interpreted to be. Nagel claims this is no better than more orthodox forms of idealism in which reality is claimed to be made up of mental items or constitutively dependent on a form supplied by the mind.

===Philosophy of mind===

====What is it like to be a something====

Nagel is probably most widely known in philosophy of mind as an advocate of the idea that consciousness and subjective experience cannot, at least with the contemporary understanding of physicalism, be satisfactorily explained with the concepts of physics. This position was primarily discussed by Nagel in one of his most famous articles: &quot;What Is It Like to Be a Bat?&quot; (1974). The article&#x27;s title question, though often attributed to Nagel, was originally asked by Timothy Sprigge. The article was originally published in 1974 in &quot;The Philosophical Review&quot;, and has been reprinted several times, including in &quot;The Mind&#x27;s I&quot; (edited by Daniel Dennett and Douglas Hofstadter), &quot;Readings in the Philosophy of Psychology&quot; (edited by Ned Block), Nagel&#x27;s &quot;Mortal Questions&quot; (1979), &quot;The Nature of Mind&quot; (edited by David M. Rosenthal), and &quot;Philosophy of Mind: Classical and Contemporary Readings&quot; (edited by David J. Chalmers).

In &quot;What Is It Like to Be a Bat?&quot;, Nagel argues that consciousness has essential to it a &quot;subjective character,&quot; a &quot;what it is like&quot; aspect. He writes, &quot;an organism has conscious mental states if and only if there is something that it is like to &quot;be&quot; that organism—something it is like &quot;for&quot; the organism.&quot; In the 50th-anniversary republication of his article in book form, Nagel writes that he &quot;tried to show that the irreducible subjectivity of consciousness is an obstacle to many proposed solutions to the mind-body problem.&quot; His critics have objected to what they see as a misguided attempt to argue from a fact about how one represents the world (trivially, one can only do so from one&#x27;s point of view) to a false claim about the world, that it somehow has first-personal perspectives built into it. On that understanding, Nagel is a conventional dualist about the physical and the mental. This is, however, a misunderstanding: Nagel&#x27;s point is that there is a constraint on what it is to possess the concept of a mental state, namely, that one be directly acquainted with it. Concepts of mental states are only made available to a thinker who can be acquainted with their own states; clearly, the possession and use of physical concepts has no corresponding constraint.

Part of the puzzlement here is because of the limitations of imagination: influenced by his Princeton colleague Saul Kripke, Nagel believes that any type identity statement that identifies a physical state type with a mental state type would be, if true, necessarily true. But Kripke argues that one can easily imagine a situation where, for example, one&#x27;s C-fibres are stimulated but one is not in pain and so refute any such psychophysical identity from the armchair. (A parallel argument does not hold for genuine theoretical identities.) This argument that there will always be an explanatory gap between an identification of a state in mental and physical terms is compounded, Nagel argues, by the fact that imagination operates in two distinct ways. When asked to imagine &quot;sensorily&quot;, one imagines C-fibres being stimulated; if asked to imagine &quot;sympathetically&quot;, one puts oneself in a conscious state resembling pain. These two ways of imagining the two terms of the identity statement are so different that there will always seem to be an explanatory gap, whether or not this is the case. (Some philosophers of mind have taken these arguments as helpful for physicalism on the grounds that it exposes a limitation that makes the existence of an explanatory gap seem compelling, while others have argued that this makes the case for physicalism even more impossible as it cannot be defended even in principle.)

Nagel is not a physicalist because he does not believe that an internal understanding of mental concepts shows them to have the kind of hidden essence that underpins a scientific identity in, say, chemistry. But his skepticism is about &quot;current&quot; physics: he envisages in his most recent work that people may be close to a scientific breakthrough in identifying an underlying essence that is neither physical (as people currently think of the physical), nor functional, nor mental, but such that it necessitates all three of these ways in which the mind &quot;appears&quot; to us. The difference between the kind of explanation he rejects and the kind he accepts depends on his understanding of transparency: from his earliest work to his most recent Nagel has always insisted that a prior context is required to make identity statements plausible, intelligible and transparent.

====Natural selection and consciousness====

In his 2012 book &quot;Mind and Cosmos&quot;, Nagel argues against a materialist view of the emergence of life and consciousness, writing that the standard neo-Darwinian view flies in the face of common sense. He writes that mind is a basic aspect of nature, and that any philosophy of nature that cannot account for it is fundamentally misguided. He argues that the principles that account for the emergence of life may be teleological, rather than materialist or mechanistic. Despite Nagel&#x27;s being an atheist and not a proponent of intelligent design (ID), his book was &quot;praised by creationists&quot;, according to the &quot;New York Times&quot;. Nagel writes in &quot;Mind and Cosmos&quot; that he disagrees with both ID defenders and their opponents, who argue that the only naturalistic alternative to ID is the current reductionist neo-Darwinian model.

Nagel has argued that ID should not be rejected as non-scientific, for instance writing in 2008 that &quot;ID is very different from creation science,&quot; and that the debate about ID &quot;is clearly a scientific disagreement, not a disagreement between science and something else.&quot; In 2009, he recommended &quot;Signature in the Cell&quot; by the philosopher and ID proponent Stephen C. Meyer in &quot;The Times Literary Supplement&quot; as one of his &quot;Best Books of the Year.&quot; Nagel does not accept Meyer&#x27;s conclusions but endorsed Meyer&#x27;s approach, and argued in &quot;Mind and Cosmos&quot; that Meyer and other ID proponents, David Berlinski and Michael Behe, &quot;do not deserve the scorn with which they are commonly met.&quot;

===Ethics===

====Nagel&#x27;s Rawlsian approach====
Nagel has been highly influential in the related fields of moral and political philosophy. Supervised by John Rawls, he has been a longstanding proponent of a Kantian and rationalist approach to moral philosophy. His distinctive ideas were first presented in the short monograph &quot;The Possibility of Altruism,&quot; published in 1970. That book seeks by reflection on the nature of practical reasoning to uncover the formal principles that underlie reason in practice and the related general beliefs about the self that are necessary for those principles to be truly applicable to us. Nagel defends motivated desire theory about the motivation of moral action. According to motivated desire theory, when a person is motivated to moral action it is indeed true that such actions are motivated, like all intentional actions, by a belief and a desire. But it is important to get the justificatory relations right: when a person accepts a moral judgment they are necessarily motivated to act. But it is the reason that does the justificatory work of justifying both the action and the desire. Nagel contrasts this view with a rival view which believes that a moral agent can only accept that they have a reason to act if the desire to carry out the action has an independent justification. An account based on presupposing sympathy would be of this kind.

The most striking claim of the book is that there is a very close parallel between prudential reasoning in one&#x27;s own interests and moral reasons to act to further the interests of another person. When one reasons prudentially, for example about the future reasons that one will have, one allows the reason in the future to justify one&#x27;s current action without reference to the strength of one&#x27;s current desires. If a hurricane were to destroy someone&#x27;s car next year, at that point they will want their insurance company to pay them to replace it: that future reason gives them a reason to take out insurance now. The strength of the reason ought not to be hostage to the strength of one&#x27;s current desires. The denial of this view of prudence, Nagel argues, means that one does not really believe that one is one and the same person through time. One is dissolving oneself into distinct person-stages.

====Altruistic action====
This is the basis of his analogy between prudential actions and moral actions: in cases of altruistic action for another person&#x27;s good that person&#x27;s reasons quite literally become reasons for one if they are timeless and intrinsic reasons. Genuine reasons are reasons for anyone. Like the 19th-century moral philosopher Henry Sidgwick, Nagel believes that one must conceive of one&#x27;s good as an impersonal good and one&#x27;s reasons as objective reasons. That means, practically, that a timeless and intrinsic value generates reasons for anyone. A person who denies the truth of this claim is committed, as in the case of a similar mistake about prudence, to a false view of themself. In this case the false view is that one&#x27;s reasons are irreducibly theirs, in a way that does not allow them to be reasons for anyone: Nagel argues this commits such a person to the view that they cannot make the same judgments about their own reasons third-personally that they can make first-personally. Nagel calls this &quot;dissociation&quot; and considers it a practical analogue of solipsism (the philosophical idea that only one&#x27;s own mind is sure to exist). Once again, a false view of what is involved in reasoning properly is refuted by showing that it leads to a false view of people&#x27;s nature.

====Subjective and objective reasons====
Nagel&#x27;s later work on ethics ceases to place as much weight on the distinction between a person&#x27;s personal or &quot;subjective&quot; reasons and their &quot;objective&quot; reasons. Earlier, in &quot;The Possibility of Altruism,&quot; he took the stance that if one&#x27;s reasons really are about intrinsic and timeless values then, &quot;qua&quot; subjective reason, one can only take them to be the guise of the reasons that there really are: the objective ones. In later discussions, Nagel treats his former view as an incomplete attempt to convey the fact that there are distinct classes of reasons and values, and speaks instead of &quot;agent-relative&quot; and &quot;agent-neutral&quot; reasons. In the case of agent-relative reasons (the successor to subjective reasons), specifying the content of the reason makes essential reference back to the agent for whom it is a reason. An example of this might be: &quot;Anyone has a reason to honor his or her parents.&quot; By contrast, in the case of agent-neutral reasons (the successor to objective reasons) specifying the content of the reason does not make any essential reference back to the person for whom it is a reason. An example of this might be: &quot;Anyone has a reason to promote the good of parenthood.&quot;

====Objective reasons====
The different classes of reasons and values (i.e., agent-relative and agent-neutral) emphasized in Nagel&#x27;s later work are situated within a Sidgwickian model in which one&#x27;s moral commitments are thought of objectively, such that one&#x27;s personal reasons and values are simply incomplete parts of an impersonal whole. The structure of Nagel&#x27;s later ethical view is that all reasons must be brought into relation to this objective view of oneself. Reasons and values that withstand detached critical scrutiny are objective, but more subjective reasons and values can nevertheless be objectively tolerated. However, the most striking part of the earlier argument and of Sidgwick&#x27;s view is preserved: agent-neutral reasons are literally reasons for anyone, so all objectifiable reasons become individually possessed no matter whose they are. Thinking reflectively about ethics from this standpoint, one must take every other agent&#x27;s standpoint on value as seriously as one&#x27;s own, since one&#x27;s own perspective is just a subjective take on an inter-subjective whole; one&#x27;s personal set of reasons is thus swamped by the objective reasons of all others.

====World agent views====
This is similar to &quot;world agent&quot; consequentialist views in which one takes up the standpoint of a collective subject whose reasons are those of everyone. But Nagel remains an individualist who believes in the separateness of persons, so his task is to explain why this objective viewpoint does not swallow up the individual standpoint of each of us. He provides an extended rationale for the importance to people of their personal point of view. The result is a hybrid ethical theory of the kind defended by Nagel&#x27;s Princeton PhD student Samuel Scheffler in &quot;The Rejection of Consequentialism&quot;. The objective standpoint and its demands have to be balanced with the subjective personal point of view of each person and its demands. One can always be maximally objective, but one does not have to be. One can legitimately &quot;cap&quot; the demands placed on oneself by the objective reasons of others. In addition, in his later work, Nagel finds a rationale for so-called deontic constraints in a way Scheffler could not. Following Warren Quinn and Frances Kamm, Nagel grounds them on the inviolability of persons.

====Political philosophy====
The extent to which one can lead a good life as an individual while respecting the demands of others leads inevitably to political philosophy. In the Locke lectures published as the book &quot;Equality and Partiality&quot;, Nagel exposes John Rawls&#x27;s theory of justice to detailed scrutiny. Once again, Nagel places such weight on the objective point of view and its requirements that he finds Rawls&#x27;s view of liberal equality not demanding enough. Rawls&#x27;s aim to redress, not remove, the inequalities that arise from class and talent seems to Nagel to lead to a view that does not sufficiently respect the needs of others. He recommends a gradual move to much more demanding conceptions of equality, motivated by the special nature of political responsibility. Normally, people draw a distinction between what people do and what people fail to bring about, but this thesis, true of individuals, does not apply to the state, which is a collective agent. A Rawlsian state permits intolerable inequalities and people need to develop a more ambitious view of equality to do justice to the demands of the objective recognition of the reasons of others. For Nagel, honoring the objective point of view demands nothing less.

===Atheism===
In &quot;Mind and Cosmos&quot;, Nagel writes that he is an atheist: &quot;I lack the &quot;sensus divinitatis&quot; that enablesindeed compelsso many people to see in the world the expression of divine purpose as naturally as they see in a smiling face the expression of human feeling.&quot; In &quot;The Last Word&quot;, he wrote, &quot;I want atheism to be true and am made uneasy by the fact that some of the most intelligent and well-informed people I know are religious believers. It isn&#x27;t just that I don&#x27;t believe in God and, naturally, hope that I&#x27;m right in my belief. It’s that I hope there is no God! I don’t want there to be a God; I don’t want the universe to be like that.&quot;

===Experience itself as a good===
Nagel has said, &quot;There are elements which, if added to one&#x27;s experience, make life better; there are other elements which if added to one&#x27;s experience, make life worse. But what remains when these are set aside is not merely neutral: it is emphatically positive. ... The additional positive weight is supplied by experience itself, rather than by any of its consequences.&quot;

==Personal life==
Nagel married Doris Blum in 1954, divorcing in 1973. In 1979, he married Anne Hollander, who died in 2014.

==Awards==
Nagel received the 1996 PEN/Diamonstein-Spielvogel Award for the Art of the Essay for &quot;Other Minds&quot; (1995). He has also been awarded the Balzan Prize in Moral Philosophy (2008), the Rolf Schock Prize in Logic and Philosophy of the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences (2008) and the Distinguished Achievement Award of the Mellon Foundation (2006).

==Selected publications==

===Books===
* (Reprinted in 1978, Princeton University Press.)
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* Nagel, Thomas (2012). &quot;Mind and Cosmos: why the materialist neo-Darwinian conception of nature is almost certainly false.&quot; Oxford New York: Oxford University Press, 

===Articles===
* 1959, &quot;Hobbes&#x27;s Concept of Obligation&quot;, &quot;Philosophical Review&quot;, pp. 68–83.
* 1959, &quot;Dreaming&quot;, &quot;Analysis&quot;, pp. 112–6.
* 1965, &quot;Physicalism&quot;, &quot;Philosophical Review&quot;, pp. 339–56.
* 1969, &quot;Sexual Perversion&quot;, &quot;Journal of Philosophy&quot;, pp. 5–17 (repr. in &quot;Mortal Questions&quot;).
* 1969, &quot;The Boundaries of Inner Space&quot;, &quot;Journal of Philosophy&quot;, pp. 452–8.
* 1970, &quot;Death&quot;, &quot;Nous&quot;, pp. 73–80 (repr. in &quot;Mortal Questions&quot;).
* 1970, &quot;Armstrong on the Mind&quot;, &quot;Philosophical Review&quot;, pp. 394–403 (a discussion review of &quot;A Materialist Theory of the Mind&quot; by D. M. Armstrong).
* 1971, &quot;Brain Bisection and the Unity of Consciousness&quot;, &quot;Synthese&quot;, pp. 396–413 (repr. in &quot;Mortal Questions&quot;).
* 1971, &quot;The Absurd&quot;, &quot;Journal of Philosophy&quot;, pp. 716–27 (repr. in &quot;Mortal Questions&quot;).
* 1972, &quot;War and Massacre&quot;, &quot;Philosophy &amp; Public Affairs&quot;, vol. 1, pp. 123–44 (repr. in &quot;Mortal Questions&quot;).
* 1973, &quot;Rawls on Justice&quot;, &quot;Philosophical Review&quot;, pp. 220–34 (a discussion review of &quot;A Theory of Justice&quot; by John Rawls).
* 1973, &quot;Equal Treatment and Compensatory Discrimination&quot;, &quot;Philosophy &amp; Public Affairs&quot;, vol. 2, pp. 348–62.
* 1974, &quot;What Is it Like to Be a Bat?&quot;, &quot;Philosophical Review&quot;, pp. 435–50 (repr. in &quot;Mortal Questions&quot;). Online text
* 1976, &quot;Moral Luck&quot;, Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society Supplementary vol. 50, pp. 137–55 (repr. in &quot;Mortal Questions&quot;).
* 1979, &quot;The Meaning of Equality&quot;, &quot;Washington University Law Quarterly&quot;, pp. 25–31.
* 1981, &quot;Tactical Nuclear Weapons and the Ethics of Conflict&quot;, &quot;Parameters: Journal of the U.S. Army War College&quot;, pp. 327–8.
* 1983, &quot;The Objective Self&quot;, in Carl Ginet and Sydney Shoemaker (eds.), &quot;Knowledge and Mind&quot;, Oxford University Press, pp. 211–232.
* 1987, &quot;Moral Conflict and Political Legitimacy&quot;, &quot;Philosophy &amp; Public Affairs&quot;, pp. 215–240.
* 1994, &quot;Consciousness and Objective Reality&quot;, in R. Warner and T. Szubka (eds.), &quot;The Mind-Body Problem&quot;, Blackwell.
* 1995, &quot;Personal Rights and Public Space&quot;, &quot;Philosophy &amp; Public Affairs&quot;, vol. 24, no. 2, pp. 83–107.
* 1997, &quot;Assisted Suicide: The Philosophers&#x27; Brief&quot; (with R. Dworkin, R. Nozick, J. Rawls, T. Scanlon, and J. J. Thomson), &quot;New York Review of Books&quot;, March 27, 1997.
* 1998, &quot;Reductionism and Antireductionism&quot;, in &quot;The Limits of Reductionism in Biology&quot;, Novartis Symposium 213, John Wiley &amp; Sons, pp. 3–10.
* 1998, &quot;Concealment and Exposure&quot;, &quot;Philosophy &amp; Public Affairs&quot;, vol. 27, no. 1, pp. 3–30. Online text
* 1998, &quot;Conceiving the Impossible and the Mind-Body Problem&quot;, &quot;Philosophy&quot;, vol. 73, no. 285, pp. 337–352. Online PDF 
* 2000, &quot;The Psychophysical Nexus&quot;, in Paul Boghossian and Christopher Peacocke (eds.) &quot;New Essays on the A Priori&quot;, Oxford: Clarendon Press, pp. 432–471. Online PDF 
* 2003, &quot;Rawls and Liberalism&quot;, in Samuel Freeman (ed.) &quot;The Cambridge Companion to Rawls&quot;, Cambridge University Press, pp. 62–85.
* 2003, &quot;John Rawls and Affirmative Action&quot;, &quot;The Journal of Blacks in Higher Education&quot;, no. 39, pp. 82–4.
* 2008, &quot;Public Education and Intelligent Design&quot;, &quot;Philosophy and Public Affairs&quot;
* 2009, &quot;The I in Me&quot;, a review article of &quot;Selves: An Essay in Revisionary Metaphysics&quot; by Galen Strawson, Oxford, 448 pp, , lrb.co.uk
* 2021, Thomas Nagel, &quot;Types of Intuition: Thomas Nagel on human rights and moral knowledge&quot;, &quot;London Review of Books&quot;, vol. 43, no. 11 (3 June 2021), pp. 3, 5–6, 8. Deontology, consequentialism, utilitarianism.
* 2023: &quot;Leader of the Martians&quot; (review of M.W. Rowe, &quot;J.L. Austin: Philosopher and D-Day Intelligence Officer&quot;, Oxford, May 2023, , 660 pp.), &quot;London Review of Books&quot;, vol. 45, no. 17 (7 September 2023), pp. 9–10. &quot;I [the reviewer, Thomas Nagel] was one of Austin&#x27;s last students...&quot; (p. 10.) A quotation from J.L. Austin: &quot;Is it not possible that the next century may see the birth... of a true and comprehensive &quot;science of language&quot;? Then we shall have rid ourselves of one more part of philosophy... in the only way we ever can get rid of philosophy, by kicking it upstairs.&quot; (p. 10.)

==See also==
* American philosophy
* List of American philosophers
* New York University Department of Philosophy
* David Chalmers
* Frank Jackson
* Galen Strawson
* Hard problem of consciousness
* Knowledge argument
* Phenomenology
* Neutral monism
==References==
==Further reading==

==External links==
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q350239" start="0" end="12" title="Thomas Nagel" label="Thomas Nagel"/>
<link wikidata="Q49210" start="128" end="147" title="New York University" label="New York University"/>
<link wikidata="Q179805" start="250" end="270" title="political philosophy" label="political philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9465" start="272" end="278" title="ethics" label="ethics"/>
<link wikidata="Q23407" start="283" end="301" title="philosophy of mind" label="philosophy of mind"/>
<link wikidata="Q7081" start="339" end="347" title="Materialism" label="material"/>
<link wikidata="Q206829" start="348" end="360" title="reductionist" label="reductionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2703462" start="415" end="443" title="What Is It Like to Be a Bat?" label="What Is It Like to Be a Bat?"/>
<link wikidata="Q6863543" start="648" end="663" title="Mind and Cosmos" label="Mind and Cosmos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096404" start="709" end="722" title="neo-Darwinian" label="neo-Darwinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7087" start="748" end="761" title="consciousness" label="consciousness"/>
<link wikidata="Q3711" start="820" end="828" title="Belgrade" label="Belgrade"/>
<link wikidata="Q191077" start="830" end="840" title="Kingdom of Yugoslavia" label="Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q403" start="846" end="852" title="Serbia" label="Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7330" start="858" end="871" title="German Jewish" label="German Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="1036" end="1039" title="Jew" label="Jew"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765120" start="1059" end="1075" title="Bachelor of Arts" label="Bachelor of Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q49115" start="1102" end="1120" title="Cornell University" label="Cornell University"/>
<link wikidata="Q24765347" start="1159" end="1174" title="Telluride House" label="Telluride House"/>
<link wikidata="Q9391" start="1215" end="1234" title="Ludwig Wittgenstein" label="Ludwig Wittgenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="1257" end="1277" title="University of Oxford" label="University of Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q253936" start="1283" end="1304" title="Fulbright Scholarship" label="Fulbright Scholarship"/>
<link wikidata="Q4838817" start="1320" end="1325" title="Bachelor of Philosophy" label="BPhil"/>
<link wikidata="Q272615" start="1372" end="1384" title="J. L. Austin" label="J. L. Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q311776" start="1389" end="1399" title="Paul Grice" label="Paul Grice"/>
<link wikidata="Q752297" start="1417" end="1437" title="Doctor of Philosophy" label="Doctor of Philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="1464" end="1482" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q172544" start="1524" end="1534" title="John Rawls" label="John Rawls"/>
<link wikidata="Q168756" start="1660" end="1694" title="University of California, Berkeley" label="University of California, Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q21578" start="1722" end="1742" title="Princeton University" label="Princeton University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7648308" start="1821" end="1831" title="Susan R. Wolf" label="Susan Wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277964" start="1833" end="1845" title="Shelly Kagan" label="Shelly Kagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q15446370" start="1851" end="1867" title="Samuel Scheffler" label="Samuel Scheffler"/>
<link wikidata="Q49210" start="1910" end="1929" title="New York University" label="New York University"/>
<link wikidata="Q463303" start="1957" end="1994" title="American Academy of Arts and Sciences" label="American Academy of Arts and Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q723551" start="2029" end="2044" title="British Academy" label="British Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q466089" start="2086" end="2116" title="American Philosophical Society" label="American Philosophical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q507237" start="2151" end="2172" title="John Simon Guggenheim Memorial Foundation" label="Guggenheim Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q304878" start="2178" end="2205" title="National Science Foundation" label="National Science Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q478050" start="2215" end="2252" title="National Endowment for the Humanities" label="National Endowment for the Humanities"/>
<link wikidata="Q550609" start="2279" end="2296" title="Rolf Schock Prize" label="Rolf Schock Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q628457" start="2329" end="2341" title="Balzan Prize" label="Balzan Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q837343" start="2370" end="2387" title="Doctor of Letters" label="Doctor of Letters"/>
<link wikidata="Q345641" start="3081" end="3097" title="Bernard Williams" label="Bernard Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q413" start="3602" end="3609" title="physics" label="physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2703462" start="4791" end="4819" title="What Is It Like to Be a Bat?" label="What Is It Like to Be a Bat?"/>
<link wikidata="Q483247" start="5017" end="5026" title="phenomena" label="phenomena"/>
<link wikidata="Q23407" start="5809" end="5829" title="Philosophy of mind" label="theories of the mind"/>
<link wikidata="Q483024" start="6162" end="6173" title="Rationalism" label="rationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3968640" start="6234" end="6251" title="mental properties" label="mental properties"/>
<link wikidata="Q16930687" start="7036" end="7047" title="Therapeutic approach" label="therapeutic"/>
<link wikidata="Q988450" start="7051" end="7063" title="Deflationary theory of truth" label="deflationary"/>
<link wikidata="Q7280493" start="7111" end="7129" title="radical skepticism" label="radical skepticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q311772" start="7422" end="7437" title="Donald Davidson (philosopher)" label="Donald Davidson"/>
<link wikidata="Q33442" start="7441" end="7463" title="philosophical idealism" label="philosophical idealism"/>
<link wikidata="Q23407" start="8115" end="8133" title="philosophy of mind" label="philosophy of mind"/>
<link wikidata="Q7087" start="8166" end="8179" title="consciousness" label="consciousness"/>
<link wikidata="Q282250" start="8184" end="8205" title="subjective experience" label="subjective experience"/>
<link wikidata="Q269114" start="8262" end="8273" title="physicalism" label="physicalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q975893" start="8558" end="8573" title="Timothy Sprigge" label="Timothy Sprigge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1817560" start="8629" end="8653" title="The Philosophical Review" label="The Philosophical Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q3818060" start="8718" end="8735" title="The Mind&amp;#x27;s I" label="The Mind&amp;#x27;s I"/>
<link wikidata="Q215263" start="8753" end="8767" title="Daniel Dennett" label="Daniel Dennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q319308" start="8772" end="8790" title="Douglas Hofstadter" label="Douglas Hofstadter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7753283" start="8925" end="8943" title="The Nature of Mind" label="The Nature of Mind"/>
<link wikidata="Q5236958" start="8961" end="8979" title="David M. Rosenthal (philosopher)" label="David M. Rosenthal"/>
<link wikidata="Q366123" start="9065" end="9082" title="David J. Chalmers" label="David J. Chalmers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5252737" start="10014" end="10021" title="Dualism (philosophy of mind)" label="dualist"/>
<link wikidata="Q21578" start="10536" end="10545" title="Princeton University" label="Princeton"/>
<link wikidata="Q298521" start="10556" end="10567" title="Saul Kripke" label="Saul Kripke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546801" start="10593" end="10606" title="Type physicalism" label="type identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q3968640" start="10662" end="10674" title="mental state" label="mental state"/>
<link wikidata="Q3311695" start="10699" end="10715" title="logical truth" label="necessarily true"/>
<link wikidata="Q5611131" start="10806" end="10814" title="Group C nerve fiber" label="C-fibres"/>
<link wikidata="Q254474" start="10966" end="10988" title="Identity (philosophy)" label="theoretical identities"/>
<link wikidata="Q269114" start="11635" end="11646" title="physicalism" label="physicalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q190995" start="12031" end="12038" title="essence" label="essence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377166" start="12355" end="12365" title="Functionalism (philosophy of mind)" label="functional"/>
<link wikidata="Q7081" start="12891" end="12902" title="Materialism" label="materialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096404" start="12978" end="12991" title="Neo-Darwinism" label="neo-Darwinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q192121" start="13246" end="13258" title="teleological" label="teleological"/>
<link wikidata="Q172618" start="13361" end="13379" title="intelligent design" label="intelligent design"/>
<link wikidata="Q130352" start="13416" end="13428" title="creationists" label="creationists"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="13459" end="13473" title="New York Times" label="New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186769" start="13825" end="13841" title="creation science" label="creation science"/>
<link wikidata="Q7512844" start="14013" end="14034" title="Signature in the Cell" label="Signature in the Cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q926941" start="14077" end="14093" title="Stephen C. Meyer" label="Stephen C. Meyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q713590" start="14350" end="14365" title="David Berlinski" label="David Berlinski"/>
<link wikidata="Q368363" start="14370" end="14382" title="Michael Behe" label="Michael Behe"/>
<link wikidata="Q179805" start="14578" end="14598" title="political philosophy" label="political philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q172544" start="14614" end="14624" title="John Rawls" label="John Rawls"/>
<link wikidata="Q1724007" start="14668" end="14675" title="Kantian" label="Kantian"/>
<link wikidata="Q483024" start="14680" end="14691" title="rationalist" label="rationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q9465" start="14704" end="14720" title="moral philosophy" label="moral philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3376512" start="14895" end="14914" title="practical reasoning" label="practical reasoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q167323" start="16910" end="16920" title="altruistic" label="altruistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q433076" start="17149" end="17163" title="Henry Sidgwick" label="Henry Sidgwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q18663" start="17852" end="17864" title="Dissociation (psychology)" label="dissociation"/>
<link wikidata="Q181020" start="17912" end="17921" title="solipsism" label="solipsism"/>
<link wikidata="Q25396191" start="18307" end="18317" title="Subjectivity" label="subjective"/>
<link wikidata="Q25396191" start="18348" end="18357" title="Objectivity (philosophy)" label="objective"/>
<link wikidata="Q646102" start="20756" end="20772" title="consequentialist" label="consequentialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q171995" start="20898" end="20911" title="individualist" label="individualist"/>
<link wikidata="Q15446370" start="21266" end="21282" title="Samuel Scheffler" label="Samuel Scheffler"/>
<link wikidata="Q221373" start="21710" end="21717" title="deontic" label="deontic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2213665" start="21827" end="21840" title="inviolability" label="inviolability"/>
<link wikidata="Q172544" start="22121" end="22131" title="John Rawls" label="John Rawls"/>
<link wikidata="Q300588" start="22139" end="22156" title="A Theory of Justice" label="theory of justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q7066" start="23191" end="23198" title="atheist" label="atheist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7451159" start="23223" end="23241" title="sensus divinitatis" label="sensus divinitatis"/>
<link wikidata="Q17523756" start="24360" end="24374" title="Anne Hollander" label="Anne Hollander"/>
<link wikidata="Q7118950" start="24430" end="24487" title="PEN/Diamonstein-Spielvogel Award for the Art of the Essay" label="PEN/Diamonstein-Spielvogel Award for the Art of the Essay"/>
<link wikidata="Q628457" start="24553" end="24565" title="Balzan Prize" label="Balzan Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q550609" start="24598" end="24615" title="Rolf Schock Prizes" label="Rolf Schock Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q191583" start="24647" end="24680" title="Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences" label="Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q4758812" start="24735" end="24752" title="Mellon Foundation" label="Mellon Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6863543" start="24897" end="24995" title="Mind and Cosmos" label="Mind and Cosmos: why the materialist neo-Darwinian conception of nature is almost certainly false."/>
<link wikidata="Q1173590" start="25783" end="25798" title="D. M. Armstrong" label="D. M. Armstrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q300588" start="26319" end="26338" title="A Theory of Justice" label="A Theory of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q2703462" start="26509" end="26537" title="What Is it Like to Be a Bat?" label="What Is it Like to Be a Bat?"/>
<link wikidata="Q1869064" start="29040" end="29062" title="London Review of Books" label="London Review of Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q221373" start="29116" end="29126" title="Deontology" label="Deontology"/>
<link wikidata="Q646102" start="29128" end="29144" title="consequentialism" label="consequentialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q160590" start="29146" end="29160" title="utilitarianism" label="utilitarianism"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29216" end="29225" title="M.W. Rowe" label="M.W. Rowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1869064" start="29332" end="29354" title="London Review of Books" label="London Review of Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q272615" start="29519" end="29530" title="J.L. Austin" label="J.L. Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q336" start="29634" end="29641" title="science" label="science"/>
<link wikidata="Q315" start="29645" end="29653" title="language" label="language"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891" start="29714" end="29724" title="philosophy" label="philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2364399" start="29834" end="29853" title="American philosophy" label="American philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3253148" start="29856" end="29885" title="List of American philosophers" label="List of American philosophers"/>
<link wikidata="Q20858171" start="29888" end="29932" title="New York University Department of Philosophy" label="New York University Department of Philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q366123" start="29935" end="29949" title="David Chalmers" label="David Chalmers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365057" start="29952" end="29965" title="Frank Cameron Jackson" label="Frank Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1491810" start="29968" end="29982" title="Galen Strawson" label="Galen Strawson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3178207" start="29985" end="30014" title="Hard problem of consciousness" label="Hard problem of consciousness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068312" start="30017" end="30035" title="Knowledge argument" label="Knowledge argument"/>
<link wikidata="Q179235" start="30038" end="30051" title="Phenomenology (philosophy)" label="Phenomenology"/>
<link wikidata="Q241657" start="30054" end="30068" title="Neutral monism" label="Neutral monism"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="192794" wikidata="Q234742" url="?curid=192794" title="DMT (disambiguation)">
<text>DMT is an abbreviation of &quot;N&quot;,&quot;N&quot;-Dimethyltryptamine, a naturally occurring psychedelic compound.

DMT may also refer to:

== Chemical substances ==
* Desoxymethyltestosterone, a designer anabolic steroid
* Dimethyl terephthalate, a polyester precursor
* DMT1, a transporter involved in human iron metabolism
* Dimethylglycine N-methyltransferase, an enzyme
* DMTMM (4-(4,6-dimethoxy-1,3,5-triazin-2-yl)-4-methyl-morpholinium chloride) an amide-coupling reagent
* Dimethoxytrityl, a protecting group used in oligonucleotide synthesis

== Other uses in science and technology ==
* Deadman timer
* Disease-modifying therapy, a class of treatments for progressive diseases
* Discrete multitone modulation, a form of orthogonal frequency-division multiplexing (OFDM)
* Definite Minimum Time, a term specific to protective relays
* UTC−00:25 (Dublin Mean Time), which was 25 minutes behind Greenwich Mean Time 1880–1916
* Digital Material Traceability (devices)
* Discrete Monitor Timings, a set of pre-defined VESA timings for computer displays.

== Other uses ==
* Danville Mass Transit, a bus service in Danville, Illinois
* Diving medical technician, a certification offered in the United States by the NBDHMT
* Dʿmt, a historical kingdom in what is now Eritrea and northern Ethiopia
* Dignified Mobile Toilets, a Nigerian mobile toilet company
* Double mini trampoline, a discipline of gymnastics
* DMT (company), German engineering company</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q234742" start="0" end="3" title="DMT (disambiguation)" label="DMT"/>
<link wikidata="Q407217" start="26" end="72" title="N,N-Dimethyltryptamine" label="&amp;quot;N&amp;quot;,&amp;quot;N&amp;quot;-Dimethyltryptamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q234742" start="119" end="122" title="DMT (disambiguation)" label="DMT"/>
<link wikidata="Q904694" start="171" end="195" title="Desoxymethyltestosterone" label="Desoxymethyltestosterone"/>
<link wikidata="Q421276" start="227" end="249" title="Dimethyl terephthalate" label="Dimethyl terephthalate"/>
<link wikidata="Q14914133" start="275" end="279" title="DMT1" label="DMT1"/>
<link wikidata="Q5277338" start="331" end="366" title="Dimethylglycine N-methyltransferase" label="Dimethylglycine N-methyltransferase"/>
<link wikidata="Q48996295" start="380" end="385" title="DMTMM" label="DMTMM"/>
<link wikidata="Q112061576" start="484" end="499" title="Dimethoxytrityl" label="Dimethoxytrityl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153563" start="600" end="613" title="Deadman timer" label="Deadman timer"/>
<link wikidata="Q114231575" start="616" end="641" title="Disease-modifying therapy" label="Disease-modifying therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q375889" start="692" end="721" title="Discrete multitone modulation" label="Discrete multitone modulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q503732" start="827" end="843" title="protective relay" label="protective relay"/>
<link wikidata="" start="847" end="856" title="UTC−00:25" label="UTC−00:25"/>
<link wikidata="Q647003" start="1026" end="1030" title="Video_Electronics_Standards_Association" label="VESA"/>
<link wikidata="Q115938980" start="1082" end="1103" title="Danville Mass Transit" label="Danville Mass Transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423517" start="1143" end="1168" title="Diving medical technician" label="Diving medical technician"/>
<link wikidata="Q139315" start="1231" end="1235" title="Dʿmt" label="Dʿmt"/>
<link wikidata="Q55609582" start="1305" end="1329" title="Dignified Mobile Toilets" label="Dignified Mobile Toilets"/>
<link wikidata="Q104901506" start="1366" end="1388" title="Double mini trampoline" label="Double mini trampoline"/>
<link wikidata="Q33112043" start="1419" end="1432" title="DMT (company)" label="DMT (company)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="192803" wikidata="Q380552" url="?curid=192803" title="Constitutional crisis">
<text>In political science, a constitutional crisis is a problem or conflict in the function of a government that the political constitution or other fundamental governing law is perceived to be unable to resolve. There are several variations to this definition. For instance, one describes it as the crisis that arises out of the failure, or at least a strong risk of failure, of a constitution to perform its central functions. The crisis may arise from a variety of possible causes. For example, a government may want to pass a law contrary to its constitution; the constitution may fail to provide a clear answer for a specific situation; the constitution may be clear, but it may be politically infeasible to follow it; the government institutions themselves may falter or fail to live up to what the law prescribes them to be; or officials in the government may justify avoiding dealing with a serious problem based on narrow interpretations of the law. Specific examples include the South African Coloured vote constitutional crisis in the 1950s, the secession of the southern U.S. states in 1860 and 1861, the dismissal of the Australian federal government in 1975 and the 2007 Ukrainian crisis. While the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland does not have a codified constitution, it is deemed to have an uncodified one, and issues and crises in the UK and its constituent countries are described as constitutional crises.

Constitutional crises may arise from conflicts between different branches of government, conflicts between central and local governments, or simply conflicts among various factions within society. In the course of government, the crisis results when one or more of the parties to a political dispute willfully chooses to violate a law of the constitution or to flout an unwritten constitutional convention; or to dispute the correct, legal interpretation of the violated constitutional law or of the flouted political custom. This was demonstrated by the XYZ Affair, which involved the bribery of French officials by a contingent of American commissioners who were sent to preserve peace between France and the United States. The incident was published in the American press and created a foreign policy crisis, which precipitated the passage of the Alien and Sedition Acts. Opposition to these acts in the form of the Virginia and Kentucky Resolutions cited that they violated freedom of speech and exhorted states to refuse their enforcement since they violated the Constitution.

When a crisis arises because the constitution is legally ambiguous, the ultimate resolution usually establishes the legal precedent to resolve future crises of constitutional administration. Such was the case in the United States presidential succession of John Tyler, which established that a successor to the presidency assumes the office without any limitation. Politically, a constitutional crisis can lead to administrative paralysis and eventual collapse of the government, the loss of political legitimacy, or to civil war. A constitutional crisis is distinct from a rebellion, which occurs when political factions &quot;outside&quot; a government challenge the government&#x27;s sovereignty, as in a &quot;coup d&#x27;état&quot; or a revolution led by the military or by civilians.

==Africa==

===Democratic Republic of the Congo===

*The Congo Crisis. President Joseph Kasavubu and Prime Minister Patrice Lumumba attempted to dismiss each other in September 1960. General Mobutu Sese Seko deposed both in a coup later that month, then restored Kasavubu as president.

===Egypt===
*Egypt experienced a constitutional crisis when President Hosni Mubarak was removed in the Egyptian Revolution. The country was left without a president until President Mohamed Morsi was elected and then again when Morsi was arrested by the Egyptian Armed Forces in a 2013 coup d&#x27;etat until President Abdel Fattah el-Sisi took office.

===Malawi===
* A constitutional crisis occurred in Malawi in 2012 with regard to the succession of Bingu wa Mutharika. The President and Vice-President were from different parties which led to deliberations over who the rightful successor would be and the constitutional crisis. Vice-President Joyce Banda eventually succeeded wa Mutharika.

===Gambia===
* Following the victory of Adama Barrow in the 2016 presidential election, president Yahya Jammeh rejected the results and refused to step down. On 17 January, Jammeh declared a 90-day state of emergency in an attempt to extend his term of office. Senegalese, Ghanaian and Nigerian forces entered the Gambia on 19 January to enforce the election results. On 21 January, Jammeh stepped down and left the country.

===Rhodesia===
* Amid demands from British politicians to enfranchise the black majority population as a condition for independence, the white minority government of Ian Smith unilaterally declared independence in 1965. The UK rejected the declaration and continued to claim sovereignty over Rhodesia until a framework for independence and black enfranchisement was negotiated in the 1979 Lancaster House Agreement.

=== Somalia ===

* An ongoing constitutional crisis developed in Somalia when the Somali President, Hassan Sheikh Mohamud, changed the Constitution of Somalia on April 30, 2024. The change was immediately opposed by the President of Puntland, Said Abdullahi Deni followed by the President of Jubaland, and resulted, Puntland withdrew its recognition of the Federal Government of Somalia and declared itself an independent state based on Article 4 of the Puntland Constitution. While Jubaland state cut its relations with the Somali government.

===South Africa===
* The Coloured vote constitutional crisis (1951–55): The National Party government disputed a Supreme Court decision overturning its Separate Representation of Voters Act to disenfranchise Coloured voters in the Cape Province. Its attempt to reverse the decision in an &quot;ad hoc&quot; court was also overturned, after which the party used reforms to the Senate to pass the measure legally.

==Asia==
===Georgia===
* 2024–2025 Georgian constitutional crisis: Leading up to the 2024 Georgian parliamentary election, oligarch Bidzina Ivanishvili established &quot;de facto&quot; control over government institutions. The elections resulted in a majority for his party, Georgian Dream, amid widespread reports of irregularities and suppression, and president Salome Zourabichvili announced that they would be re-run. Despite this, the new parliament convened and elected Mikheil Kavelashvili as president with opposition parties boycotting. Zourabichvili vacated her official residence on December 29, 2024 but maintained, along with opposition parties, that she was the legitimate president.

===Iran===
*Mohammed Reza Pahlavi&#x27;s 1953 dismissal of Prime Minister Mohammed Mossadegh and Mossadegh&#x27;s subsequent refusal to quit the office, leading to the 1953 Iranian coup d&#x27;état.

===Malaysia===
* 1966 Sarawak constitutional crisis started by a group of politicians who were dissatisfied towards Stephen Kalong Ningkan&#x27;s leadership as chief minister. Ningkan was later removed from the chief minister post by the Governor of Sarawak in June 1966.
* The 1988 Malaysian constitutional crisis was a series of events that began with the United Malays National Organisation (UMNO) party elections in 1987 and ended with the suspension and the eventual removal of Lord President of the Supreme Court Tun Salleh Abas from his seat.
* The 1993 amendments to the Constitution of Malaysia (by some interpretations a constitutional crisis) involved the limitation of monarchs&#x27; legal immunity in Malaysia. Prime Minister Mahathir Mohamad successfully amended the constitution to make the monarchies more accountable to their actions.
* The 2020 Malaysian constitutional crisis was a series of events that began when Prime Minister Mahathir Mohamad and associates attempted to replace his coalition partners and form a unity government supported by opposition parties.

===Pakistan===
*Supreme Court Chief Justice Sajjad Ali Shah clashed repeatedly with Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif in late 1997, accusing him of undermining the court&#x27;s independence. After Ali Shah suspended a constitutional amendment that prevented dismissal of the prime minister, Sharif ordered President Farooq Leghari to appoint a new chief justice. When Leghari refused, Sharif considered impeaching him, but backed down after a warning from the armed forces. Faced with a choice of accepting Sharif&#x27;s demands or dismissing him, Leghari resigned. Ali Shah resigned shortly afterward, establishing Sharif&#x27;s dominance.
*Following a no-confidence motion against Prime Minister Imran Khan on 8 March 2022, a constitutional crisis occurred when the deputy speaker of the National Assembly rejected the no-confidence motion on the 3 April 2022. President Arif Alvi subsequently dissolved the national assembly, upon advice from the Prime Minister, which constitutionally could not be done by a Prime Minister who is facing a no-confidence motion.

===Thailand===
*The 2005–2006 Thai political crisis. In March 2006, 60 seats of the National Assembly of Thailand could not be elected, and Prime Minister Thaksin Shinawatra refused to resign.

===Sri Lanka===

*On 26 October 2018, President Maithripala Sirisena appointed former President Mahinda Rajapaksa as Prime Minister and dismissed incumbent Prime Minister Ranil Wickremesinghe. Ranil Wickremesing refused to accept the dismissal while stating that it was unconstitutional and undemocratic.

==Europe==

=== Austria ===

* The self-elimination of the Austrian Parliament in 1933, when all three speakers of the National Council resigned. Engelbert Dollfuss stated the parliament had eliminated itself and could rule by decree. This was a step towards the one-party fascist state, the Federal State of Austria.

===Belgium===
*The Royal Question over the status of king Leopold III began when he acted against ministerial advice during the 1940 Nazi invasion and refused to join the government in exile. Deported to Germany before Belgium&#x27;s 1944 liberation, Leopold&#x27;s return was narrowly approved in a 1950 referendum but a subsequent general strike prompted him to abdicate the following year.
*In 1990, King Baudouin refused routine Royal Assent to the law on abortion in Belgium. The issue was resolved by (constitutionally but controversially) having Baudouin temporarily declared incapable of reigning, the Council of Ministers giving assent as provided for in the Belgian Constitution, and Baudouin declared capable again.

===Denmark===
*The Easter Crisis of 1920, when King Christian X of Denmark dismissed the country&#x27;s cabinet.

===England===

*The 1215 Barons&#x27; revolt against the rule of King John, which led to the Magna Carta. Immediately, John repudiated Magna Carta, leading to the First Barons&#x27; War.
*The English Reformation: Pope Clement VII&#x27;s refusal to annul King Henry VIII&#x27;s first marriage with Catherine of Aragon impeded the king&#x27;s efforts to produce a male heir. Henry repudiated the Pope&#x27;s ecclesiastical authority within England and required all officials to recognize him as Supreme Head of the Church of England, allowing him to divorce Catherine and marry Anne Boleyn.
*King Charles I&#x27;s insistence on the Divine Right of Kings, manifest in his Personal Rule from 1629 to 1640, and leading directly to the Wars of the Three Kingdoms.
*The Glorious Revolution of 1688–89: The flight of King James II/VII from the country left no king in his place to rule England or Scotland or to summon a Parliament. When King William and Queen Mary jointly replaced him there was therefore no legally recognised Parliament to legitimise their irregular succession to the throne. This led to the Crown and Parliament Recognition Act 1689.

===Estonia===
*The early 1930s political crisis in Estonia as two constitutional reforms had been rejected by the electorate and only the third referendum in 1933 succeeded in replacing the parliamentary republic with the presidential republic. The succeeding constitutional reform was proposed by the Vaps Movement, who were however kept from power by the self-coup of Prime Minister Konstantin Päts, who was supported by the Riigikogu.

===France===
*The Brittany Affair of 1765: The king&#x27;s court in Brittany forbade collection of taxes to which the provincial Estates did not consent. After King Louis XV annulled the court&#x27;s decree, most of its members resigned. The chief prosecutor, Louis-René de Caradeuc de La Chalotais, was accused of writing letters denouncing the king&#x27;s action and charged with treason. A court convened to try La Chalotais reached no conclusion due to questions of jurisdiction and the weakness of the evidence. The king then transferred the case to his own council, further inflaming fears of absolutism to the point that he was obligated to release La Chalotais and yield to the provincial authorities.
*The 16 May 1877 crisis: President Patrice de Mac-Mahon dismissed Prime Minister Jules Simon and named Albert de Broglie to replace him. The National Assembly refused to recognize the new government and a crisis, which ended with the dissolution of the Assembly and new elections, ensued.

===Germany===
* Crisis of the Weimar Republic (1930–1933): A series of conservative chancellors appointed by President Paul von Hindenburg were unable to secure legislation from the Reichstag, dominated first by the Social Democratic Party and later the Nazi and Communist parties. These chancellors increasingly turned to legislation by emergency presidential decrees, thereby laying the constitutional foundation of Adolf Hitler&#x27;s dictatorship.

===Malta===
* The 1981 election, when, due to a quirk in that country&#x27;s Single Transferable Vote system, the party winning more than half the votes won fewer than half the seats in parliament.

===Order of Malta===
* In December 2016 Matthew Festing, Grand Master of the Order of Malta, dismissed its Grand Chancellor Albrecht von Boeselager for allowing the distribution of contraceptives in violation of the Catholic Church&#x27;s policy. Boeslanger protested that the dismissal was irregular under the Order&#x27;s constitution and appealed to Pope Francis. Francis ordered an investigation of the dispute, then demanded and received Festing&#x27;s resignation. The Order elected Giacomo dalla Torre del Tempio di Sanguinetto as Festing&#x27;s successor on a program of constitutional reform and promoting religious obedience.

===Norway===
*Impeachment of prime minister Christian August Selmer&#x27;s cabinet in 1883/1884 regarding the king&#x27;s right to veto changes to the constitution, and establishment of an ad-hoc parliamentary practice until amended to the constitution in 2007.
*Dissolution of the union between Norway and Sweden in 1905

===Roman Republic===
* Caesar&#x27;s Civil War: In 50 BC the Roman Senate ordered Julius Caesar, a popular military general and territorial governor, to disband his army and return to Rome after he invaded Gaul and Britain. Rather than comply, Caesar crossed the boundary of his territory with a legion of his army intending to confront the government. The Senate retreated before his advance, allowing him to establish a dictatorship that set the template for the Roman Empire.

===Russia===
*The constitutional crisis of 1993: President Boris Yeltsin ordered the dissolution of the Supreme Soviet when it refused constitutional reforms that would allow him to implement his privatization program. After the Constitutional Court struck down Yeltsin&#x27;s order, parliament impeached him and recognized a rival government of dissenting officials. Yeltsin used military force to disperse parliament, established a government by presidential decree, and pushed through a new constitution that increased the power of the presidency.

===Scotland===
This covers the Kingdom of Scotland, which became part of the Kingdom of Great Britain after 1707. For constitutional crises since then, see United Kingdom below.
* The death of seven-year-old Queen Margaret in 1290 prompted a succession dispute involving thirteen claimants. The interim Guardians of Scotland asked King Edward I of England to arbitrate the dispute. Edward pursued his own interest in establishing lordship over Scotland by selecting claimant John Balliol in return for an oath of fealty. Scottish nobles rejected Edward&#x27;s control, leading to the Wars of Scottish Independence and a 10-year vacancy of the throne.

===Spain===

*2017–18 Spanish constitutional crisis: The government of Catalonia under Carles Puigdemont held an independence referendum against instructions of the Spanish courts. The referendum passed by an overwhelming margin, albeit with limited voter participation, whereupon the Catalonian government declared independence. The Spanish government dissolved the Catalonian government, arrested pro-independence politicians and imposed direct rule from Madrid for more than half a year.

===Turkey===
*2023 Turkish constitutional crisis

===Ukraine===

* 2020-2021 Ukrainian constitutional crisis: The Constitutional Court of Ukraine ruled much of Ukraine&#x27;s 2014 anti-corruption reform unconstitutional, placing the country&#x27;s foreign relations at risk.

===United Kingdom===
While the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland does not have a written constitution, it is deemed to have an unwritten one, and issues and crises in the UK and its constituent countries are described as constitutional crises.
*The regency crisis of 1788: A new Parliament was convened while King George III was unable, due to illness, to charge it with its responsibilities or to assent to any bills. Parliament nonetheless submitted an irregular bill that provided for George, Prince of Wales to act as regent, and the Lord Chancellor Lord Thurlow affixed the royal seal to it without the king&#x27;s signature. This precedent was repeated in 1811 after the king again fell ill.
*The House of Lords&#x27; rejection of the 1909 People&#x27;s Budget, a proposal by Chancellor of the Exchequer David Lloyd George and President of the Board of Trade Winston Churchill entailing welfare reforms funded by taxes on landowners. This caused a two-year impasse, which ended after the Liberal Party won the January 1910 general election and the House of Lords ratified the law. However, the impasse resumed when Prime Minister H. H. Asquith introduced the Parliament Act permanently removing the House of Lords&#x27; veto over money bills and sharply limiting its veto over public bills, which the House of Lords blocked after the December 1910 general election ended in a hung parliament. King George V finally forced the House to ratify the law by threatening to end its Conservative majority by appointing hundreds of new peers.
*The 1936 Edward VIII abdication crisis, when King Edward VIII proposed to marry divorcee Wallis Simpson against the advice of his ministers. This was unacceptable to the leaders of the United Kingdom and the Dominions because Simpson was twice divorced and the Church of England, of which Edward nominally served as the head, forbade remarriage of divorcees if their spouses were still alive. Rather than ending their relationship the King chose to abdicate and his brother assumed the throne as King George VI. 
*The 2019 British prorogation controversy in October 2019, when the Government of Conservative Prime Minister Boris Johnson advised Queen Elizabeth II to prorogue the British Parliament for five weeks. The decision was taken during contentious parliamentary debate over the United Kingdom&#x27;s impending withdrawal from the European Union. In the unanimous &quot;R (Miller) v The Prime Minister&quot; and &quot;Cherry v Advocate General for Scotland&quot; decisions, the Supreme Court of the United Kingdom unanimously found the prorogation to be unlawful as preventing the ability of Parliament to carry out its constitutional functions without reasonable justification.

==North America==

===Canada===
* In the King–Byng Affair of 1926, Governor General the Viscount Byng of Vimy refused the request of his Prime Minister, William Lyon Mackenzie King, to dissolve Parliament and call new elections after King had, months before, refused to resign. Instead, Byng dismissed King and appointed Arthur Meighen as Prime Minister, after which Meighen found himself unable to obtain the confidence of the House of Commons, triggering his own resignation and the 1926 federal election. Reaction to the affair was reflected in the Balfour Declaration of 1926, the resulting separation of dominion governors-general from the British government, and the Statute of Westminster, 1931, that made each realm of the Crown independent.
* The 1936 abdication crisis, when King Edward VIII proposed to marry divorcee Wallis Simpson against the advice of his ministers.
* The 1982 patriation of the constitution was contentious, as there were conflicting opinions from the federal government, provincial governments, and Supreme Court over what exactly the procedure was for Canada to request a constitutional amendment from the Parliament of the United Kingdom. The Supreme Court&#x27;s decision in the Quebec Veto Reference found that Quebec did not have a veto on patriation and the process for amendment used was legitimate and binding. The National Assembly of Quebec symbolically refuses to ratify the Constitution Act, 1982, in its current form.
* The 2008–2009 Canadian parliamentary dispute, in which Liberal, New Democratic, and Bloc Québécois members of Parliament attempted to vote non-confidence against the Conservative ministry and replace it with a coalition government, was unprecedented in the Canadian constitutional system. Prime Minister Stephen Harper controversially advised Governor General Michaëlle Jean to prorogue Parliament to avoid the vote. The coalition effort subsequently fell apart, leaving the key questions around the dispute unanswered.

===Honduras===
*The 2009 Honduran constitutional crisis saw President Manuel Zelaya attempting to hold a non-binding referendum which Congress and the Supreme Court deemed unconstitutional. The Honduran Armed Forces, following orders from the Supreme Court, arrested President Zelaya.

===United States===
*The Nullification Crisis of 1832: South Carolina proposed to nullify the federally enacted Tariffs of 1828 and 1832. President Andrew Jackson responded by signing the Force Bill to assert federal authority, and South Carolina agreed to the compromise Tariff of 1833.
*In 1841 presidential duties passed to Vice President John Tyler upon the death of President William Henry Harrison. The Constitution was unclear as to whether Tyler should assume the office of President or merely execute the duties of the vacant office. Tyler insisted that politicians recognize him as President and returned, unopened, all mail addressed otherwise. Despite opposition from some Whig members of Congress, including John Quincy Adams and Henry Clay, both houses passed a resolution confirming Tyler&#x27;s position. This precedent was later codified in the Twenty-fifth Amendment.
*The secession crisis (1860–1861): Sectional divisions in the Democratic Party resulted in the election of Abraham Lincoln. Alarmed by Lincoln&#x27;s intention to prohibit slavery in western territories, eleven southern slaveholding states withdrew from the federal union and formed a confederacy. Lincoln refused to recognize the secessions and restored the states to the union by force in the conclusion of the Civil War.
*1876 presidential election: Republicans and Democrats disputed voting results in three states. An &quot;ad hoc&quot; Electoral Commission, created by Congress, voted along party lines in favor of Republican candidate Rutherford B. Hayes, in exchange for withdrawing federal troops from the South and ending Reconstruction.
*The 1952 steel strike: President Harry S. Truman nationalized the country&#x27;s steel industry on the basis of his inherent powers in order to prevent a strike by the United Steelworkers that would impede the Korean War. This action reopened the &quot;Great Debate&quot; of 1950–51 regarding the extent of Truman&#x27;s authority to counter the spread of communism. The Supreme Court annulled Truman&#x27;s order in &quot;Youngstown Sheet &amp; Tube Co. v. Sawyer&quot;, holding that presidential actions must proceed from constitutional or legislative authority. Truman used the threat of a second nationalization to push steel workers and management to an agreement.
*In the Watergate scandal (1972–1974), President Richard Nixon and his staff obstructed investigations into their political activities. Nixon resigned, under threat of impeachment, after the release of an audio tape showing that he had personally approved the obstruction. Congressional moves to restrain presidential authority continued for years afterward.

==Oceania==

===Australia===
*The 1936 Edward VIII abdication crisis, when King Edward VIII proposed to marry divorcee Wallis Simpson against the advice of his ministers.
*The 1975 Australian constitutional crisis saw the Prime Minister Gough Whitlam and his government dismissed by the nation&#x27;s Governor-General Sir John Kerr, in response to a prolonged budget deadlock in Parliament. Whitlam&#x27;s Labor government had the confidence of the lower house, the House of Representatives. In the Australian Constitution, the Senate has equal powers with the House of Representatives, except it may not initiate or amend a supply bill. It can, however, reject or defer consideration of such a bill, and that is what it did on this occasion. The Constitution permits the Governor-General to dismiss the government if they cannot command the confidence of Parliament and will not call an election. Though the government lacked the confidence of the Senate, they commanded the confidence of the lower house, where government is formed, and confidence motions introduced. Whitlam also stated his intention to call an election, but Kerr nonetheless dismissed him without prior warning and installed Malcolm Fraser as Prime Minister, despite Fraser&#x27;s inability to command the confidence of either house of Parliament. After Fraser&#x27;s Liberal government passed several important appropriations bills, Kerr declared a double dissolution of Parliament and the 1975 federal election, which Fraser won in a landslide. 
*In 2017, the eligibility of a number of Australian parliamentarians to sit in the Parliament of Australia was called into question because of their actual or possible dual citizenship. The issue arises from section 44 of the Constitution of Australia, which prohibits members of either house of the Parliament from having allegiance to a foreign power. Several MPs resigned in anticipation of being ruled ineligible, and five more were forced to resign after being ruled ineligible by the High Court of Australia, including National Party leader and Deputy Prime Minister Barnaby Joyce. This became an ongoing political event referred to variously as a &quot;constitutional crisis&quot; or the &quot;citizenship crisis&quot;.

===Fiji===
*In the Fiji constitutional crisis of 1977, the winning party in a general election failed to name a government due to internal conflicts. The Governor-General intervened, appointing a prime minister from the opposition party.

===Kiribati===
===New Zealand===
*The 1936 Edward VIII abdication crisis, when King Edward VIII proposed to marry divorcee Wallis Simpson against the advice of his ministers.
*The New Zealand constitutional crisis of 1984 was caused by Prime Minister Sir Rob Muldoon&#x27;s refusal to devalue the New Zealand dollar as per the instructions of the Prime Minister-elect, David Lange. The outgoing cabinet rebelled against Muldoon, who relented. The crisis led to the passage of the Constitution Act, which patriated the constitution from the United Kingdom.

===Papua New Guinea===
*The Papua New Guinean constitutional crisis of 2011–2012 was caused by a disagreement, involving every branch of government including the Supreme Court, as to who the legitimate Prime Minister was. Specifically, whether Prime Minister Michael Somare&#x27;s dismissal by the Speaker of the National Parliament while he was in hospital had been lawful. After ten months, the crisis was resolved peacefully by a general election.

=== Samoa ===

* The April 2021 Samoan general election resulted in legal challenges and a crisis.

===Tuvalu===
*The Tuvaluan constitutional crisis of 2013 occurred when Prime Minister Willy Telavi sought to continue governing after having lost his parliamentary majority. He deferred allowing Parliament to sit, and his ally Speaker Kamuta Latasi did not allow a motion of no confidence to be tabled when it finally did sit. The Opposition accused the government of acting unconstitutionally, and Governor General Sir Iakoba Italeli intervened, removing the Prime Minister from office so that Parliament could decide who should form the government. Telavi sought in vain to ask the Queen of Tuvalu, Elizabeth II, to remove the Governor General. Parliament elected Opposition Leader Enele Sopoaga to the premiership.

==South America==

===Chile===
*1973 Chilean coup d&#x27;état: Accusing Salvador Allende&#x27;s government of increasing authoritarianism, the Supreme Court, Comptroller General and Chamber of Deputies declared him out of order, and the Chamber urged the military to put an end to constitutional breaches. The military deposed Allende a few weeks later and abolished the constitution.

===Peru===
*Peruvian Constitutional Crisis of 1992: President Alberto Fujimori, with the support of the armed forces, dissolved the Congress after it rejected his proposal for stronger action against Shining Path and MRTA. Then, he called for elections for a Democratic Constitutional Congress to write the 1993 Peruvian Constitution. Until the new constitution was written, he ruled by decree.

===Venezuela===
*2017 Venezuelan constitutional crisis and Venezuelan presidential crisis: The constitutional chamber of the Supreme Tribunal of Justice ruled that the country&#x27;s legislature, the National Assembly, was operating in contempt of the constitution due to prior rulings that some members had been improperly elected and assumed legislative power for itself. Politicians opposed to the government of President Nicolás Maduro, as well as Maduro&#x27;s Prosecutor General, denounced the ruling for undermining the constitutional order, and the Tribunal rescinded it the following day. Maduro summoned a Constituent Assembly, nominally to draft a new constitution, but in practice to assert his authority against that of the National Assembly. After an irregular presidential election the following year, National Assembly President Juan Guaidó was recognized as interim president in opposition to Maduro, which he continued to claim through the end of 2022.

==See also==

* Cabinet crisis
* Constitutional amendment
* Judicial interpretation

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q36442" start="3" end="20" title="political science" label="political science"/>
<link wikidata="Q380552" start="24" end="45" title="Constitutional crisis" label="constitutional crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7755" start="112" end="134" title="constitution" label="political constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q5149235" start="998" end="1033" title="Coloured vote constitutional crisis" label="Coloured vote constitutional crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115346" start="1052" end="1089" title="Secession in the United States" label="secession of the southern U.S. states"/>
<link wikidata="Q575834" start="1112" end="1158" title="1975 Australian constitutional crisis" label="dismissal of the Australian federal government"/>
<link wikidata="Q2734427" start="1175" end="1196" title="2007 Ukrainian political crisis" label="2007 Ukrainian crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="1208" end="1260" title="United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland" label="United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q784210" start="1321" end="1338" title="Constitution of the United Kingdom" label="an uncodified one"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255828" start="1725" end="1742" title="Controversy" label="political dispute"/>
<link wikidata="Q7755" start="1785" end="1797" title="constitution" label="constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2720142" start="1823" end="1848" title="Constitutional convention (political custom)" label="constitutional convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q266994" start="1998" end="2008" title="XYZ Affair" label="XYZ Affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="2139" end="2145" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1118757" start="2293" end="2316" title="Alien and Sedition Acts" label="Alien and Sedition Acts"/>
<link wikidata="Q6140753" start="2362" end="2395" title="Kentucky and Virginia Resolutions" label="Virginia and Kentucky Resolutions"/>
<link wikidata="Q11881" start="2783" end="2793" title="John Tyler" label="John Tyler"/>
<link wikidata="Q207982" start="3018" end="3038" title="Legitimacy (political)" label="political legitimacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8465" start="3046" end="3055" title="civil war" label="civil war"/>
<link wikidata="Q124734" start="3100" end="3109" title="rebellion" label="rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q45382" start="3240" end="3256" title="coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="coup d&amp;#x27;état"/>
<link wikidata="Q10931" start="3268" end="3278" title="revolution" label="revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773926" start="3374" end="3386" title="Congo Crisis" label="Congo Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q206048" start="3398" end="3413" title="Joseph Kasavubu" label="Joseph Kasavubu"/>
<link wikidata="Q161672" start="3433" end="3448" title="Patrice Lumumba" label="Patrice Lumumba"/>
<link wikidata="Q164535" start="3508" end="3524" title="Mobutu Sese Seko" label="Mobutu Sese Seko"/>
<link wikidata="Q60775580" start="3543" end="3547" title="1960 Democratic Republic of the Congo coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="coup"/>
<link wikidata="Q15618993" start="3664" end="3673" title="President of Egypt" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q34105" start="3674" end="3687" title="Hosni Mubarak" label="Hosni Mubarak"/>
<link wikidata="Q29198" start="3707" end="3726" title="Egyptian revolution of 2011" label="Egyptian Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q4631" start="3785" end="3798" title="Mohamed Morsi" label="Mohamed Morsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075553" start="3857" end="3878" title="Egyptian Armed Forces" label="Egyptian Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q13605743" start="3884" end="3905" title="2013 Egyptian coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="2013 coup d&amp;#x27;etat"/>
<link wikidata="Q307871" start="3922" end="3942" title="Abdel Fattah el-Sisi" label="Abdel Fattah el-Sisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q181586" start="4056" end="4074" title="Bingu wa Mutharika" label="Bingu wa Mutharika"/>
<link wikidata="Q4626100" start="4213" end="4234" title="Malawian Constitutional Crisis 2012" label="constitutional crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q57388" start="4251" end="4262" title="Joyce Banda" label="Joyce Banda"/>
<link wikidata="Q27917049" start="4339" end="4351" title="Adama Barrow" label="Adama Barrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q22247770" start="4359" end="4385" title="2016 Gambian presidential election" label="2016 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q15921518" start="4387" end="4396" title="President of the Gambia" label="president"/>
<link wikidata="Q57356" start="4397" end="4409" title="Yahya Jammeh" label="Yahya Jammeh"/>
<link wikidata="Q28398113" start="4435" end="4455" title="2016–2017 Gambian constitutional crisis" label="refused to step down"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041" start="4560" end="4567" title="Senegal" label="Senegal"/>
<link wikidata="Q117" start="4572" end="4577" title="Ghana" label="Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033" start="4585" end="4592" title="Nigeria" label="Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1005" start="4609" end="4619" title="the Gambia" label="the Gambia"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="4760" end="4767" title="United Kingdom" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q1809409" start="4783" end="4856" title="No independence before majority rule" label="enfranchise the black majority population as a condition for independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q313424" start="4891" end="4900" title="Ian Smith" label="Ian Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q7321053" start="4901" end="4935" title="Rhodesia&amp;#x27;s Unilateral Declaration of Independence" label="unilaterally declared independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1801770" start="5114" end="5139" title="Lancaster House Agreement" label="Lancaster House Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q129736736" start="5164" end="5193" title="Constitutional crisis in Somalia" label="ongoing constitutional crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045" start="5207" end="5214" title="Somalia" label="Somalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q19364214" start="5224" end="5240" title="President of Somalia" label="Somali President"/>
<link wikidata="Q319153" start="5242" end="5263" title="Hassan Sheikh Mohamud" label="Hassan Sheikh Mohamud"/>
<link wikidata="Q2687821" start="5277" end="5300" title="Constitution of Somalia" label="Constitution of Somalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q61905410" start="5362" end="5383" title="President of Puntland" label="President of Puntland"/>
<link wikidata="Q17069995" start="5385" end="5404" title="Said Abdullahi Deni" label="Said Abdullahi Deni"/>
<link wikidata="Q86010041" start="5421" end="5442" title="List of presidents of Jubaland" label="President of Jubaland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440239" start="5499" end="5528" title="Federal Government of Somalia" label="Federal Government of Somalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7260596" start="5596" end="5617" title="Constitution of Puntland" label="Puntland Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q949280" start="5625" end="5633" title="Jubaland" label="Jubaland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5149235" start="5712" end="5747" title="Coloured vote constitutional crisis" label="Coloured vote constitutional crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q740718" start="5763" end="5777" title="National Party (South Africa)" label="National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7644981" start="5800" end="5813" title="Supreme Court of South Africa" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q262851" start="5839" end="5876" title="Separate Representation of Voters Act, 1951" label="Separate Representation of Voters Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130204" start="5895" end="5903" title="Coloureds" label="Coloured"/>
<link wikidata="Q849164" start="5918" end="5931" title="Cape Province" label="Cape Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q7450034" start="6063" end="6069" title="Senate of South Africa" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q131582783" start="6125" end="6165" title="2024–2025 Georgian constitutional crisis" label="2024–2025 Georgian constitutional crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q102350982" start="6185" end="6221" title="2024 Georgian parliamentary election" label="2024 Georgian parliamentary election"/>
<link wikidata="Q57794" start="6232" end="6251" title="Bidzina Ivanishvili" label="Bidzina Ivanishvili"/>
<link wikidata="Q46516" start="6375" end="6389" title="Georgian Dream" label="Georgian Dream"/>
<link wikidata="Q272416" start="6464" end="6484" title="Salome Zourabichvili" label="Salome Zourabichvili"/>
<link wikidata="Q711893" start="6576" end="6596" title="Mikheil Kavelashvili" label="Mikheil Kavelashvili"/>
<link wikidata="Q128245" start="6811" end="6832" title="Mohammed Reza Pahlavi" label="Mohammed Reza Pahlavi"/>
<link wikidata="Q123037" start="6873" end="6891" title="Mohammed Mossadegh" label="Mohammed Mossadegh"/>
<link wikidata="Q593774" start="6967" end="6996" title="1953 Iranian coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="1953 Iranian coup d&amp;#x27;état"/>
<link wikidata="Q4572426" start="7016" end="7050" title="1966 Sarawak constitutional crisis" label="1966 Sarawak constitutional crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7609648" start="7115" end="7137" title="Stephen Kalong Ningkan" label="Stephen Kalong Ningkan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4584527" start="7277" end="7313" title="1988 Malaysian constitutional crisis" label="1988 Malaysian constitutional crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1668154" start="7357" end="7392" title="United Malays National Organisation" label="United Malays National Organisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6679876" start="7482" end="7517" title="Lord President of the Supreme Court" label="Lord President of the Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7518" end="7521" title="Malay titles#Tun" label="Tun"/>
<link wikidata="Q7404974" start="7522" end="7533" title="Salleh Abas" label="Salleh Abas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4588908" start="7555" end="7602" title="1993 amendments to the Constitution of Malaysia" label="1993 amendments to the Constitution of Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2457196" start="7695" end="7709" title="sovereign immunity" label="legal immunity"/>
<link wikidata="Q181383" start="7738" end="7754" title="Mahathir Mohamad" label="Mahathir Mohamad"/>
<link wikidata="Q86509170" start="7857" end="7893" title="2020 Malaysian constitutional crisis" label="2020 Malaysian constitutional crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q181383" start="7948" end="7964" title="Mahathir Mohamad" label="Mahathir Mohamad"/>
<link wikidata="Q7660436" start="8130" end="8145" title="Syed Sajjad Ali Shah" label="Sajjad Ali Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q134068" start="8185" end="8197" title="Nawaz Sharif" label="Nawaz Sharif"/>
<link wikidata="Q334059" start="8396" end="8410" title="Farooq Leghari" label="Farooq Leghari"/>
<link wikidata="Q480498" start="8483" end="8490" title="impeach" label="impeach"/>
<link wikidata="Q111468181" start="8734" end="8754" title="No-confidence motion against Imran Khan" label="no-confidence motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q155164" start="8763" end="8788" title="Imran Khan" label="Prime Minister Imran Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q111483002" start="8808" end="8829" title="2022 Pakistani constitutional crisis" label="constitutional crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518223" start="8870" end="8887" title="National Assembly of Pakistan" label="National Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q4790529" start="8953" end="8962" title="Arif Alvi" label="Arif Alvi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918562" start="9166" end="9197" title="2005–2006 Thai political crisis" label="2005–2006 Thai political crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368318" start="9230" end="9259" title="National Assembly of Thailand" label="National Assembly of Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q164373" start="9301" end="9319" title="Thaksin Shinawatra" label="Thaksin Shinawatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q6737124" start="9388" end="9408" title="Maithripala Sirisena" label="Maithripala Sirisena"/>
<link wikidata="Q57338" start="9436" end="9453" title="Mahinda Rajapaksa" label="Mahinda Rajapaksa"/>
<link wikidata="Q983402" start="9511" end="9531" title="Ranil Wickremesinghe" label="Ranil Wickremesinghe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2267560" start="9681" end="9724" title="self-elimination of the Austrian Parliament" label="self-elimination of the Austrian Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q871363" start="9765" end="9781" title="National Council (Austria)" label="National Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q11734" start="9792" end="9810" title="Engelbert Dollfuss" label="Engelbert Dollfuss"/>
<link wikidata="Q176495" start="9938" end="9962" title="Federal State of Austria" label="Federal State of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2666386" start="9984" end="9998" title="Royal Question" label="Royal Question"/>
<link wikidata="Q12973" start="10023" end="10034" title="Leopold III of Belgium" label="Leopold III"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308979" start="10063" end="10081" title="advice (constitutional)" label="ministerial advice"/>
<link wikidata="Q697625" start="10093" end="10111" title="Battle of Belgium" label="1940 Nazi invasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2417996" start="10132" end="10155" title="Belgian government in exile" label="the government in exile"/>
<link wikidata="Q19429045" start="10184" end="10214" title="Liberation of Belgium" label="Belgium&amp;#x27;s 1944 liberation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995364" start="10263" end="10280" title="1950 Belgian monarchy referendum" label="a 1950 referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q12976" start="10368" end="10381" title="Baudouin I of Belgium" label="King Baudouin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070654" start="10398" end="10410" title="Royal Assent" label="Royal Assent"/>
<link wikidata="Q4668443" start="10425" end="10444" title="abortion in Belgium" label="abortion in Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q633629" start="10633" end="10653" title="Belgian Constitution" label="Belgian Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q619621" start="10712" end="10733" title="Easter Crisis of 1920" label="Easter Crisis of 1920"/>
<link wikidata="Q156617" start="10740" end="10756" title="Christian X of Denmark" label="King Christian X"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="10760" end="10767" title="Denmark" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q129308" start="10872" end="10881" title="John of England" label="King John"/>
<link wikidata="Q12519" start="10900" end="10911" title="Magna Carta" label="Magna Carta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2086498" start="10970" end="10992" title="First Barons&amp;#x27; War" label="First Barons&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645505" start="10999" end="11018" title="English Reformation" label="English Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q83159" start="11020" end="11036" title="Pope Clement VII" label="Pope Clement VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q701040" start="11055" end="11060" title="Annulment" label="annul"/>
<link wikidata="Q38370" start="11066" end="11076" title="Henry VIII of England" label="Henry VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q162819" start="11104" end="11123" title="Catherine of Aragon" label="Catherine of Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q179876" start="11245" end="11252" title="Kingdom of England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q2962058" start="11300" end="11337" title="Supreme Head of the Church of England" label="Supreme Head of the Church of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q80823" start="11383" end="11394" title="Anne Boleyn" label="Anne Boleyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q81506" start="11397" end="11411" title="Charles I of England" label="King Charles I"/>
<link wikidata="Q839452" start="11437" end="11458" title="Divine Right of Kings" label="Divine Right of Kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302736" start="11476" end="11489" title="Personal Rule" label="Personal Rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577772" start="11537" end="11563" title="Wars of the Three Kingdoms" label="Wars of the Three Kingdoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q189508" start="11570" end="11589" title="Glorious Revolution" label="Glorious Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q126188" start="11616" end="11633" title="James II of England" label="King James II/VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q35749" start="11720" end="11730" title="Parliament" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q129987" start="11737" end="11749" title="William III of England" label="King William"/>
<link wikidata="Q130812" start="11754" end="11764" title="Mary II of England" label="Queen Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q5189480" start="11911" end="11952" title="Crown and Parliament Recognition Act 1689" label="Crown and Parliament Recognition Act 1689"/>
<link wikidata="Q191" start="12006" end="12013" title="Estonia" label="Estonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5401652" start="12093" end="12109" title="October 1933 Estonian constitutional referendum" label="third referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q4198907" start="12145" end="12167" title="parliamentary republic" label="parliamentary republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q49892" start="12177" end="12198" title="presidential republic" label="presidential republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q631241" start="12257" end="12270" title="Vaps Movement" label="Vaps Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q4460509" start="12312" end="12321" title="self-coup" label="self-coup"/>
<link wikidata="Q737115" start="12325" end="12339" title="Prime Minister of Estonia" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q299114" start="12340" end="12355" title="Konstantin Päts" label="Konstantin Päts"/>
<link wikidata="Q217799" start="12382" end="12391" title="Riigikogu" label="Riigikogu"/>
<link wikidata="Q327" start="12462" end="12470" title="Brittany" label="Brittany"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888561" start="12523" end="12530" title="The Estates" label="Estates"/>
<link wikidata="Q7738" start="12559" end="12567" title="Louis XV of France" label="Louis XV"/>
<link wikidata="Q562426" start="12654" end="12692" title="Louis-René de Caradeuc de La Chalotais" label="Louis-René de Caradeuc de La Chalotais"/>
<link wikidata="Q3002758" start="13109" end="13127" title="16 May 1877 crisis" label="16 May 1877 crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q158838" start="13139" end="13159" title="Patrice de Mac-Mahon" label="Patrice de Mac-Mahon"/>
<link wikidata="Q548532" start="13185" end="13196" title="Jules Simon" label="Jules Simon"/>
<link wikidata="Q434932" start="13207" end="13224" title="Albert de Broglie" label="Albert de Broglie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969555" start="13245" end="13262" title="National Assembly" label="National Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2139585" start="13370" end="13383" title="1877 French legislative election" label="new elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q41304" start="13424" end="13439" title="Weimar Republic" label="Weimar Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2667" start="13513" end="13532" title="Paul von Hindenburg" label="Paul von Hindenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q637829" start="13576" end="13585" title="Reichstag (Weimar Republic)" label="Reichstag"/>
<link wikidata="Q49768" start="13610" end="13633" title="Social Democratic Party of Germany" label="Social Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7320" start="13648" end="13652" title="Nazi Party" label="Nazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q153401" start="13657" end="13666" title="Communist Party of Germany" label="Communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="13812" end="13824" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q3722367" start="13865" end="13878" title="1981 Maltese general election" label="1981 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q115807" start="13924" end="13948" title="Single Transferable Vote" label="Single Transferable Vote"/>
<link wikidata="Q371637" start="14086" end="14101" title="Matthew Festing" label="Matthew Festing"/>
<link wikidata="Q190353" start="14123" end="14137" title="Order of Malta" label="Order of Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2639773" start="14170" end="14193" title="Albrecht von Boeselager" label="Albrecht von Boeselager"/>
<link wikidata="Q450675" start="14399" end="14411" title="Pope Francis" label="Pope Francis"/>
<link wikidata="Q364969" start="14535" end="14580" title="Giacomo dalla Torre del Tempio di Sanguinetto" label="Giacomo dalla Torre del Tempio di Sanguinetto"/>
<link wikidata="Q3731370" start="14697" end="14708" title="Impeachment (Norway)" label="Impeachment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078837" start="14727" end="14750" title="Christian August Selmer" label="Christian August Selmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2264910" start="14946" end="15004" title="Dissolution of the union between Norway and Sweden in 1905" label="Dissolution of the union between Norway and Sweden in 1905"/>
<link wikidata="Q1238338" start="15029" end="15052" title="Caesar&amp;#x27;s Civil War" label="Caesar&amp;#x27;s Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q130614" start="15067" end="15079" title="Roman Senate" label="Roman Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048" start="15088" end="15101" title="Julius Caesar" label="Julius Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="15190" end="15194" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q202161" start="15204" end="15216" title="Gallic Wars" label="invaded Gaul"/>
<link wikidata="Q742306" start="15221" end="15228" title="Julius Caesar&amp;#x27;s invasions of Britain" label="Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q25238182" start="15257" end="15294" title="Crossing the Rubicon" label="crossed the boundary of his territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="15471" end="15483" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q862099" start="15504" end="15533" title="Russian constitutional crisis of 1993" label="constitutional crisis of 1993"/>
<link wikidata="Q218295" start="15535" end="15544" title="President of Russia" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q34453" start="15545" end="15558" title="Boris Yeltsin" label="Boris Yeltsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2626571" start="15590" end="15604" title="Supreme Soviet of Russia" label="Supreme Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q230791" start="16069" end="16088" title="Kingdom of Scotland" label="Kingdom of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q161885" start="16115" end="16139" title="Kingdom of Great Britain" label="Kingdom of Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16194" end="16208" title="#United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q229159" start="16246" end="16260" title="Margaret of Scotland (Maid of Norway)" label="Queen Margaret"/>
<link wikidata="Q613650" start="16309" end="16327" title="Competitors for the Crown of Scotland" label="thirteen claimants"/>
<link wikidata="Q1552880" start="16341" end="16362" title="Guardians of Scotland" label="Guardians of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q57798" start="16374" end="16393" title="Edward I of England" label="Edward I of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q310065" start="16513" end="16525" title="John Balliol" label="John Balliol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813294" start="16543" end="16557" title="oath of fealty" label="oath of fealty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368240" start="16622" end="16651" title="Wars of Scottish Independence" label="Wars of Scottish Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q39791250" start="16704" end="16741" title="2017–18 Spanish constitutional crisis" label="2017–18 Spanish constitutional crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5705" start="16761" end="16770" title="Catalonia" label="Catalonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4740163" start="16777" end="16794" title="Carles Puigdemont" label="Carles Puigdemont"/>
<link wikidata="Q27145747" start="16803" end="16826" title="2017 Catalan independence referendum" label="independence referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q41796018" start="16997" end="17018" title="Catalan declaration of independence" label="declared independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q123377963" start="17196" end="17230" title="2023 Turkish constitutional crisis" label="2023 Turkish constitutional crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q104033937" start="17249" end="17290" title="2020–2021 Ukrainian constitutional crisis" label="2020-2021 Ukrainian constitutional crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2714836" start="17296" end="17327" title="Constitutional Court of Ukraine" label="Constitutional Court of Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5173087" start="17367" end="17377" title="Corruption in Ukraine" label="corruption"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="17489" end="17541" title="United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland" label="United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q784210" start="17601" end="17617" title="Constitution of the United Kingdom" label="an unwritten one"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739604" start="17756" end="17766" title="Parliament of Great Britain" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q127318" start="17786" end="17801" title="George III of the United Kingdom" label="King George III"/>
<link wikidata="Q130586" start="17965" end="17988" title="George IV" label="George, Prince of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q217217" start="18015" end="18030" title="Lord Chancellor" label="Lord Chancellor"/>
<link wikidata="Q44599" start="18031" end="18043" title="Edward Thurlow, 1st Baron Thurlow" label="Lord Thurlow"/>
<link wikidata="Q11007" start="18180" end="18194" title="House of Lords" label="House of Lords"/>
<link wikidata="Q3374979" start="18223" end="18243" title="People&amp;#x27;s Budget" label="People&amp;#x27;s Budget"/>
<link wikidata="Q531471" start="18259" end="18286" title="Chancellor of the Exchequer" label="Chancellor of the Exchequer"/>
<link wikidata="Q134982" start="18287" end="18305" title="David Lloyd George" label="David Lloyd George"/>
<link wikidata="Q27037814" start="18310" end="18341" title="President of the Board of Trade" label="President of the Board of Trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016" start="18342" end="18359" title="Winston Churchill" label="Winston Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q59554918" start="18370" end="18385" title="Liberal welfare reforms" label="welfare reforms"/>
<link wikidata="Q98113836" start="18405" end="18415" title="Land ownership in the United Kingdom" label="landowners"/>
<link wikidata="Q622441" start="18471" end="18484" title="Liberal Party (UK)" label="Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q3075752" start="18493" end="18522" title="January 1910 United Kingdom general election" label="January 1910 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q166714" start="18613" end="18626" title="H. H. Asquith" label="H. H. Asquith"/>
<link wikidata="Q15080258" start="18642" end="18656" title="Parliament Act 1911" label="Parliament Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q10857741" start="18713" end="18723" title="money bill" label="money bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q876477" start="18760" end="18772" title="Public and private bills" label="public bills"/>
<link wikidata="Q3076583" start="18817" end="18847" title="December 1910 United Kingdom general election" label="December 1910 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394879" start="18859" end="18874" title="hung parliament" label="hung parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q269412" start="18876" end="18889" title="George V" label="King George V"/>
<link wikidata="Q21488839" start="19011" end="19016" title="Peerages in the United Kingdom" label="peers"/>
<link wikidata="Q307716" start="19028" end="19057" title="Edward VIII abdication crisis" label="Edward VIII abdication crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q590227" start="19064" end="19080" title="Edward VIII of the United Kingdom" label="King Edward VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q209417" start="19108" end="19122" title="Wallis Simpson" label="Wallis Simpson"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="19204" end="19218" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q223832" start="19227" end="19235" title="Dominion" label="Dominion"/>
<link wikidata="Q82708" start="19280" end="19297" title="Church of England" label="Church of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q7311547" start="19353" end="19363" title="remarriage" label="remarriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q280856" start="19515" end="19529" title="George VI" label="King George VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q68544129" start="19537" end="19573" title="2019 British prorogation controversy" label="2019 British prorogation controversy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6063" start="19600" end="19610" title="Government of the United Kingdom" label="Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q180589" start="19642" end="19655" title="Boris Johnson" label="Boris Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="19664" end="19682" title="Queen Elizabeth II" label="Queen Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q65044147" start="19686" end="19694" title="prorogation in the United Kingdom" label="prorogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q11010" start="19699" end="19717" title="Parliament of the United Kingdom" label="British Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888194" start="19806" end="19848" title="Brexit" label="United Kingdom&amp;#x27;s impending withdrawal"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="19858" end="19872" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q68629673" start="19891" end="19989" title="R (Miller) v The Prime Minister and Cherry v Advocate General for Scotland" label="&amp;quot;R (Miller) v The Prime Minister&amp;quot; and &amp;quot;Cherry v Advocate General for Scotland&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122261" start="20005" end="20040" title="Supreme Court of the United Kingdom" label="Supreme Court of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q183174" start="20248" end="20264" title="King–Byng Affair" label="King–Byng Affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q390776" start="20274" end="20290" title="Governor General of Canada" label="Governor General"/>
<link wikidata="Q334974" start="20295" end="20316" title="Viscount Byng of Vimy" label="Viscount Byng of Vimy"/>
<link wikidata="Q839078" start="20344" end="20358" title="Prime Minister of Canada" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q128633" start="20360" end="20387" title="William Lyon Mackenzie King" label="William Lyon Mackenzie King"/>
<link wikidata="Q741182" start="20392" end="20411" title="dissolution of parliament" label="dissolve Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q128645" start="20528" end="20542" title="Arthur Meighen" label="Arthur Meighen"/>
<link wikidata="Q329547" start="20617" end="20627" title="confidence (politics)" label="confidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q383590" start="20635" end="20651" title="Canadian House of Commons" label="House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1666164" start="20692" end="20713" title="1926 Canadian federal election" label="1926 federal election"/>
<link wikidata="Q195559" start="20759" end="20786" title="Balfour Declaration of 1926" label="Balfour Declaration of 1926"/>
<link wikidata="Q223832" start="20816" end="20824" title="British Dominions" label="dominion"/>
<link wikidata="Q382844" start="20825" end="20842" title="Governor-General" label="governors-general"/>
<link wikidata="Q6063" start="20852" end="20870" title="Government of the United Kingdom" label="British government"/>
<link wikidata="Q719883" start="20880" end="20908" title="Statute of Westminster 1931" label="Statute of Westminster, 1931"/>
<link wikidata="Q307716" start="20968" end="20985" title="Abdication of Edward VIII" label="abdication crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q590227" start="20997" end="21008" title="Edward VIII" label="Edward VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q209417" start="21036" end="21050" title="Wallis Simpson" label="Wallis Simpson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230986" start="21099" end="21109" title="patriation" label="patriation"/>
<link wikidata="Q899061" start="21117" end="21129" title="Canadian constitution" label="constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q422404" start="21191" end="21209" title="Government of Canada" label="federal government"/>
<link wikidata="Q196615" start="21239" end="21252" title="Supreme Court of Canada" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q53463" start="21313" end="21337" title="constitutional amendment" label="constitutional amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q11010" start="21347" end="21379" title="Parliament of the United Kingdom" label="Parliament of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7269818" start="21422" end="21443" title="Quebec Veto Reference" label="Quebec Veto Reference"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="21455" end="21461" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q1492249" start="21563" end="21590" title="National Assembly of Quebec" label="National Assembly of Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q868875" start="21626" end="21648" title="Constitution Act, 1982" label="Constitution Act, 1982"/>
<link wikidata="Q3002773" start="21677" end="21717" title="2008–2009 Canadian parliamentary dispute" label="2008–2009 Canadian parliamentary dispute"/>
<link wikidata="Q138345" start="21728" end="21735" title="Liberal Party of Canada" label="Liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q130765" start="21737" end="21751" title="New Democratic Party" label="New Democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q735105" start="21757" end="21771" title="Bloc Québécois" label="Bloc Québécois"/>
<link wikidata="Q329547" start="21807" end="21826" title="Motion of no confidence" label="vote non-confidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q488523" start="21839" end="21851" title="Conservative Party of Canada" label="Conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q206" start="21977" end="21991" title="Stephen Harper" label="Stephen Harper"/>
<link wikidata="Q128933" start="22033" end="22047" title="Michaëlle Jean" label="Michaëlle Jean"/>
<link wikidata="Q14931237" start="22051" end="22059" title="Prorogation in Canada" label="prorogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q16151533" start="22214" end="22249" title="2009 Honduran constitutional crisis" label="2009 Honduran constitutional crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q191060" start="22264" end="22277" title="Manuel Zelaya" label="Manuel Zelaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415847" start="22328" end="22336" title="National Congress of Honduras" label="Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q7644913" start="22345" end="22358" title="Supreme Court of Honduras" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050254" start="22388" end="22409" title="Armed Forces of Honduras" label="Honduran Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q472699" start="22505" end="22525" title="Nullification Crisis" label="Nullification Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456" start="22535" end="22549" title="South Carolina" label="South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q779359" start="22562" end="22569" title="Nullification (U.S. Constitution)" label="nullify"/>
<link wikidata="Q7686034" start="22592" end="22607" title="Tariff of Abominations" label="Tariffs of 1828"/>
<link wikidata="Q7686035" start="22612" end="22616" title="Tariff of 1832" label="1832"/>
<link wikidata="Q11817" start="22628" end="22642" title="Andrew Jackson" label="Andrew Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q8564464" start="22668" end="22678" title="Force Bill" label="Force Bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q7686036" start="22752" end="22766" title="Tariff of 1833" label="Tariff of 1833"/>
<link wikidata="Q11881" start="22822" end="22832" title="John Tyler" label="John Tyler"/>
<link wikidata="Q11869" start="22861" end="22883" title="William Henry Harrison" label="William Henry Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="22962" end="22971" title="President of the United States" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q42183" start="23165" end="23169" title="Whig Party (United States)" label="Whig"/>
<link wikidata="Q11816" start="23201" end="23218" title="John Quincy Adams" label="John Quincy Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q319630" start="23223" end="23233" title="Henry Clay" label="Henry Clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q217797" start="23342" end="23364" title="Twenty-fifth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Twenty-fifth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q91" start="23473" end="23488" title="Abraham Lincoln" label="Abraham Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q81931" start="23651" end="23662" title="Confederate States of America" label="confederacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="23779" end="23788" title="American Civil War" label="Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q72251" start="23791" end="23817" title="1876 United States presidential election" label="1876 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="23819" end="23830" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republicans"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="23835" end="23844" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q5354979" start="23908" end="23928" title="Electoral Commission (United States)" label="Electoral Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="23941" end="23949" title="United States Congress" label="Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q35686" start="24008" end="24027" title="Rutherford B. Hayes" label="Rutherford B. Hayes"/>
<link wikidata="Q623429" start="24098" end="24112" title="Reconstruction era" label="Reconstruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q4567632" start="24119" end="24136" title="1952 steel strike" label="1952 steel strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q11613" start="24148" end="24163" title="Harry S. Truman" label="Harry S. Truman"/>
<link wikidata="Q16986280" start="24231" end="24246" title="Inherent powers (United States)" label="inherent powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q494197" start="24283" end="24302" title="United Steelworkers" label="United Steelworkers"/>
<link wikidata="Q8663" start="24325" end="24335" title="Korean War" label="Korean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="24471" end="24480" title="communism" label="communism"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="24486" end="24499" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q8058665" start="24538" end="24579" title="Youngstown Sheet &amp;amp; Tube Co. v. Sawyer" label="Youngstown Sheet &amp;amp; Tube Co. v. Sawyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q42761" start="24793" end="24810" title="Watergate scandal" label="Watergate scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q9588" start="24834" end="24847" title="Richard Nixon" label="Richard Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q525302" start="24862" end="24872" title="Obstruction of justice" label="obstructed"/>
<link wikidata="Q20711778" start="24953" end="24964" title="Impeachment process against Richard Nixon" label="impeachment"/>
<link wikidata="Q7041997" start="24990" end="25000" title="Nixon tapes" label="audio tape"/>
<link wikidata="Q307716" start="25184" end="25213" title="Edward VIII abdication crisis" label="Edward VIII abdication crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q590227" start="25220" end="25236" title="Edward VIII of the United Kingdom" label="King Edward VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q209417" start="25264" end="25278" title="Wallis Simpson" label="Wallis Simpson"/>
<link wikidata="Q575834" start="25321" end="25358" title="1975 Australian constitutional crisis" label="1975 Australian constitutional crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q319145" start="25367" end="25381" title="Prime Minister of Australia" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q23333" start="25382" end="25395" title="Gough Whitlam" label="Gough Whitlam"/>
<link wikidata="Q610669" start="25446" end="25462" title="Governor-General of Australia" label="Governor-General"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354851" start="25463" end="25476" title="John Kerr (governor-general)" label="Sir John Kerr"/>
<link wikidata="Q382118" start="25524" end="25534" title="Parliament of Australia" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q216082" start="25551" end="25556" title="Australian Labor Party" label="Labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q783401" start="25611" end="25635" title="Australian House of Representatives" label="House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144614" start="25644" end="25667" title="Australian Constitution" label="Australian Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q783330" start="25673" end="25679" title="Australian Senate" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q10857741" start="25770" end="25781" title="supply bill" label="supply bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q329547" start="25987" end="25997" title="Confidence (politics)" label="confidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q315979" start="26341" end="26355" title="Malcolm Fraser" label="Malcolm Fraser"/>
<link wikidata="Q241149" start="26484" end="26491" title="Liberal Party of Australia" label="Liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300018" start="26566" end="26598" title="Double dissolution" label="double dissolution of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q609541" start="26607" end="26628" title="1975 Australian federal election" label="1975 federal election"/>
<link wikidata="Q39058672" start="26678" end="26732" title="2017 Australian parliamentary eligibility crisis" label="eligibility of a number of Australian parliamentarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q382118" start="26747" end="26770" title="Parliament of Australia" label="Parliament of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q756296" start="26832" end="26848" title="dual citizenship" label="dual citizenship"/>
<link wikidata="Q7444616" start="26872" end="26915" title="section 44 of the Constitution of Australia" label="section 44 of the Constitution of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358798" start="27154" end="27177" title="High Court of Australia" label="High Court of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q946040" start="27189" end="27203" title="National Party of Australia" label="National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q5261065" start="27215" end="27236" title="Deputy Prime Minister of Australia" label="Deputy Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q4861362" start="27237" end="27250" title="Barnaby Joyce" label="Barnaby Joyce"/>
<link wikidata="Q4577643" start="27411" end="27445" title="1977 Fijian constitutional crisis" label="Fiji constitutional crisis of 1977"/>
<link wikidata="Q2670766" start="27546" end="27562" title="Governor-General of Fiji" label="Governor-General"/>
<link wikidata="Q307716" start="27674" end="27703" title="Edward VIII abdication crisis" label="Edward VIII abdication crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q590227" start="27710" end="27726" title="Edward VIII of the United Kingdom" label="King Edward VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q209417" start="27754" end="27768" title="Wallis Simpson" label="Wallis Simpson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4581800" start="27811" end="27852" title="New Zealand constitutional crisis, 1984" label="New Zealand constitutional crisis of 1984"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071117" start="27867" end="27881" title="Prime Minister of New Zealand" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q737739" start="27882" end="27897" title="Rob Muldoon" label="Sir Rob Muldoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472704" start="27928" end="27946" title="New Zealand dollar" label="New Zealand dollar"/>
<link wikidata="Q367589" start="28000" end="28011" title="David Lange" label="David Lange"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995062" start="28111" end="28127" title="Constitution Act 1986 (NZ)" label="Constitution Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q3002715" start="28216" end="28268" title="2011–2012 Papua New Guinean constitutional crisis" label="Papua New Guinean constitutional crisis of 2011–2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q7644964" start="28350" end="28363" title="Supreme Court of Papua New Guinea" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074656" start="28390" end="28404" title="Prime Minister of Papua New Guinea" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q316264" start="28447" end="28461" title="Michael Somare" label="Michael Somare"/>
<link wikidata="Q24563" start="28501" end="28520" title="National Parliament of Papua New Guinea" label="National Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q3587228" start="28619" end="28637" title="2012 Papua New Guinean general election" label="a general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q84082554" start="28661" end="28695" title="April 2021 Samoan general election" label="April 2021 Samoan general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q106946870" start="28731" end="28737" title="2021 Samoan constitutional crisis" label="crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q17048919" start="28758" end="28796" title="Tuvaluan constitutional crisis" label="Tuvaluan constitutional crisis of 2013"/>
<link wikidata="Q561559" start="28826" end="28838" title="Willy Telavi" label="Willy Telavi"/>
<link wikidata="Q739504" start="28975" end="28988" title="Kamuta Latasi" label="Kamuta Latasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q329547" start="29005" end="29028" title="motion of no confidence" label="motion of no confidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q644809" start="29139" end="29155" title="Governor General of Tuvalu" label="Governor General"/>
<link wikidata="Q3147210" start="29160" end="29174" title="Iakoba Italeli" label="Iakoba Italeli"/>
<link wikidata="Q3320130" start="29324" end="29339" title="monarchy of Tuvalu" label="Queen of Tuvalu"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="29341" end="29353" title="Elizabeth II" label="Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q330640" start="29424" end="29437" title="Enele Sopoaga" label="Enele Sopoaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q856670" start="29491" end="29520" title="1973 Chilean coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="1973 Chilean coup d&amp;#x27;état"/>
<link wikidata="Q440" start="29531" end="29547" title="Salvador Allende" label="Salvador Allende"/>
<link wikidata="Q374398" start="29602" end="29615" title="Supreme Court of Chile" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q5165728" start="29617" end="29636" title="Comptroller General of Chile" label="Comptroller General"/>
<link wikidata="Q2893606" start="29857" end="29895" title="Peruvian Constitutional Crisis of 1992" label="Peruvian Constitutional Crisis of 1992"/>
<link wikidata="Q133040" start="29907" end="29923" title="Alberto Fujimori" label="Alberto Fujimori"/>
<link wikidata="Q207854" start="30045" end="30057" title="Shining Path" label="Shining Path"/>
<link wikidata="Q829088" start="30062" end="30066" title="Túpac Amaru Revolutionary Movement" label="MRTA"/>
<link wikidata="Q5255590" start="30104" end="30138" title="Democratic Constitutional Congress" label="Democratic Constitutional Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q7445552" start="30157" end="30178" title="Peruvian Constitution" label="Peruvian Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q29053328" start="30258" end="30295" title="2017 Venezuelan constitutional crisis" label="2017 Venezuelan constitutional crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q60569233" start="30300" end="30330" title="Venezuelan presidential crisis" label="Venezuelan presidential crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q578438" start="30366" end="30393" title="Supreme Tribunal of Justice (Venezuela)" label="Supreme Tribunal of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585014" start="30441" end="30458" title="National Assembly (Venezuela)" label="National Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q58132" start="30666" end="30680" title="Nicolás Maduro" label="Nicolás Maduro"/>
<link wikidata="Q58833335" start="31086" end="31097" title="Juan Guaidó" label="Juan Guaidó"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968864" start="31229" end="31243" title="Cabinet crisis" label="Cabinet crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q53463" start="31246" end="31270" title="Constitutional amendment" label="Constitutional amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331848" start="31273" end="31296" title="Judicial interpretation" label="Judicial interpretation"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="192810" wikidata="Q5429609" url="?curid=192810" title="Fahrenheit (graphics API)">
<text>Fahrenheit was an effort to create a unified high-level API for 3D computer graphics to unify Direct3D and OpenGL. It was designed primarily by Microsoft and SGI and also included work from an HP-Microsoft joint effort.

Direct3D and OpenGL are low-level APIs that concentrate primarily on the rendering steps of the 3D rendering pipeline. Programs that use these APIs have to supply a considerable amount of code to handle the rest of the pipeline. Fahrenheit hoped to provide a single API that would do most of this work, and then call either Direct3D or OpenGL for the last steps.

Much of the original Fahrenheit project was abandoned, and Microsoft and SGI eventually gave up on attempts to work together. In the end, only the scene graph portion of the Fahrenheit system, known as XSG, saw a release and was discontinued shortly afterwards.

== History ==

=== Background ===
In the 1990s SGI&#x27;s OpenGL was the &quot;de facto&quot; standard for 3D computer graphics. Prior to the mid-90s different platforms had used various custom solutions, but SGI&#x27;s power in the graphics market, combined with the efforts of the OpenGL Architecture Review Board (ARB), led to the rapid standardization of OpenGL across the majority of the graphics workstation market. In the mid-1990s, Microsoft licensed OpenGL for their Windows NT operating system as its primary 3D system; Microsoft was positioning NT as a workstation-class system, and OpenGL was required in order to be a real competitor in this space. Initial support was released in Windows NT Workstation version 3.5 in 1994.

Confusing matters was Microsoft&#x27;s February 1995 purchase of RenderMorphics. Their Reality Lab product was a 3D library written specifically for gaming purposes, aimed primarily at the &quot;low end&quot; market. After renaming it to Direct3D 3.0, Microsoft released it as the primary 3D API for Windows 95 and game programming. This sparked off a massive debate, both within Microsoft and outside, about the merits of the two APIs and whether or not Direct3D should be promoted.

Through the mid-90s SGI had been working on a series of efforts to provide a higher level API on top of OpenGL to make programming easier. By 1997 this had evolved into their OpenGL++ system, a retained-mode C++ API on top of OpenGL. They proposed that a modified version be used as a single API on top of either OpenGL or a new high-performance low-level API that Microsoft was known to be working on (not based on Reality Lab). This would not only hide the implementation details and make the OpenGL/DirectX war superfluous, but at the same time offer considerably better high-level interfaces for a more robust object oriented development environment.

The OpenGL++ effort dragged on in the ARB through 1997. Although SGI committed resources to the project in order to provide a sample implementation, it appears they were unhappy with progress overall and complained &quot;There&#x27;s been lots of work, but relatively little communication.&quot; Microsoft in particular had stated in no uncertain terms that they would not be supporting the effort, and SGI felt that their support would be essential for any efforts moving forward.

=== Announcement ===
A joint press release in December 1997, followed by an announcement at an ARB meeting in early 1998 by SGI, announced that work on OpenGL++ had been abandoned and SGI had partnered with Microsoft to produce a new system code-named &quot;Fahrenheit&quot;. SGI was to provide the primary &quot;mid-sized&quot; API used in most applications, Fahrenheit Scene Graph, as well as a modified version for handling very large models from CAD applications, Fahrenheit Large Model. Microsoft would provide a new low-level rendering engine for Windows known as Fahrenheit Low Level, essentially a replacement for the Reality Lab-based version of Direct3D. The project was officially announced at SIGGRAPH 1998 for release in late 1999 or early 2000.

Fahrenheit became the primary focus of development at SGI. Their MIPS-based workstations were quickly losing the performance lead they had in the early 1990s, and the company was in serious trouble as the average PC slowly but surely encroached on the high-end graphics market. SGI saw Fahrenheit as an exit strategy; once complete they would be able to move to a PC-based lineup while still offering the best development tools for a now universal API. Although no porting work began, toolkits like Open Inventor and OpenGL Performer were intended in future to be layered on Fahrenheit, meaning that they could deliver a single fully functional development system for Fahrenheit when it shipped, supporting both their existing customers as well as new ones.

=== Cancellation ===
By 1999 it was clear that Microsoft had no intention of delivering Low Level; although officially working on it, almost no resources were dedicated to actually producing code. At the same time Microsoft was in the process of massively investing in DirectX 7.0 (similar to 3.0 largely in name only). Without Low Level, Fahrenheit couldn&#x27;t be delivered on Windows, and the project stalled. Eventually SGI abandoned work on Fahrenheit and started planning other Scene Graph products which became the last in a series of such projects.

By 2000 DirectX 7.0 was in the marketplace, and proving quite popular. DirectX had become the primary API during the rise of 3D gaming in the late 1990s. Microsoft did release Fahrenheit Scene Graph as XSG the same year, but did so with a note saying it would not be supported. No new versions of XSG were ever released, and all of the pages related to either Fahrenheit or XSG on both the Microsoft and SGI web pages have since disappeared. Hardware accelerated OpenGL support was dropped from the included video drivers in Windows XP, although most video card manufacturers deliver their own implementations.

== Description ==
As compared to Open Inventor or Iris Performer, the design of the XSG included some novel ideas. The composition primitives and traversal methods allowed applications to construct scenes in a manner best suited to the structure of the data being visualized, but then to apply a scene graph optimizer to restructure the scene for more efficient rendering without changing the scene&#x27;s appearance. The developer simply did whatever seemed natural, and the system made it work quickly.

Pipelined rendering allowed a multithreaded application to construct the scene, cull its primitives, and render it in different threads (borrowing from the Performer app-cull-draw pipeline). The representation of primitive scene data was optimized to minimize the amount of data stored so as to avoid completely duplicating it on a thread-by-thread basis.

One of the unique features of XSG was the ability to replace most of the built-in methods for walking the graph with their own versions. Developers could write new functions for quickly traversing their known methods of storing data inside XSG, and then chain them into existing rendering paths.

David Blythe, the primary architect of Fahrenheit at SGI, worked at Microsoft on DirectX until 2010. He was also Chief Graphics Software Architect at Intel.

== See also ==

* QuickDraw 3D
* Microsoft Talisman

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5429609" start="0" end="10" title="Fahrenheit (graphics API)" label="Fahrenheit"/>
<link wikidata="Q165194" start="56" end="59" title="API" label="API"/>
<link wikidata="Q189177" start="64" end="84" title="3D computer graphics" label="3D computer graphics"/>
<link wikidata="Q939208" start="94" end="102" title="Direct3D" label="Direct3D"/>
<link wikidata="Q178570" start="107" end="113" title="OpenGL" label="OpenGL"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283" start="144" end="153" title="Microsoft" label="Microsoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q623459" start="158" end="161" title="Silicon Graphics" label="SGI"/>
<link wikidata="Q80978" start="193" end="195" title="Hewlett-Packard" label="HP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366289" start="320" end="338" title="rendering pipeline" label="rendering pipeline"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406181" start="732" end="743" title="scene graph" label="scene graph"/>
<link wikidata="Q5429609" start="787" end="790" title="Fahrenheit (graphics API)" label="XSG"/>
<link wikidata="Q178570" start="906" end="912" title="OpenGL" label="OpenGL"/>
<link wikidata="Q385853" start="921" end="950" title="de facto standard" label="&amp;quot;de facto&amp;quot; standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635732" start="1131" end="1163" title="OpenGL Architecture Review Board" label="OpenGL Architecture Review Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q192525" start="1241" end="1261" title="workstation" label="graphics workstation"/>
<link wikidata="Q486487" start="1324" end="1334" title="Windows NT" label="Windows NT"/>
<link wikidata="Q9135" start="1335" end="1351" title="operating system" label="operating system"/>
<link wikidata="Q7301255" start="1652" end="1666" title="RenderMorphics" label="RenderMorphics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7301255" start="1674" end="1685" title="Reality Lab" label="Reality Lab"/>
<link wikidata="Q939208" start="1825" end="1837" title="Direct3D" label="Direct3D 3.0"/>
<link wikidata="Q83370" start="1887" end="1897" title="Windows 95" label="Windows 95"/>
<link wikidata="Q7095790" start="2247" end="2255" title="OpenGL plus plus" label="OpenGL++"/>
<link wikidata="Q2261107" start="2266" end="2279" title="retained mode" label="retained-mode"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407" start="2280" end="2283" title="C++" label="C++"/>
<link wikidata="Q79872" start="2686" end="2701" title="object oriented" label="object oriented"/>
<link wikidata="Q184793" start="3661" end="3664" title="Computer-aided design" label="CAD"/>
<link wikidata="Q679325" start="3916" end="3924" title="SIGGRAPH" label="SIGGRAPH"/>
<link wikidata="Q527464" start="4036" end="4040" title="MIPS architecture" label="MIPS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1798124" start="4470" end="4483" title="Open Inventor" label="Open Inventor"/>
<link wikidata="Q10341077" start="4488" end="4504" title="OpenGL Performer" label="OpenGL Performer"/>
<link wikidata="Q11248" start="5814" end="5824" title="Windows XP" label="Windows XP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1798124" start="5934" end="5947" title="Open Inventor" label="Open Inventor"/>
<link wikidata="Q10341077" start="5951" end="5965" title="Iris Performer" label="Iris Performer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3927832" start="7237" end="7249" title="QuickDraw 3D" label="QuickDraw 3D"/>
<link wikidata="Q6840231" start="7252" end="7270" title="Microsoft Talisman" label="Microsoft Talisman"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="192817" wikidata="Q2628635" url="?curid=192817" title="Bernadette Devlin McAliskey">
<text>Josephine Bernadette McAliskey (née Devlin; born 23 April 1947), usually known as Bernadette Devlin or Bernadette McAliskey, is an Irish civil rights leader and former politician. She served as Member of Parliament (MP) for Mid Ulster in Northern Ireland from 1969 to 1974. McAliskey came to national and international prominence at the age of 21 when she became the youngest female ever (at that time) to become a member of the British Parliament. McAliskey broke the traditional Irish republican policy of abstentionism and took her seat in Westminster. McAliskey&#x27;s ascension came at the outbreak of the Troubles, an ethno-nationalist conflict which would come to dominate Northern Ireland for the next 30 years. For the majority of that time, McAliskey was politically active, advocating for a 32-county socialist Irish republic to replace the two states on the island of Ireland. Originally linked to the People&#x27;s Democracy group, McAliskey was later a founder of the Irish Republican Socialist Party. However, McAliskey left the party after a year when members voted that its paramilitary wing, the Irish National Liberation Army, did not have to obey the political wing.

McAliskey continued to be politically active, such as during the 1981 Irish hunger strike. It was during this period when she and her husband survived an assassination attempt by undercover members of the Ulster Defence Association, an Ulster loyalist paramilitary. 

Since 1997 McAliskey has worked as the head of the South Tyrone Empowerment Programme, an NGO based in Dungannon which focuses on community development.

==Early life==
Devlin was born in Cookstown, County Tyrone, to a Catholic family, where she was the third of six children born to John James and Elizabeth Bernadette Devlin. Her father raised her to hold Irish Republican ideals before he died when Bernadette was nine years old. Subsequently, the family had to depend on welfare to survive, an experience which affected Bernadette deeply. Bernadette&#x27;s mother died when Bernadette was nineteen years old, leaving her to partially raise her siblings while also attending university.

She attended St Patrick&#x27;s Girls Academy in Dungannon. She was studying psychology at Queen&#x27;s University Belfast in 1968 when she took a prominent role in a student-led civil rights organisation, People&#x27;s Democracy. Following complaints from Unionist politicians, Devlin&#x27;s scholarship was revoked and she was refused to be allowed to sit her final exams. Queen&#x27;s University has never offered a formal apology to Devlin, but Devlin has stated she would not accept one even if it was offered.

==Political activism==
===Political beginnings===
She stood unsuccessfully against James Chichester-Clark in the 1969 Northern Ireland general election. When George Forrest, the MP for Mid Ulster, died, she fought the subsequent by-election on the &quot;Unity&quot; ticket, defeating the Ulster Unionist Party candidate, Forrest&#x27;s widow Anna, and was elected to the Westminster Parliament. Aged 21, she was the youngest MP at the time, and remained the youngest woman ever elected to Westminster until the May 2015 general election when 20-year-old Mhairi Black eclipsed Devlin&#x27;s achievement.

Devlin stood on the slogan &quot;I will take my seat and fight for your rights&quot; – signalling her rejection of the traditional Irish republican principle of abstentionism. On 22 April 1969, the day before her 22nd birthday, she swore the Oath of Allegiance and made her maiden speech within an hour.
===Battle of the Bogside===

After engaging, on the side of the residents, in the Battle of the Bogside in August, she was convicted of incitement to riot in December 1969, for which she served six months imprisonment. After being re-elected at the 1970 general election, Devlin declared that she would sit in Parliament as an independent socialist.

===U.S. tour and meetings with Black Panthers===

Almost immediately after the Battle of the Bogside, Devlin undertook a tour of the United States in August 1969, a trip which generated a significant amount of media attention. She met with members of the Black Panther Party in Watts, Los Angeles and gave them her support. She made appearances on &quot;Meet the Press&quot; and &quot;The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson&quot;. At a number of speaking events, she made parallels between the struggle in the U.S. by African-Americans seeking civil rights and Catholics in Northern Ireland, sometimes to the embarrassment of her audience. During an event in Philadelphia, she had to goad an African-American singer to sing &quot;We Shall Overcome&quot; to the Irish-American audience, many of whom refused to stand for the song. In Detroit, she refused to take the stage until African-Americans, who were barred from the event, were allowed in. In New York, Mayor John Lindsay arranged a ceremony to present Devlin with a key to the city of New York. Devlin, frustrated with conservative elements of the Irish-American community, left the tour to return to Northern Ireland and, believing the freedom of New York should go to the American poor, sent Eamonn McCann to present the key on her behalf to a representative from the Harlem chapter of the Black Panther Party.

In September 1969, while still on tour, the Unionist Stratton Mills dubbed Devlin &quot;nothing less than Fidel Castro in a miniskirt&quot;. Devlin responded by stating that Mills was a coward for waiting until she was abroad to make such a remark, but also that she was &quot;as left as James Connolly and the starry plough&quot;. The two had a face-to-face debate in New York that month. 

===Bloody Sunday===
Having witnessed the Bloody Sunday massacre in Derry in 1972, Devlin was infuriated that she was later consistently denied the floor in the House of Commons by the Speaker Selwyn Lloyd, despite the fact that parliamentary convention decreed that any Member of Parliament witnessing an incident under discussion would be granted an opportunity to speak about it therein.

The day following Bloody Sunday, Devlin slapped Conservative Home Secretary Reginald Maudling across the face when he falsely asserted in the House of Commons that the Parachute Regiment had fired in self-defence on Bloody Sunday. Asked by an all-male press corps if she intended to apologise to Maudling, Devlin said: &quot;I&#x27;m just sorry I didn&#x27;t get him by the throat&quot;.

Thirteen years later, former British Prime Minister Edward Heath recalled the event: &quot;I remember very well when an hon. Lady rushed from the Opposition Benches and hit Mr. Maudling. I remember that vividly because I thought that she was going to hit me. She could not stretch as far as that, so she had to make do with him.&quot;

Devlin appeared on &quot;Firing Line&quot; in 1972 to discuss the situation in Northern Ireland.

===Irish Republican Socialist Party===
Devlin helped to form the Irish Republican Socialist Party (IRSP) with Seamus Costello in 1974. This was a revolutionary socialist breakaway from Official Sinn Féin and, later that same day, Costello also created the Irish National Liberation Army (INLA) as a split from the Official Irish Republican Army. Devlin did not join the INLA and while she served on the party&#x27;s national executive in 1975, she resigned when a proposal that the INLA become subordinate to the party executive was defeated. In 1977, she joined the Independent Socialist Party, but it disbanded the following year.

===Support for prisoners===
McAliskey stood as an independent candidate in support of the prisoners on the blanket protest and dirty protest at Long Kesh prison in the 1979 elections to the European Parliament in the Northern Ireland constituency, and won 5.9% of the vote. She was a leading spokesperson for the Smash H-Block Campaign, which supported the hunger strikes in 1980 and 1981.

In September 1981 McAliskey toured continental Europe to try and raise support for the strikers. She was deported from Spain immediately upon arrival at Barcelona airport. Instead, McAliskey flew to Paris and called upon French Trade Unions to place an embargo on handling British goods until the hunger strikes ended. 

===Attempted assassination===
On 16 January 1981, Devlin and her husband were attacked by members of the Ulster Freedom Fighters, a cover name of the Ulster Defence Association (UDA), who broke into their home near Coalisland, County Tyrone. The gunmen shot Devlin nine times in front of her children.

British soldiers were watching the McAliskey home at the time, but they failed to prevent the assassination attempt. Allegations were subsequently made that elements of the security forces had colluded with the UDA in planning the botched assassination. An army patrol from 3 Para entered the house after waiting outside for half an hour. Devlin has claimed that the patrol &quot;were there to make sure that the gunmen got into my house and that they were caught on the way out.&quot; Soldiers from the Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders (ASH) then arrived and transported her by helicopter to a nearby hospital.

The paramilitaries had torn out the telephone and, while the wounded couple were being given first aid by the newly arrived troops, an ASH soldier ran to a neighbour&#x27;s house, commandeered a car, and drove to the home of a councillor to telephone for help. The couple were taken by helicopter to hospital in nearby Dungannon for emergency treatment and then to the Musgrave Park Hospital, Military Wing, in Belfast, under intensive care.

The attackers—Ray Smallwoods, Tom Graham (38), both from Lisburn, and Andrew Watson (25) from Seymour Hill, Dunmurry—were captured by the army patrol and subsequently jailed. All three were members of the South Belfast UDA. Smallwoods was the driver of the getaway car.

===Dáil Éireann elections===
She twice failed, in February and November 1982, in attempts to be elected to the Dublin North-Central constituency of the Irish parliament, Dáil Éireann.

===Funeral of Dominic McGlinchey===
In 1994, McAliskey attended the funeral of former Irish National Liberation Army Chief of Staff Dominic McGlinchey. The INLA had been the armed wing of the Irish Republican Socialist Party, which McAliskey had helped found. McAliskey kissed the coffin, which was carried by her, Sean McGlinchey, Dominic junior and Father O&#x27;Daly, who had given McGlinchey the last rites on Hardman&#x27;s Gardens. During the funeral oration, she condemned the recent press coverage which had accused McGlinchey of drug dealing and criminality and said of the journalists responsible that they were &quot;curs and dogs. May every one of them rot in hell. They have taken away Dominic McGlinchy&#x27;s character and they will stand judgement for it. He was the finest Republican of them all. He never dishonoured the cause he believed in. His war was with the armed soldiers and the police of this state&quot;.

Following this speech, &quot;The Times&quot; reported that some of the mourners turned on the observing press corps and shouted abuse. A couple of months after the funeral, McAliskey explained her thinking to &quot;The Guardian&quot;. Their reporter, David Sharrock, asked if her tirade had been intended to counteract the negative stories about McGlinchey that had recently appeared in the press. McAliskey said 

===South Tyrone Empowerment Programme===
McAliskey is chief executive of the South Tyrone Empowerment Programme (STEP) and was involved in its founding in 1997. STEP provides a range of services and advocacy in areas including community development, training, support and advice for migrants, policy work, and community enterprise.

===Denied entry into the US===
In 2003 she was barred from entering the United States and deported on the grounds that the United States Department of State had declared her to pose &quot;a serious threat to the security of the United States&quot; – apparently referring to her conviction for incitement to riot in 1969 – although she protested that she had no terrorist involvement and had frequently been permitted to travel to the United States in the past.

===Later political activity===
On 12 May 2007, McAliskey was a guest speaker at the socialist republican political party Éirígí&#x27;s first Annual James Connolly commemoration in Arbour Hill, Dublin. She works with migrant workers to improve their treatment in Northern Ireland.

During the 2016 Northern Ireland Assembly election, McAliskey was an election agent for People before Profit&#x27;s candidate in Foyle, Eamonn McCann. McCann was successfully elected. 

During the campaigning for the 2024 European Parliament election in Ireland, McAliskey endorsed Clare Daly in the Dublin constituency.

==Political views==
Throughout her life, McAliskey has been associated with Irish Republicanism and various Socialist and Communist groups. In September 1969 the Unionist Stratton Mills dubbed Devlin &quot;nothing less than Fidel Castro in a miniskirt&quot;. Devlin responded that ideologically she was &quot;as left as James Connolly and the starry plough&quot;. In a May 1969 interview, McAliskey stated she had &quot;never read Marx&quot;, but stated that &quot;I have read Connolly and if James Connolly was a revolutionary socialist then so am I’. She also stated her admiration for Countess Markievicz.

===Border Poll===
In March 2017 McAliskey stated that she would not vote Yes in a Border Poll held on the prospect of a United Ireland. She also accused Sinn Féin of seeking United Ireland only if it could control that state. McAliskey stated: &quot;Sinn Fein has no intention of moving forward to a united Ireland that it doesn&#x27;t control.&quot; Additionally, she stated &quot;Do I think the people who are in the current mainstream of political ideology - whether that&#x27;s from Fine Gael and Fianna Fail right through Sinn Fein, on into the SDLP and on over to the Unionists and the DUP - should be let out to run a country? No&quot;. McAliskey expanded: &quot;Would I like to dismantle the Irish Republic? Yes. Would I like to dismantle the northern state? Yes. I would like to start again and have a constitutional conference, a series of clear discussions and debates and a democratic process for building a new independent republic in which everybody could feel they belonged. 

In November 2018, during a live public interview in Belfast during an episode of the Blindboy podcast, McAliskey stated she would not vote for a United Ireland unless that combined state was explicitly socialist. In August 2019 McAliskey made a similar statement, once again affirming she would not vote for a United Ireland in a Border Poll, asking rhetorically, &quot;Who would want to join the Free State?&quot;. This prompted the Irish political magazine &quot;The Phoenix&quot; to accuse McAliskey of having abandoned Irish Republicanism. &quot;The Phoenix&quot; contrasted her statements with statements McAliskey made in 1992, in which she proclaimed she would &quot;burn every blade of grass&quot; in Ireland to retain her &quot;birthright&quot;.

In September 2023 McAliskey stated: &quot;I have no more interest than the average Unionist in being submerged into the Free State. Absolutely none. I can think of no worse fate that might befall a population than to be sucked into the existing system of the Republic of Ireland. I think we need a new Ireland, and I think it starts with a new Constitution.&quot;

===Northern Ireland===
Speaking in September 2016, McAliskey stated that if the Irish and British governments had &quot;been serious&quot; about reforming Northern Ireland following the Good Friday Agreement, they would have &quot;insisted on a 20-year strategy for desegregating housing, desegregating education, ending our private and cultural segregation&quot;. 

In February 2018 Declan Kearney of Sinn Féin claimed the Northern Ireland civil rights movement was influenced by decisions of the IRA and the Sinn Féin leadership. Kearney told the BBC &quot;Republicans were involved. The IRA and the Sinn Féin leaderships encouraged their activists to organise and to campaign under the umbrella of the civil rights movement, alongside other democrats and other political activists - human rights activists, communists and trade unionists. So, the role of republicanism was central to the emergence of the civil rights movement along with many others.&quot; In response, McAliskey stated that Kearney&#x27;s views were &quot;delusional silliness&quot; . 

===Republicanism===
McAliskey stated in September 2016 that &quot;If republicanism is about being true to the ideals of Thomas Paine and Wolfe Tone, then Sinn Féin are bad Republicans&quot;, and &quot;If you take as the keystone of republicanism that authority exercised over a human being, without that human being’s acquiescence and knowledge, is a usurpation of that person’s rights, then by what definition are Sinn Féin republicans?&quot;. 

===Abortion===
McAliskey has described herself as a &quot;hardliner&quot; on abortion, stating &quot;I don’t need, and you are not entitled to, an explanation about what I do with me, to make you feel better. You can’t say some abortions are okay and some are not. You are either pro-choice or you are not. I am a hardliner and most people don’t dare enunciate that view yet. I have a clear, old-fashioned bottom line: abortion on demand is a valid demand&quot;. 

McAliskey believes in abortion at any point of the pregnancy: &quot;So if it&#x27;s my body and it&#x27;s my right, it&#x27;s my right from the start to the end. So don&#x27;t tell me to settle for the first 12 weeks, the first 24 weeks, a position where a foetus may not have any real chance of survival. Don&#x27;t tell me these things will be acceptable, but making a choice for myself in any circumstance is my choice. I&#x27;ve always believed in the fundamental right of any woman to secure a safe, a free termination of pregnancy, an abortion, when she asks for it – and that there&#x27;s a full stop and an exclamation mark after that.&quot;

==Personal life==
In 1971, she gave birth to a daughter, Róisín, which cost her some political support because she was unmarried. She later married Róisín&#x27;s father Michael McAliskey on her 26th birthday on 23 April 1973.

==In popular culture==
In 1969, director and producer John Goldschmidt made the documentary film &quot;Bernadette Devlin&quot; for ATV, which was shown on the British television channel ITV and on the American television channel CBS&#x27;s &quot;60 Minutes&quot; programme, and included footage of Devlin during the Battle of the Bogside. She was also interviewed at length by Marcel Ophüls in &quot;A Sense of Loss&quot; (1972). Another documentary, &quot;Bernadette: Notes on a Political Journey&quot;, directed by Irish programme-maker Leila Doolan, was released in 2011. At the 2008 Cannes Film Festival a biographical film of Devlin was announced, but she stated that &quot;the whole concept is abhorrent to me&quot; and the film was not made.

Devlin, and her assault after the Bloody Sunday massacre on the British Home Secretary, Reginald Maudling, were the subject of the title song of the 1990 music album, &quot;Slap!&quot; by anarchist pop/punk band Chumbawamba.

In the 2002 film, &quot;Bloody Sunday&quot;, Devlin is played by actress Mary Moulds.

==References==
==External links==
*Podcast Interview with Bernadette Devlin McAliskey. The Blindboy Podcast. 2018
*Public Lecture by Bernadette Devlin McAliskey. &#x27;A Terrible State of Chassis&#x27;, Derry, 2016 (51 min. video), Field Day, 30 September 2016.
* McAliskey, Bernadette Devlin. &quot;The Price of My Soul&quot; (Foreword and Chapter Twelve), cain.ulst.ac.uk; accessed 8 August 2015.
* McIntyre, Anthony. &quot;Knowing Too Much and Saying It Too Well: Bernadette McAliskey Barred from US&quot;, lark.phoblacht.net, 23 February 2003; accessed 8 August 2015.
* Interview with Peter Stanford, Independent.co.uk, 29 July 2007.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2628635" start="0" end="30" title="Bernadette Devlin McAliskey" label="Josephine Bernadette McAliskey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2628635" start="36" end="42" title="Bernadette Devlin McAliskey" label="Devlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2628635" start="82" end="99" title="Bernadette Devlin McAliskey" label="Bernadette Devlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2628635" start="103" end="123" title="Bernadette Devlin McAliskey" label="Bernadette McAliskey"/>
<link wikidata="Q16707842" start="194" end="214" title="Member of Parliament (United Kingdom)" label="Member of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q751660" start="224" end="234" title="Mid Ulster (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Mid Ulster"/>
<link wikidata="Q517372" start="481" end="497" title="Irish republican" label="Irish republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q13580111" start="508" end="521" title="abstentionism" label="abstentionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q815436" start="607" end="619" title="the Troubles" label="the Troubles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2706972" start="914" end="937" title="People&amp;#x27;s Democracy (Ireland)" label="People&amp;#x27;s Democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2116865" start="982" end="1014" title="Irish Republican Socialist Party" label="Irish Republican Socialist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146230" start="1114" end="1144" title="Irish National Liberation Army" label="Irish National Liberation Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417338" start="1253" end="1277" title="1981 Irish hunger strike" label="1981 Irish hunger strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330968" start="1393" end="1419" title="Ulster Defence Association" label="Ulster Defence Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q2394819" start="1424" end="1439" title="Ulster loyalist" label="Ulster loyalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7568707" start="1507" end="1541" title="South Tyrone Empowerment Programme" label="South Tyrone Empowerment Programme"/>
<link wikidata="Q79913" start="1546" end="1549" title="NGO" label="NGO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025602" start="1559" end="1568" title="Dungannon" label="Dungannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129639" start="1644" end="1653" title="Cookstown" label="Cookstown"/>
<link wikidata="Q192229" start="1655" end="1668" title="County Tyrone" label="County Tyrone"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="1675" end="1683" title="Catholic" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q517372" start="1814" end="1830" title="Irish Republican" label="Irish Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q7595049" start="2160" end="2191" title="St Patrick&amp;#x27;s Academy, Dungannon" label="St Patrick&amp;#x27;s Girls Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025602" start="2195" end="2204" title="Dungannon" label="Dungannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q9418" start="2223" end="2233" title="psychology" label="psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q877925" start="2237" end="2268" title="Queen&amp;#x27;s University Belfast" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s University Belfast"/>
<link wikidata="Q191600" start="2325" end="2337" title="civil rights" label="civil rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q2706972" start="2352" end="2375" title="People&amp;#x27;s Democracy (Ireland)" label="People&amp;#x27;s Democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q335869" start="2746" end="2768" title="James Chichester-Clark" label="James Chichester-Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q7058565" start="2776" end="2814" title="1969 Northern Ireland general election" label="1969 Northern Ireland general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q5539361" start="2821" end="2835" title="George Forrest (Northern Ireland politician)" label="George Forrest"/>
<link wikidata="Q751660" start="2848" end="2858" title="Mid Ulster (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Mid Ulster"/>
<link wikidata="Q6841037" start="2881" end="2903" title="1969 Mid Ulster by-election" label="subsequent by-election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650977" start="2917" end="2922" title="Unity (Northern Ireland)" label="Unity"/>
<link wikidata="Q15145017" start="2929" end="2935" title="Ticket (election)" label="ticket"/>
<link wikidata="Q841045" start="2951" end="2972" title="Ulster Unionist Party" label="Ulster Unionist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q11010" start="3034" end="3056" title="Parliament of the United Kingdom" label="Westminster Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q4838448" start="3079" end="3102" title="Baby of the House" label="youngest MP at the time"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586935" start="3174" end="3199" title="2015 United Kingdom general election" label="May 2015 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q19863151" start="3217" end="3229" title="Mhairi Black" label="Mhairi Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q517372" start="3398" end="3414" title="Irish republican" label="Irish republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q13580111" start="3428" end="3441" title="abstentionism" label="abstentionism"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3509" end="3527" title="Oath of Allegiance (United Kingdom)#Parliamentarians" label="Oath of Allegiance"/>
<link wikidata="Q6735422" start="3541" end="3554" title="maiden speech" label="maiden speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q2890741" start="3653" end="3674" title="Battle of the Bogside" label="Battle of the Bogside"/>
<link wikidata="Q918442" start="3820" end="3841" title="1970 United Kingdom general election" label="1970 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="3910" end="3919" title="socialist" label="socialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="4055" end="4068" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q189150" start="4177" end="4196" title="Black Panther Party" label="Black Panther Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1687279" start="4200" end="4218" title="Watts, Los Angeles" label="Watts, Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543066" start="4276" end="4290" title="Meet the Press" label="Meet the Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q6057742" start="4307" end="4346" title="The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson" label="The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="4582" end="4594" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1314091" start="4653" end="4670" title="We Shall Overcome" label="We Shall Overcome"/>
<link wikidata="Q12439" start="4756" end="4763" title="Detroit" label="Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q99864" start="4946" end="4961" title="Freedom of the City" label="key to the city"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075293" start="5028" end="5052" title="Irish Americans" label="Irish-American community"/>
<link wikidata="Q2904605" start="5174" end="5187" title="Eamonn McCann" label="Eamonn McCann"/>
<link wikidata="Q189074" start="5250" end="5256" title="Harlem" label="Harlem"/>
<link wikidata="Q7622269" start="5347" end="5361" title="Stratton Mills" label="Stratton Mills"/>
<link wikidata="Q11256" start="5400" end="5412" title="Fidel Castro" label="Fidel Castro"/>
<link wikidata="Q213374" start="5582" end="5596" title="James Connolly" label="James Connolly"/>
<link wikidata="Q7602280" start="5605" end="5618" title="Starry Plough (flag)" label="starry plough"/>
<link wikidata="Q190819" start="5727" end="5740" title="Bloody Sunday (1972)" label="Bloody Sunday"/>
<link wikidata="Q163584" start="5753" end="5758" title="Derry" label="Derry"/>
<link wikidata="Q333080" start="5878" end="5890" title="Selwyn Lloyd" label="Selwyn Lloyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="6125" end="6137" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484309" start="6138" end="6152" title="Secretary of State for the Home Department" label="Home Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q333275" start="6153" end="6170" title="Reginald Maudling" label="Reginald Maudling"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6245" end="6263" title="Parachute Regiment (United Kingdom)#1970s Northern Ireland" label="Parachute Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q128967" start="6518" end="6530" title="Edward Heath" label="Edward Heath"/>
<link wikidata="Q5452076" start="6827" end="6838" title="Firing Line (TV program)" label="Firing Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q2116865" start="6965" end="6997" title="Irish Republican Socialist Party" label="Irish Republican Socialist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780947" start="7010" end="7025" title="Seamus Costello" label="Seamus Costello"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860218" start="7085" end="7103" title="Official Sinn Féin" label="Official Sinn Féin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146230" start="7156" end="7186" title="Irish National Liberation Army" label="Irish National Liberation Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548637" start="7214" end="7244" title="Official Irish Republican Army" label="Official Irish Republican Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q6017233" start="7467" end="7494" title="Independent Socialist Party (Ireland)" label="Independent Socialist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q327591" start="7584" end="7605" title="independent (politician)" label="independent candidate"/>
<link wikidata="Q881645" start="7641" end="7656" title="blanket protest" label="blanket protest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1228262" start="7661" end="7674" title="dirty protest" label="dirty protest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478908" start="7678" end="7687" title="Long Kesh" label="Long Kesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1451109" start="7702" end="7716" title="1979 European Parliament election in the United Kingdom" label="1979 elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q8889" start="7724" end="7743" title="European Parliament" label="European Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q7058448" start="7751" end="7780" title="Northern Ireland (European Parliament constituency)" label="Northern Ireland constituency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417338" start="7891" end="7922" title="1981 Irish Hunger Strike" label="hunger strikes in 1980 and 1981"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330968" start="8351" end="8374" title="Ulster Defence Association" label="Ulster Freedom Fighters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330968" start="8396" end="8422" title="Ulster Defence Association" label="Ulster Defence Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q2503992" start="8461" end="8471" title="Coalisland" label="Coalisland"/>
<link wikidata="Q192229" start="8473" end="8486" title="County Tyrone" label="County Tyrone"/>
<link wikidata="Q4636662" start="8823" end="8829" title="3rd Battalion, Parachute Regiment" label="3 Para"/>
<link wikidata="Q3135445" start="9053" end="9086" title="Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders" label="Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025602" start="9482" end="9491" title="Dungannon" label="Dungannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6941171" start="9532" end="9554" title="Musgrave Park Hospital" label="Musgrave Park Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q679690" start="9589" end="9603" title="intensive care" label="intensive care"/>
<link wikidata="Q7298119" start="9620" end="9634" title="Ray Smallwoods" label="Ray Smallwoods"/>
<link wikidata="Q1828035" start="9663" end="9670" title="Lisburn" label="Lisburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1809263" start="9927" end="9935" title="February 1982 Irish general election" label="February"/>
<link wikidata="Q1662746" start="9940" end="9953" title="November 1982 Irish general election" label="November 1982"/>
<link wikidata="Q2913560" start="9988" end="10008" title="Dublin North-Central (Dáil constituency)" label="Dublin North-Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q651981" start="10047" end="10059" title="Dáil Éireann" label="Dáil Éireann"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146230" start="10148" end="10178" title="Irish National Liberation Army" label="Irish National Liberation Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q550360" start="10194" end="10212" title="Dominic McGlinchey" label="Dominic McGlinchey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7568707" start="11488" end="11522" title="South Tyrone Empowerment Programme" label="South Tyrone Empowerment Programme"/>
<link wikidata="Q718998" start="11638" end="11659" title="community development" label="community development"/>
<link wikidata="Q789915" start="11867" end="11900" title="United States Department of State" label="United States Department of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q3086688" start="12327" end="12333" title="Éirígí" label="Éirígí"/>
<link wikidata="Q213374" start="12354" end="12368" title="James Connolly" label="James Connolly"/>
<link wikidata="Q4784920" start="12386" end="12397" title="Arbour Hill" label="Arbour Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q15320003" start="12422" end="12437" title="migrant workers" label="migrant workers"/>
<link wikidata="Q16973450" start="12498" end="12537" title="2016 Northern Ireland Assembly election" label="2016 Northern Ireland Assembly election"/>
<link wikidata="Q5354552" start="12556" end="12570" title="election agent" label="election agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q3545406" start="12575" end="12595" title="People before Profit" label="People before Profit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2904605" start="12623" end="12636" title="Eamonn McCann" label="Eamonn McCann"/>
<link wikidata="Q117272547" start="12704" end="12748" title="2024 European Parliament election in Ireland" label="2024 European Parliament election in Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2975532" start="12769" end="12779" title="Clare Daly" label="Clare Daly"/>
<link wikidata="Q517372" start="12885" end="12904" title="Irish Republicanism" label="Irish Republicanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="12917" end="12926" title="Socialist" label="Socialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="12931" end="12940" title="Communist" label="Communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7622269" start="12980" end="12994" title="Stratton Mills" label="Stratton Mills"/>
<link wikidata="Q11256" start="13033" end="13045" title="Fidel Castro" label="Fidel Castro"/>
<link wikidata="Q213374" start="13129" end="13143" title="James Connolly" label="James Connolly"/>
<link wikidata="Q7602280" start="13152" end="13165" title="Starry Plough (flag)" label="starry plough"/>
<link wikidata="Q9061" start="13240" end="13244" title="Karl Marx" label="Marx"/>
<link wikidata="Q2120936" start="13323" end="13346" title="revolutionary socialist" label="revolutionary socialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q195768" start="13397" end="13416" title="Countess Markievicz" label="Countess Markievicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q76382" start="13572" end="13581" title="Sinn Féin" label="Sinn Féin"/>
<link wikidata="Q96354031" start="14496" end="14504" title="Blindboy Boatclub" label="Blindboy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3752036" start="14556" end="14570" title="United Ireland" label="United Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q31747" start="14808" end="14818" title="Irish Free State" label="Free State"/>
<link wikidata="Q7756955" start="14876" end="14887" title="The Phoenix (magazine)" label="The Phoenix"/>
<link wikidata="Q208958" start="15718" end="15739" title="Good Friday Agreement" label="Good Friday Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q24052777" start="15916" end="15930" title="Declan Kearney" label="Declan Kearney"/>
<link wikidata="Q126462" start="16710" end="16722" title="Thomas Paine" label="Thomas Paine"/>
<link wikidata="Q437962" start="16727" end="16737" title="Wolfe Tone" label="Wolfe Tone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7386525" start="18210" end="18216" title="Róisín McAliskey" label="Róisín"/>
<link wikidata="Q6235648" start="18434" end="18450" title="John Goldschmidt" label="John Goldschmidt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5399070" start="18511" end="18514" title="Associated Television" label="ATV"/>
<link wikidata="Q220072" start="18566" end="18569" title="ITV (TV network)" label="ITV"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="18609" end="18612" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q247869" start="18626" end="18636" title="60 Minutes" label="60 Minutes"/>
<link wikidata="Q711420" start="18757" end="18770" title="Marcel Ophüls" label="Marcel Ophüls"/>
<link wikidata="Q115812204" start="18780" end="18795" title="A Sense of Loss (film)" label="A Sense of Loss"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088627" start="18962" end="18987" title="2008 Cannes Film Festival" label="2008 Cannes Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q645928" start="18990" end="19007" title="biographical film" label="biographical film"/>
<link wikidata="Q333275" start="19218" end="19235" title="Reginald Maudling" label="Reginald Maudling"/>
<link wikidata="Q7538682" start="19303" end="19308" title="Slap!" label="Slap!"/>
<link wikidata="Q6199" start="19318" end="19327" title="anarchism" label="anarchist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089523" start="19342" end="19353" title="Chumbawamba" label="Chumbawamba"/>
<link wikidata="Q885302" start="19380" end="19393" title="Bloody Sunday (film)" label="Bloody Sunday"/>
<link wikidata="Q110568507" start="19530" end="19550" title="The Blindboy Podcast" label="The Blindboy Podcast"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="192818" wikidata="Q8059289" url="?curid=192818" title="Youth culture">
<text>Youth culture refers to the societal norms of children, adolescents, and young adults. Specifically, it comprises the processes and symbolic systems that are shared by the youth and are distinct from those of adults in the community. 

An emphasis on clothes, popular music, sports, vocabulary, and dating typically sets youth apart from other age groups. Within youth culture, there are many constantly changing youth subcultures, which may be divided based on race, ethnicity, economic status, public appearance, or a variety of other factors.

==Existence==
There is a debate surrounding the presence, existence, and origins of youth culture. Some researchers argue that youth culture is not a separate culture, as their values and morals are not distinct from those of their parents. Additionally, peer influence varies greatly among contexts, gender, age, and social status, making a single &quot;youth culture&quot; difficult to define. which differ from those of their parent&#x27;s culture. Janssen &quot;et al.&quot; used the terror management theory (TMT) to argue for the existence of youth culture. They tested the following hypothesis: &quot;If youth culture serves to help adolescents deal with problems of vulnerability and finiteness, then reminders of mortality should lead to increased allegiance to cultural practices and beliefs of the youth.&quot; The results supported the hypothesis and the outcome of previous studies, and suggest that youth culture is a culture.

Schwartz and Merten used adolescent language to argue that youth culture is distinct from the rest of society. Schwartz argued that high school students used their vocabulary to create meanings that are distinct to adolescents. Specifically, the adolescent status terminology (the words that adolescents use to describe hierarchical social statuses) contains qualities and attributes that are not present in adult status judgments. According to Schwartz, this reflects a difference in social structures and the ways that adults and teens experience social reality. This difference indicates cultural differences between adolescents and adults, which supports the presence of separate youth culture.

==Movements==

Throughout the twentieth century, youth have had a strong influence on both lifestyle and culture. The flappers and the Mods are two examples of the impact of youth culture on society. The flappers were young women that were confident about a prosperous future after World War I. This liveliness showed in their new attitudes in life in which they openly drank, smoked, and, in some cases, socialized with gangster-type men. The fashionable dress at the time also reflected the flapper&#x27;s new lifestyle.

Mods emerged during a time of war and political and social troubles, and stemmed from a group called the modernists. They were young men and women who came from all classes who believed that their fashion choices &quot;gave them entrée everywhere&quot; and empowered them. The Mods&#x27; style and embrace of modern technology spread from the UK overseas to North America and other countries.

==Theories==

The presence of youth culture is a relatively recent historical phenomenon. There are several dominant theories about the emergence of youth culture in the 20th century, which include hypotheses about the historical, economic, and psychological influences on the presence of youth culture. One historical theory credits the emergence of youth culture to the beginning of compulsory schooling. James Coleman argues that age segregation is the root of separate youth culture. Before mandatory education, many children and adolescents interacted primarily with adults. In contrast, modern children associate extensively with others their age. These interactions allow adolescents to develop shared experiences and meanings, which are the root of youth culture.

Another theory posits that some cultures facilitate the development of youth culture, while others do not. The basis of this distinction is the presence of universalistic or particularistic norms. Particularistic norms are guidelines for behavior that vary from one individual to another. In contrast, universalistic norms apply to all members of society. Universalistic norms are more likely to be found in industrialized societies. Modernization in the last century has encouraged universalistic norms since interaction in modern societies makes it necessary for everyone to learn the same set of norms. Modernization and universalistic norms have encouraged the growth of youth culture. The need for universalistic norms has made it impractical for young people&#x27;s socialization to come primarily from immediate family members, which would lead to significant variation in the communicated norms. Therefore, many societies use age grouping, such as in schools, to educate their children on societies&#x27; norms and prepare them for adulthood; youth culture is a byproduct of this tactic. Because children spend so much time together and learn the same things as the rest of their age group, they develop their own culture.

Psychological theorists have noted the role of youth culture in identity development. Youth culture may be a means of finding identity when one&#x27;s path in life is not always clear. Erik Erikson theorized that the vital psychological conflict of adolescence is identity versus role confusion. The goal of this stage of life is to answer the question, &quot;Who am I?&quot; 

In many societies, adolescents are expected to behave like children and take on adult roles. Some psychologists have theorized that forming youth culture is a step to adopt an identity that reconciles these two conflicting expectations. For example, Talcott Parsons posited that adolescence is when young people transition from reliance on parents to autonomy. In this transitory state, dependence on the peer group serves as a stand-in for parents. Burlingame restated this hypothesis in 1970. He wrote that adolescents replace parents with the peer group and that this reliance on the peer group diminishes as youth enter adulthood and take on adult roles.

Fasick relates youth culture as a method of identity development to the simultaneous elongation of childhood and the need for independence in adolescence. According to Fasick, adolescents face contradictory pulls from society. Compulsory schooling keeps them socially and economically dependent on their parents, while young people need to achieve some sort of independence to participate in the market economy of modern society. As a means of coping with these contrasting aspects of adolescence, youth create freedom through behavior—specifically, through leisure-oriented activities done with peers.

==Impact on adolescents==
For decades, adults have worried that youth subcultures were the root of moral degradation and changing values in younger generations. Researchers have characterized youth culture as embodying values that are &quot;in conflict with those of the adult world&quot;. Common concerns about youth culture include a perceived lack of interest in education, involvement in risky behaviors like substance use and sexual activity, and engaging extensively in leisure activities. These perceptions have led many adults to believe that adolescents hold different values than older generations and to perceive youth culture as an attack on the morals of current society. These worries have prompted the creation of parenting websites such as The Youth Culture Report and the Center for Parent Youth Understanding, whose goal is to preserve the values of older generations in young people.

There is no consensus among researchers about whether youth subcultures hold different beliefs than adults do. Some researchers have noted the simultaneous rise in age segregation and adolescent adjustment problems such as suicide, delinquency, and premarital pregnancy. However, most evidence suggests that these youth problems are not a reflection of different morals held by younger generations. Multiple studies have found that most adolescents hold views that are similar to their parents. One study challenged the theory that adolescent cohorts had distanced themselves from their parents by finding that between 1976 and 1982, their problems increased, and they became less peer-oriented. A second study&#x27;s findings that adolescents&#x27; values were more similar to their parents in the 1980s than in the 1960s and &#x27;70s echoes Sebald&#x27;s finding. Another study did find differences between adolescents&#x27; and parents&#x27; attitudes but found that the differences were in the degree of belief, not in the behavior itself.

There may also be pluralistic ignorance on the part of youth when comparing their attitudes to peers and parents. A study by Lerner &quot;et al.&quot; asked college students to compare their attitudes on several issues to their peers and parents. Most students rated their attitudes as falling somewhere between their parents&#x27; more conservative attitudes and their peers&#x27; more liberal attitudes. The authors suggested that the reason for this is that the students perceived their friends as more liberal than they were.

Sports, language, music, clothing, and dating tend to be superficial ways of expressing autonomy—they can be adopted without compromising one&#x27;s beliefs or values. Some areas in which adolescents assert autonomy can cause long-term consequences, such as substance use and sexual activity.

The impact of youth culture on deviance and sexual behavior is debatable. More than 70 percent of American high school students report having drunk alcohol. Similarly, about two-thirds of teenagers have engaged in sexual intercourse by the time they leave high school. As drinking and having sex may be common in adolescence, many researchers include them as aspects of youth culture. While engaging in these activities can have harmful consequences, the majority of adolescents who engage in these risky behaviors do not suffer long-term consequences. The possibilities of addiction, pregnancy, incarceration, and other negative outcomes are some potentially negative effects of participation in youth culture. Research demonstrates that many factors may influence youth to engage in high-risk behaviors, including &quot;a lack of stable role models, heightened family stresses, lowered levels of family investment, weakened emotional bonds between parents and their children, lowered levels of social capital and social control, and a lack of hope in future&quot;.

Teen culture may also have benefits for adolescents. Peer influence can have a positive effect on adolescents&#x27; well-being; for example, most teens report that peer pressure stops them from using drugs or engaging in sexual activity.

==Impact on society in general==

Young people can make changes in society, such as through youth-led revolutions. Organizations of young people, which were often based on student identity, were crucial to the American civil rights movement, which included organizations like the Southern Student Organizing Committee, Students for a Democratic Society, and the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee. The Freedom Summer campaign relied heavily on college students; hundreds of students engaged in registering African Americans to vote, teaching in &quot;Freedom Schools&quot;, and organizing the Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party.

The American protests in the Vietnam War were also student-driven. Many college campuses opposed the war with sit-ins and demonstrations. Organizations such as the Young Americans for Freedom, the Student Libertarian Movement, and the Student Peace Union were based on youth status and contributed to anti-war activities. Some scholars have claimed that the activism during the Vietnam War was symbolic of a youth culture whose values were against mainstream American culture.

In the early 2010s, the Arab Spring illustrated how young people played roles in demonstrations and protests. The movement was initiated primarily by young people, mostly college students dissatisfied with the opportunities afforded to them. The participation of young people prompted Time magazine to include several youth members of the movement in its 2011 list of 100 most influential people. Additionally, this movement utilized social media (which is considered an aspect of youth culture) to schedule, coordinate, and publicize events.

==See also==
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q8059289" start="0" end="13" title="Youth culture" label="Youth culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q205665" start="28" end="42" title="Social norm" label="societal norms"/>
<link wikidata="Q7569" start="46" end="51" title="child" label="child"/>
<link wikidata="Q131774" start="56" end="67" title="adolescence" label="adolescents"/>
<link wikidata="Q17156455" start="73" end="85" title="young adult" label="young adults"/>
<link wikidata="Q654810" start="299" end="305" title="dating" label="dating"/>
<link wikidata="Q19116554" start="413" end="429" title="youth subculture" label="youth subculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q189970" start="865" end="878" title="social status" label="social status"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474856" start="1035" end="1059" title="terror management theory" label="terror management theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2721121" start="1304" end="1314" title="allegiance" label="allegiance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1982569" start="1318" end="1335" title="cultural practice" label="cultural practice"/>
<link wikidata="Q34394" start="1341" end="1347" title="belief" label="belief"/>
<link wikidata="Q1483126" start="2307" end="2314" title="flapper" label="flapper"/>
<link wikidata="Q503685" start="2324" end="2328" title="Mod (subculture)" label="Mods"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="2471" end="2482" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q878985" start="2818" end="2828" title="Modernism" label="modernists"/>
<link wikidata="Q511009" start="3492" end="3512" title="compulsory education" label="compulsory schooling"/>
<link wikidata="Q4691931" start="3540" end="3555" title="age segregation" label="age segregation"/>
<link wikidata="Q19001724" start="4036" end="4050" title="Universalism" label="universalistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3296948" start="4054" end="4069" title="Moral particularism" label="particularistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q202398" start="4288" end="4302" title="Industrialisation" label="industrialized"/>
<link wikidata="Q856122" start="4314" end="4327" title="Modernization theory" label="Modernization"/>
<link wikidata="Q844569" start="5176" end="5184" title="Identity (social science)" label="identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q58074" start="5297" end="5309" title="Erik Erikson" label="Erik Erikson"/>
<link wikidata="Q983472" start="5376" end="5406" title="Erikson&amp;#x27;s stages of psychosocial development" label="identity versus role confusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q203913" start="5740" end="5755" title="Talcott Parsons" label="Talcott Parsons"/>
<link wikidata="Q180910" start="6708" end="6715" title="leisure" label="leisure"/>
<link wikidata="Q3184856" start="7167" end="7180" title="Substance abuse" label="substance use"/>
<link wikidata="Q926274" start="8722" end="8743" title="pluralistic ignorance" label="pluralistic ignorance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7169" start="9041" end="9053" title="Conservatism" label="conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q6216" start="9091" end="9098" title="Liberalism" label="liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q484105" start="9323" end="9331" title="autonomy" label="autonomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q214693" start="10525" end="10539" title="social capital" label="social capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q784843" start="10761" end="10774" title="peer pressure" label="peer pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q48537" start="11055" end="11076" title="civil rights movement" label="civil rights movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q7570515" start="11116" end="11153" title="Southern Student Organizing Committee" label="Southern Student Organizing Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2250103" start="11155" end="11188" title="Students for a Democratic Society" label="Students for a Democratic Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q127723" start="11198" end="11239" title="Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee" label="Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q3024031" start="11245" end="11259" title="Freedom Summer" label="Freedom Summer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6879148" start="11436" end="11472" title="Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party" label="Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q5254589" start="11479" end="11496" title="Opposition to the U.S. involvement in the Vietnam War" label="American protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="11504" end="11515" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q8057921" start="11639" end="11666" title="Young Americans for Freedom" label="Young Americans for Freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7627725" start="11710" end="11729" title="Student Peace Union" label="Student Peace Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q794691" start="11776" end="11784" title="Anti-war movement" label="anti-war"/>
<link wikidata="Q33761" start="11977" end="11988" title="Arab Spring" label="Arab Spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="12238" end="12251" title="Time (magazine)" label="Time magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q202833" start="12387" end="12399" title="social media" label="social media"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="192819" wikidata="Q866012" url="?curid=192819" title="University of Queensland">
<text>The University of Queensland is a public research university located primarily in Brisbane, the capital city of the Australian state of Queensland. Founded in 1909 by the Queensland parliament, UQ is one of the six sandstone universities, an informal designation of the oldest university in each state. UQ is also a founding member of edX, Australia&#x27;s leading Group of Eight and the international research-intensive Association of Pacific Rim Universities.

The main St Lucia campus occupies much of the riverside inner suburb of St Lucia, southwest of the Brisbane central business district. Other UQ campuses and facilities are located throughout Queensland, the largest of which are the Gatton campus and the Mayne Medical School. UQ&#x27;s overseas establishments include UQ North America office in Washington D.C., and the UQ-Ochsner Clinical School in Louisiana, United States.

The university offers associate, bachelor, master, doctoral, and higher doctorate degrees through a college, a graduate school, and six faculties. UQ incorporates over one hundred research institutes and centres offering research programs, such as the Institute for Molecular Bioscience, Boeing Research and Technology Australia Centre, the Australian Institute for Bioengineering and Nanotechnology, and the UQ Dow Centre for Sustainable Engineering Innovation. Recent notable research of the university include pioneering the invention of the HPV vaccine that prevents cervical cancer, developing a COVID-19 vaccine that was in human trials, and the development of high-performance superconducting MRI magnets for portable scanning of human limbs.

UQ counts two Nobel laureates (Peter C. Doherty and John Harsanyi), over a hundred Olympians winning numerous gold medals, and 117 Rhodes Scholars among its alumni and former staff. UQ&#x27;s alumni also include University of California, San Francisco Chancellor Sam Hawgood, the first female Governor-General of Australia Dame Quentin Bryce, former President of King&#x27;s College London Ed Byrne, member of United Kingdom&#x27;s Prime Minister Council for Science and Technology Max Lu, Oscar and Emmy awards winner Geoffrey Rush, triple Grammy Award winner Tim Munro, former CEO and chairman of Dow Chemical Andrew N. Liveris, and current director of multiple organisations including IBM.

==History==
===Foundation of the university===
According to the Queensland Government&#x27;s Heritage Register&#x27;s History section:

Proposals for a university in Queensland began in the 1870s. A Royal Commission in 1874, chaired by Sir Charles Lilley, recommended the immediate establishment of a university. Those against a university argued that technical rather than academic education was more important in an economy dominated by primary industry. Those in favour of the university, in the face of this opposition, distanced themselves from Oxford and Cambridge and proposed instead a model derived from the mid-western states of the U.S.A. A second Royal Commission in 1891 recommended the inclusion of five faculties in a new university; Arts, Law, Medicine, Science, and Applied Science. Education generally was given a low priority in Queensland&#x27;s budgets, and in a colony with a literacy rate of 57% in 1861, primary education was the first concern well ahead of secondary and technical education. The government, despite the findings of the Royal Commissions, was unwilling to commit funds to the establishment of a university.

In 1893, the Queensland University Extension Movement was begun by a group of private individuals who organised public lecture courses in adult education, hoping to excite wider community support for a university in Queensland. In 1894, 245 students were enrolled in the extension classes and the lectures were described as practical and useful. In 1906 the University Extension Movement staged the University Congress, a forum for interested delegates to promote the idea of a university. Opinion was mobilised, a fund was started and a draft Bill for a Queensland University was prepared. Stress was laid on the practical aspects of university education and its importance for the commerce of Queensland. The proceedings of the Congress were forwarded to Premier [of Queensland] Kidston. In October 1906, sixty acres in Victoria Park were gazetted for university purposes.

The University of Queensland was established by an Act of State Parliament on 10 December 1909 to commemorate the 50th anniversary of Queensland&#x27;s separation from the colony of New South Wales. The Act allowed for the university to be governed by a senate of 20 men and Sir William MacGregor, the incoming Governor, was appointed the first chancellor with RH Roe as the vice-chancellor. Old Government House ... [then Government House] in George Street was set aside for the university following the departure of the governor to the Bardon residence, &quot;Fernberg&quot;..., sparking the first debates about the best location for the university.

In 1910 the first teaching faculties were created. These included Engineering, Classics, Mathematics[,] and Chemistry. In December of the same year, the Senate appointed the first four professors; BD Steele in chemistry, JL Michie in classics, H. Priestley in mathematics and A Gibson in engineering. In 1911 the first students enrolled.

The university&#x27;s first classes in the Government House were held in 1911 with 83 commencing students and Sir William MacGregor is the first chancellor (with RH Roe as vice-chancellor). The University of Queensland began to award degrees to its first group of graduating students in 1914.

===1920s to 1990s===

The development of the university was delayed by World War I, but after the first world war the university enrolments for education and research took flight as demand for higher education increased in Australia. Thus, in the early 1920s the growing university had to look for a more spacious campus as its original site in George Street, Brisbane, had limited room for expansion. In 1927, James O&#x27;Neil Mayne and his sister, Mary, provided a grant of approximately £50,000 to the Brisbane City Council to acquire of land in St Lucia and provided it to the University of Queensland as its permanent home. In the same year, the pitch drop experiment was started by Thomas Parnell. The experiment has been described as the world&#x27;s oldest and continues to this day. Lack of finance delayed development of the St Lucia campus. Hence, the construction of the university&#x27;s first building in St Lucia only began in 1938. It was later named the Forgan Smith Building, after the premier of the day and it was completed in 1939. During World War II, the Forgan Smith Building was used as a military base and it served first as advanced headquarters for the Allied Land Forces in the South West Pacific.

The first Doctor of Science was awarded in 1942. The first PhD was awarded in 1952.

===1990s to present day===

In 1990, Australia reorganised its higher education system by abolishing the binary system of universities and colleges of advanced education. Under this transition, the university merged with Queensland Agricultural College, to establish the new UQ Gatton campus. In 1999, UQ Ipswich began operation as one of the completely web-enabled campuses in Australia.

In 2010, The University of Queensland was a recipient of the Queensland Greats Awards.

In May 2013, UQ joined edX, an international consortium of massive open online courses (MOOCs). From May 2014, the initial four UQx courses cover hypersonics, tropical coastal ecosystems, biomedical imaging and the science of everyday thinking.

==Campuses and buildings==

The University of Queensland maintains a number of campuses and facilities throughout Queensland. UQ has its main campus in the suburb of St Lucia in Brisbane, bordered by a meander in the Brisbane River to the north, east, and south. UQ&#x27;s main campus has been recognised for its beauty by a number of sources. Its other campuses include Gatton, Herston and Dutton Park (formerly the Pharmacy Australia Centre of Excellence).

===St Lucia campus===
In 1927, the land on which the St Lucia campus is built was resumed by the Brisbane City Council using money donated by James O&#x27;Neil Mayne and his sister Mary Emelia Mayne to replace the less spacious city campus. The city campus is now home to the Gardens Point campus of the Queensland University of Technology. Construction of the new university at St Lucia began in 1937.

====Great Court====
At its centre is the heritage-listed Great Court – a open area surrounded by Helidon sandstone buildings with grotesques of great academics and historic scenes, floral and faunal motifs and crests of universities and colleges from around the world. This central semi-circular quadrangle features a connected arcade so students could reach any section under cover. The Great Court was added to the Queensland Heritage Register in 2002.

====Museums====
The University of Queensland Art Museum is located in the James and Mary Emelia Mayne Centre on the St Lucia campus. The Art Museum was established in the Forgan Smith Tower in 1976 to house the artworks collected by The University of Queensland since the 1940s, relocating to its present site in 2004. Today, with more than 4,400 artworks, the University&#x27;s Art Collection is Queensland&#x27;s second largest public art collection.

The university also houses the R.D. Milns Antiquities Museum in the Michie building (bldg 9, level 2) which contains Queensland&#x27;s only publicly accessible collection of antiquities from ancient Rome, Greece, Egypt and the Near East. The museum supports research and teaching at the university. The UQ Anthropology Museum (also in the Michie Building on level 1) contains a significant collection of ethnographic material. It is also open to the public.

===Gatton campus===
The UQ Gatton Campus covers 1068 ha at Lawes, near the town of Gatton, Queensland, about west of Brisbane on the Warrego Highway. The campus was opened in 1897 next to the site of the Queensland Agricultural College which was then amalgamated with UQ in 1990. UQ Gatton is the core campus for research, learning and teaching activities and facilities in agriculture, animals, veterinary science and the environment.

In 2008 the Centre for Advanced Animal Science (CAAS) was opened at the Gatton campus – a collaborative venture between UQ and the Queensland Government.

===Herston campus===

UQ Mayne Medical School and the Queensland Institute of Medical Research is the core campus for clinical health teaching and research. The campus is situated in Herston and operates within Queensland Health system of the Royal Brisbane Hospital, Royal Children&#x27;s Hospital, Royal Women&#x27;s Hospital and the Queensland Institute of Medical Research.

It is home to the Faculty of Medicine, the School of Population Health, the Herston Health Sciences Library, the Centre for Clinical Research and clinical research and learning activities of the School of Nursing and Midwifery. 
The Herston campus also houses other key facilities such as the Oral Health Centre and the purpose-built Herston Imaging Research Facility. The medical school building was added to the Queensland Heritage Register in 1999.

The Marks-Hirschfeld Museum of Medical History is in the Mayne Medical School at the Herston campus. Operated by volunteers and supported by The University of Queensland Alumni, it has a collection of over 7,000 items of medical memorabilia, medical and surgical instruments. The focus is on the study of medical history in Queensland, but the collection includes items with broader significance to Australia and internationally.

;Overseas clinical schools
* Louisiana, United States – the UQ-Ochsner Clinical School operates at Ochsner Medical Center, New Orleans and Baton Rouge, allowing medical school students from the UQ-Ochsner program to receive two years of overseas clinical experience, contributing towards their UQ Doctor of Medicine (MD) degree.

===Ipswich campus===

In 2014, UQ sold the Ipswich Campus to the University of Southern Queensland, believing that this regional teaching campus would be better used by USQ.

The campus was made up of nearly 20 buildings and more than 5001 students on nearly . Courses offered included: arts, business, medicine and social sciences as well as Interaction design. It is located near central Ipswich, Queensland, just south of the CBD. Nearby landmarks include Limestone Park, Workshops Rail Museum and RAAF Base Amberley.

The site dates back to 1878 with the opening of the Ipswich branch of the Woogaroo Lunatic Asylum. Operations continued until 1910 when it became the Ipswich Hospital for the Insane. In 1938 it was renamed the Ipswich Mental Hospital and in 1964 it was renamed again as the Ipswich Special Hospital. It was finally named the Challinor Centre in 1968 in honour of Henry Challinor, the ship&#x27;s surgeon on the . From 1968 to 1997 the Challinor Centre served as an institution for people with intellectual disabilities. In late 1997 the Challinor Centre began its first stage of transformation as the new UQ Ipswich campus.

===Satellite teaching and research centres===
UQ has other research and education facilities not directly attached to its four campuses. These locations are primarily for research, which cannot be undertaken in the campus locales but also represent buildings which established pre-eminence in education before the creation of the current campuses.
;Queen Street
Queen Street, Brisbane is the location of the Customs House and the UQ Business School Downtown Venue. Customs House is one of Brisbane&#x27;s heritage icons and is located on the river along Queen Street in the Brisbane central business district. It is leased to and operated by the University of Queensland as a cultural, educational and heritage facility. The UQ Business School Downtown is an inner-city corporate education, meeting and dining venue and facility which is on Level 19 of Central Plaza One in the Brisbane central business district.
;Indooroopilly
Indooroopilly is the site of the Julius Kruttschnitt Mineral Research Centre and the Queensland University Regiment Logistics Company. The Julius Kruttschnitt Mineral Research Centre (JKMRC) of The University of Queensland Sustainable Minerals Institute is at a former silver and lead mine at Finney&#x27;s Hill in Indooroopilly. Acquired in 1951 by the School of Mining Engineering under the leadership of Frank T. M. White, Foundation Professor (appointed 1950), this mine (formerly Finney&#x27;s Hill United Silver Mines Limited) then became known as the Queensland University Experimental Mine. It promptly became an integral part of the teaching and research capacity of the School, which in 1952 expanded to become the Department of Mining and Metallurgical Engineering.

JKMRC, incorporating the Experimental Mine, was officially established as a University Centre in 1970, with a goal to develop practical technical solutions for large-scale mining and minerals industry challenges. It is named after Julius Kruttschnitt, the chairman of Mount Isa Mines and a board member of the university&#x27;s Faculty of Engineering.

The Queensland University Regiment Logistics Company is housed in the Witton Barracks, Indooroopilly.

====Other locations====

* Pinjarra Hills – the Pinjarra Hills Research Station, the Veterinary Science Farm and the Pinjarra Aquatic Research Station are located in Pinjarra Hills, Brisbane. The Aquatic Research Station investigates aquaculture and inland ecology.
* Heron Island – the Heron Island Research Station is situated on Heron Island, north-east of Gladstone. Its primary use is for coral reef ecology research and teaching and is an integral component of the Great Barrier Reef Ocean Observations System and the national Integrated Marine Observing System. It consists of more than 30 buildings on a two hectare lease.
* Moreton Bay – the Moreton Bay Research Station and Study Centre is in Dunwich on North Stradbroke Island and researches the ecosystems.
* Mt Nebo – The University of Queensland operates an International Seismograph Station on Mt Nebo.
* Charters Towers – The University of Queensland operates an International Seismograph Station at Charters Towers.
* Dayboro – the Dayboro Veterinary Surgery was bought by the university in 1987 as a teaching clinic for fifth year veterinary students in their dairy cattle medicine rotation. Later, separate brick accommodation was built for student accommodation. Research projects into practical aspects of dairy production are frequently carried out by clinic staff. There is a full range of veterinary services and pet care for dogs, cats, horses, cows, alpacas, goats, and all manner of other small and large animals.

==Governance and structure==

The University of Queensland is organised into a number of divisions for academic, administrative and logistical purposes.

===University Senate===
The senate is the governing body of The University of Queensland and consists of 22 members from the university and community. The senate is led by the chancellor and deputy chancellor, elected by the senate. The University of Queensland Act 1998 grants the senate wide powers to appoint staff, manage and control university affairs and property and manage and control finances to promote the university&#x27;s interests.
* Vice-Chancellor and President
* Provost
* Deputy Vice-Chancellor (Academic)
* Deputy Vice-Chancellor (External Engagement)
* Deputy Vice-Chancellor (Research)
* Pro-Vice-Chancellor
* Pro-Vice-Chancellor (Advancement)
* Pro-Vice-Chancellor (Indigenous Engagement)
* Pro-Vice-Chancellor (Research)
* Pro-Vice-Chancellor (Research Infrastructure)
* Pro-Vice-Chancellor (Research Training)
* Pro-Vice-Chancellor (Teaching and Learning)
* Chief Operating Officer
* President of the Academic Board
The academic board is the university&#x27;s senior academic advisory body. It formulates policy on academic matters including new programs, teaching, learning and assessment, research, promotions, student academic matters, prizes and scholarships. An academic board member is elected annually as its president. The president is assisted by a half-time deputy president.

===Faculties and departments===
The university has six faculties to support both research and teaching activities.
Faculty of Business, Economics and Law
* School of Business
* School of Economics
* School of Law

Faculty of Engineering, Architecture and Information Technology
* School of Architecture
* School of Chemical Engineering
* School of Civil Engineering
* School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
* School of Mechanical and Mining Engineering

Faculty of Health and Behavioural Sciences
* School of Dentistry
* School of Health and Rehabilitation Sciences
* School of Human Movement and Nutrition Sciences
* School of Nursing, Midwifery and Social Work
* School of Pharmacy
* School of Psychology

Faculty of Humanities and Social Sciences
* School of Communication and Arts
* School of Education
* School of Historical and Philosophical Inquiry
* School of Languages and Cultures
* School of Music
* School of Political Science and International Studies
* School of Social Science

Faculty of Medicine
* School of Biomedical Sciences
* School of Public Health

Faculty of Science
* School of Agriculture and Food Sciences
* School of Chemistry and Molecular Biosciences
* School of the Environment
* School of Mathematics and Physics
* School of Veterinary Science

UQ has a semester-based modular system for conducting academic courses. The Australian higher education model features a combination of the British system, such as small group teaching (tutorials) and the American system (course credits).

=== Academic affiliations ===
UQ is a partner of McDonnell International Scholars Academy - an international network of research universities and scholars comprising 28 university partners, including Boğaziçi University, Fudan University, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Indian Institute of Science, Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, Keio University, Korea University, Makerere University, Middle East Technical University, National Taiwan University, National University of Singapore, National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University, Peking University, Reichman University, Seoul National University, State University of Campinas, Tata Institute of Social Sciences, Technion – Israel Institute of Technology, Tecnológico de Monterrey, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Tsinghua University, University of Chile, University of Ghana, University of Hong Kong, University of Indonesia, University of Tokyo, Utrecht University and Yonsei University.

==Academic profile==

===Research and publications===
Queensland has a strong research focus in science, medicine and technology. The university&#x27;s research advancement includes pioneering the development of the cervical cancer vaccines, Gardasil and Cervarix, by UQ Professor Ian Frazer.
In 2009, the Australian Cancer Research Foundation reported that UQ had taken the lead in numerous areas of cancer research.

In the Commonwealth Government&#x27;s Excellence in Research for Australia 2012 National Report, UQ&#x27;s research is rated above world standard in more broad fields than at any other Australian university (in 22 broad fields), and more UQ researchers are working in research fields that ERA has assessed as above world standard than at any other Australian university. UQ research in biomedical and clinical health sciences, technology, engineering, biological sciences, chemical sciences, environmental sciences, and physical sciences was ranked above world standard (rating 5).

In 2015, UQ is ranked by Nature Index as the research institution with the highest volume of research output in both interdisciplinary journals &quot;Nature&quot; and &quot;Science&quot; within the southern hemisphere, with approximately twofold more output than the global average.&lt;ref name=&quot;nature.com/nature/journal/v519/n7544_supp_ni/full/519S64a&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;

In 2020 Clarivate named 34 UQ professors to its list of Highly Cited Researchers.

Aside from disciplinary-focused teaching and research within the academic faculties, the university maintains a number of interdisciplinary research institutes and centres at the national, state and university levels. For example, the Asia-Pacific Centre for the Responsibility to Protect, the University of Queensland Seismology Station, Heron Island Research Station and the Institute of Modern Languages.

The University of Queensland plays a key role in Brisbane Diamantina Health Partners, Queensland&#x27;s first academic health science system. This partnership currently comprises Children&#x27;s Health Queensland, Mater Health Services, Metro North Hospital and Health Service, Metro South Health, QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute, Queensland University of Technology, The University of Queensland and the Translational Research Institute.

=== Research divisions ===
With the support from the Queensland Government, the Australian Government and major donor The Atlantic Philanthropies, The University of Queensland dedicates basic, translational and applied research via the following research-focused institutes:
* Institute for Molecular Bioscience – within the Queensland Bioscience Precinct which houses scientists from the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation and the Community for Open Antimicrobial Drug Discovery

* Translational Research Institute, which houses The University of Queensland&#x27;s Diamantina Institute, School of Medicine and the Mater Medical Research Institute
* Australian Institute for Bioengineering and Nanotechnology
* Institute for Social Science Research
* Sustainable Minerals Institute
* Global Change Institute
*Queensland Alliance for Environmental Health Science
* Queensland Alliance for Agriculture and Food Innovation
* Queensland Brain Institute
* Centre for Advanced Imaging
* Boeing Research and Technology Australia Centre
* UQ Dow Centre
===Commercialisation and entrepreneurship===
UniQuest is the main commercialisation company of The University of Queensland and specialises in global technology transfer and facilitates access for all business. UniQuest has created over 100 startups from its intellectual property portfolio, and since 2000 UniQuest and its start-ups have raised more than $700 million to take university technologies to market. UQ technologies licensed by UniQuest include UQ&#x27;s cervical cancer vaccine technology, image correction technology in magnetic resonance imaging machines, and the Triple P Positive Parenting Program.

===Libraries and databases===
The University of Queensland Library was founded in 1910. It developed from a small provincial university library into a major research library.
It consists of 11 branches.

* Architecture and Music Library (ARMUS)
* Biological Sciences Library
* Central Library
* Dorothy Hill Engineering and Sciences Library (DHESL)
* Duhig Tower
* Fryer Library
* Gatton Library (J.K. Murray Library)
* Herston Health Sciences Library
* Dutton Park Health Sciences Library (formerly &#x27;Pharmacy Australia Centre of Excellence Health Sciences Library&#x27;) 
* Rural Clinical School Library (RCS)
* Walter Harrison Law Library
===Journals and publications===

==== Publishing house ====
University of Queensland Press publishes academic works, as well as, non-fiction works and has launched the careers of noted authors.

==== Academic journals ====
The university publishes several academic journals through its various schools and faculties and in association with publishers:
*Australian Journal of Indigenous Education
*Australian Journal of Politics and History
*Hecate Journal
*LAWASIA Journal
*npj Science of Learning (in partnership with Springer Nature)
*Queensland Archaeological Research (1984–2011, now published by JCU)
*Queensland Historical Atlas
*TEMPUS: Archaeology and Material Culture Studies in Anthropology, monograph series.
*The University of Queensland Law Journal

=== Academic reputation ===

In the 2024 &quot;Aggregate Ranking of Top Universities&quot;, which measures aggregate performance across the QS, THE and ARWU rankings, the university attained a position of #53 (4th nationally).
; National publications
In the &quot;Australian Financial Review&quot; Best Universities Ranking 2024, the university was ranked #1 amongst Australian universities.

; Global publications

In the 2025 &quot;Quacquarelli Symonds&quot; World University Rankings (published 2024), the university attained a tied position of #40 (6th nationally).

In the &quot;Times Higher Education&quot; World University Rankings 2025 (published 2024), the university attained a position of #77 (5th nationally).

In the 2024 &quot;Academic Ranking of World Universities&quot;, the university attained a position of #63 (2nd nationally).

In the 2024–2025 &quot;U.S. News &amp; World Report&quot; Best Global Universities, the university attained a position of #41 (5th nationally).

In the &quot;CWTS Leiden Ranking&quot; 2024, the university attained a position of #58 (3rd nationally).

=== Student outcomes ===
The Australian Government&#x27;s QILT conducts national surveys documenting the student life cycle from enrolment through to employment. These surveys place more emphasis on criteria such as student experience, graduate outcomes and employer satisfaction than perceived reputation, research output and citation counts.

In the 2023 Employer Satisfaction Survey, graduates of the university had an overall employer satisfaction rate of 86.4%.

In the 2023 Graduate Outcomes Survey, graduates of the university had a full-time employment rate of 81.3% for undergraduates and 86.8% for postgraduates. The initial full-time salary was for undergraduates and for postgraduates.

In the 2023 Student Experience Survey, undergraduates at the university rated the quality of their entire educational experience at 77.9% meanwhile postgraduates rated their overall education experience at 76%.

==Student life==
The University of Queensland maintains a number of support and student services. The campuses at St Lucia and Gatton have Student Centres which provide information and support services.

===Student union===
The UQ Union is the peak student representation body that coordinates various student services and activities, including over 190 affiliated clubs and societies, some of whom are listed below.

* Semper Floreat – University of Queensland Student Newspaper
* University of Queensland Australian Football Club
* University of Queensland Debating Society (UQDS)
* University of Queensland Football Club
* Queensland University Regiment
* University of Queensland Rugby Club
* UQ Newman Catholic Society, which was the university&#x27;s first official student society

===Sports and athletics===

UQ Sport offers a wide range of sport, fitness and recreation opportunities at the St Lucia and Gatton campuses of the University of Queensland. Its facilities and services are open to students, staff, alumni, and the general public.

The UQ Athletics Centre maintains an Olympic standard 8 lane synthetic track and grandstand able to accommodate up to 565 spectators. The UQ Sport and Fitness Centre is a multi-purpose indoor facility.

The UQ Tennis Centre is the largest tennis centre in both Brisbane and Queensland. The UQ Playing Fields and Ovals is also managed by UQ Sport, home to a total of eight oval fields at the St Lucia campus. The majority are designated for use by particular sports including cricket, rugby and soccer. These ovals are also used for recreational activities and lunchtime social sport.

===Residential colleges===
The University of Queensland has 11 residential colleges with 10 of these located on its St Lucia campus and one on its Gatton campus. The University of Queensland Intercollege Council is the organisational and representative body for the residential colleges which coordinates sporting and cultural events and competitions.

* Cromwell College is a co-ed college founded in 1950. It is affiliated with the Uniting Church and accommodates 249 students.
* Duchesne College is a women&#x27;s only college founded in 1937 in Toowong, moving the university in 1959. It is affiliated with the Society of the Sacred Heart and accommodates 210 students.
* Emmanuel College is a co-educational college founded in 1911. It accommodates 340 students.
* Gatton Halls of Residence was established in 1897 and has 440 residential students, making it by far the largest and oldest college at the University.
* Grace College is a women&#x27;s college founded in 1970. It accommodates 181 students.
* International House is a co-educational college for International and Australian students founded in 1965.
* King&#x27;s College provides accommodation for 320 male and female students of the University.
* St John&#x27;s College is a co-educational college founded in 1911. It is administered by the Anglican Diocese of Brisbane.
* St Leo&#x27;s College is a men&#x27;s college affiliated with the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Brisbane.
* Union College is a co-educational, secular college named after the student union. It is listed on the Queensland Heritage Register.
* Women&#x27;s College is a college for female students.

===Transportation===

The university is served by the UQ St Lucia ferry wharf, the westernmost stop and terminus of the CityCat service. Translink also operates two bus stations on campus: the University of Queensland bus station at Chancellor&#x27;s Place in the west, connecting passengers to Brisbane&#x27;s inner west suburbs such as Indooroopilly, Toowong and Milton; and the UQ Lakes busway station in the east, the western terminus of the Eastern Busway, with services to Brisbane&#x27;s inner south suburbs such as Woolloongabba, Carindale and Mount Gravatt via the Eleanor Schonell Bridge. This bridge also allows pedestrians and cyclists to cross the Brisbane River, to reach Dutton Park. The closest stops of the Queensland Rail City network are the Toowong railway station, Park Road railway station, and Dutton Park railway station.

== Notable people ==
=== Notable alumni ===
UQ has produced numerous distinguished alumni. Several notable examples include recipient of a Nobel Prize in Physiology and Medicine Peter C. Doherty, recipient of the &quot;Triple Crown of Acting&quot; (having won Primetime Emmy, Tony and Academy Awards) Geoffrey Rush, triple Grammy Award-winning musician Tim Munro, former Chief Justices of Australia Sir Gerard Brennan and Sir Harry Gibbs, international not-for-profit &#x27;Hear and Say&#x27; founder and officer of the order of Australia Dimity Dornan, Principal of King&#x27;s College London Edward Byrne, singer and eurovision representative Dami Im, former CEO of Dow Chemical Andrew Liveris, the first female Governor-General of Australia Dame Quentin Bryce, former Singaporean Minister of Defence and Manpower Lee Boon Yang, consecutive Olympic gold medal-winning swimmer David Theile, highly cited epidemiologist Graham Colditz, international best-selling author Kate Morton, CEO of MS Research Australia and Harvard Club of Australia fellow Matthew Miles, and Ben Roberts-Smith, former general manager of &quot;Seven Brisbane&quot; and former Australian soldier.

==Controversies==
=== Relationship with the Confucius Institute ===

Apparent links with the Confucius Institute, a Chinese government-supported international education partnership program, have been controversial for UQ. The university offers 13 courses co-funded by the institute, mainly around Chinese arts, media and language. Critics of these courses have claimed Chinese government influence on the course content, while UQ has contested that they have been developed by university academics without external contribution.

=== Student suspensions===

On 29 May 2020, the UQ disciplinary board issued a two-year suspension to activist Drew Pavlou for alleged bullying, discrimination and harassment of university students and staff. Pavlou has contested the reasoning describing in a statement released on Twitter that his suspension was &quot;to silence [him] for [his] political activism&quot;, something denied by both the university, and the disciplinary and appeals boards. Pavlou has admitted to swearing at other students on Facebook and an online university forum. An appeal to the UQ Senate Disciplinary Appeals Committee resulted in the committee endorsing two counts of serious misconduct, however reducing the suspension from two years to one semester.

In June 2020, Pavlou launched a second lawsuit in the Supreme Court seeking 3.5 million in damages from the university for alleged defamation and a breach of contract. In September 2020, the Queensland Crime and Corruption Commission declined a request by Pavlou to investigate UQ Chancellor Peter Varghese and former Vice-Chancellor Peter Høj, citing that there was &quot;insufficient evidence to suggest anyone who was subject of the complaint had engaged in corrupt conduct.

=== Sexual assaults ===
Between 2011 and 2016 there were 38 reported cases of sexual assault and harassment on campus, resulting in 1 expulsion and 2 one-week suspensions. This included a report in 2015 where a staff member &quot;filmed someone in the shower&quot;. These figures are lower than the 2017 Australian Human Rights Commission report on sexual assault and harassment. The vice-chancellor responded &quot;there is no place for sexual assault or sexual harassment at UQ. Such behaviour is never the victim’s fault, and it will not be tolerated here&quot; and introduced a number of new initiatives to address sexual assault problems.

===Divestment===
The University of Queensland&#x27;s investment portfolio is a subject of ongoing debate. A fossil fuel divestment campaign began in 2013, led by the student group Fossil Free UQ and supported by the climate advocacy group 350.org. The goal of the campaign is &quot;to freeze all new investments and phase out all current investments in coal, petroleum and gas over the next five years because fossil fuels drive climate change&quot;. 

On 18 April 2016, students occupied the Vice-Chancellory stating, &#x27;We are asking the university to remove investment from the top 200 most polluting companies in the world&#x27; and calling for greater transparency regarding University investments. The sit-in resulted in communication with the Vice-Chancellor in May 2016.

In October 2016, Fossil Free QUT provided a report to the University Senate. For the period July 2015 to June 2016 direct fossil fuel companies comprised an average of 3.82% of UQ&#x27;s $169.2m investment portfolio. The University Senate voted not to divest from fossil fuels citing, &#x27;that divestment would make no real difference&#x27;.

In September 2013, 350.org Australia released a report &#x27;Exposing The Ties&#x27; to show &#x27;shows how key decision makers at some of the country&#x27;s leading tertiary institutions including the University of Queensland, University of Newcastle and University of New South Wales are non-executive directors or former employees of fossil fuel companies including AGL, BHP and Rio Tinto.&#x27; This showed The University of Queensland received $31million from the Australian Coal Association Research Program (ACARP) and the University&#x27;s Senate includes three non-executive directors of Senex Energy, Metro Mining and Queensland Investment Corporation, (owner of Epic Energy and Lochard Energy) and a former Queensland Resources Council board member and recipient of the Queensland Resources Council Medal.

Seven of the twenty-two members of the senate for UQ have interests in the fossil fuel industry, having ties with fossil fuel companies previously or currently.

In October 2017, ten students occupied the Chancellor&#x27;s Office deeming the 2016 Senate vote on divestment illegitimate due to conflicts of interest. The students were removed by the Queensland Police Service.

In 2020, when the Prime Minister Scott Morrison was visiting, fifty students protested at the university, damaging university&#x27;s property and the prime minister&#x27;s car. Some students came close to the prime minister and used a blowhorn with sirens.
==See also==

* AustLit, an Australian literature resource hosted by the School of Communication and Arts
* List of universities in Australia
* TC Beirne School of Law

==Footnotes==

== References ==
==Further reading==

==External links==

* The University of Queensland
* The University of Queensland Press</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q866012" start="4" end="28" title="University of Queensland" label="University of Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q875538" start="34" end="40" title="Public university" label="public"/>
<link wikidata="Q15936437" start="41" end="60" title="research university" label="research university"/>
<link wikidata="Q34932" start="82" end="90" title="Brisbane" label="Brisbane"/>
<link wikidata="Q36074" start="136" end="146" title="Queensland" label="Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2396028" start="215" end="237" title="sandstone universities" label="sandstone universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q2106448" start="335" end="338" title="edX" label="edX"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377311" start="365" end="379" title="Group of Eight (Australian universities)" label="Group of Eight"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074688" start="421" end="460" title="Association of Pacific Rim Universities" label="Association of Pacific Rim Universities"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="472" end="487" title="#St Lucia campus" label="St Lucia campus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1802491" start="535" end="543" title="St Lucia, Queensland" label="St Lucia"/>
<link wikidata="Q978583" start="562" end="596" title="Brisbane central business district" label="Brisbane central business district"/>
<link wikidata="Q19880168" start="695" end="708" title="University of Queensland Gatton Campus" label="Gatton campus"/>
<link wikidata="Q19817807" start="717" end="737" title="University of Queensland Mayne Medical School" label="Mayne Medical School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7076440" start="836" end="859" title="Ochsner Medical Center" label="Ochsner Clinical School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588" start="863" end="872" title="Louisiana" label="Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q31855" start="1070" end="1088" title="research institute" label="research institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q866012" start="1142" end="1176" title="Institute for Molecular Bioscience" label="Institute for Molecular Bioscience"/>
<link wikidata="Q66" start="1178" end="1184" title="Boeing" label="Boeing"/>
<link wikidata="Q24189122" start="1231" end="1289" title="Australian Institute for Bioengineering and Nanotechnology" label="Australian Institute for Bioengineering and Nanotechnology"/>
<link wikidata="Q855639" start="1302" end="1305" title="Dow Chemical" label="Dow"/>
<link wikidata="Q900189" start="1435" end="1446" title="HPV vaccines" label="HPV vaccine"/>
<link wikidata="Q160105" start="1461" end="1476" title="cervical cancer" label="cervical cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q87719492" start="1491" end="1507" title="COVID-19 vaccine" label="COVID-19 vaccine"/>
<link wikidata="Q124131" start="1574" end="1589" title="Superconductivity" label="superconducting"/>
<link wikidata="Q161238" start="1590" end="1593" title="Magnetic resonance imaging" label="MRI"/>
<link wikidata="Q7189700" start="1615" end="1638" title="MRI scanner" label="scanning of human limbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q339619" start="1655" end="1670" title="Nobel laureates" label="Nobel laureates"/>
<link wikidata="Q309814" start="1672" end="1688" title="Peter C. Doherty" label="Peter C. Doherty"/>
<link wikidata="Q272510" start="1693" end="1706" title="John Harsanyi" label="John Harsanyi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5389" start="1724" end="1733" title="Olympic Games" label="Olympians"/>
<link wikidata="Q6603207" start="1833" end="1839" title="List of University of Queensland people" label="alumni"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061104" start="1853" end="1892" title="University of California, San Francisco" label="University of California, San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q33537789" start="1904" end="1915" title="Sam Hawgood" label="Sam Hawgood"/>
<link wikidata="Q610669" start="1934" end="1963" title="Governor-General of Australia" label="Governor-General of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q229300" start="1969" end="1982" title="Quentin Bryce" label="Quentin Bryce"/>
<link wikidata="Q245247" start="2004" end="2030" title="King&amp;#x27;s College London" label="King&amp;#x27;s College London"/>
<link wikidata="Q5342122" start="2031" end="2039" title="Ed Byrne (academic)" label="Ed Byrne"/>
<link wikidata="Q5176312" start="2088" end="2122" title="Council for Science and Technology" label="Council for Science and Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q24572188" start="2123" end="2129" title="Max Lu" label="Max Lu"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="2131" end="2136" title="Academy Awards" label="Oscar"/>
<link wikidata="Q123737" start="2141" end="2145" title="Emmy" label="Emmy"/>
<link wikidata="Q166272" start="2160" end="2173" title="Geoffrey Rush" label="Geoffrey Rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="2182" end="2194" title="Grammy Award" label="Grammy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q3049362" start="2202" end="2211" title="Eighth Blackbird" label="Tim Munro"/>
<link wikidata="Q855639" start="2240" end="2252" title="Dow Chemical" label="Dow Chemical"/>
<link wikidata="Q83636" start="2253" end="2270" title="Andrew N. Liveris" label="Andrew N. Liveris"/>
<link wikidata="Q37156" start="2329" end="2332" title="IBM" label="IBM"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986735" start="2534" end="2550" title="Royal Commission" label="Royal Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q2959658" start="2575" end="2589" title="Charles Lilley" label="Charles Lilley"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="2885" end="2891" title="Oxford University" label="Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q35794" start="2896" end="2905" title="Cambridge University" label="Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="2978" end="2983" title="United States" label="U.S.A"/>
<link wikidata="Q975085" start="3263" end="3280" title="primary education" label="primary education"/>
<link wikidata="Q13006147" start="3317" end="3326" title="secondary education" label="secondary"/>
<link wikidata="Q9166713" start="3331" end="3340" title="tertiary education" label="technical"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495862" start="3894" end="3902" title="Congress" label="Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q686822" start="4028" end="4032" title="Bill (law)" label="Bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q13526082" start="4241" end="4248" title="Premier of Queensland" label="Premier"/>
<link wikidata="Q8013991" start="4265" end="4272" title="William Kidston" label="Kidston"/>
<link wikidata="Q21030032" start="4306" end="4319" title="Victoria Park, Brisbane" label="Victoria Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076579" start="4411" end="4414" title="Act of Parliament" label="Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q3365548" start="4418" end="4434" title="Parliament of Queensland" label="State Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224" start="4542" end="4557" title="New South Wales" label="New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q2579853" start="4639" end="4656" title="William MacGregor" label="William MacGregor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7308741" start="4721" end="4727" title="Reginald Heber Roe" label="RH Roe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2018368" start="4752" end="4772" title="Old Government House, Queensland" label="Old Government House"/>
<link wikidata="Q5544894" start="4804" end="4817" title="George Street, Brisbane" label="George Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q4860196" start="4898" end="4904" title="Bardon, Queensland" label="Bardon"/>
<link wikidata="Q747133" start="4922" end="4930" title="Government House, Brisbane" label="Fernberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q4895818" start="5210" end="5219" title="Bertram Dillon Steele" label="BD Steele"/>
<link wikidata="Q22018973" start="5234" end="5243" title="John Lundie Michie" label="JL Michie"/>
<link wikidata="Q21538939" start="5257" end="5269" title="Henry Priestley (mathematician)" label="H. Priestley"/>
<link wikidata="Q21535294" start="5289" end="5297" title="Alexander James Gibson" label="A Gibson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7308741" start="5514" end="5520" title="Reginald Heber Roe" label="RH Roe"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="5717" end="5728" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q34932" start="6006" end="6014" title="Brisbane" label="Brisbane"/>
<link wikidata="Q6779478" start="6097" end="6101" title="Mary Emelia Mayne" label="Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q56477660" start="6152" end="6173" title="Brisbane City Council" label="Brisbane City Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q899222" start="6298" end="6319" title="pitch drop experiment" label="pitch drop experiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783425" start="6335" end="6349" title="Thomas Parnell (scientist)" label="Thomas Parnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q13526082" start="6651" end="6658" title="Premiers of Queensland" label="premier"/>
<link wikidata="Q985983" start="7238" end="7244" title="Gatton, Queensland" label="Gatton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009253" start="7265" end="7272" title="Ipswich, Queensland" label="Ipswich"/>
<link wikidata="Q30325381" start="7411" end="7435" title="Queensland Greats Awards" label="Queensland Greats Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q2106448" start="7461" end="7464" title="edX" label="edX"/>
<link wikidata="Q967853" start="7526" end="7531" title="MOOCs" label="MOOCs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1802491" start="7850" end="7858" title="St Lucia, Queensland" label="St Lucia"/>
<link wikidata="Q180537" start="7886" end="7893" title="meander" label="meander"/>
<link wikidata="Q905910" start="7901" end="7915" title="Brisbane River" label="Brisbane River"/>
<link wikidata="Q985983" start="8055" end="8061" title="Gatton, Queensland" label="Gatton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5744618" start="8063" end="8070" title="Herston, Queensland" label="Herston"/>
<link wikidata="Q5317555" start="8075" end="8086" title="Dutton Park, Queensland" label="Dutton Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1802491" start="8197" end="8205" title="St Lucia, Queensland" label="St Lucia"/>
<link wikidata="Q56477660" start="8241" end="8262" title="Brisbane City Council" label="Brisbane City Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q6779478" start="8325" end="8342" title="Mary Emelia Mayne" label="Mary Emelia Mayne"/>
<link wikidata="Q5522473" start="8420" end="8433" title="Gardens Point, Brisbane" label="Gardens Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144750" start="8448" end="8483" title="Queensland University of Technology" label="Queensland University of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2471925" start="8589" end="8604" title="heritage-listed" label="heritage-listed"/>
<link wikidata="Q2098837" start="8645" end="8652" title="Helidon, Queensland" label="Helidon"/>
<link wikidata="Q13085" start="8653" end="8662" title="sandstone" label="sandstone"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8678" end="8688" title="Grotesque#In architecture" label="grotesques"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229071" start="8747" end="8753" title="Motif (visual arts)" label="motifs"/>
<link wikidata="Q17000625" start="8965" end="8993" title="Queensland Heritage Register" label="Queensland Heritage Register"/>
<link wikidata="Q7896183" start="9024" end="9059" title="University of Queensland Art Museum" label="University of Queensland Art Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q96412749" start="9489" end="9518" title="University of Queensland R.D. Milns Antiquities Museum" label="R.D. Milns Antiquities Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q18166789" start="9761" end="9783" title="University of Queensland Anthropology Museum" label="UQ Anthropology Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q19875129" start="9976" end="9981" title="Lawes, Queensland" label="Lawes"/>
<link wikidata="Q985983" start="10000" end="10018" title="Gatton, Queensland" label="Gatton, Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112627" start="10485" end="10506" title="Queensland Government" label="Queensland Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q19817807" start="10531" end="10554" title="University of Queensland Mayne Medical School" label="UQ Mayne Medical School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270958" start="10563" end="10603" title="Queensland Institute of Medical Research" label="Queensland Institute of Medical Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q5744618" start="10692" end="10699" title="Herston, Queensland" label="Herston"/>
<link wikidata="Q17006271" start="10720" end="10737" title="Queensland Health" label="Queensland Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q7373845" start="10752" end="10775" title="Royal Brisbane and Women&amp;#x27;s Hospital" label="Royal Brisbane Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q7373942" start="10777" end="10807" title="Royal Children&amp;#x27;s Hospital" label="Royal Children&amp;#x27;s Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q7373845" start="10809" end="10836" title="Royal Brisbane and Women&amp;#x27;s Hospital" label="Royal Women&amp;#x27;s Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270958" start="10845" end="10885" title="Queensland Institute of Medical Research" label="Queensland Institute of Medical Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q17000625" start="11302" end="11330" title="Queensland Heritage Register" label="Queensland Heritage Register"/>
<link wikidata="Q30315197" start="11345" end="11387" title="Marks-Hirschfeld Museum of Medical History" label="Marks-Hirschfeld Museum of Medical History"/>
<link wikidata="Q7076440" start="11871" end="11893" title="Ochsner Medical Center" label="Ochsner Medical Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q34404" start="11895" end="11906" title="New Orleans" label="New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q28218" start="11911" end="11922" title="Baton Rouge, Louisiana" label="Baton Rouge"/>
<link wikidata="Q978124" start="12167" end="12200" title="University of Southern Queensland" label="University of Southern Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061656" start="12445" end="12463" title="Interaction design" label="Interaction design"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009253" start="12492" end="12511" title="Ipswich, Queensland" label="Ipswich, Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q22032353" start="12577" end="12598" title="Workshops Rail Museum" label="Workshops Rail Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q955757" start="12603" end="12621" title="RAAF Base Amberley" label="RAAF Base Amberley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7756132" start="12698" end="12721" title="Woogaroo Lunatic Asylum" label="Woogaroo Lunatic Asylum"/>
<link wikidata="Q24089904" start="12834" end="12857" title="Ipswich Mental Hospital" label="Ipswich Mental Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q16063119" start="12987" end="13002" title="Henry Challinor" label="Henry Challinor"/>
<link wikidata="Q183560" start="13117" end="13142" title="intellectual disabilities" label="intellectual disabilities"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270510" start="13611" end="13633" title="Queen Street, Brisbane" label="Queen Street, Brisbane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146279" start="13657" end="13670" title="Customs House, Brisbane" label="Customs House"/>
<link wikidata="Q7865580" start="13679" end="13697" title="UQ Business School" label="UQ Business School"/>
<link wikidata="Q978583" start="13823" end="13857" title="Brisbane central business district" label="Brisbane central business district"/>
<link wikidata="Q7865580" start="13974" end="13992" title="UQ Business School" label="UQ Business School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1279957" start="14178" end="14191" title="Indooroopilly" label="Indooroopilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q6309912" start="14211" end="14230" title="Julius Kruttschnitt" label="Julius Kruttschnitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7271026" start="14263" end="14293" title="Queensland University Regiment" label="Queensland University Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q14979994" start="14401" end="14431" title="Sustainable Minerals Institute" label="Sustainable Minerals Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1279957" start="14493" end="14506" title="Indooroopilly" label="Indooroopilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q51719710" start="14585" end="14602" title="Frank T. M. White" label="Frank T. M. White"/>
<link wikidata="Q21536028" start="15187" end="15206" title="Julius Kruttschnitt II" label="Julius Kruttschnitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q6921438" start="15224" end="15239" title="Mount Isa Mines" label="Mount Isa Mines"/>
<link wikidata="Q7271026" start="15313" end="15343" title="Queensland University Regiment" label="Queensland University Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1279957" start="15396" end="15409" title="Indooroopilly" label="Indooroopilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q7195922" start="15578" end="15592" title="Pinjarra Hills, Queensland" label="Pinjarra Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q188989" start="15646" end="15657" title="aquaculture" label="aquaculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q24190838" start="15699" end="15728" title="Heron Island Research Station" label="Heron Island Research Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q2719889" start="15744" end="15756" title="Heron Island, Australia" label="Heron Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q705699" start="15772" end="15781" title="Gladstone, Queensland" label="Gladstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q30622480" start="16063" end="16091" title="Moreton Bay Research Station" label="Moreton Bay Research Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546321" start="16126" end="16149" title="North Stradbroke Island" label="North Stradbroke Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q14935513" start="16271" end="16278" title="Mount Nebo (Queensland)" label="Mt Nebo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020266" start="16378" end="16393" title="Charters Towers" label="Charters Towers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5154139" start="19825" end="19836" title="communication in small groups" label="small group"/>
<link wikidata="Q535741" start="19847" end="19855" title="tutorial" label="tutorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q782369" start="19883" end="19896" title="course credit" label="course credit"/>
<link wikidata="Q896267" start="20101" end="20120" title="Boğaziçi University" label="Boğaziçi University"/>
<link wikidata="Q495015" start="20122" end="20138" title="Fudan University" label="Fudan University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333303" start="20140" end="20186" title="Hong Kong University of Science and Technology" label="Hong Kong University of Science and Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q948720" start="20188" end="20215" title="Indian Institute of Science" label="Indian Institute of Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661242" start="20217" end="20254" title="Indian Institute of Technology Bombay" label="Indian Institute of Technology Bombay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194650" start="20256" end="20292" title="Indian Institute of Technology Delhi" label="Indian Institute of Technology Delhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q815432" start="20294" end="20309" title="Keio University" label="Keio University"/>
<link wikidata="Q39997" start="20311" end="20327" title="Korea University" label="Korea University"/>
<link wikidata="Q261506" start="20329" end="20348" title="Makerere University" label="Makerere University"/>
<link wikidata="Q756126" start="20350" end="20382" title="Middle East Technical University" label="Middle East Technical University"/>
<link wikidata="Q32746" start="20384" end="20410" title="National Taiwan University" label="National Taiwan University"/>
<link wikidata="Q738236" start="20412" end="20444" title="National University of Singapore" label="National University of Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q85877927" start="20446" end="20486" title="National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University" label="National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University"/>
<link wikidata="Q16952" start="20488" end="20505" title="Peking University" label="Peking University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2908845" start="20507" end="20526" title="Reichman University" label="Reichman University"/>
<link wikidata="Q39913" start="20528" end="20553" title="Seoul National University" label="Seoul National University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060678" start="20555" end="20583" title="State University of Campinas" label="State University of Campinas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2151120" start="20585" end="20618" title="Tata Institute of Social Sciences" label="Tata Institute of Social Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q333705" start="20620" end="20661" title="Technion – Israel Institute of Technology" label="Technion – Israel Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343885" start="20663" end="20687" title="Tecnológico de Monterrey" label="Tecnológico de Monterrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q15570" start="20689" end="20724" title="The Chinese University of Hong Kong" label="The Chinese University of Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q16955" start="20726" end="20745" title="Tsinghua University" label="Tsinghua University"/>
<link wikidata="Q232141" start="20747" end="20766" title="University of Chile" label="University of Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q2303765" start="20768" end="20787" title="University of Ghana" label="University of Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q15568" start="20789" end="20812" title="University of Hong Kong" label="University of Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q534515" start="20814" end="20837" title="University of Indonesia" label="University of Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7842" start="20839" end="20858" title="University of Tokyo" label="University of Tokyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q221653" start="20860" end="20878" title="Utrecht University" label="Utrecht University"/>
<link wikidata="Q39988" start="20883" end="20900" title="Yonsei University" label="Yonsei University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2643555" start="21145" end="21153" title="Gardasil" label="Gardasil"/>
<link wikidata="Q2575335" start="21158" end="21166" title="Cervarix" label="Cervarix"/>
<link wikidata="Q930011" start="21184" end="21194" title="Ian Frazer" label="Ian Frazer"/>
<link wikidata="Q180445" start="22055" end="22061" title="Nature (journal)" label="Nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q192864" start="22078" end="22085" title="Science (journal)" label="Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q27991358" start="22295" end="22304" title="Clarivate" label="Clarivate"/>
<link wikidata="Q17232838" start="22605" end="22658" title="Asia-Pacific Centre for the Responsibility to Protect" label="Asia-Pacific Centre for the Responsibility to Protect"/>
<link wikidata="Q23583496" start="22664" end="22707" title="University of Queensland Seismology Station" label="University of Queensland Seismology Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q24190838" start="22709" end="22738" title="Heron Island Research Station" label="Heron Island Research Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q6040623" start="22747" end="22776" title="Institute of Modern Languages (Queensland)" label="Institute of Modern Languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q24191258" start="22828" end="22863" title="Brisbane Diamantina Health Partners" label="Brisbane Diamantina Health Partners"/>
<link wikidata="Q4671274" start="22889" end="22919" title="Academic health science centre" label="academic health science system"/>
<link wikidata="Q6786513" start="22993" end="23014" title="Mater Health Services" label="Mater Health Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270958" start="23077" end="23118" title="QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute" label="QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144750" start="23120" end="23155" title="Queensland University of Technology" label="Queensland University of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q18353972" start="23194" end="23226" title="Translational Research Institute (Australia)" label="Translational Research Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112627" start="23282" end="23303" title="Queensland Government" label="Queensland Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991162" start="23309" end="23330" title="Australian Government" label="Australian Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q4816508" start="23347" end="23374" title="The Atlantic Philanthropies" label="The Atlantic Philanthropies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1117048" start="23618" end="23678" title="Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation" label="Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q19872444" start="23687" end="23734" title="Community for Open Antimicrobial Drug Discovery" label="Community for Open Antimicrobial Drug Discovery"/>
<link wikidata="Q18353972" start="23738" end="23770" title="Translational Research Institute (Australia)" label="Translational Research Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q24189122" start="23905" end="23963" title="Australian Institute for Bioengineering and Nanotechnology" label="Australian Institute for Bioengineering and Nanotechnology"/>
<link wikidata="Q14979994" start="24006" end="24036" title="Sustainable Minerals Institute" label="Sustainable Minerals Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q39052981" start="24177" end="24203" title="Queensland Brain Institute" label="Queensland Brain Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q66" start="24236" end="24242" title="Boeing" label="Boeing"/>
<link wikidata="Q855639" start="24289" end="24292" title="Dow Chemical" label="Dow"/>
<link wikidata="Q7896192" start="24951" end="24983" title="University of Queensland Library" label="University of Queensland Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q7896194" start="25623" end="25653" title="University of Queensland Press" label="University of Queensland Press"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25916" end="25958" title="Australian Journal of Indigenous Education" label="Australian Journal of Indigenous Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q4824354" start="25960" end="26002" title="Australian Journal of Politics and History" label="Australian Journal of Politics and History"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26004" end="26018" title="Hecate Journal" label="Hecate Journal"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26020" end="26035" title="LAWASIA Journal" label="LAWASIA Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q96388294" start="26037" end="26060" title="npj Science of Learning" label="npj Science of Learning"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26100" end="26134" title="Queensland Archaeological Research" label="Queensland Archaeological Research"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26170" end="26197" title="Queensland Historical Atlas" label="Queensland Historical Atlas"/>
<link wikidata="Q18166789" start="26199" end="26263" title="University of Queensland Anthropology Museum" label="TEMPUS: Archaeology and Material Culture Studies in Anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7896190" start="26288" end="26324" title="University of Queensland Law Journal" label="University of Queensland Law Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1809545" start="26584" end="26649" title="Australian Financial Review" label="&amp;quot;Australian Financial Review&amp;quot; Best Universities Ranking"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790510" start="26760" end="26780" title="QS World University Rankings" label="Quacquarelli Symonds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790510" start="26787" end="26812" title="QS World University Rankings" label="World University Rankings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318318" start="26904" end="26964" title="Times Higher Education World University Rankings" label="&amp;quot;Times Higher Education&amp;quot; World University Rankings"/>
<link wikidata="Q478743" start="27061" end="27111" title="Academic Ranking of World Universities" label="&amp;quot;Academic Ranking of World Universities&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q25143635" start="27191" end="27256" title="U.S. News &amp;amp; World Report Best Global Universities Ranking" label="&amp;quot;U.S. News &amp;amp; World Report&amp;quot; Best Global Universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q17275094" start="27326" end="27357" title="CWTS Leiden Ranking" label="&amp;quot;CWTS Leiden Ranking&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7896195" start="28564" end="28572" title="UQ Union" label="UQ Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q7449775" start="28756" end="28770" title="Semper Floreat" label="Semper Floreat"/>
<link wikidata="Q7896184" start="28818" end="28867" title="University of Queensland Australian Football Club" label="University of Queensland Australian Football Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q7896187" start="28870" end="28911" title="University of Queensland Debating Society" label="University of Queensland Debating Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q7896188" start="28921" end="28959" title="University of Queensland Football Club (UQFC)" label="University of Queensland Football Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q7271026" start="28962" end="28992" title="Queensland University Regiment" label="Queensland University Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551359" start="28995" end="29030" title="University of Queensland Rugby Club" label="University of Queensland Rugby Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q3339127" start="29033" end="29059" title="Newman Center" label="UQ Newman Catholic Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q2680291" start="30036" end="30055" title="residential college" label="residential college"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315477" start="30139" end="30184" title="University of Queensland Intercollege Council" label="University of Queensland Intercollege Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315477" start="30328" end="30344" title="Cromwell College" label="Cromwell College"/>
<link wikidata="Q523620" start="30407" end="30421" title="Uniting Church" label="Uniting Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315477" start="30455" end="30471" title="Duchesne College" label="Duchesne College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1589649" start="30522" end="30529" title="Toowong, Queensland" label="Toowong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092656" start="30588" end="30615" title="Society of the Sacred Heart" label="Society of the Sacred Heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q14935412" start="30649" end="30665" title="Emmanuel College, University of Queensland" label="Emmanuel College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315477" start="30743" end="30768" title="Gatton Halls of Residence, University of Queensland" label="Gatton Halls of Residence"/>
<link wikidata="Q23091869" start="30896" end="30909" title="Grace College, University of Queensland" label="Grace College"/>
<link wikidata="Q14935447" start="30985" end="31004" title="International House, University of Queensland" label="International House"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315477" start="31094" end="31113" title="King&amp;#x27;s College, University of Queensland" label="King&amp;#x27;s College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315477" start="31191" end="31213" title="St John&amp;#x27;s College, University of Queensland" label="St John&amp;#x27;s College"/>
<link wikidata="Q4763460" start="31285" end="31313" title="Anglican Diocese of Brisbane" label="Anglican Diocese of Brisbane"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315477" start="31317" end="31338" title="St Leo&amp;#x27;s College, University of Queensland" label="St Leo&amp;#x27;s College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364209" start="31383" end="31421" title="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Brisbane" label="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Brisbane"/>
<link wikidata="Q18754855" start="31425" end="31438" title="Union College, University of Queensland" label="Union College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7896195" start="31492" end="31505" title="UQ Union" label="student union"/>
<link wikidata="Q17000625" start="31527" end="31555" title="Queensland Heritage Register" label="Queensland Heritage Register"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315477" start="31559" end="31579" title="The Women&amp;#x27;s College, University of Queensland" label="Women&amp;#x27;s College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7896196" start="31669" end="31692" title="UQ St Lucia ferry wharf" label="UQ St Lucia ferry wharf"/>
<link wikidata="Q97194713" start="31735" end="31742" title="CityCat" label="CityCat"/>
<link wikidata="Q7833625" start="31752" end="31761" title="TransLink (South East Queensland)" label="Translink"/>
<link wikidata="Q7896197" start="31808" end="31844" title="University of Queensland bus station" label="University of Queensland bus station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1279957" start="31953" end="31966" title="Indooroopilly, Queensland" label="Indooroopilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1589649" start="31968" end="31975" title="Toowong" label="Toowong"/>
<link wikidata="Q3314513" start="31980" end="31986" title="Milton, Queensland" label="Milton"/>
<link wikidata="Q14935586" start="31996" end="32019" title="UQ Lakes busway station" label="UQ Lakes busway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q5330026" start="32061" end="32075" title="Eastern Busway, Brisbane" label="Eastern Busway"/>
<link wikidata="Q8033858" start="32138" end="32151" title="Woolloongabba" label="Woolloongabba"/>
<link wikidata="Q2598852" start="32153" end="32162" title="Carindale, Queensland" label="Carindale"/>
<link wikidata="Q2534564" start="32167" end="32180" title="Mount Gravatt, Queensland" label="Mount Gravatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5354386" start="32189" end="32212" title="Eleanor Schonell Bridge" label="Eleanor Schonell Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5317555" start="32301" end="32312" title="Dutton Park, Queensland" label="Dutton Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q7283988" start="32339" end="32367" title="Queensland Rail City network" label="Queensland Rail City network"/>
<link wikidata="Q7824341" start="32376" end="32399" title="Toowong railway station" label="Toowong railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q7137982" start="32401" end="32426" title="Park Road railway station" label="Park Road railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q5317557" start="32432" end="32459" title="Dutton Park railway station" label="Dutton Park railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q80061" start="32601" end="32639" title="Nobel Prize in Physiology and Medicine" label="Nobel Prize in Physiology and Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q309814" start="32640" end="32656" title="Peter C. Doherty" label="Peter C. Doherty"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32681" end="32703" title="List of people who have won Academy, Emmy, Grammy, and Tony Awards#Three competitive awards" label="Triple Crown of Acting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044427" start="32722" end="32736" title="Primetime Emmy Award" label="Primetime Emmy"/>
<link wikidata="Q191874" start="32738" end="32742" title="Tony Award" label="Tony"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="32747" end="32761" title="Academy Awards" label="Academy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q166272" start="32763" end="32776" title="Geoffrey Rush" label="Geoffrey Rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="32785" end="32797" title="Grammy Award" label="Grammy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q3409185" start="32833" end="32860" title="Chief Justice of Australia" label="Chief Justices of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778295" start="32865" end="32879" title="Gerard Brennan" label="Gerard Brennan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5669075" start="32888" end="32899" title="Harry Gibbs" label="Harry Gibbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q35498130" start="33001" end="33014" title="Dimity Dornan" label="Dimity Dornan"/>
<link wikidata="Q245247" start="33029" end="33055" title="King&amp;#x27;s College London" label="King&amp;#x27;s College London"/>
<link wikidata="Q5342122" start="33056" end="33068" title="Ed Byrne (academic)" label="Edward Byrne"/>
<link wikidata="Q15126651" start="33107" end="33114" title="Dami Im" label="Dami Im"/>
<link wikidata="Q855639" start="33130" end="33142" title="Dow Chemical" label="Dow Chemical"/>
<link wikidata="Q83636" start="33143" end="33157" title="Andrew Liveris" label="Andrew Liveris"/>
<link wikidata="Q610669" start="33176" end="33205" title="Governor-General of Australia" label="Governor-General of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q229300" start="33211" end="33224" title="Quentin Bryce" label="Quentin Bryce"/>
<link wikidata="Q5015558" start="33233" end="33253" title="Cabinet of Singapore" label="Singaporean Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q6513114" start="33278" end="33291" title="Lee Boon Yang" label="Lee Boon Yang"/>
<link wikidata="Q636830" start="33305" end="33323" title="Olympic medal" label="Olympic gold medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1176824" start="33340" end="33352" title="David Theile" label="David Theile"/>
<link wikidata="Q5592728" start="33382" end="33396" title="Graham Colditz" label="Graham Colditz"/>
<link wikidata="Q465890" start="33432" end="33443" title="Kate Morton" label="Kate Morton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4886369" start="33530" end="33547" title="Ben Roberts-Smith" label="Ben Roberts-Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q4836719" start="33581" end="33595" title="Seven Brisbane" label="Seven Brisbane"/>
<link wikidata="Q834650" start="33727" end="33746" title="Confucius Institute" label="Confucius Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q91732925" start="34275" end="34286" title="Drew Pavlou" label="Drew Pavlou"/>
<link wikidata="Q918" start="34446" end="34453" title="Twitter" label="Twitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5185245" start="35097" end="35139" title="Crime and Corruption Commission" label="Queensland Crime and Corruption Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q7177475" start="35198" end="35212" title="Peter Varghese" label="Peter Varghese"/>
<link wikidata="Q15543511" start="35240" end="35249" title="Peter Høj" label="Peter Høj"/>
<link wikidata="Q4056090" start="35689" end="35723" title="Australian Human Rights Commission" label="Australian Human Rights Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q19903988" start="36138" end="36160" title="fossil fuel divestment" label="fossil fuel divestment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091619" start="36269" end="36276" title="350.org" label="350.org"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="36459" end="36473" title="climate change" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q531285" start="37387" end="37410" title="University of Newcastle (Australia)" label="University of Newcastle"/>
<link wikidata="Q734764" start="37415" end="37444" title="University of New South Wales" label="University of New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q292374" start="37528" end="37531" title="AGL Energy" label="AGL"/>
<link wikidata="Q625713" start="37533" end="37536" title="BHP" label="BHP"/>
<link wikidata="Q821293" start="37541" end="37550" title="Rio Tinto Group" label="Rio Tinto"/>
<link wikidata="Q4824001" start="37628" end="37655" title="Australian Coal Association" label="Australian Coal Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q17032158" start="37756" end="37768" title="Senex Energy" label="Senex Energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q18383271" start="37787" end="37820" title="Queensland Investment Corporation" label="Queensland Investment Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270980" start="38326" end="38351" title="Queensland Police Service" label="Queensland Police Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q4822839" start="38627" end="38634" title="AustLit" label="AustLit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553106" start="38719" end="38752" title="List of universities in Australia" label="List of universities in Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q14935568" start="38755" end="38778" title="TC Beirne School of Law" label="TC Beirne School of Law"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="192821" wikidata="Q842626" url="?curid=192821" title="List of official languages">
<text>This is a list of official, or otherwise administratively-recognized, languages of sovereign countries, regions, and supra-national institutions. The article also lists lots of languages which have no administrative mandate as an official language, generally describing these as &quot;de facto&quot; official languages.

== Official languages of sovereign countries, wholly or partly ==

=== A ===
Abkhaz:
* Abkhazia (with Russian; independence is disputed)

Afar:
* Djibouti (with Arabic, French, Somali)
* Ethiopia (with Amharic, Oromo, Somali, Tigrinya)

Afrikaans:
* Namibia (with English and German)
* South Africa (with English, Ndebele, Northern Sotho, Sotho, South African Sign Language,Swati, Tsonga, Tswana, Venda, Xhosa, Zulu)

Aja-Gbe:
* Benin (a national language along with Anii, Bariba, Biali, Boko, Dendi, Fon-Gbe, Foodo, Fula, Gen-Gbe, Lukpa, Mbelime, Nateni, Tammari, Waama, Waci-Gbe, Yobe, Yom, Xwela-Gbe, Yoruba, the official language is French)

Akan (Akuapem Twi, Asante Twi, Fante):
* Ghana (a government-sponsored language along with Ewe-Gbe, Dagaare, Dagbani, Dangme, Ga, Gonja, Kasem, Nzema, the official language is English)

Albanian:
* Albania
* Kosovo (with Serbian)
* North Macedonia (with Macedonian)

Amharic:
* Ethiopia (with Afar, Oromo, Somali, Tigrinya)

Anii:
* Benin (a national language along with Aja-Gbe, Bariba, Biali, Boko, Dendi, Fon-Gbe, Foodo, Fula, Gen-Gbe, Lukpa, Mbelime, Nateni, Tammari, Waama, Waci-Gbe, Yobe, Yom, Xwela-Gbe, Yoruba, the official languages is French)

Arabic (see also List of countries where Arabic is an official language):
* Algeria (with Berber)
* Bahrain
* Chad (with French)
* Comoros (with French and Comorian)
* Djibouti (with French)
* Egypt
* Eritrea (with Tigrinya and English)
* Iraq (with Kurdish)
*Israel (with Hebrew)
* Jordan
* Kuwait
* Lebanon
* Libya
* Mali (with Tuareg and French)
* Mauritania (with several national languages: Fula, Soninke, Wolof)
* Morocco (with Berber)
* Niger (with French, Buduma, Fula, Gourmanché, Hausa, Kanuri, Songhay-Zarma, Tamasheq, Tasawaq, Tebu)
* Oman 
* Palestine
* Qatar
* Saudi Arabia
* Somaliland (with English and Somali; independence is disputed)
* Somalia (with Somali)
* Sudan (with English)
* Syria
* Tunisia
* United Arab Emirates
* Yemen

Araona:
* Bolivia (with Spanish, Quechua, Guaraní and 33 other languages)

Armenian:
* Armenia
* Artsakh (independence disputed)

Assamese:
* India (with 21 other regional languages, and with English as a link language)

Aymara:
* Bolivia (with Spanish, Quechua, Guaraní and 33 other languages)
* Peru (with Spanish and Quechua and other languages)

Azerbaijani:
* Azerbaijan

=== B ===

Balanta:
* Senegal (a national language along with Bassari, Bedik, Fula, Hassaniya, Jola, Mandinka, Mandjak, Mankanya, Noon, Safen, Serer, Soninke, Wolof, the official language is French)

Bambara:
* see &quot;Manding&quot;
* Mali (a national language along with Bomu, Bozo, Dogon, Fula, Mamara, Songhay, Soninke, Syenara, Tamasheq, the official language is French)

Bariba:
* Benin (a national language along with Aja-Gbe, Anii, Biali, Boko, Dendi, Fon-Gbe, Foodo, Fula, Gen-Gbe, Lukpa, Mbelime, Nateni, Tammari, Waama, Waci-Gbe, Yobe, Yom, Xwela-Gbe, Yoruba, the official languages is French)

Basque:
* Co-official in some autonomous communities of Spain:
** Basque Country
** Navarre; both with Spanish

Bassari:
* Senegal (a national language along with Balanta, Bedik, Fula, Hassaniya, Jola, Mandinka, Mandjak, Mankanya, Noon, Safen, Serer, Soninke, Wolof, the official language is French)

Bedik:
* Senegal (a national language along with Balanta, Bassari, Fula, Hassaniya, Jola, Mandinka, Mandjak, Mankanya, Noon, Safen, Serer, Soninke, Wolof, the official language is French)

Belarusian:
* Belarus (with Russian)

Bengali:
* Bangladesh
* India (with 21 other regional languages, and with English as a link language)
* Sierra Leone

Berber:
* Algeria (with Arabic)
* Morocco (with Arabic)

Biali:
* Benin (a national language along with Aja-Gbe, Anii, Bariba, Boko, Dendi, Fon-Gbe, Foodo, Fula, Gen-Gbe, Lukpa, Mbelime, Nateni, Tammari, Waama, Waci-Gbe, Yobe, Yom, Xwela-Gbe, Yoruba, the official languages is French)

Bislama:
* Vanuatu (with English and French)

Boko:
* Benin (a national language along with Aja-Gbe, Anii, Bariba, Biali, Dendi, Fon-Gbe, Foodo, Fula, Gen-Gbe, Lukpa, Mbelime, Nateni, Tammari, Waama, Waci-Gbe, Yobe, Yom, Xwela-Gbe, Yoruba, the official languages is French)

Bomu:
* Mali (a national language along with Bambara, Bozo, Dogon, Fula, Mamara, Songhay, Soninke, Syenara, Tamasheq, the official language is French)

Bosnian:
* Bosnia and Herzegovina (with Croatian, Serbian) (&quot;de facto&quot;)

Bozo:
* Mali (a national language along with Bambara, Bomu, Dogon, Fula, Mamara, Songhay, Soninke, Syenara, Tamasheq, the official language is French)

Buduma:
* Niger (with French, Arabic, Fula, Gourmanché, Hausa, Kanuri, Songhay-Zarma, Tamasheq, Tasawaq, Tebu)

Bulgarian:
* Bulgaria

Burmese:
* Myanmar (formerly Burma)

=== C ===
Cantonese:
* Hong Kong (using Traditional Chinese characters); with Mandarin Chinese and English 
* Macau (using Traditional Chinese characters); with Mandarin Chinese and Portuguese

Catalan:
* Andorra, 
* Co-official in some autonomous communities of Spain:
** Balearic Islands
** Catalonia
** Valencian Community; all with Spanish

Chinese, Mandarin:
* Mainland China (using Simplified Chinese characters)
* Macau (using both Simplified Chinese characters and Traditional Chinese characters)
* Hong Kong (using both Simplified Chinese characters and Traditional Chinese characters; with Cantonese and English)
* Singapore (using Simplified Chinese characters; with English, Malay and Tamil)
* Taiwan (using Traditional Chinese characters; other official languages of Taiwan are Formosan languages, Taiwanese Hokkien, Hakka and Taiwan Sign Language.)

Chichewa:
* Malawi (with English)
* Zimbabwe (with English, Shona, Ndebele, Chirbawe, Kalanga, &quot;Koisan&quot; (Tshuwau), Nambya, Ndau, Zimbabwean sign language, Tonga, Tswana, Venda, Xhosa)

Chirbawe (Sena):
* see &quot;Sena&quot;

Comorian
* Comoros (with Arabic and French)
Corsican :

* France (with French)
* Corsica

Croatian:
* Croatia
* Bosnia and Herzegovina (with Bosnian and Serbian) (&quot;de facto&quot;)

Czech:
* Czech Republic
* Slovakia (legislation states that a person using Czech language at a Slovak institution must be treated as if using Slovak language)

=== D ===
Dagaare:
* Ghana (a government-sponsored language along with Akan (Akuapem Twi, Ashante Twi, Fante), Ewe-Gbe, Dagbani, Dangme, Ga, Gonja, Kasem, Nzema, the official language is English)

Dagbani:
* Ghana (a government-sponsored language along with Akan (Akuapem Twi, Ashante Twi, Fante), Ewe-Gbe, Dagaare, Dangme, Ga, Gonja, Kasem, Nzema, the official language is English)

Dangme
* Ghana (a government-sponsored language along with Akan (Akuapem Twi, Ashante Twi, Fante), Ewe-Gbe, Dagaare, Dagbani, Ga, Gonja, Kasem, Nzema, the official language is English)

Danish:
* Denmark
* Faroe Islands (with Faroese)

Dari:
* Afghanistan (a local variant of Persian, but defined as &quot;Dari&quot; in the Afghan constitution; together with Pashto)

Dendi:
* Benin (a national language along with Aja-Gbe, Anii, Bariba, Biali, Boko, Fon-Gbe, Foodo, Fula, Gen-Gbe, Lukpa, Mbelime, Nateni, Tammari, Waama, Waci-Gbe, Yobe, Yom, Xwela-Gbe, Yoruba, the official languages is French)

Dhivehi:
* Maldives

Dioula:
* see &quot;Manding&quot;
* Burkina Faso (a national language along with Fula, Mossi and other languages, the official language is French)

Dogon:
* Mali (a national language along with Bambara, Bomu, Bozo, Fula, Mamara, Songhay, Soninke, Syenara, Tamasheq, the official language is French)

Dutch:
* Belgium (official language with French and German)
:sole official language in:
:*Flanders
:co-official language in:
:*Brussels (with French)
* The Netherlands (sole official language in every province except Friesland, where West Frisian is co-official and the BES islands, where Papiamento and English are co-official)
** Aruba (with Papiamento)
** Curaçao (with Papiamento and English)
** Sint Maarten (with English)
* Suriname

Dzongkha:
* Bhutan

=== E ===

English (see also List of countries where English is an official language):
* Antigua and Barbuda
* Australia
* The Bahamas
* Barbados
* Belize
* Botswana (but the national language is Tswana)
* Cameroon (with French)
* Canada (with French)
** Ontario &quot;(de facto; with limited French)&quot;
** Quebec (with French)
** Nova Scotia &quot;(de facto; with limited French &amp; Gaelic)&quot;
** New Brunswick (with French)
** Manitoba (with French)
** British Columbia &quot;(de facto; with limited French)&quot;
** Prince Edward Island &quot;(de facto; with limited French)&quot;
** Saskatchewan &quot;(de facto; with limited French)&quot;
** Alberta &quot;(de facto; with limited French)&quot;
** Newfoundland and Labrador &quot;(de facto; with limited French, Innu-aimun, &amp; Inuttut)&quot;
** Northwest Territories (with 10 others)
** Yukon (with French)
** Nunavut (with Inuit &amp; French)
* Curaçao (with Dutch and Papiamento)
* Dominica
* England
* Eritrea (with Tigrinya and Arabic)
* Eswatini (with Swati)
* Fiji (with Bau Fijian and Fiji Hindi)
* Gambia
* Ghana (with Akan (Akuapem Twi, Ashante Twi, Fante), Ewe-Gbe, Dagaare, Dagbani, Dangme, Ga, Gonja, Kasem, Nzema)
* Grenada
* Guyana
* Hong Kong (with Cantonese and Mandarin Chinese)
* India (with 22 regional languages)
* Republic of Ireland (&quot;second official&quot;; with Irish)
* Jamaica
* Kenya (with Swahili)
* Kiribati
* Lesotho (with Sotho)
* Liberia
* Malawi (with Chichewa)
* Malaysia (de facto official language with Malay; still serves as official and national language with Malay in Sabah and Sarawak)
* Malta (with Maltese)
* Marshall Islands (with Marshallese)
* Mauritius (with French)
* Micronesia, Federated States of
* Namibia (Afrikaans, German, and Oshiwambo are spoken regionally)
* Nauru (with Nauruan)
* New Zealand (with Māori and New Zealand Sign Language)
* Nigeria (with Hausa, Igbo and Yoruba)
* Pakistan (with Urdu as the national language)
* Palau (with Palauan)
* Papua New Guinea (with Tok Pisin and Hiri Motu)
* Philippines (with Filipino)
* Rwanda (with French and Kinyarwanda)
* Saint Kitts and Nevis
* Saint Lucia
* Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
* Samoa (with Samoan)
* Seychelles (with Seychellois Creole and French)
* Sierra Leone
* Singapore (with Chinese, Malay, Tamil)
* Sint Maarten (with Dutch)
* Solomon Islands
* Somaliland (with Arabic and Somali; independence is disputed)
* South Africa (with Afrikaans, Ndebele, Northern Sotho, Sotho, Swati, Tsonga, Tswana, Venda, Xhosa, Zulu)
* South Sudan
* Sri Lanka (with Sinhala and Tamil)
* Sudan (with Arabic)
* Tanzania (with Swahili)
* Tonga (with Tongan)
* Trinidad and Tobago
* Tuvalu (with Tuvaluan)
* Uganda (with Swahili)
* United Kingdom (de facto; individual countries in the UK have statutorily defined official languages, but the UK as a whole does not)
* United States (de facto; the United States has no administratively mandated official language)
* Vanuatu (with Bislama and French)
* Zambia
* Zimbabwe (with Shona, Ndebele, Chewa, Chirbawe, Kalanga, &quot;Koisan&quot; (Tshuwau), Nambya, Ndau, Zimbabwean sign language, Tonga, Tswana, Venda, Xhosa)

Estonian:
* Estonia

Ewe-Gbe:
* Ghana (a government-sponsored language along with Akan (Akuapem Twi, Ashante Twi, Fante), Dagaare, Dagbani, Dangme Ga, Gonja, Kasem, Nzema, the official language is English)
* Togo (with French and Kabye)

=== F ===
Faroese:

* Faroe Islands
* Denmark

Fijian:
* Fiji (with English and Fiji Hindi)

Filipino:
* Philippines (with English)

Finnish:
* Finland (with Swedish)

Fon-Gbe:
* Benin (a national language along with Aja-Gbe, Anii, Bariba, Biali, Boko, Dendi, Fon-Gbe, Foodo, Fula, Gen-Gbe, Lukpa, Mbelime, Nateni, Tammari, Waama, Waci-Gbe, Yobe, Yom, Xwela-Gbe, Yoruba, the official languages is French)

Foodo:
* Benin (a national language along with Aja-Gbe, Anii, Bariba, Biali, Boko, Dendi, Fon-Gbe, Fula, Gen-Gbe, Lukpa, Mbelime, Nateni, Tammari, Waama, Waci-Gbe, Yobe, Yom, Xwela-Gbe, Yoruba, the official languages is French)

Formosan:
* Taiwan (other national languages of Taiwan are Mandarin, Taiwanese Hokkien, Hakka and Taiwan Sign Language.)

French (see also List of countries where French is an official language):
* Belgium (official language with Dutch and German)
:sole official language in:
:* Wallonia (except for the Canton of Eupen and the Canton of Sankt Vith, where German is the official language)
:co-official language in:
:*Brussels (with Dutch)
* Benin (with several national languages: Aja-Gbe, Anii, Bariba, Biali, Boko, Dendi, Fon-Gbe, Foodo, Fula, Gen-Gbe, Lukpa, Mbelime, Nateni, Tammari, Waama, Waci-Gbe, Yobe, Yom, Xwela-Gbe, Yoruba)
* Burkina Faso (with several national languages including Dioula, Fula, Mossi)
* Burundi (with Kirundi)
* Cameroon (with English)
* Canada (with English)
** Quebec &quot;(with limited English)&quot;
** New Brunswick (with English)
** Manitoba (with English)
** Northwest Territories (with 10 others)
** Yukon (with English)
** Nunavut (with Inuit &amp; English)
* Central African Republic (with Sango)
* Chad (with Arabic)
* Comoros (with Arabic and Comorian)
* Ivory Coast
* Democratic Republic of the Congo
* Djibouti (with Arabic)
* Equatorial Guinea (with Spanish and Portuguese)
* France
** French Guiana
** French Polynesia
** French Loyalty Islands
** French Southern and Antarctic Lands
** Scattered islands in the Indian Ocean
** Guadeloupe
** Martinique
** Mayotte
** New Caledonia
** Réunion
** Saint Barthélemy
** Saint Martin
** Saint Pierre and Miquelon
** Wallis and Futuna
** (Adélie Land)
** (Clipperton Island)
* Gabon
* Guernsey (with English)
* Guinea (with several national languages: Fula, Kissi, Kpelle, Malinke, Susu, Toma, Oniyan, Wamey)
* Haiti (with Haitian Creole)
* Italy 
** Aosta Valley (with Italian)
* Jersey (with English)
* Luxembourg (with German and Luxembourgish)
* Madagascar (with Malagasy)
* Mali (with several national languages: Bambara, Bomu, Bozo, Dogon, Fula, Mamara, Songhay, Soninke, Syenara, Tamasheq)
* Mauritius (with English)
* Monaco
* Niger (with Arabic, Buduma, Fula, Gourmanché, Hausa, Kanuri, Songhay-Zarma, Tamasheq, Tasawaq, Tebu)
* Rwanda (with English and Kinyarwanda)
* Senegal (with several national languages: Balanta, Bassari, Bedik, Fula, Hassaniya, Jola, Mandinka, Mandjak, Mankanya, Noon, Safen, Serer, Soninke, Wolof)
* Seychelles (with Seychellois Creole and English)
* Switzerland (&quot;National and official language&quot; with German, Italian, and (Romansh))
:&quot;Official language&quot; in:
:*Canton of Geneva
:*Canton of Vaud
:*Canton of Jura
:*Canton of Neuchâtel
:*Canton of Fribourg (with German)
:*Canton of Bern (with German)
:*Canton of Valais (with German)
* Togo (with Ewe-Gbe and Kabye)
* Vanuatu (with Bislama and English)

Fula:
* Benin (a national language along with Aja-Gbe, Anii, Bariba, Biali, Boko, Dendi, Fon-Gbe, Foodo, Gen-Gbe, Lukpa, Mbelime, Nateni, Tammari, Waama, Waci-Gbe, Yobe, Yom, Xwela-Gbe, Yoruba, the official languages is French)
* Burkina Faso (a national language along with Dioula, Mossi and other languages, the official language is French)
* Guinea (a national language along with Kissi, Kpelle, Malinke, Susu, Toma, Oniyan, Wamey, the official language is French)
* Mali (a national language along with Bambara, Bomu, Bozo, Dogon, Mamara, Songhay, Soninke, Syenara, Tamasheq, the official language is French)
* Mauritania (a national language along with Soninke, Wolof, the official language is Arabic)
* Niger (with French, Arabic, Buduma, Gourmanché, Hausa, Kanuri, Songhay-Zarma, Tamasheq, Tasawaq, Tebu)
* Senegal (a national language along with Balanta, Bassari, Bedik, Hassaniya, Jola, Mandinka, Mandjak, Mankanya, Noon, Safen, Serer, Soninke, Wolof, the official language is French)

=== G ===
Ga:
* Ghana (a government-sponsored language along with Akan (Akuapem Twi, Ashante Twi, Fante), Ewe-Gbe, Dagaare, Dagbani, Dangme, Gonja, Kasem, Nzema, the official language is English)

Gàidhlig:
* Scotland (along with English and Scots)

Gbe:
* see &quot;Aja-Gbe&quot;, &quot;Ewe-Gbe&quot;, &quot;Fon-Gbe&quot;, &quot;Gen-Gbe&quot;, &quot;Waci-Gbe&quot;, &quot;Xwela-Gbe&quot;

Gen-Gbe:
* Benin (a national language along with Aja-Gbe, Anii, Bariba, Biali, Boko, Dendi, Fon-Gbe, Foodo, Fula, Lukpa, Mbelime, Nateni, Tammari, Waama, Waci-Gbe, Yobe, Yom, Xwela-Gbe, Yoruba, the official languages is French)

Georgian:
* Georgia
* South Ossetia (with Ossetian and Russian; independence is disputed)
* Abkhazia (with Georgian according to the Georgian constitution; independence is disputed)

German:
* Austria (with Hungarian, Burgenland Croatian, and Slovene)
* Belgium (official language with Dutch and French)
:sole official language in:
:* Canton of Eupen
:* Canton of Sankt Vith
* Brazil 
** Antônio Carlos
** Santa Maria do Herval
** Domingos Martins
** Laranja da Terra
** Pancas
** Santa Maria de Jetibá
** Vila Pavão
** Pomerode
** Canguçu
* Germany
* Liechtenstein
* Luxembourg (with French and Luxembourgish)
* Italy (in South Tyrol)
* Namibia (with Afrikaans and English)
* Switzerland (&quot;National and official language&quot; with French, Italian, and (Romansh))

:&quot;Official language&quot; in 21 cantons:
:*17 of the 26 cantons (monolingually German)
:*Canton of Grisons (with Italian and Romansh)
:*Canton of Bern (with French)
:*Canton of Fribourg (with French)
:*Canton of Valais (with French)

Gonja:
* Ghana (a government-sponsored language along with Akan (Akuapem Twi, Ashante Twi, Fante), Ewe-Gbe, Dagaare, Dagbani, Dangme, Ga, Kasem, Nzema, the official language is English)

Gourmanché
* Niger (with French, Arabic, Buduma, Fula, Hausa, Kanuri, Songhay-Zarma, Tamasheq, Tasawaq, Tebu)

Greek:
* Greece
* Cyprus (with Turkish)
* Albania (Greek Minority Zone of Himara, Finiq and Dervican with Albanian)

Guaraní:
* Paraguay (with Spanish)
* Bolivia (with Spanish, Quechua, Aymara and 33 other languages)

Gujarati:
* India

=== H ===

Haitian Creole:
* Haiti (with French)

Hakka:
* Taiwan (other national languages of Taiwan are Mandarin, Taiwanese Hokkien, Formosan languages and Taiwan Sign Language.)

Hassaniya:
* Senegal (a national language along with Balanta, Bassari, Bedik, Fula, Jola, Mandinka, Mandjak, Mankanya, Noon, Safen, Serer, Soninke, Wolof, the official language is French)

Hausa:
* Niger (with French, Arabic, Buduma, Fula, Gourmanché, Kanuri, Songhay-Zarma, Tamasheq, Tasawaq, Tebu)
* Nigeria (with English, Igbo and Yoruba)

Hebrew:
* Israel (with Arabic)

Hindi:
* India (&quot;official language of the Union&quot;; with English; 21 other regional languages namely Assamese, Bengali, Bodo, Dogri, Gujarati, Kannada, Kashmiri, Konkani, Maithili, Malayalam, Meitei (Manipuri), Marathi, Nepali, Odia, Punjabi, Sanskrit, Santhali, Sindhi, Tamil, Telugu, Urdu)
* Fiji (with English and Bau Fijian; known constitutionally as &quot;Fiji Hindi&quot; as an umbrella term to cover Standard Hindi, Urdu, as well as other Hindustani dialects)

Hiri Motu:
* Papua New Guinea (with English and Tok Pisin)

Hungarian:
* Hungary

=== I ===

Igbo:
* Nigeria (with English, Hausa and Yoruba)

Icelandic:
* Iceland

Indonesian:
* Indonesia (a standardized dialect of Malay)

Irish:
* Republic of Ireland (&quot;national&quot;; with English being &quot;second official&quot;)

Italian:
* Italy
* Croatia
** Istria County (with Croatian)
* San Marino
* Slovenia 
** Slovenian Istria (with Slovene)
* Switzerland (&quot;National and official language&quot; with French, German, and (Romansh))

:&quot;Official language&quot; in:
:*Canton of Ticino
:*Canton of Grisons (with German and Romansh)
* Vatican City (with Latin)

=== J ===

Japanese:
* Japan (de facto)
* Palau (Angaur)

Javanese:
* native to Java; Indonesia
** Special region of Yogyakarta

Jola:
* Senegal (a national language along with Balanta, Bassari, Bedik, Fula, Hassaniya, Mandinka, Mandjak, Mankanya, Noon, Safen, Serer, Soninke, Wolof, the official language is French)

=== K ===

Kabye:
* Togo (with French and Ewe-Gbe)

Kalanga:
* Zimbabwe (with English, Shona, Ndebele, Chewa, Chirbawe, Tshuwau (&quot;Koisan&quot;), Nambya, Ndau, Zimbabwean sign language, Tonga, Tswana, Venda, Xhosa)

Kannada:

*India in the state of Karnataka (with 21 other regional Languages, Hindi and English as the languages of Union of India)

Kanuri:
* Niger (with French, Arabic, Buduma, Fula, Gourmanché, Hausa, Songhay-Zarma, Tamasheq, Tasawaq, Tebu)

Kasem:
* Ghana (a government-sponsored language along with Akan (Akuapem Twi, Ashante Twi, Fante), Ewe-Gbe, Dagaare, Dagbani, Dangme, Ga, Gonja, Nzema, the official language is English)

Kazakh:
* Kazakhstan (with Russian)

Khmer:
* Cambodia

Kinyarwanda:
* Rwanda (with French and English)

Kirundi:
* Burundi (with French)

Kissi
* Guinea (a national language along with Fula, Kpelle, Malinke, Susu, Toma, Oniyan, Wamey, the official language is French)

&quot;Koisan&quot; (Tshuwau):
* Zimbabwe (with English, Shona, Ndebele, Chewa, Chirbawe, Kalanga, Nambya, Ndau, Zimbabwean sign language, Tonga, Tswana, Venda, Xhosa)

Korean:
* North Korea
* South Korea (with Korean Sign Language)

Korean Sign Language:
* South Korea (with Korean)

Kpelle:
* Guinea (a national language along with Fula, Kissi, Malinke, Susu, Toma, Oniyan, Wamey, the official language is French)

Kurdish:
* Iraq (with Arabic)

Kyrgyz:
* Kyrgyzstan (with Russian)

=== L ===

Lao:
* Laos
Latin:

* Holy See
* Hungary
* Croatia
* Poland

Latvian:
* Latvia

Lithuanian:
* Lithuania

Lukpa:
* Benin (a national language along with Aja-Gbe, Anii, Bariba, Biali, Boko, Dendi, Fon-Gbe, Foodo, Fula, Gen-Gbe, Mbelime, Nateni, Tammari, Waama, Waci-Gbe, Yobe, Yom, Xwela-Gbe, Yoruba, the official languages is French)

Luxembourgish:
* Luxembourg (with French and German)

=== M ===

Macedonian:
* North Macedonia (with Albanian)

Malagasy:
* Madagascar (with French)

Malay:
* Malaysia (with de facto official language English)
* Brunei
* Singapore (with English, Chinese and Tamil)
* Indonesia (a standardized local dialect of Malay, but treated as the separate language in Indonesia)

Malinke:
* see &quot;Manding&quot;
* Guinea (a national language along with Fula, Kissi, Kpelle, Susu, Toma, Oniyan, Wamey, the official language is French)

Maltese:
* Malta (with English)

Mamara:
* Mali (a national language along with Bambara, Bomu, Bozo, Dogon, Fula, Songhay, Soninke, Syenara, Tamasheq, the official language is French)

Manding (Mandinka, Malinke):
* see &quot;Bambara&quot;, &quot;Dioula&quot;, &quot;Malinke&quot;, &quot;Mandinka&quot;

Mandinka:
* see &quot;Manding&quot;
* Senegal (a national language along with Balanta, Bassari, Bedik, Fula, Hassaniya, Jola, Mandjak, Mankanya, Noon, Safen, Serer, Soninke, Wolof, the official language is French)

Mandjak:
* Senegal (a national language along with Balanta, Bassari, Bedik, Fula, Hassaniya, Jola, Mandinka, Mankanya, Noon, Safen, Serer, Soninke, Wolof, the official language is French)

Mankanya:
* Senegal (a national language along with Balanta, Bassari, Bedik, Fula, Hassaniya, Jola, Mandinka, Mandjak, Noon, Safen, Serer, Soninke, Wolof, the official language is French)

Manx Gaelic:
* Isle of Man (with English)

Māori:
* New Zealand (with English and New Zealand Sign Language)

Marshallese:
* Marshall Islands (with English)

Mauritian Creole 
* Mauritius

Mbelime:
* Benin (a national language along with Aja-Gbe, Anii, Bariba, Biali, Boko, Dendi, Fon-Gbe, Foodo, Fula, Gen-Gbe, Lukpa, Nateni, Tammari, Waama, Waci-Gbe, Yobe, Yom, Xwela-Gbe, Yoruba, the official languages is French)

Meitei (officially known as Manipuri) 
* India (along with 21 other scheduled languages recognised by the 8th schedule of the Indian Constitution)

Mongolian:
* Mongolia

Montenegrin:
* Montenegro

Mossi:
* Burkina Faso (a national language along with Dioula, Fula and other languages, the official language is French)

=== N ===
Nambya:
* Zimbabwe (with English, Shona, Ndebele, Chewa, Chirbawe, Kalanga, &quot;Koisan&quot; (Tshuwau), Ndau, Zimbabwean sign language, Tonga, Tswana, Venda, Xhosa)

Nateni:
* Benin (a national language along with Aja-Gbe, Anii, Bariba, Biali, Boko, Dendi, Fon-Gbe, Foodo, Fula, Gen-Gbe, Lukpa, Mbelime, Tammari, Waama, Waci-Gbe, Yobe, Yom, Xwela-Gbe, Yoruba, the official languages is French)

Nauruan
* Nauru (with English)

Ndau:
* Zimbabwe (with English, Shona, Ndebele, Chewa, Chirbawe, Kalanga, &quot;Koisan&quot; (Tshuwau), Nambya, Zimbabwean sign language, Tonga, Tswana, Venda, Xhosa)

Ndebele (Northern):
* South Africa (with Afrikaans, English, Northern Sotho, Sotho, Swati, Tsonga, Tswana, Venda, Xhosa, Zulu)
* Zimbabwe (with English, Shona, Chewa, Chirbawe, Kalanga, &quot;Koisan&quot; (Tshuwau), Nambya, Ndau, Zimbabwean sign language, Tonga, Tswana, Venda, Xhosa)

Ndebele (Southern):
* South Africa (with Afrikaans, English, Northern Sotho, Sotho, Swati, Tsonga, Tswana, Venda, Xhosa, Zulu)

Nepali:
* Nepal

New Zealand Sign Language:
* New Zealand (with English and Māori)

Noon:
* Senegal (a national language along with Balanta, Bassari, Bedik, Fula, Hassaniya, Jola, Mandinka, Mandjak, Mankanya, Safen, Serer, Soninke, Wolof, the official language is French)

Northern Sotho:
* South Africa (with Afrikaans, English, Ndebele, Sotho, Swati, Tsonga, Tswana, Venda, Xhosa, Zulu)

Norwegian:
* Norway (two official written forms – &quot;Bokmål&quot; and &quot;Nynorsk&quot;)

Nzema:
* Ghana (a government-sponsored language along with Akan (Akuapem Twi, Ashante Twi, Fante), Ewe-Gbe, Dagaare, Dagbani, Dangme, Ga, Gonja, Kasem, the official language is English)

=== O ===
Oniyan:
* Guinea (a national language along with Fula, Kissi, Kpelle, Malinke, Susu, Toma, Wamey, the official language is French)

Oriya
*India (with 21 other regional Languages, and with English as a link language)

Oromo:
* Ethiopia

Ossetian:
* South Ossetia (with Russian and Georgian; independence is disputed)

=== P ===
Palauan:
* Palau (with English)

Papiamento:
* Aruba (with Dutch)
* Curaçao (with Dutch and English)
* Netherlands (Bonaire)

Pashto:
* Afghanistan (with Dari in Afghanistan)

Persian:
* Iran
* Afghanistan (called Dari in Afghanistan; with Pashto)
* Tajikistan (called Tajiki in Tajikistan; with Russian for &quot;inter-ethnic communication&quot;)

Polish:
* Poland

Portuguese:
* Angola
* Brazil
* Cape Verde
* East Timor (with Tetum)
* Equatorial Guinea (with Spanish and French)
* Guinea-Bissau
* Macau (with Cantonese)
* Mozambique
* Portugal
* São Tomé and Príncipe

Punjabi:
* India

=== Q ===
Quechua:
* Bolivia (with Spanish, Aymara, Guaraní and 33 other languages)
* Ecuador (with Shuar and Spanish)
* Peru (with Spanish, Aymara and other languages)

=== R ===

Romanian:
* Romania
* Moldova

Romansh:
* &quot;National language&quot; in Switzerland (with German, French, and Italian)
** Official language in canton of Grisons (with German and Italian)

Russian:
* Russia (in some regions together with regional languages)
* Abkhazia (with Abkhaz according to the Abkhazian constitution; independence is disputed)
* Belarus (with Belarusian)
* Kazakhstan (with Kazakh)
* Kyrgyzstan (with Kyrgyz)
* South Ossetia (with Ossetian and Georgian; independence is disputed)
* Tajikistan (&quot;inter-ethnic communication&quot;; with Tajik)
* Transnistria (with Moldovan and Ukrainian; independence is disputed)

=== S ===

Safen:
* Senegal (a national language along with Balanta, Bassari, Bedik, Fula, Hassaniya, Jola, Mandinka, Mandjak, Mankanya, Noon, Serer, Soninke, Wolof, the official language is French)

Samoan
* Samoa (with English)

Sango
* Sao Pauloan Brazilian Portuguese (Portugues)
* Central African Republic (with French)

Sena:
* Zimbabwe as &quot;Chirbawe&quot; (with English, Shona, Ndebele, Chewa, Kalanga, &quot;Koisan&quot; (Tshuwau), Nambya, Ndau, Zimbabwean sign language, Tonga, Tswana, Venda, Xhosa)
Scots

* Scotland (With English and Scots Gaelic)

Serbian:
* Serbia
* Bosnia and Herzegovina (with Bosnian, Croatian) (&quot;de facto&quot;)
* Kosovo (independence is disputed; with Albanian)

Serer:
* Senegal (a national language along with Balanta, Bassari, Bedik, Fula, Hassaniya, Jola, Mandinka, Mandjak, Mankanya, Noon, Safen, Soninke, Wolof, the official language is French)

Seychellois Creole
* Seychelles (with French and English)

Shona:
* Zimbabwe (with English, Ndebele, Chewa, Chirbawe, Kalanga, &quot;Koisan&quot; (Tshuwau), Nambya, Ndau, Zimbabwean sign language, Tonga, Tswana, Venda, Xhosa)

Sinhala:
* Sri Lanka (with Tamil, and with English as a link language)

Slovak:
* Slovakia
* Czech Republic

Slovene:
* Slovenia

Somali:
* Djibouti (with Arabic, French, Afar)
* Somalia (with Arabic)
* Somaliland (with Arabic and English; independence is disputed)

Songhay-Zarma:
* Mali (a national language along with Bambara, Bomu, Bozo, Dogon, Fula, Mamara, Soninke, Syenara, Tamasheq, the official language is French)
* Niger (with French, Arabic, Buduma, Fula, Gourmanché, Hausa, Kanuri, Tamasheq, Tasawaq, Tebu)

Soninke:
* Mali (a national language along with Bambara, Bomu, Bozo, Dogon, Fula, Mamara, Songhay, Syenara, Tamasheq, the official language is French)
* Mauritania (a national language along with Fula, Wolof, the official language is Arabic)
* Senegal (a national language along with Balanta, Bassari, Bedik, Fula, Hassaniya, Jola, Mandinka, Mandjak, Mankanya, Noon, Safen, Serer, Wolof, the official language is French)

Sotho:
* Lesotho (with English)
* South Africa (with Afrikaans, English, Ndebele, Northern Sotho, Swati, Tsonga, Tswana, Venda, Xhosa, Zulu)

South African Sign Language
* South Africa (with Afrikaans, English, Ndebele, Northern Sotho, Swati, Tsonga, Tswana, Venda, Xhosa, Zulu)

Spanish:
* Argentina (de facto)
* Bolivia (with Aymara, Quechua, Guaraní, and 33 other languages)
* Chile
** Easter Island (with Rapa Nui)
* Colombia
* Costa Rica
* Cuba
* Dominican Republic
* Ecuador (with Quechua and Shuar)
* El Salvador
* Equatorial Guinea (with French and Portuguese)
* Guatemala
* Honduras
* Mexico (de facto)
* Nicaragua
* Panama
* Paraguay (with Guaraní)
* Peru (with Aymara, Quechua and other languages)
* Spain (Aranese, Basque, Catalan, and Galician are co-official in some regions)
* United States (in the US territory of Puerto Rico)
* Uruguay (de facto)
* Venezuela
* Western Sahara (with Arabic)

Susu:
* Guinea (a national language along with Fula, Kissi, Kpelle, Malinke, Toma, Oniyan, Wamey, the official language is French)

Swahili:
* Kenya (with English)
* Rwanda (with English, French and Kinyarwanda)
* Tanzania (de facto; with English)
* Uganda (since 2005; with English)

Swati:
* Eswatini (with English)
* South Africa (with Afrikaans, English, Ndebele, Northern Sotho, Sotho, Tsonga, Tswana, Venda, Xhosa, Zulu)

Swedish:
* Sweden
* Finland (with Finnish)
* Åland (monolingually Swedish) (an autonomous province under Finnish sovereignty)

Syenara:
* Mali (a national language along with Bambara, Bomu, Bozo, Dogon, Fula, Mamara, Songhay, Soninke, Tamasheq, the official language is French)

=== T ===

Taiwan Sign Language:
* Taiwan (other national languages of Taiwan are Mandarin, Formosan languages, Hakka and Taiwanese Hokkien.)

Taiwanese Hokkien:
* Taiwan (using Traditional Chinese characters and/or pe̍h-oē-jī (Latin letters); other national languages of Taiwan are Mandarin, Formosan languages, Hakka and Taiwan Sign Language.)

Tajik:
* Tajikistan (a variant of Persian written in Cyrillic)

Tagalog:
* &quot;see Filipino &quot;

Tamasheq:
* Mali (a national language along with Bambara, Bomu, Bozo, Dogon, Fula, Mamara, Songhay, Soninke, Syenara, the official language is French)
* Niger (with French, Arabic, Buduma, Fula, Gourmanché, Hausa, Kanuri, Songhay-Zarma, Tasawaq, Tebu)

Tamil:
* India in the state of Tamil Nadu and Pondicherry (with 21 other languages, and with [[ Hindi and English language as the link language and official language of Union)
* [[Singapore]] (with [[English language|English]], [[Chinese language|Chinese]] and [[Malay language|Malay]])
* [[Sri Lanka]] (with [[Sinhala language|Sinhala]], and with [[English language|English]] as a link language)

[[Tammari language|Tammari]]:
* [[Benin]] (a national language along with [[Aja-Gbe language|Aja-Gbe]], [[Anii language|Anii]], [[Bariba language|Bariba]], [[Biali language|Biali]], [[Boko language|Boko]], [[Dendi language|Dendi]], [[Fon language|Fon-Gbe]], [[Foodo language|Foodo]], [[Fula language|Fula]], [[Gen language|Gen-Gbe]], [[Lukpa language|Lukpa]], [[Mbelime language|Mbelime]], [[Nateni language|Nateni]], [[Waama language|Waama]], [[Waci Gbe language|Waci-Gbe]], [[Yobe language|Yobe]], [[Yom language|Yom]], [[Pherá language|Xwela-Gbe]], [[Yoruba language|Yoruba]], the official languages is [[French language|French]])

[[Tasawaq language|Tasawaq]]:
* [[Niger]] (with [[French language|French]], [[Arabic language|Arabic]], [[Buduma language|Buduma]], [[Fula language|Fula]], [[Gourmanché language|Gourmanché]], [[Hausa language|Hausa]], [[Kanuri language|Kanuri]], [[Songhay language|Songhay]]-[[Zarma language|Zarma]], [[Tamasheq language|Tamasheq]], [[Tebu language|Tebu]])

[[Tebu language|Tebu]]:
* [[Niger]] (with [[French language|French]], [[Arabic language|Arabic]], [[Buduma language|Buduma]], [[Fula language|Fula]], [[Gourmanché language|Gourmanché]], [[Hausa language|Hausa]], [[Kanuri language|Kanuri]], [[Songhay language|Songhay]]-[[Zarma language|Zarma]], [[Tamasheq language|Tamasheq]], [[Tasawaq language|Tasawaq]])

[[Telugu language|Telugu]]:
* India (with 21 other regional Languages, and with [[English language|English]] as a link language)

[[Tetum language|Tetum]]:
* [[East Timor]] (with [[Portuguese language|Portuguese]])

[[Thai language|Thai]]:
* [[Thailand]]

[[Tigrinya language|Tigrinya]]:
* [[Eritrea]] (with [[Arabic language|Arabic]] and [[English language|English]])
* Ethiopia (with Afar, Amharic, Oromo and Somali)

[[Tok Pisin]]:
* [[Papua New Guinea]] (with English and Hiri Motu)

[[Toma language|Toma]]:
* [[Guinea]] (a national language along with [[Fula language|Fula]], [[Kissi language|Kissi]], [[Kpelle language|Kpelle]], [[Malinke language|Malinke]], [[Susu language|Susu]], [[Oniyan language|Oniyan]], [[Wamey language|Wamey]], the official language is [[French language|French]])

[[Tonga language (Zambia and Zimbabwe)|Tonga]]:
* [[Zimbabwe]] (with [[English language|English]], [[Shona language|Shona]], [[Northern Ndebele language|Ndebele]], [[Chewa language|Chewa]], [[Sena language|Chirbawe]], [[Kalanga language|Kalanga]], [[Tshuwau language|&quot;Koisan&quot;]] (Tshuwau), [[Nambya language|Nambya]], [[Ndau dialect|Ndau]], [[Zimbabwean sign languages|Zimbabwean sign language]], [[Tswana language|Tswana]], [[Venda (language)|Venda]], [[Xhosa language|Xhosa]])

[[Tongan language|Tongan]]
* [[Tonga]] (with [[English language|English]])

[[Tsonga language|Tsonga]]:
* [[South Africa]] (with [[Afrikaans language|Afrikaans]], English, [[Southern Ndebele language|Ndebele]], [[Northern Sotho language|Northern Sotho]], [[Sotho language|Sotho]], [[Swati language|Swati]], [[Tswana language|Tswana]], [[Venda language|Venda]], [[Xhosa language|Xhosa]], [[Zulu language|Zulu]])

[[Tswana language|Tswana]]:
* [[Botswana]] (with English)
* [[South Africa]] (with [[Afrikaans language|Afrikaans]], English, [[Southern Ndebele language|Ndebele]], [[Northern Sotho language|Northern Sotho]], [[Sotho language|Sotho]], [[Swati language|Swati]], [[Tsonga language|Tsonga]], [[Venda language|Venda]], [[Xhosa language|Xhosa]], [[Zulu language|Zulu]])
* [[Zimbabwe]] (with [[English language|English]], [[Shona language|Shona]], [[Northern Ndebele language|Ndebele]], [[Chewa language|Chewa]], [[Sena language|Chirbawe]], [[Kalanga language|Kalanga]], [[Tshuwau language|&quot;Koisan&quot;]] (Tshuwau), [[Nambya language|Nambya]], [[Ndau dialect|Ndau]], [[Zimbabwean sign languages|Zimbabwean sign language]], [[Tonga language (Zambia and Zimbabwe)|Tonga]], [[Venda (language)|Venda]], [[Xhosa language|Xhosa]])

[[Turkish language|Turkish]]:
* [[Turkey]]
* [[Cyprus]] (with [[Greek language|Greek]])
* [[TRNC|Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus]] (independence disputed)

[[Turkmen language|Turkmen]]:
* [[Turkmenistan]]

[[Tuvaluan language|Tuvaluan]]
* [[Tuvalu]] (with [[English language|English]])

=== U ===

[[Ukrainian language|Ukrainian]]:
* [[Ukraine]]
* [[Transnistria]] (with Moldovan and Russian; independence is disputed)

[[Urdu language|Urdu]]:
* [[Pakistan]] (with English)
* [[India]] (Urdu dialect and in script it is Sanscrit with 21 other regional languages, and with [[English language|English]] as a link language)

[[Uzbek language|Uzbek]]:
* [[Uzbekistan]]

=== V ===

[[Venda language|Venda]]:
* [[South Africa]] (with [[Afrikaans language|Afrikaans]], English, [[Southern Ndebele language|Ndebele]], [[Northern Sotho language|Northern Sotho]], [[Sotho language|Sotho]], [[Swati language|Swati]], [[Tsonga language|Tsonga]], [[Tswana language|Tswana]], [[Xhosa language|Xhosa]], [[Zulu language|Zulu]])
* [[Zimbabwe]] (with [[English language|English]], [[Shona language|Shona]], [[Northern Ndebele language|Ndebele]], [[Chewa language|Chewa]], [[Sena language|Chirbawe]], [[Kalanga language|Kalanga]], [[Tshuwau language|&quot;Koisan&quot;]] (Tshuwau), [[Nambya language|Nambya]], [[Ndau dialect|Ndau]], [[Zimbabwean sign languages|Zimbabwean sign language]], [[Tonga language (Zambia and Zimbabwe)|Tonga]], [[Tswana language|Tswana]], [[Xhosa language|Xhosa]])

[[Vietnamese language|Vietnamese]]:
* [[Vietnam]]

=== W ===
[[Waama language|Waama]]:
* [[Benin]] (a national language along with [[Aja-Gbe language|Aja-Gbe]], [[Anii language|Anii]], [[Bariba language|Bariba]], [[Biali language|Biali]], [[Boko language|Boko]], [[Dendi language|Dendi]], [[Fon language|Fon-Gbe]], [[Foodo language|Foodo]], [[Fula language|Fula]], [[Gen language|Gen-Gbe]], [[Lukpa language|Lukpa]], [[Mbelime language|Mbelime]], [[Nateni language|Nateni]], [[Tammari language|Tammari]], [[Waci Gbe language|Waci-Gbe]], [[Yobe language|Yobe]], [[Yom language|Yom]], [[Pherá language|Xwela-Gbe]], [[Yoruba language|Yoruba]], the official languages is [[French language|French]])

[[Waci Gbe language|Waci-Gbe]]:
* [[Benin]] (a national language along with [[Aja-Gbe language|Aja-Gbe]], [[Anii language|Anii]], [[Bariba language|Bariba]], [[Biali language|Biali]], [[Boko language|Boko]], [[Dendi language|Dendi]], [[Fon language|Fon-Gbe]], [[Foodo language|Foodo]], [[Fula language|Fula]], [[Gen language|Gen-Gbe]], [[Lukpa language|Lukpa]], [[Mbelime language|Mbelime]], [[Nateni language|Nateni]], [[Tammari language|Tammari]], [[Waama language|Waama]], [[Yobe language|Yobe]], [[Yom language|Yom]], [[Pherá language|Xwela-Gbe]], [[Yoruba language|Yoruba]], the official languages is [[French language|French]])

[[Wamey language|Wamey]]:
* [[Guinea]] (a national language along with [[Fula language|Fula]], [[Kissi language|Kissi]], [[Kpelle language|Kpelle]], [[Malinke language|Malinke]], [[Susu language|Susu]], [[Toma language|Toma]], [[Oniyan language|Oniyan]], the official language is [[French language|French]])

[[Welsh language|Welsh]]:
* [[United Kingdom]] (limited &quot;de jure&quot; official status in Wales)

[[Wolof language|Wolof]]:
* [[Mauritania]] (a national language along with [[Fula language|Fula]], [[Soninke language|Soninke]], the official language is [[Arabic language|Arabic]])
* [[Senegal]] (a national language along with [[Balanta languages|Balanta]], [[Bassari language|Bassari]], [[Bedik language|Bedik]], [[Fula language|Fula]], [[Hassaniya Arabic|Hassaniya]], [[Jola language|Jola]], [[Mandinka language|Mandinka]], [[Mandjak language|Mandjak]], [[Mankanya language|Mankanya]], [[Noon language|Noon]], [[Safen language|Safen]], [[Serer language|Serer]], [[Soninke language|Soninke]], the official language is [[French language|French]])

=== X ===

[[Xhosa language|Xhosa]]:
* [[South Africa]] (with [[Afrikaans language|Afrikaans]], English, [[Southern Ndebele language|Ndebele]], [[Northern Sotho language|Northern Sotho]], [[Sotho language|Sotho]], [[Swati language|Swati]], [[Tsonga language|Tsonga]], [[Tswana language|Tswana]], [[Venda language|Venda]], [[Zulu language|Zulu]])
* [[Zimbabwe]] (with [[English language|English]], [[Shona language|Shona]], [[Northern Ndebele language|Ndebele]], [[Chewa language|Chewa]], [[Sena language|Chirbawe]], [[Kalanga language|Kalanga]], [[Tshuwau language|&quot;Koisan&quot;]] (Tshuwau), [[Nambya language|Nambya]], [[Ndau dialect|Ndau]], [[Zimbabwean sign languages|Zimbabwean sign language]], [[Tonga language (Zambia and Zimbabwe)|Tonga]], [[Tswana language|Tswana]], [[Venda (language)|Venda]])

[[Pherá language|Xwela-Gbe]]:
* [[Benin]] (a national language along with [[Aja-Gbe language|Aja-Gbe]], [[Anii language|Anii]], [[Bariba language|Bariba]], [[Biali language|Biali]], [[Boko language|Boko]], [[Dendi language|Dendi]], [[Fon language|Fon-Gbe]], [[Foodo language|Foodo]], [[Fula language|Fula]], [[Gen language|Gen-Gbe]], [[Lukpa language|Lukpa]], [[Mbelime language|Mbelime]], [[Nateni language|Nateni]], [[Tammari language|Tammari]], [[Waama language|Waama]], [[Waci Gbe language|Waci-Gbe]], [[Yobe language|Yobe]], [[Yom language|Yom]], [[Yoruba language|Yoruba]], the official languages is [[French language|French]])

=== Y ===
[[Yobe language|Yobe]]:
* [[Benin]] (a national language along with [[Aja-Gbe language|Aja-Gbe]], [[Anii language|Anii]], [[Bariba language|Bariba]], [[Biali language|Biali]], [[Boko language|Boko]], [[Dendi language|Dendi]], [[Fon language|Fon-Gbe]], [[Foodo language|Foodo]], [[Fula language|Fula]], [[Gen language|Gen-Gbe]], [[Lukpa language|Lukpa]], [[Mbelime language|Mbelime]], [[Nateni language|Nateni]], [[Tammari language|Tammari]], [[Waama language|Waama]], [[Waci Gbe language|Waci-Gbe]], [[Yom language|Yom]], [[Pherá language|Xwela-Gbe]], [[Yoruba language|Yoruba]], the official languages is [[French language|French]])

[[Yom language|Yom]]:
* [[Benin]] (a national language along with [[Aja-Gbe language|Aja-Gbe]], [[Anii language|Anii]], [[Bariba language|Bariba]], [[Biali language|Biali]], [[Boko language|Boko]], [[Dendi language|Dendi]], [[Fon language|Fon-Gbe]], [[Foodo language|Foodo]], [[Fula language|Fula]], [[Gen language|Gen-Gbe]], [[Lukpa language|Lukpa]], [[Mbelime language|Mbelime]], [[Nateni language|Nateni]], [[Tammari language|Tammari]], [[Waama language|Waama]], [[Waci Gbe language|Waci-Gbe]], [[Yobe language|Yobe]], [[Pherá language|Xwela-Gbe]], [[Yoruba language|Yoruba]], the official languages is [[French language|French]])

[[Yoruba language|Yoruba]]:
* [[Benin]] (a national language along with [[Aja-Gbe language|Aja-Gbe]], [[Anii language|Anii]], [[Bariba language|Bariba]], [[Biali language|Biali]], [[Boko language|Boko]], [[Dendi language|Dendi]], [[Fon language|Fon-Gbe]], [[Foodo language|Foodo]], [[Fula language|Fula]], [[Gen language|Gen-Gbe]], [[Lukpa language|Lukpa]], [[Mbelime language|Mbelime]], [[Nateni language|Nateni]], [[Tammari language|Tammari]], [[Waama language|Waama]], [[Waci Gbe language|Waci-Gbe]], [[Yobe language|Yobe]], [[Pherá language|Xwela-Gbe]], [[Yom language|Yom]], the official languages is [[French language|French]])
* [[Nigeria]] (with [[English language|English]], [[Hausa language|Hausa]] and [[Igbo language|Igbo]])

=== Z ===
[[Zimbabwean sign languages|Zimbabwean sign language]]:
* [[Zimbabwe]] (with [[English language|English]], [[Shona language|Shona]], [[Northern Ndebele language|Ndebele]], [[Chewa language|Chewa]], [[Sena language|Chirbawe]], [[Kalanga language|Kalanga]], [[Tshuwau language|&quot;Koisan&quot;]] (Tshuwau), [[Nambya language|Nambya]], [[Ndau dialect|Ndau]], [[Tonga language (Zambia and Zimbabwe)|Tonga]], [[Tswana language|Tswana]], [[Venda (language)|Venda]], [[Xhosa language|Xhosa]])

[[Zulu language|Zulu]]:
* [[South Africa]] (with [[Afrikaans language|Afrikaans]], English, [[Southern Ndebele language|Ndebele]], [[Northern Sotho language|Northern Sotho]], [[Sotho language|Sotho]], [[Swati language|Swati]], [[Tsonga language|Tsonga]], [[Tswana language|Tswana]], [[Venda language|Venda]], [[Xhosa language|Xhosa]])

== List of languages by the number of countries in which they are the most widely used ==
This is a ranking of languages by number of sovereign countries in which they are &quot;de jure&quot; or &quot;de facto&quot; official, co-official, an administrative or working language.
== Official regional and minority languages ==
[[Abaza language|Abaza]]:
* [[Karachay–Cherkessia]] (&quot;state language&quot;; with Cherkess, Karachay, Nogai and Russian)

[[Adyghe language|Adyghe]]:
* [[Adygea]] (&quot;state language&quot;; with Russian)

[[Aghul language|Aghul]]:
* [[Dagestan]] (&quot;as one of the Dagestan peoples languages&quot;; with Russian)

[[Aklanon language|Aklanon]]:
* [[Visayas]] ([[Philippines]]) (with Filipino, English, Bikol, Cebuano, Hiligaynon, Ilocano, Kinaray-a, Surigaonon, Tagalog, and Waray)

[[Albanian language|Albanian]]:
* [[Kosovo]]
* [[North Macedonia]] (in some municipalities)
* [[Montenegro]] (The only official language is [[Montenegrin language|Montenegrin]], while Albanian is in official use along with [[Serbian language|Serbian]], [[Bosnian language|Bosnian]] and [[Croatian language|Croatian]])

[[Altay language|Altay]]:
* [[Altay Republic|Altay, Republic of]] (&quot;state language&quot;; with Russian)

[[Arabic language|Arabic]]:
* [[Philippines]] (mainly in [[Mindanao]])

Aranese &quot;see Occitan&quot;

[[Armenian language|Armenian]]:
* [[Nagorno Karabagh]]

[[Aromanian language|Aromanian]]:
* [[Kruševo]]

[[Assamese language|Assamese]]:
* India (with [[Hindi language|Hindi]], [[English language|English]] {as a &quot;subsidiary official language&quot;} and [[Languages with official status in India|20 other official languages]])
** [[Assam]]

[[Avar language|Avar]]:
* [[Dagestan]] (&quot;as one of the Dagestan peoples languages&quot;; with Russian)

[[Azeri language|Azeri]]:
* [[Dagestan]] (&quot;as one of the Dagestan peoples languages&quot;; with Russian)

[[Balkar language|Balkar]]:
* [[Kabardino-Balkaria]] (&quot;state language&quot;; with Kabardian and Russian)

[[Bashkir language|Bashkir]]:
* [[Bashkortostan]] (&quot;state language&quot;; with Russian)

[[Basque language|Basque]]:
* [[Basque Autonomous Community]] (with Spanish)
* [[Navarre]] (in some areas with Spanish)

[[Bengali language|Bengali]]:
* India (as a &quot;subsidiary official language&quot;} and [[Languages with official status in India|20 other official languages]]; second most spoken Indian Language)
** [[Andaman and Nicobar Islands]]
** [[Assam]]
** [[Tripura]]
** [[West Bengal]]

[[Central Bikol language|Bikol]]:
* [[Luzon]] and [[Visayas]] ([[Philippines]]) (with Filipino, English, Aklanon, Cebuano, Hiligaynon, Ibanag, Ilocano, Ivatan, Kapampangan, Kinaray-a, Pangasinan, Sambal, Surigaonon, Tagalog, and Waray)

[[Bosnian language|Bosnian]]:
* part of [[Serbia]]
** [[Sandžak]] region
* [[Montenegro]] (with [[Montenegrin language|Montenegrin]], [[Albanian language|Albanian]], [[Croatian language|Croatian]] and [[Serbian language|Serbian]])

[[Buryat language|Buryat]]:
* [[Buryat Republic|Buryatia]] (&quot;state language&quot;; with Russian)
* [[Zabaykalsky Krai]]
** [[Agin-Buryat Okrug]] (&quot;authorized language&quot;)

[[Standard Cantonese|Cantonese Chinese]]:
*China:
** Some provinces [[Guangdong|Canton Province]] (with Mandarin)
** [[Hong Kong]] (for [[Chinese language]], Cantonese is spoken &quot;de facto&quot;; co-official with English)
** [[Macau]] (for Chinese language, Cantonese is spoken &quot;de facto&quot;; co-official with Portuguese)

[[Catalan language|Catalan]]:
* parts of Spain
** [[Balearic Islands]] (with Spanish)
** [[Catalonia]] (with Spanish)
** [[Valencia (autonomous community)|Valencia]] (named as [[Valencian language|Valencian]], with Spanish)
* parts of France
** [[Pyrénées Orientales]]
* parts of Italy
** [[Alghero]]

[[Cebuano language|Cebuano]]:
* [[Visayas]] and [[Mindanao]] ([[Philippines]]) (with Filipino, English, Aklanon, Bikol, Chavacano, Hiligaynon, Ilocano, Kinaray-a, Maguindanao, Maranao, Surigaonon, Tagalog, Tausug, Waray, and Yakan)

[[Chavacano]]:
* [[Mindanao]] ([[Philippines]]) (with Filipino, English, Cebuano, Hiligaynon, Ilocano, Maguindanao, Maranao, Surigaonon, Tagalog, Tausug, and Yakan)

[[Chechen language|Chechen]]:
* [[Chechnya]] (&quot;state language&quot;; with Russian)
* [[Dagestan]] (&quot;as one of the Dagestan peoples languages&quot;; with Russian)

[[Kabardian language|Cherkess]]:
* [[Karachay–Cherkessia]] (&quot;state language&quot;; with Abaza, Karachay, Nogai and Russian)

[[Cherokee language|Cherokee]]:
* [[Cherokee Nation]] tribal jurisdiction area in [[Oklahoma]], United States.

[[Chipewyan language|Chipewyan]]:
* [[Northwest Territories]] (with Cree, English, French, Gwich&#x27;in, Inuinnaqtun, Inuktitut, Inuvialuktun, North Slavey, South Slavey and Tłįchǫ (Dogrib))

[[Chukchi language|Chukchi]]:
* [[Sakha Republic|Sakha]] (&quot;local official language&quot;; in localities with Chukchi population)

[[Chuvash language|Chuvash]]:
* [[Chuvash Republic|Chuvashia]] (&quot;state language&quot;; with Russian)

[[Cree language|Cree]]:
* [[Northwest Territories]] (with Chipewyan, English, French, Gwich&#x27;in, Inuinnaqtun, Inuktitut, Inuvialuktun, North Slavey, South Slavey and Tłįchǫ (Dogrib))

[[Crimean Tatar language|Crimean Tatar]]
* [[Crimea]] (with Russian and Ukrainian)

[[Croatian language|Croatian]]:
* part of Austria
** [[Burgenland]] (with [[German language|German]] and [[Hungarian language|Hungarian]])*part of Italy
** [[Molise]]
* part of [[Serbia]]
** [[Vojvodina]] (with [[Hungarian language|Hungarian]], [[Pannonian Rusyn language|Pannonian Rusyn]], [[Romanian language|Romanian]], [[Serbian language|Serbian]] and [[Slovak language|Slovak]])
* [[Montenegro]] (with [[Montenegrin language|Montenegrin]], [[Albanian language|Albanian]], [[Bosnian language|Bosnian]] and [[Serbian language|Serbian]])

[[Dargwa language|Dargwa]]:
* [[Dagestan]] (&quot;as one of the Dagestan peoples languages&quot;; with Russian)

[[Dolgan language|Dolgan]]:
* [[Sakha Republic|Sakha]] (&quot;local official language&quot;; in localities with Dolgan population)

[[Dutch language|Dutch]]:
* The [[Nord-Pas-de-Calais]] (&quot;France&quot;) ([[French Flemish]] dialect with [[French language|French]], [[English language|English]] for some part of the region)

English:
* parts of Canada:

:*[[Alberta]]
:*[[British Columbia]]
:*[[Manitoba]] (with French)
:*[[Newfoundland and Labrador]]
:*[[Nova Scotia]]
:*[[Ontario]]
:*[[Prince Edward Island]]
:*[[Quebec]]
:*[[Saskatchewan]]
:*[[New Brunswick]] (with French)
:*[[Northwest Territories]] (with Chipewyan, Cree, French, Gwich&#x27;in, Inuinnaqtun, Inuktitut, Inuvialuktun, Slavey (North and South) and Tłįchǫ)
:*[[Nunavut]] (with Inuktitut, Inuinnaqtun, and French)
:*[[Yukon]] (with French)
* The United Kingdom:
:*[[England]]
:*[[Northern Ireland]]
:*[[Scotland]] (with [[Scottish Gaelic language|Scottish Gaelic]] in some municipalities)
:*[[Wales]] (with [[Welsh language|Welsh]])
:*[[Isle of Man]] (with [[Manx language|Manx Gaelic]])
:*[[Guernsey]] (with French)
:*[[Jersey]] (with French)
* parts of the United States. See &quot;[[English-only movement]]&quot;. English is an official language in the following states and territories:
** [[Alabama]]
** [[Alaska]]
** [[Arkansas]]
** [[California]]
** [[Colorado]]
** [[Florida]]
** [[Georgia (U.S. state)|Georgia]]
** [[Hawaii]] (with [[Hawaiian language]])
** [[Illinois]]
** [[Indiana]]
** [[Iowa]]
** [[Kentucky]]
** [[Massachusetts]]
** [[Minnesota]]
** [[Mississippi]]
** [[Montana]]
** [[Nebraska]]
** [[New Hampshire]]
** [[North Carolina]]
** [[North Dakota]]
** [[Puerto Rico]] (with Spanish)
** [[South Carolina]]
** [[South Dakota]] (with [[Sioux language|Lakota &amp; Dakota]])
** [[Texas]]
** [[Tennessee]]
** [[U.S. Virgin Islands]]
** [[Utah]]
** [[Virginia]]
** [[West Virginia]]
** [[Wyoming]]

[[Erzya language|Erzya]]:
* [[Mordovia]] (&quot;state language&quot;; with Moksha and Russian)

[[Even language|Even]]:
* [[Sakha Republic|Sakha]] (&quot;local official language&quot;; in localities with Even population)

[[Evenki language|Evenki]]:
* [[Sakha Republic|Sakha]] (&quot;local official language&quot;; in localities with Evenki population)

[[Faroese language|Faroese]]:
* [[Faroe Islands]] (with [[Danish language|Danish]])

[[Finnish language|Finnish]]:
* [[Republic of Karelia|Karelia]] (&quot;authorized language&quot;; with Karelian and Veps)

[[French language|French]]:
* parts of Canada

:*[[New Brunswick]] (co-official with English)
:*[[Northwest Territories]] (with Chipewyan, Cree, English, Gwich&#x27;in, Inuinnaqtun, Inuktitut, Inuvialuktun, Slavey (North and South) and Tłįchǫ)
:*[[Nunavut]] (with English, Inuinnaqtun, Inuktitut)
:*[[Quebec]]
:*[[Yukon]] (with English)
* [[Guernsey]] (with English)
* [[Jersey]] (with English)
* [[Puducherry (union territory)|Puducherry]] (co-official with [[Tamil language|Tamil]] in the [[Union Territory]] of Puducherry. Also [[Telugu language|Telugu]] and [[Malayalam]] are its regional official languages)
* part of Italy
** [[Aosta]] (co-official with Italian)
* part of United States with [[Louisiana]]

[[West Frisian language|Frisian (West)]]:
* The [[Netherlands]]: co-official in the province of [[Friesland]] (with Dutch)

[[Friulian language|Friulian]]:
* The [[Friuli]] region of northeastern Italy

[[Gagauz language|Gagauz]]:

* [[Gagauzia]] ([[Moldova]]) (with [[Russian language|Russian]])

[[Galician language|Galician]]:
* part of Spain
** [[Galicia (Spain)|Galicia]] (with Spanish)

[[German language|German]]:
* Italy
** [[South Tyrol]] (together with [[Italian language|Italian]] and [[Ladin language|Ladin]])

[[Greek language|Greek]]:
* parts of south [[Albania]]
* parts of south Italy
** [[Salento]] ([[Grecia Salentina]], together with [[Italian language|Italian]])
** [[Calabria]] ([[Bovesia]], together with [[Italian language|Italian]])

[[Guaraní language|Guaraní]]:
* [[Bolivia]]
* [[Paraguay]]
* in [[Argentina]]
** [[Corrientes Province]] (co-official with [[Spanish language|Spanish]])

[[Gujarati language|Gujarati]]:
* India (with 21 other regional languages)
** [[Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu]]
** [[Gujarat]]

[[Gwich&#x27;in language|Gwich&#x27;in]]:
* [[Northwest Territories]] (with Cree, Chipewyan, English, French, Inuinnaqtun, Inuktitut, Inuvialuktun, North Slavey, South Slavey and Tłįchǫ (Dogrib))

[[Hawaiian language|Hawaiian]]:
* [[Hawaii]] (with English)

[[Hiligaynon language|Hiligaynon]]:
* [[Visayas]] and [[Mindanao]] ([[Philippines]]) (with Filipino, English, Aklanon, Bikol, Cebuano, Chavacano, Hiligaynon, Ilocano, Kinaray-a, Maguindanao, Maranao, Surigaonon, Tagalog, Tausug, Waray, and Yakan)
[[Hindi language|Hindi]]:
* India (with 21 other regional languages)
** [[Andaman and Nicobar Islands]]
** [[Bihar]] 
**[[Chhattisgarh]] 
** [[Delhi]] Territory
**[[Haryana]] 
**[[Jharkhand]] 
**[[Madhya Pradesh]] 
**[[Rajasthan]] 
**[[Uttarakhand]]
** [[Uttar Pradesh]] 
[[Hungarian language|Hungarian]]:
* part of [[Serbia]]
** [[Vojvodina]] (with Croatian, Serbian, Romanian, Slovak and Ruthenian)
* part of [[Romania]]
* part of [[Slovenia]]
* part of [[Croatia]]
* part of [[Slovakia]]
* part of [[Austria]]

[[Ibanag language|Ibanag]]:
* [[Luzon]] ([[Philippines]]) (with Filipino, English, Bikol, Ilocano, Ivatan, Kapampangan, Pangasinan, Sambal, and Tagalog)

[[Ilocano language|Ilocano]]:
* [[Luzon]] and [[Mindanao]] ([[Philippines]]) (with Filipino, English, Bikol, Cebuano, Chavacano, Hiligaynon, Ibanag, Ilocano, Ivatan, Kapampangan, Maguindanao, Maranao, Pangasinan, Sambal, Surigaonon, Tagalog, Tausug, and Yakan.)

[[Ingush language|Ingush]]:
* [[Ingushetia]] (&quot;state language&quot;; with Russian)

[[Inuinnaqtun]]:
* [[Northwest Territories]] (with Cree, Chipewyan, English, French, Gwich&#x27;in, Inuktitut, Inuvialuktun, North Slavey, South Slavey and Tłįchǫ (Dogrib))
* [[Nunavut]] (with English, French, and Inuktitut)

[[Inuktitut]]:
* [[Nunavut]] (with English, French, and Inuinnaqtun)
* [[Northwest Territories]] (with Cree, Chipewyan, English, French, Gwich&#x27;in, Inuinnaqtun, Inuvialuktun, North Slavey, South Slavey and Tłįchǫ (Dogrib))

[[Inuvialuktun]]:
* [[Northwest Territories]] (with Cree, Chipewyan, English, French, Gwich&#x27;in, Inuinnaqtun, Inuktitut, North Slavey, South Slavey and Tłįchǫ (Dogrib))

[[Irish language|Irish]]:
* [[Northern Ireland]] (United Kingdom) (along with [[Ulster Scots dialects|Ulster Scots]] and [[English language|English]])

[[Italian language|Italian]]:
* part of [[Croatia]]
** [[Istria county]] (with Croatian)
* part of [[Slovenia]]
** [[Izola]], [[Koper]] and [[Piran]] municipalities (with Slovene)

[[Ivatan language|Ivatan]]:
* [[Luzon]] ([[Philippines]]) (with Filipino, English, Bikol, Ibanag, Ilocano, Kapampangan, Pangasinan, Sambal, and Tagalog)

[[Japanese language|Japanese]]:
* Part of [[Palau]]
** [[Angaur]] (with [[English language|English]])

[[Kabardian language|Kabardian]]:
* [[Kabardino-Balkaria]] (&quot;state language&quot;; with Balkar and Russian)

[[Kalaallisut language|Kalaallisut]]:
* [[Greenland]]

[[Kalmyk language|Kalmyk]]:
* [[Kalmykia]] (&quot;state language&quot;; with Russian)

[[Kannada language|Kannada]]:
* India (with 21 other regional languages)

[[Kapampangan language|Kapampangan]]:
* [[Luzon]] ([[Philippines]]) (with Filipino, English, Bikol, Ilocano, Ibanag, Ivatan, Pangasinan, Sambal, and Tagalog)

[[Karachay language|Karachay]]:
* [[Karachay–Cherkessia]] (&quot;state language&quot;; with Abaza, Cherkess, Nogai and Russian)

[[Karelian language|Karelian]]:
* [[Republic of Karelia|Karelia]] (&quot;authorized language&quot;; with Finnish and Veps)

[[Kashmiri language|Kashmiri]]:
* India (with 21 other regional languages)
** [[Jammu and Kashmir (union territory)|Jammu and Kashmir]]

[[Kazakh language|Kazakh]]:
* [[Altay Republic|Republic of Altay]] (&quot;official language&quot;; in localities with Kazakh population)
* part of the [[People&#x27;s Republic of China]]
** [[Ili Kazakh Autonomous Prefecture|Ili]], with Chinese (Mandarin)
** [[Barkol Kazak Autonomous County|Barkol]], with Chinese (Mandarin)
** [[Mori Kazak Autonomous County|Mori]], with Chinese (Mandarin)
* part of [[Mongolia]]
** [[Bayan-Olgiy Autonomous County|Mori]], with Mongolian

[[Khakas language|Khakas]]:
* [[Khakassia]] (&quot;state language&quot;; with Russian)

[[Khanty language|Khanty]]:
* [[Khanty–Mansi Autonomous Okrug]] (&quot;aboriginal language&quot;; with Mansi and Nenets)
* [[Yamalo-Nenets Autonomous Okrug]] (&quot;aboriginal language&quot;; with Nenets and Selkup)

[[Kinaray-a language|Kinaray-a]]:
* [[Visayas]] ([[Philippines]]) (with Filipino, English, Aklanon, Bikol, Cebuano, Hiligaynon, Surigaonon, Tagalog, and Waray)

[[Komi language|Komi]]:
* [[Komi Republic|Komi]] (&quot;state language&quot;; with Russian)

[[Komi-Permyak language|Komi-Permyak]]:
* [[Perm Krai]]
** [[Komi-Permyak Okrug]] (&quot;official language&quot;)

[[Korean language|Korean]]:
* part of the [[People&#x27;s Republic of China]] with Chinese (Mandarin)
** [[Changbai Korean Autonomous County|Changbai]] (Jangbaek, Changbaek)
** [[Yanbian Korean Autonomous Prefecture|Yanbian]] (Yeonbyeon, Yŏnbyŏn)

[[Kumyk language|Kumyk]]:
* [[Dagestan]] (&quot;as one of the Dagestan peoples languages&quot;; with Russian)

[[Kyrgyz language|Kyrgyz]]:
* part of the [[People&#x27;s Republic of China]]
* [[Kizilsu Kirghiz Autonomous Prefecture|Kizilsu]] (with Chinese (Mandarin))

[[Lak language|Lak]]:
* [[Dagestan]] (&quot;as one of the Dagestan peoples languages&quot;; with Russian)

[[Lezgian language|Lezgian]]:
* [[Dagestan]] (&quot;as one of the Dagestan peoples languages&quot;; with Russian)

[[Macedonian language|Macedonian]]
* part of [[Albania]]
* part of [[Serbia]]

[[Maguindanao language|Maguindanao]]:
* [[Mindanao]] ([[Philippines]]) (with Filipino, English, Cebuano, Chavacano, Hiligaynon, Ilocano, Maranao, Surigaonon, Tagalog, Tausug, and Yakan)

[[Malayalam language|Malayalam]]:
* India (with 21 other regional languages)
** [[Kerala]]
** [[Puducherry (union territory)|Puducherry]]
** [[Lakshadweep]]

[[Mansi language|Mansi]]:
* [[Khanty–Mansi Autonomous Okrug]] (&quot;aboriginal language&quot;; with Khanty and Nenets)

[[Maranao language|Maranao]]:
* [[Mindanao]] ([[Philippines]]) (with Filipino, English, Cebuano, Chavacano, Hiligaynon, Ilocano, Maguindanao, Surigaonon, Tagalog, Tausug, and Yakan)

[[Marathi language|Marathi]]:
* India (with 21 other regional languages)
** [[Maharashtra]]
** [[Goa]]
** [[Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu]]

[[Mari language|Mari]] (Hill and Meadow):
* [[Mari El]] (&quot;state language&quot;; with Russian)

[[Maya language|Mayan]]:
* Mexico (*only recognized)
* [[Guatemala]] (*only recognized)
* [[Belize]] (*only recognized)
* [[Honduras]] (*only recognized)
* [[El Salvador]] (*only recognized)

[[Meitei language|Meitei]] (officially known as [[Manipuri language|Manipuri]]):
* India (with [[Languages with official status in India|21 other official languages]])
** [[Manipur]] 
** [[Tripura]] (formerly)

[[Mi&#x27;kmaq language|Mi&#x27;kmaq]]:
* [[Nova Scotia]] (&quot;first language&quot;; with English (de facto), French, Scottish Gaelic)

[[Moksha language|Moksha]]:
* [[Mordovia]] (&quot;state language&quot;; with Erzya and Russian)

[[Mongolian language|Mongolian]]:
* part of the [[People&#x27;s Republic of China]]
** [[Inner Mongolia]], with Chinese (Mandarin)
** [[Haixi Mongol and Tibetan Autonomous Prefecture|Haixi]], with Tibetan and Chinese (Mandarin)
** [[Bortala Mongol Autonomous Prefecture|Bortala]], with Chinese (Mandarin)
** [[Bayin&#x27;gholin Mongol Autonomous Prefecture|Bayin&#x27;gholin]], with Chinese (Mandarin)
** [[Dorbod Mongol Autonomous County|Dorbod]], with Chinese (Mandarin)
** [[Qian Gorlos Mongol Autonomous County|Qian Gorlos]], with Chinese (Mandarin)
** [[Harqin Left Mongol Autonomous County|Harqin Left]], with Chinese (Mandarin)
** [[Fuxin Mongol Autonomous County|Fuxin]], with Chinese (Mandarin)
** [[Weichang Manchu and Mongol Autonomous County|Weichang]], with Chinese (Mandarin)
** [[Subei Mongol Autonomous County|Subei]], with Chinese (Mandarin)
** [[Henan Mongol Autonomous County|Henan]], with Chinese (Mandarin)

[[Náhuatl]]:
* Mexico (*only recognized)
* [[El Salvador]] (*only recognized)

[[Nenets languages|Nenets]]:
* [[Khanty–Mansi Autonomous Okrug]] (&quot;aboriginal language&quot;; with Khanty and Mansi)
* [[Yamalo-Nenets Autonomous Okrug]] (&quot;aboriginal language&quot;; with Khanty and Selkup)

[[Nepali language|Nepali]]:
* India (with 21 other regional languages)

[[Nogai language|Nogai]]:
* [[Dagestan]] (&quot;as one of the Dagestan peoples languages&quot;; with Russian)
* [[Karachay–Cherkessia]] (&quot;state language&quot;; with Abaza, Cherkess, Karachay and Russian)

[[Occitan language|Occitan]]:
* [[Catalonia]], with Catalan and Spanish)

[[Odia language|Odia]]:
* India (with 21 other regional languages)
** [[Odisha]]

[[Ossetic language|Ossetic]] (Digor and Iron dialects):
* [[North Ossetia|North Ossetia—Alania]] (&quot;state language&quot;; with Russian)

[[Pangasinan language|Pangasinan]]:
* [[Luzon]] ([[Philippines]]) (with Filipino, English, Bikol, Ibanag, Ilocano, Ivatan, Kapampangan, Sambal, and Tagalog)

[[Portuguese language|Portuguese]]:
* part of the [[People&#x27;s Republic of China]]
** [[Macau]] (with [[Chinese language|Chinese]])

[[Punjabi language|Punjabi]]:
* Pakistan
** [[Punjab, Pakistan|Punjab]]
* India (with 21 other regional languages)
** [[Punjab, India|Punjab]]
** [[Delhi]]

[[Romanian language|Romanian]]:
* [[Vojvodina]] (with Croatian, Serbian, Hungarian, Slovak and Ruthenian)

[[Russian language|Russian]]. Russian is fixed as a state language in the Constitutions of the republics of the Russian Federation:
* [[Adygea]] (&quot;state language&quot;; with Adyghe)
* [[Altay Republic|Altay, Republic of]] (&quot;state language&quot;; with Altay)
* [[Bashkortostan]] (&quot;state language&quot;; with Bashkir)
* [[Buryat Republic|Buryatia]] (&quot;state language&quot;; with Buryat)
* [[Chechnya]] (&quot;state language&quot;; with Chechen)
* [[Chuvash Republic|Chuvashia]] (&quot;state language&quot;; with Chuvash)
* [[Dagestan]] (&quot;state language&quot;; with the languages of the Dagestan peoples)
* [[Ingushetia]] (&quot;state language&quot;; with Ingush)
* [[Kabardino-Balkaria]] (&quot;state language&quot;; with Balkar and Kabardian)
* [[Kalmykia]] (&quot;state language&quot;; with Kalmyk)
* [[Karachay–Cherkessia]] (&quot;state language&quot;; with Abaza, Cherkess, Karachay and Nogai)
* [[Republic of Karelia|Karelia]] (&quot;state language&quot;)
* [[Khakassia]] (&quot;state language&quot;; with Khakas)
* [[Komi Republic|Komi]] (&quot;state language&quot;; with Komi)
* [[Mari El]] (&quot;state language&quot;; with Mari (Hill and Meadow))
* [[Mordovia]] (&quot;state language&quot;; with Erzya and Moksha)
* [[North Ossetia|North Ossetia—Alania]] (&quot;state language&quot;; with Ossetic)
* [[Sakha Republic|Sakha]] (&quot;state language&quot;; with Sakha)
* [[Tatarstan]] (&quot;state language&quot;; with Tatar)
* [[Tuva|Tyva]] (&quot;state language&quot;; with Tuvan)
* [[Udmurtia]] (&quot;state language&quot;; with Udmurt)
* Russian (with [[Gagauz language|Gagauz]]) is an official language of [[Gagauzia]] (autonomous republic within [[Moldova]])

[[Rusyn language|Rusyn]]:
* [[Vojvodina]] (with Croatian, Serbian, Romanian, Hungarian, Slovak)
* [[Ukraine]]
** Zakarapts&#x27;ka region (with Ukrainian, Hungarian)

[[Rutul language|Rutul]]:
* [[Dagestan]] (&quot;as one of the Dagestan peoples languages&quot;; with Russian)

[[Sakha language|Sakha]]:
* [[Sakha Republic|Sakha]] (&quot;state language&quot;; with Russian)

[[Sambal language|Sambal]]:
* [[Luzon]] ([[Philippines]]) (with Filipino, English, Bikol, Ibanag, Ilocano, Ivatan, Kapampangan, Pangasinan, and Tagalog)

[[Sami languages|Sami]]:
* [[Finland]] (in four municipalities)
* Norway (in six municipalities in two provinces)
* Sweden (in four municipalities and surrounding municipalities)

[[Sanskrit language|Sanskrit]]:
* [[Nepal]]

[[Saraiki language|Saraiki]]
* [[Pakistan]]

[[Sarikoli language|Sarikoli]]:
* part of the [[People&#x27;s Republic of China]] (It&#x27;s different from Tajiki of Tajikistan)
** [[Taxkorgan Tajik Autonomous County|Taxkorgan]] (with Chinese (Mandarin))

[[Selkup language|Selkup]]:
* [[Yamalo-Nenets Autonomous Okrug]] (&quot;aboriginal language&quot;; with Khanty and Nenets)

[[Serbian language|Serbian]]:
* [[Croatia]]-Co-official minority language in municipalities: [[Borovo, Croatia|Borovo]], [[Trpinja]], [[Markušica]], [[Negoslavci]], [[Vukovar#Minority languages|Vukovar]], [[Šodolovci]], [[Erdut]], [[Darda, Croatia|Darda]], [[Jagodnjak]], [[Kneževi Vinogradi]], [[Dvor, Croatia|Dvor]], [[Gvozd]], [[Biskupija]], [[Ervenik]], [[Kistanje]], [[Gračac]], [[Udbina]], [[Vrbovsko]], [[Donji Kukuruzari]] and [[Nijemci]].

[[Sindhi language|Sindhi]]:
* India (with 21 other regional languages)
* [[Pakistan]] (Official language in the province of [[Sindh]] along with [[Urdu]] and [[English language|English]])

[[Slavey languages|North and South Slavey]]:
* [[Northwest Territories]] (with Cree, Chipewyan, English, French, Gwich&#x27;in, Inuinnaqtun, Inuktitut, Inuvialuktun, and Tłįchǫ (Dogrib))

[[Slovak language|Slovak]]:
* part of [[Serbia]]
** [[Vojvodina]] (with Croatian, Serbian, Hungarian, Romanian and Ruthenian)

[[Slovene language|Slovene]]:
* part of Italy
** [[Friuli-Venezia Giulia]] (with [[Italian language|Italian]], [[Friulian language|Friulian]] and [[German Language|German]])
* part of Austria
** [[Carinthia (state)|Carinthia]] (with [[German language|German]])

[[Spanish language|Spanish]]:
* [[New Mexico]] (spoken with English)
* [[Puerto Rico]] (with English)
* [[Philippines]] (mainly as [[Chavacano]] in [[Mindanao]])
* [[El Cenizo, Texas]]

[[Surigaonon language|Surigaonon]]:
* [[Visayas]] and [[Mindanao]] ([[Philippines]]) (with Filipino, English, Aklanon, Bikol, Cebuano, Chavacano, Hiligaynon, Ilocano, Kinaray-a, Maguindanao, Maranao, Tagalog, Tausug, Waray, and Yakan)

[[Tabasaran language|Tabasaran]]:
* [[Dagestan]] (&quot;as one of the Dagestan peoples languages&quot;; with Russian)

[[Tagalog language|Tagalog]]:
* [[Luzon]], [[Visayas]], and [[Mindanao]] ([[Philippines]]) (with Filipino, English, Aklanon, Bikol, Cebuano, Chavacano, Hiligaynon, Ibanag, Ilocano, Ivatan, Kapampangan, Kinaray-a, Maguindanao, Maranao, Pangasinan, Sambal, Surigaonon, Tausug, Waray, and Yakan)

[[Tahitian language|Tahitian]]:
* [[French Polynesia]] (with French)

[[Tamil language|Tamil]]:
* India (with 21 other regional languages)
** [[Andaman and Nicobar Islands]]
** [[Puducherry (union territory)|Puducherry]]
** [[Tamil Nadu]]
* [[Sri Lanka]]
* [[Singapore]]

[[Tat language (Caucasus)|Tat]]:
* [[Dagestan]] (&quot;as one of the Dagestan peoples languages&quot;; with Russian)

[[Tatar language|Tatar]]:
* [[Tatarstan]] (&quot;state language&quot;; with Russian)

[[Tausug language|Tausug]]:
* [[Mindanao]] ([[Philippines]]) (with Filipino, English, Cebuano, Chavacano, Hiligaynon, Ilocano, Maguindanao, Surigaonon, Tagalog, Maranao, and Yakan)

[[Telugu language|Telugu]]:
* India (with 21 other regional languages)
** [[Andhra Pradesh]]
** [[Telangana]]
** [[Puducherry (union territory)|Puducherry]]
** [[Andaman and Nicobar Islands]]

[[Standard Tibetan|Tibetan]]:
* [[Tibet Autonomous Region]] (with Chinese (Mandarin))
* [[Aba Tibetan and Qiang Autonomous Prefecture|Aba]] (with Chinese (Mandarin))
* [[Garzê Tibetan Autonomous Prefecture|Garzê]] (with Chinese (Mandarin))
* [[Dêqên Tibetan Autonomous Prefecture|Dêqên]] (with Chinese (Mandarin))
* [[Wenshan Zhuang and Miao Autonomous Prefecture|Wenshan]] (with Chinese (Mandarin))
* [[Gannan Tibetan Autonomous Prefecture|Gannan]] (with Chinese (Mandarin))
* [[Haibei Tibetan Autonomous Prefecture|Haibai]] (with Chinese (Mandarin))
* [[Hainan Tibetan Autonomous Prefecture|Hainan]] (with Chinese (Mandarin))
* [[Huangnan Tibetan Autonomous Prefecture|Huangnan]] (with Chinese (Mandarin))
* [[Golog Tibetan Autonomous Prefecture|Golog]] (with Chinese (Mandarin))
* [[Gyêgu Tibetan Autonomous Prefecture|Gyêgu]] (with Chinese (Mandarin))
* [[Haixi Mongol and Tibetan Autonomous Prefecture|Haixi]] (with Mongolian and Chinese (Mandarin))
* [[Muli Tibetan Autonomous County|Muli]] (with Chinese (Mandarin))
* [[Tianzhu Tibetan Autonomous County|Tianzhu]] (with Chinese (Mandarin))

[[Dogrib language|Tłįchǫ]]:
* [[Northwest Territories]] (with Cree, Chipewyan, English, French, Gwich&#x27;in, Inuinnaqtun, Inuktitut, Inuvialuktun, North Slavey, and South Slavey)

[[Tsakhur language|Tsakhur]]:
* [[Dagestan]] (&quot;as one of the Dagestan peoples languages&quot;; with Russian)

[[Tswana language|Tswana]]:
* [[South Africa]] (with [[Afrikaans language|Afrikaans]], English, [[Southern Ndebele language|Ndebele]], [[Northern Sotho language|Northern Sotho]], [[Sotho language|Sotho]], [[Swati language|Swati]], [[Tsonga language|Tsonga]], [[Venda language|Venda]], [[Xhosa language|Xhosa]], [[Zulu language|Zulu]])

[[Turkish language|Turkish]]:
* [[North Macedonia]] in [[Plasnica]] and [[Centar Župa]]
* [[Kosovo]] in [[Prizren]] and [[Mamuša]]
* part of [[Bulgaria]]

[[Tuvan language|Tuvan]]:
* [[Tuva|Tyva]] (&quot;state language&quot;; with Russian)

[[Udmurt language|Udmurt]]:
* [[Udmurtia]] (&quot;state language&quot;; with Russian)

[[Urdu language|Urdu]]:
* Pakistan (with English as co-official language) 
* India (with 21 other regional languages)
** [[Jammu and Kashmir (union territory)|Jammu and Kashmir]]
** [[Delhi]] Territory
** [[Uttar Pradesh]] state
** [[Bihar]] state
** [[Andhra Pradesh]] mainly in Hyderabad (former princely state of Nizam) and adjacent areas of Maharashtra and Karnataka

[[Uyghur language|Uyghur]]:
* [[Xinjiang]] (with Chinese (Mandarin))

[[Veps language|Veps]]:
* [[Republic of Karelia|Karelia]] (&quot;authorized language&quot;; with Finnish and Karelian)

[[Vietnamese language|Vietnamese]]:
* [[Guangxi Province]], China (some regional status)
* Part of [[Cambodia]]
* Part of [[Laos]]

[[Waray language|Waray]]:
* [[Visayas]] ([[Philippines]]) (with Filipino, English, Aklanon, Cebuano, Hiligaynon, Kinaray-a, and Tagalog)

[[Welsh language|Welsh]]:
* [[Wales]] (United Kingdom) (with English)

[[Yakan language|Yakan]]:
* [[Mindanao]] ([[Philippines]]) (with Filipino, English, Cebuano, Chavacano, Hiligaynon, Ilocano, Maguindanao, Maranao, Surigaonon, Tagalog, and Tausug)

[[Yiddish language|Yiddish]]:
* Russia (only in [[Jewish Autonomous Oblast]], with [[Russian language|Russian]])

[[Yukaghir languages|Yukaghir]]:
* [[Sakha Republic|Sakha]] (&quot;local official language&quot;; in localities with Yukaghir population)

[[Standard Zhuang|Zhuang]]:
* [[Guangxi]] (with Chinese (Mandarin))
* [[Lianshan Zhuang and Yao Autonomous County|Lianshan]] (with Chinese (Mandarin))

== See also ==
* [[List of official languages of international organizations]]
* [[List of official languages by country and territory]]
* [[National language]]

==Notes==
== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q712144" start="285" end="293" title="de facto" label="de facto"/>
<link wikidata="Q5111" start="398" end="404" title="Abkhaz language" label="Abkhaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q31354462" start="408" end="416" title="Abkhazia" label="Abkhazia"/>
<link wikidata="Q27811" start="459" end="463" title="Afar language" label="Afar"/>
<link wikidata="Q977" start="467" end="475" title="Djibouti" label="Djibouti"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="482" end="488" title="Arabic language" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="490" end="496" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q13275" start="498" end="504" title="Somali language" label="Somali"/>
<link wikidata="Q115" start="508" end="516" title="Ethiopia" label="Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q28244" start="523" end="530" title="Amharic language" label="Amharic"/>
<link wikidata="Q33864" start="532" end="537" title="Oromo language" label="Oromo"/>
<link wikidata="Q13275" start="539" end="545" title="Somali language" label="Somali"/>
<link wikidata="Q34124" start="547" end="555" title="Tigrinya language" label="Tigrinya"/>
<link wikidata="Q14196" start="558" end="567" title="Afrikaans language" label="Afrikaans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030" start="571" end="578" title="Namibia" label="Namibia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="585" end="592" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="597" end="603" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="607" end="619" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="626" end="633" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q36785" start="635" end="642" title="Southern Ndebele language" label="Ndebele"/>
<link wikidata="Q33890" start="644" end="658" title="Northern Sotho language" label="Northern Sotho"/>
<link wikidata="Q34340" start="660" end="665" title="Sotho language" label="Sotho"/>
<link wikidata="Q3322093" start="667" end="694" title="South African Sign Language" label="South African Sign Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q34014" start="695" end="700" title="Swati language" label="Swati"/>
<link wikidata="Q34327" start="702" end="708" title="Tsonga language" label="Tsonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q34137" start="710" end="716" title="Tswana language" label="Tswana"/>
<link wikidata="Q32704" start="718" end="723" title="Venda language" label="Venda"/>
<link wikidata="Q13218" start="725" end="730" title="Xhosa language" label="Xhosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q10179" start="732" end="736" title="Zulu language" label="Zulu"/>
<link wikidata="Q35035" start="739" end="746" title="Aja-Gbe language" label="Aja-Gbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q962" start="750" end="755" title="Benin" label="Benin"/>
<link wikidata="Q34838" start="788" end="792" title="Anii language" label="Anii"/>
<link wikidata="Q34889" start="794" end="800" title="Bariba language" label="Bariba"/>
<link wikidata="Q34961" start="802" end="807" title="Biali language" label="Biali"/>
<link wikidata="Q34983" start="809" end="813" title="Boko language" label="Boko"/>
<link wikidata="Q35164" start="815" end="820" title="Dendi language" label="Dendi"/>
<link wikidata="Q33291" start="822" end="829" title="Fon language" label="Fon-Gbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465566" start="831" end="836" title="Foodo language" label="Foodo"/>
<link wikidata="Q33454" start="838" end="842" title="Fula language" label="Fula"/>
<link wikidata="Q33450" start="844" end="851" title="Gen language" label="Gen-Gbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3258739" start="853" end="858" title="Lukpa language" label="Lukpa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4286473" start="860" end="867" title="Mbelime language" label="Mbelime"/>
<link wikidata="Q3070731" start="869" end="875" title="Nateni language" label="Nateni"/>
<link wikidata="Q35186" start="877" end="884" title="Tammari language" label="Tammari"/>
<link wikidata="Q7958576" start="886" end="891" title="Waama language" label="Waama"/>
<link wikidata="Q35913" start="903" end="907" title="Yobe language" label="Yobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q36893" start="909" end="912" title="Yom language" label="Yom"/>
<link wikidata="Q36887" start="914" end="923" title="Pherá language" label="Xwela-Gbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q34311" start="925" end="931" title="Yoruba language" label="Yoruba"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="958" end="964" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q28026" start="967" end="971" title="Akan language" label="Akan"/>
<link wikidata="Q31150449" start="973" end="984" title="Akuapem Twi" label="Akuapem Twi"/>
<link wikidata="Q19261685" start="986" end="996" title="Asante dialect" label="Asante Twi"/>
<link wikidata="Q35570" start="998" end="1003" title="Fante dialect" label="Fante"/>
<link wikidata="Q117" start="1008" end="1013" title="Ghana" label="Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q30005" start="1058" end="1065" title="Ewe language" label="Ewe-Gbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q35159" start="1067" end="1074" title="Dagaare language" label="Dagaare"/>
<link wikidata="Q32238" start="1076" end="1083" title="Dagbani language" label="Dagbani"/>
<link wikidata="Q35141" start="1085" end="1091" title="Dangme language" label="Dangme"/>
<link wikidata="Q33287" start="1093" end="1095" title="Ga language" label="Ga"/>
<link wikidata="Q35267" start="1097" end="1102" title="Gonja language" label="Gonja"/>
<link wikidata="Q35552" start="1104" end="1109" title="Kasem language" label="Kasem"/>
<link wikidata="Q36337" start="1111" end="1116" title="Nzema language" label="Nzema"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="1143" end="1150" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q8748" start="1153" end="1161" title="Albanian language" label="Albanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q222" start="1165" end="1172" title="Albania" label="Albania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246" start="1175" end="1181" title="Kosovo" label="Kosovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q9299" start="1188" end="1195" title="Serbian language" label="Serbian"/>
<link wikidata="Q221" start="1199" end="1214" title="North Macedonia" label="North Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q9296" start="1221" end="1231" title="Macedonian language" label="Macedonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q28244" start="1234" end="1241" title="Amharic language" label="Amharic"/>
<link wikidata="Q115" start="1245" end="1253" title="Ethiopia" label="Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q27811" start="1260" end="1264" title="Afar language" label="Afar"/>
<link wikidata="Q33864" start="1266" end="1271" title="Oromo language" label="Oromo"/>
<link wikidata="Q13275" start="1273" end="1279" title="Somali language" label="Somali"/>
<link wikidata="Q34124" start="1281" end="1289" title="Tigrinya language" label="Tigrinya"/>
<link wikidata="Q34838" start="1292" end="1296" title="Anii language" label="Anii"/>
<link wikidata="Q962" start="1300" end="1305" title="Benin" label="Benin"/>
<link wikidata="Q35035" start="1338" end="1345" title="Aja-Gbe language" label="Aja-Gbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q34889" start="1347" end="1353" title="Bariba language" label="Bariba"/>
<link wikidata="Q34961" start="1355" end="1360" title="Biali language" label="Biali"/>
<link wikidata="Q34983" start="1362" end="1366" title="Boko language" label="Boko"/>
<link wikidata="Q35164" start="1368" end="1373" title="Dendi language" label="Dendi"/>
<link wikidata="Q33291" start="1375" end="1382" title="Fon language" label="Fon-Gbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465566" start="1384" end="1389" title="Foodo language" label="Foodo"/>
<link wikidata="Q33454" start="1391" end="1395" title="Fula language" label="Fula"/>
<link wikidata="Q33450" start="1397" end="1404" title="Gen language" label="Gen-Gbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3258739" start="1406" end="1411" title="Lukpa language" label="Lukpa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4286473" start="1413" end="1420" title="Mbelime language" label="Mbelime"/>
<link wikidata="Q3070731" start="1422" end="1428" title="Nateni language" label="Nateni"/>
<link wikidata="Q35186" start="1430" end="1437" title="Tammari language" label="Tammari"/>
<link wikidata="Q7958576" start="1439" end="1444" title="Waama language" label="Waama"/>
<link wikidata="Q36987" start="1446" end="1454" title="Waci Gbe language" label="Waci-Gbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q35913" start="1456" end="1460" title="Yobe language" label="Yobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q36893" start="1462" end="1465" title="Yom language" label="Yom"/>
<link wikidata="Q36887" start="1467" end="1476" title="Pherá language" label="Xwela-Gbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q34311" start="1478" end="1484" title="Yoruba language" label="Yoruba"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="1512" end="1518" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="1521" end="1527" title="Arabic language" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q786740" start="1538" end="1592" title="List of countries where Arabic is an official language" label="List of countries where Arabic is an official language"/>
<link wikidata="Q262" start="1597" end="1604" title="Algeria" label="Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q398" start="1621" end="1628" title="Bahrain" label="Bahrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q657" start="1631" end="1635" title="Chad" label="Chad"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="1642" end="1648" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q970" start="1652" end="1659" title="Comoros" label="Comoros"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="1666" end="1672" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q33077" start="1677" end="1685" title="Comorian language" label="Comorian"/>
<link wikidata="Q977" start="1689" end="1697" title="Djibouti" label="Djibouti"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="1704" end="1710" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="1714" end="1719" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q986" start="1722" end="1729" title="Eritrea" label="Eritrea"/>
<link wikidata="Q34124" start="1736" end="1744" title="Tigrinya language" label="Tigrinya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="1749" end="1756" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="1760" end="1764" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q36368" start="1771" end="1778" title="Kurdish language" label="Kurdish"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="1781" end="1787" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q9288" start="1794" end="1800" title="Hebrew language" label="Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q810" start="1804" end="1810" title="Jordan" label="Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q817" start="1813" end="1819" title="Kuwait" label="Kuwait"/>
<link wikidata="Q822" start="1822" end="1829" title="Lebanon" label="Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016" start="1832" end="1837" title="Libya" label="Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q912" start="1840" end="1844" title="Mali" label="Mali"/>
<link wikidata="Q34065" start="1851" end="1857" title="Tuareg language" label="Tuareg"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="1862" end="1868" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025" start="1872" end="1882" title="Mauritania" label="Mauritania"/>
<link wikidata="Q33454" start="1917" end="1921" title="Fula language" label="Fula"/>
<link wikidata="Q36660" start="1923" end="1930" title="Soninke language" label="Soninke"/>
<link wikidata="Q34257" start="1932" end="1937" title="Wolof language" label="Wolof"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028" start="1941" end="1948" title="Morocco" label="Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032" start="1965" end="1970" title="Niger" label="Niger"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="1977" end="1983" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q56287" start="1985" end="1991" title="Buduma language" label="Buduma"/>
<link wikidata="Q33454" start="1993" end="1997" title="Fula language" label="Fula"/>
<link wikidata="Q35474" start="1999" end="2009" title="Gourmanché language" label="Gourmanché"/>
<link wikidata="Q56475" start="2011" end="2016" title="Hausa language" label="Hausa"/>
<link wikidata="Q36094" start="2018" end="2024" title="Kanuri language" label="Kanuri"/>
<link wikidata="Q505198" start="2026" end="2033" title="Songhay language" label="Songhay"/>
<link wikidata="Q36990" start="2034" end="2039" title="Zarma language" label="Zarma"/>
<link wikidata="Q4670066" start="2041" end="2049" title="Tamasheq language" label="Tamasheq"/>
<link wikidata="Q36564" start="2051" end="2058" title="Tasawaq language" label="Tasawaq"/>
<link wikidata="Q2967105" start="2060" end="2064" title="Tebu language" label="Tebu"/>
<link wikidata="Q842" start="2068" end="2072" title="Oman" label="Oman"/>
<link wikidata="Q219060" start="2076" end="2085" title="Palestine" label="Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q846" start="2088" end="2093" title="Qatar" label="Qatar"/>
<link wikidata="Q851" start="2096" end="2108" title="Saudi Arabia" label="Saudi Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q34754" start="2111" end="2121" title="Somaliland" label="Somaliland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="2128" end="2135" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q13275" start="2140" end="2146" title="Somali language" label="Somali"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045" start="2176" end="2183" title="Somalia" label="Somalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q13275" start="2190" end="2196" title="Somali language" label="Somali"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049" start="2200" end="2205" title="Sudan" label="Sudan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="2212" end="2219" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q858" start="2223" end="2228" title="Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q948" start="2231" end="2238" title="Tunisia" label="Tunisia"/>
<link wikidata="Q878" start="2241" end="2261" title="United Arab Emirates" label="United Arab Emirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q805" start="2264" end="2269" title="Yemen" label="Yemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q958414" start="2271" end="2277" title="Araona language" label="Araona"/>
<link wikidata="Q750" start="2281" end="2288" title="Bolivia" label="Bolivia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="2295" end="2302" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q5218" start="2304" end="2311" title="Quechua languages" label="Quechua"/>
<link wikidata="Q35876" start="2313" end="2320" title="Guaraní language" label="Guaraní"/>
<link wikidata="Q8785" start="2346" end="2354" title="Armenian language" label="Armenian"/>
<link wikidata="Q399" start="2358" end="2365" title="Armenia" label="Armenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q244165" start="2368" end="2375" title="Republic of Artsakh" label="Artsakh"/>
<link wikidata="Q29401" start="2401" end="2409" title="Assamese language" label="Assamese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="2463" end="2470" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q4627" start="2492" end="2498" title="Aymara language" label="Aymara"/>
<link wikidata="Q750" start="2502" end="2509" title="Bolivia" label="Bolivia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="2516" end="2523" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q5218" start="2525" end="2532" title="Quechua languages" label="Quechua"/>
<link wikidata="Q35876" start="2534" end="2541" title="Guaraní language" label="Guaraní"/>
<link wikidata="Q419" start="2568" end="2572" title="Peru" label="Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="2579" end="2586" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q5218" start="2591" end="2598" title="Quechua languages" label="Quechua"/>
<link wikidata="Q9292" start="2621" end="2632" title="Azerbaijani language" label="Azerbaijani"/>
<link wikidata="Q227" start="2636" end="2646" title="Azerbaijan" label="Azerbaijan"/>
<link wikidata="Q35006" start="2659" end="2666" title="Balanta languages" label="Balanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041" start="2670" end="2677" title="Senegal" label="Senegal"/>
<link wikidata="Q35098" start="2710" end="2717" title="Bassari language" label="Bassari"/>
<link wikidata="Q35096" start="2719" end="2724" title="Bedik language" label="Bedik"/>
<link wikidata="Q33454" start="2726" end="2730" title="Fula language" label="Fula"/>
<link wikidata="Q56231" start="2732" end="2741" title="Hassaniya Arabic" label="Hassaniya"/>
<link wikidata="Q35176" start="2743" end="2747" title="Jola language" label="Jola"/>
<link wikidata="Q33678" start="2749" end="2757" title="Mandinka language" label="Mandinka"/>
<link wikidata="Q35822" start="2759" end="2766" title="Mandjak language" label="Mandjak"/>
<link wikidata="Q35789" start="2768" end="2776" title="Mankanya language" label="Mankanya"/>
<link wikidata="Q36304" start="2778" end="2782" title="Noon language" label="Noon"/>
<link wikidata="Q36308" start="2784" end="2789" title="Safen language" label="Safen"/>
<link wikidata="Q36284" start="2791" end="2796" title="Serer language" label="Serer"/>
<link wikidata="Q36660" start="2798" end="2805" title="Soninke language" label="Soninke"/>
<link wikidata="Q34257" start="2807" end="2812" title="Wolof language" label="Wolof"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="2839" end="2845" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q33243" start="2848" end="2855" title="Bambara language" label="Bambara"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2869" end="2876" title="#M" label="Manding"/>
<link wikidata="Q912" start="2885" end="2889" title="Mali" label="Mali"/>
<link wikidata="Q35065" start="2922" end="2926" title="Bomu language" label="Bomu"/>
<link wikidata="Q35021" start="2928" end="2932" title="Bozo language" label="Bozo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5397128" start="2934" end="2939" title="Escarpment Dogon" label="Dogon"/>
<link wikidata="Q33454" start="2941" end="2945" title="Fula language" label="Fula"/>
<link wikidata="Q36187" start="2947" end="2953" title="Mamara language" label="Mamara"/>
<link wikidata="Q505198" start="2955" end="2962" title="Songhay language" label="Songhay"/>
<link wikidata="Q36660" start="2964" end="2971" title="Soninke language" label="Soninke"/>
<link wikidata="Q35210" start="2973" end="2980" title="Syenara language" label="Syenara"/>
<link wikidata="Q4670066" start="2982" end="2990" title="Tamasheq language" label="Tamasheq"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="3017" end="3023" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q34889" start="3026" end="3032" title="Bariba language" label="Bariba"/>
<link wikidata="Q962" start="3036" end="3041" title="Benin" label="Benin"/>
<link wikidata="Q35035" start="3074" end="3081" title="Aja-Gbe language" label="Aja-Gbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q34838" start="3083" end="3087" title="Anii language" label="Anii"/>
<link wikidata="Q34961" start="3089" end="3094" title="Biali language" label="Biali"/>
<link wikidata="Q34983" start="3096" end="3100" title="Boko language" label="Boko"/>
<link wikidata="Q35164" start="3102" end="3107" title="Dendi language" label="Dendi"/>
<link wikidata="Q33291" start="3109" end="3116" title="Fon language" label="Fon-Gbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465566" start="3118" end="3123" title="Foodo language" label="Foodo"/>
<link wikidata="Q33454" start="3125" end="3129" title="Fula language" label="Fula"/>
<link wikidata="Q33450" start="3131" end="3138" title="Gen language" label="Gen-Gbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3258739" start="3140" end="3145" title="Lukpa language" label="Lukpa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4286473" start="3147" end="3154" title="Mbelime language" label="Mbelime"/>
<link wikidata="Q3070731" start="3156" end="3162" title="Nateni language" label="Nateni"/>
<link wikidata="Q35186" start="3164" end="3171" title="Tammari language" label="Tammari"/>
<link wikidata="Q7958576" start="3173" end="3178" title="Waama language" label="Waama"/>
<link wikidata="Q36987" start="3180" end="3188" title="Waci Gbe language" label="Waci-Gbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q35913" start="3190" end="3194" title="Yobe language" label="Yobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q36893" start="3196" end="3199" title="Yom language" label="Yom"/>
<link wikidata="Q36887" start="3201" end="3210" title="Pherá language" label="Xwela-Gbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q34311" start="3212" end="3218" title="Yoruba language" label="Yoruba"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="3246" end="3252" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q8752" start="3255" end="3261" title="Basque language" label="Basque"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="3311" end="3316" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3995" start="3321" end="3335" title="Basque Country (autonomous community)" label="Basque Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q4018" start="3339" end="3346" title="Navarre" label="Navarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="3358" end="3365" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q35098" start="3367" end="3374" title="Bassari language" label="Bassari"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041" start="3378" end="3385" title="Senegal" label="Senegal"/>
<link wikidata="Q35006" start="3418" end="3425" title="Balanta languages" label="Balanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q35096" start="3427" end="3432" title="Bedik language" label="Bedik"/>
<link wikidata="Q33454" start="3434" end="3438" title="Fula language" label="Fula"/>
<link wikidata="Q56231" start="3440" end="3449" title="Hassaniya Arabic" label="Hassaniya"/>
<link wikidata="Q35176" start="3451" end="3455" title="Jola language" label="Jola"/>
<link wikidata="Q33678" start="3457" end="3465" title="Mandinka language" label="Mandinka"/>
<link wikidata="Q35822" start="3467" end="3474" title="Mandjak language" label="Mandjak"/>
<link wikidata="Q35789" start="3476" end="3484" title="Mankanya language" label="Mankanya"/>
<link wikidata="Q36304" start="3486" end="3490" title="Noon language" label="Noon"/>
<link wikidata="Q36308" start="3492" end="3497" title="Safen language" label="Safen"/>
<link wikidata="Q36284" start="3499" end="3504" title="Serer language" label="Serer"/>
<link wikidata="Q36660" start="3506" end="3513" title="Soninke language" label="Soninke"/>
<link wikidata="Q34257" start="3515" end="3520" title="Wolof language" label="Wolof"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="3547" end="3553" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q35096" start="3556" end="3561" title="Bedik language" label="Bedik"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041" start="3565" end="3572" title="Senegal" label="Senegal"/>
<link wikidata="Q35006" start="3605" end="3612" title="Balanta languages" label="Balanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q35098" start="3614" end="3621" title="Bassari language" label="Bassari"/>
<link wikidata="Q33454" start="3623" end="3627" title="Fula language" label="Fula"/>
<link wikidata="Q56231" start="3629" end="3638" title="Hassaniya Arabic" label="Hassaniya"/>
<link wikidata="Q35176" start="3640" end="3644" title="Jola language" label="Jola"/>
<link wikidata="Q33678" start="3646" end="3654" title="Mandinka language" label="Mandinka"/>
<link wikidata="Q35822" start="3656" end="3663" title="Mandjak language" label="Mandjak"/>
<link wikidata="Q35789" start="3665" end="3673" title="Mankanya language" label="Mankanya"/>
<link wikidata="Q36304" start="3675" end="3679" title="Noon language" label="Noon"/>
<link wikidata="Q36308" start="3681" end="3686" title="Safen language" label="Safen"/>
<link wikidata="Q36284" start="3688" end="3693" title="Serer language" label="Serer"/>
<link wikidata="Q36660" start="3695" end="3702" title="Soninke language" label="Soninke"/>
<link wikidata="Q34257" start="3704" end="3709" title="Wolof language" label="Wolof"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="3736" end="3742" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q9091" start="3745" end="3755" title="Belarusian language" label="Belarusian"/>
<link wikidata="Q184" start="3759" end="3766" title="Belarus" label="Belarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737" start="3773" end="3780" title="Russian language" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9610" start="3783" end="3790" title="Bengali language" label="Bengali"/>
<link wikidata="Q902" start="3794" end="3804" title="Bangladesh" label="Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="3807" end="3812" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="3857" end="3864" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044" start="3887" end="3899" title="Sierra Leone" label="Sierra Leone"/>
<link wikidata="Q25448" start="3901" end="3907" title="Berber language" label="Berber"/>
<link wikidata="Q262" start="3911" end="3918" title="Algeria" label="Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028" start="3935" end="3942" title="Morocco" label="Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q34961" start="3958" end="3963" title="Biali language" label="Biali"/>
<link wikidata="Q962" start="3967" end="3972" title="Benin" label="Benin"/>
<link wikidata="Q35035" start="4005" end="4012" title="Aja-Gbe language" label="Aja-Gbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q34838" start="4014" end="4018" title="Anii language" label="Anii"/>
<link wikidata="Q34889" start="4020" end="4026" title="Bariba language" label="Bariba"/>
<link wikidata="Q34983" start="4028" end="4032" title="Boko language" label="Boko"/>
<link wikidata="Q35164" start="4034" end="4039" title="Dendi language" label="Dendi"/>
<link wikidata="Q33291" start="4041" end="4048" title="Fon language" label="Fon-Gbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465566" start="4050" end="4055" title="Foodo language" label="Foodo"/>
<link wikidata="Q33454" start="4057" end="4061" title="Fula language" label="Fula"/>
<link wikidata="Q33450" start="4063" end="4070" title="Gen language" label="Gen-Gbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3258739" start="4072" end="4077" title="Lukpa language" label="Lukpa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4286473" start="4079" end="4086" title="Mbelime language" label="Mbelime"/>
<link wikidata="Q3070731" start="4088" end="4094" title="Nateni language" label="Nateni"/>
<link wikidata="Q35186" start="4096" end="4103" title="Tammari language" label="Tammari"/>
<link wikidata="Q7958576" start="4105" end="4110" title="Waama language" label="Waama"/>
<link wikidata="Q36987" start="4112" end="4120" title="Waci Gbe language" label="Waci-Gbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q35913" start="4122" end="4126" title="Yobe language" label="Yobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q36893" start="4128" end="4131" title="Yom language" label="Yom"/>
<link wikidata="Q36887" start="4133" end="4142" title="Pherá language" label="Xwela-Gbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q34311" start="4144" end="4150" title="Yoruba language" label="Yoruba"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="4178" end="4184" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q35452" start="4187" end="4194" title="Bislama language" label="Bislama"/>
<link wikidata="Q686" start="4198" end="4205" title="Vanuatu" label="Vanuatu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="4212" end="4219" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="4224" end="4230" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q34983" start="4233" end="4237" title="Boko language" label="Boko"/>
<link wikidata="Q962" start="4241" end="4246" title="Benin" label="Benin"/>
<link wikidata="Q35035" start="4279" end="4286" title="Aja-Gbe language" label="Aja-Gbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q34838" start="4288" end="4292" title="Anii language" label="Anii"/>
<link wikidata="Q34889" start="4294" end="4300" title="Bariba language" label="Bariba"/>
<link wikidata="Q34961" start="4302" end="4307" title="Biali language" label="Biali"/>
<link wikidata="Q35164" start="4309" end="4314" title="Dendi language" label="Dendi"/>
<link wikidata="Q33291" start="4316" end="4323" title="Fon language" label="Fon-Gbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465566" start="4325" end="4330" title="Foodo language" label="Foodo"/>
<link wikidata="Q33454" start="4332" end="4336" title="Fula language" label="Fula"/>
<link wikidata="Q33450" start="4338" end="4345" title="Gen language" label="Gen-Gbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3258739" start="4347" end="4352" title="Lukpa language" label="Lukpa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4286473" start="4354" end="4361" title="Mbelime language" label="Mbelime"/>
<link wikidata="Q3070731" start="4363" end="4369" title="Nateni language" label="Nateni"/>
<link wikidata="Q35186" start="4371" end="4378" title="Tammari language" label="Tammari"/>
<link wikidata="Q7958576" start="4380" end="4385" title="Waama language" label="Waama"/>
<link wikidata="Q36987" start="4387" end="4395" title="Waci Gbe language" label="Waci-Gbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q35913" start="4397" end="4401" title="Yobe language" label="Yobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q36893" start="4403" end="4406" title="Yom language" label="Yom"/>
<link wikidata="Q36887" start="4408" end="4417" title="Pherá language" label="Xwela-Gbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q34311" start="4419" end="4425" title="Yoruba language" label="Yoruba"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="4453" end="4459" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q35065" start="4462" end="4466" title="Bomu language" label="Bomu"/>
<link wikidata="Q912" start="4470" end="4474" title="Mali" label="Mali"/>
<link wikidata="Q33243" start="4507" end="4514" title="Bambara language" label="Bambara"/>
<link wikidata="Q35021" start="4516" end="4520" title="Bozo language" label="Bozo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5397128" start="4522" end="4527" title="Escarpment Dogon" label="Dogon"/>
<link wikidata="Q33454" start="4529" end="4533" title="Fula language" label="Fula"/>
<link wikidata="Q36187" start="4535" end="4541" title="Mamara language" label="Mamara"/>
<link wikidata="Q505198" start="4543" end="4550" title="Songhay language" label="Songhay"/>
<link wikidata="Q36660" start="4552" end="4559" title="Soninke language" label="Soninke"/>
<link wikidata="Q35210" start="4561" end="4568" title="Syenara language" label="Syenara"/>
<link wikidata="Q4670066" start="4570" end="4578" title="Tamasheq language" label="Tamasheq"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="4605" end="4611" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q9303" start="4614" end="4621" title="Bosnian language" label="Bosnian"/>
<link wikidata="Q225" start="4625" end="4647" title="Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q6654" start="4654" end="4662" title="Croatian language" label="Croatian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9299" start="4664" end="4671" title="Serbian language" label="Serbian"/>
<link wikidata="Q35021" start="4697" end="4701" title="Bozo language" label="Bozo"/>
<link wikidata="Q912" start="4705" end="4709" title="Mali" label="Mali"/>
<link wikidata="Q33243" start="4742" end="4749" title="Bambara language" label="Bambara"/>
<link wikidata="Q35065" start="4751" end="4755" title="Bomu language" label="Bomu"/>
<link wikidata="Q5397128" start="4757" end="4762" title="Escarpment Dogon" label="Dogon"/>
<link wikidata="Q33454" start="4764" end="4768" title="Fula language" label="Fula"/>
<link wikidata="Q36187" start="4770" end="4776" title="Mamara language" label="Mamara"/>
<link wikidata="Q505198" start="4778" end="4785" title="Songhay language" label="Songhay"/>
<link wikidata="Q36660" start="4787" end="4794" title="Soninke language" label="Soninke"/>
<link wikidata="Q35210" start="4796" end="4803" title="Syenara language" label="Syenara"/>
<link wikidata="Q4670066" start="4805" end="4813" title="Tamasheq language" label="Tamasheq"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="4840" end="4846" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q56287" start="4849" end="4855" title="Buduma language" label="Buduma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032" start="4859" end="4864" title="Niger" label="Niger"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="4871" end="4877" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="4879" end="4885" title="Arabic language" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q33454" start="4887" end="4891" title="Fula language" label="Fula"/>
<link wikidata="Q35474" start="4893" end="4903" title="Gourmanché language" label="Gourmanché"/>
<link wikidata="Q56475" start="4905" end="4910" title="Hausa language" label="Hausa"/>
<link wikidata="Q36094" start="4912" end="4918" title="Kanuri language" label="Kanuri"/>
<link wikidata="Q505198" start="4920" end="4927" title="Songhay language" label="Songhay"/>
<link wikidata="Q36990" start="4928" end="4933" title="Zarma language" label="Zarma"/>
<link wikidata="Q4670066" start="4935" end="4943" title="Tamasheq language" label="Tamasheq"/>
<link wikidata="Q36564" start="4945" end="4952" title="Tasawaq language" label="Tasawaq"/>
<link wikidata="Q2967105" start="4954" end="4958" title="Tebu language" label="Tebu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7918" start="4961" end="4970" title="Bulgarian language" label="Bulgarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q219" start="4974" end="4982" title="Bulgaria" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q9228" start="4984" end="4991" title="Burmese language" label="Burmese"/>
<link wikidata="Q836" start="4995" end="5002" title="Myanmar" label="Myanmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q9186" start="5031" end="5040" title="Cantonese" label="Cantonese"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="5044" end="5053" title="Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q178528" start="5061" end="5091" title="Traditional Chinese characters" label="Traditional Chinese characters"/>
<link wikidata="Q9192" start="5099" end="5115" title="Mandarin Chinese" label="Mandarin Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="5120" end="5127" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q14773" start="5131" end="5136" title="Macau" label="Macau"/>
<link wikidata="Q178528" start="5144" end="5174" title="Traditional Chinese characters" label="Traditional Chinese characters"/>
<link wikidata="Q9192" start="5182" end="5198" title="Mandarin Chinese" label="Mandarin Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146" start="5203" end="5213" title="Portuguese language" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q7026" start="5215" end="5222" title="Catalan language" label="Catalan"/>
<link wikidata="Q228" start="5226" end="5233" title="Andorra" label="Andorra"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="5284" end="5289" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q5765" start="5294" end="5310" title="Balearic Islands" label="Balearic Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q5705" start="5314" end="5323" title="Catalonia" label="Catalonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5720" start="5327" end="5346" title="Valencian Community" label="Valencian Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="5357" end="5364" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q727694" start="5366" end="5383" title="Standard Mandarin" label="Chinese, Mandarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q19188" start="5387" end="5401" title="Mainland China" label="Mainland China"/>
<link wikidata="Q185614" start="5409" end="5438" title="Simplified Chinese characters" label="Simplified Chinese characters"/>
<link wikidata="Q14773" start="5442" end="5447" title="Macau" label="Macau"/>
<link wikidata="Q185614" start="5460" end="5489" title="Simplified Chinese characters" label="Simplified Chinese characters"/>
<link wikidata="Q178528" start="5494" end="5524" title="Traditional Chinese characters" label="Traditional Chinese characters"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="5528" end="5537" title="Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q185614" start="5550" end="5579" title="Simplified Chinese characters" label="Simplified Chinese characters"/>
<link wikidata="Q178528" start="5584" end="5614" title="Traditional Chinese characters" label="Traditional Chinese characters"/>
<link wikidata="Q9186" start="5621" end="5630" title="Cantonese" label="Cantonese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="5635" end="5642" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="5646" end="5655" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q185614" start="5663" end="5692" title="Simplified Chinese characters" label="Simplified Chinese characters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="5699" end="5706" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q9237" start="5708" end="5713" title="Malay language" label="Malay"/>
<link wikidata="Q5885" start="5718" end="5723" title="Tamil language" label="Tamil"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="5727" end="5733" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q178528" start="5741" end="5771" title="Traditional Chinese characters" label="Traditional Chinese characters"/>
<link wikidata="Q715278" start="5812" end="5830" title="Formosan languages" label="Formosan languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q36778" start="5832" end="5849" title="Taiwanese Hokkien" label="Taiwanese Hokkien"/>
<link wikidata="Q2391532" start="5851" end="5856" title="Taiwanese Hakka" label="Hakka"/>
<link wikidata="Q34019" start="5861" end="5881" title="Taiwan Sign Language" label="Taiwan Sign Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q33273" start="5885" end="5893" title="Chewa language" label="Chichewa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020" start="5897" end="5903" title="Malawi" label="Malawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="5910" end="5917" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q954" start="5921" end="5929" title="Zimbabwe" label="Zimbabwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="5936" end="5943" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q34004" start="5945" end="5950" title="Shona language" label="Shona"/>
<link wikidata="Q35613" start="5952" end="5959" title="Northern Ndebele language" label="Ndebele"/>
<link wikidata="Q2964008" start="5961" end="5969" title="Sena language" label="Chirbawe"/>
<link wikidata="Q33672" start="5971" end="5978" title="Kalanga language" label="Kalanga"/>
<link wikidata="Q963636" start="5980" end="5998" title="Tshuwau language" label="&amp;quot;Koisan&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3553981" start="6010" end="6016" title="Nambya language" label="Nambya"/>
<link wikidata="Q13311" start="6018" end="6022" title="Ndau dialect" label="Ndau"/>
<link wikidata="Q8072097" start="6024" end="6048" title="Zimbabwean sign languages" label="Zimbabwean sign language"/>
<link wikidata="Q34101" start="6050" end="6055" title="Tonga language (Zambia and Zimbabwe)" label="Tonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q34137" start="6057" end="6063" title="Tswana language" label="Tswana"/>
<link wikidata="Q32704" start="6065" end="6070" title="Venda (language)" label="Venda"/>
<link wikidata="Q13218" start="6072" end="6077" title="Xhosa language" label="Xhosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2964008" start="6080" end="6088" title="Sena language" label="Chirbawe"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6109" end="6113" title="#S" label="Sena"/>
<link wikidata="Q33077" start="6121" end="6129" title="Comorian language" label="Comorian"/>
<link wikidata="Q970" start="6132" end="6139" title="Comoros" label="Comoros"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="6146" end="6152" title="Arabic language" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="6157" end="6163" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q33111" start="6165" end="6173" title="Corsican language" label="Corsican"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="6192" end="6198" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q14112" start="6202" end="6209" title="Corsica" label="Corsica"/>
<link wikidata="Q6654" start="6211" end="6219" title="Croatian language" label="Croatian"/>
<link wikidata="Q224" start="6223" end="6230" title="Croatia" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q225" start="6233" end="6255" title="Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q9303" start="6262" end="6269" title="Bosnian language" label="Bosnian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9299" start="6274" end="6281" title="Serbian language" label="Serbian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9056" start="6307" end="6312" title="Czech language" label="Czech"/>
<link wikidata="Q213" start="6316" end="6330" title="Czech Republic" label="Czech Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q214" start="6333" end="6341" title="Slovakia" label="Slovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q35159" start="6477" end="6484" title="Dagaare language" label="Dagaare"/>
<link wikidata="Q117" start="6488" end="6493" title="Ghana" label="Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q28026" start="6538" end="6542" title="Akan language" label="Akan"/>
<link wikidata="Q30005" start="6578" end="6585" title="Ewe language" label="Ewe-Gbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q32238" start="6587" end="6594" title="Dagbani language" label="Dagbani"/>
<link wikidata="Q35141" start="6596" end="6602" title="Dangme language" label="Dangme"/>
<link wikidata="Q33287" start="6604" end="6606" title="Ga language" label="Ga"/>
<link wikidata="Q35267" start="6608" end="6613" title="Gonja language" label="Gonja"/>
<link wikidata="Q35552" start="6615" end="6620" title="Kasem language" label="Kasem"/>
<link wikidata="Q36337" start="6622" end="6627" title="Nzema language" label="Nzema"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="6654" end="6661" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q32238" start="6664" end="6671" title="Dagbani language" label="Dagbani"/>
<link wikidata="Q117" start="6675" end="6680" title="Ghana" label="Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q28026" start="6725" end="6729" title="Akan language" label="Akan"/>
<link wikidata="Q30005" start="6765" end="6772" title="Ewe language" label="Ewe-Gbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q35159" start="6774" end="6781" title="Dagaare language" label="Dagaare"/>
<link wikidata="Q35141" start="6783" end="6789" title="Dangme language" label="Dangme"/>
<link wikidata="Q33287" start="6791" end="6793" title="Ga language" label="Ga"/>
<link wikidata="Q35267" start="6795" end="6800" title="Gonja language" label="Gonja"/>
<link wikidata="Q35552" start="6802" end="6807" title="Kasem language" label="Kasem"/>
<link wikidata="Q36337" start="6809" end="6814" title="Nzema language" label="Nzema"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="6841" end="6848" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q35141" start="6851" end="6857" title="Dangme language" label="Dangme"/>
<link wikidata="Q117" start="6860" end="6865" title="Ghana" label="Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q28026" start="6910" end="6914" title="Akan language" label="Akan"/>
<link wikidata="Q30005" start="6950" end="6957" title="Ewe language" label="Ewe-Gbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q35159" start="6959" end="6966" title="Dagaare language" label="Dagaare"/>
<link wikidata="Q32238" start="6968" end="6975" title="Dagbani language" label="Dagbani"/>
<link wikidata="Q33287" start="6977" end="6979" title="Ga language" label="Ga"/>
<link wikidata="Q35267" start="6981" end="6986" title="Gonja language" label="Gonja"/>
<link wikidata="Q35552" start="6988" end="6993" title="Kasem language" label="Kasem"/>
<link wikidata="Q36337" start="6995" end="7000" title="Nzema language" label="Nzema"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="7027" end="7034" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q9035" start="7037" end="7043" title="Danish language" label="Danish"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="7047" end="7054" title="Denmark" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q4628" start="7057" end="7070" title="Faroe Islands" label="Faroe Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q25258" start="7077" end="7084" title="Faroese language" label="Faroese"/>
<link wikidata="Q178440" start="7087" end="7091" title="Dari language" label="Dari"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="7095" end="7106" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q58680" start="7210" end="7216" title="Pashto language" label="Pashto"/>
<link wikidata="Q35164" start="7219" end="7224" title="Dendi language" label="Dendi"/>
<link wikidata="Q962" start="7228" end="7233" title="Benin" label="Benin"/>
<link wikidata="Q35035" start="7266" end="7273" title="Aja-Gbe language" label="Aja-Gbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q34838" start="7275" end="7279" title="Anii language" label="Anii"/>
<link wikidata="Q34889" start="7281" end="7287" title="Bariba language" label="Bariba"/>
<link wikidata="Q34961" start="7289" end="7294" title="Biali language" label="Biali"/>
<link wikidata="Q34983" start="7296" end="7300" title="Boko language" label="Boko"/>
<link wikidata="Q33291" start="7302" end="7309" title="Fon language" label="Fon-Gbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465566" start="7311" end="7316" title="Foodo language" label="Foodo"/>
<link wikidata="Q33454" start="7318" end="7322" title="Fula language" label="Fula"/>
<link wikidata="Q33450" start="7324" end="7331" title="Gen language" label="Gen-Gbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3258739" start="7333" end="7338" title="Lukpa language" label="Lukpa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4286473" start="7340" end="7347" title="Mbelime language" label="Mbelime"/>
<link wikidata="Q3070731" start="7349" end="7355" title="Nateni language" label="Nateni"/>
<link wikidata="Q35186" start="7357" end="7364" title="Tammari language" label="Tammari"/>
<link wikidata="Q7958576" start="7366" end="7371" title="Waama language" label="Waama"/>
<link wikidata="Q36987" start="7373" end="7381" title="Waci Gbe language" label="Waci-Gbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q35913" start="7383" end="7387" title="Yobe language" label="Yobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q36893" start="7389" end="7392" title="Yom language" label="Yom"/>
<link wikidata="Q36887" start="7394" end="7403" title="Pherá language" label="Xwela-Gbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q34311" start="7405" end="7411" title="Yoruba language" label="Yoruba"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="7439" end="7445" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q32656" start="7448" end="7455" title="Dhivehi language" label="Dhivehi"/>
<link wikidata="Q826" start="7459" end="7467" title="Maldives" label="Maldives"/>
<link wikidata="Q32706" start="7469" end="7475" title="Dioula language" label="Dioula"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7489" end="7496" title="#M" label="Manding"/>
<link wikidata="Q965" start="7505" end="7517" title="Burkina Faso" label="Burkina Faso"/>
<link wikidata="Q33454" start="7550" end="7554" title="Fula language" label="Fula"/>
<link wikidata="Q36096" start="7556" end="7561" title="Mossi language" label="Mossi"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="7608" end="7614" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q5397128" start="7617" end="7622" title="Escarpment Dogon" label="Dogon"/>
<link wikidata="Q912" start="7626" end="7630" title="Mali" label="Mali"/>
<link wikidata="Q33243" start="7663" end="7670" title="Bambara language" label="Bambara"/>
<link wikidata="Q35065" start="7672" end="7676" title="Bomu language" label="Bomu"/>
<link wikidata="Q35021" start="7678" end="7682" title="Bozo language" label="Bozo"/>
<link wikidata="Q33454" start="7684" end="7688" title="Fula language" label="Fula"/>
<link wikidata="Q36187" start="7690" end="7696" title="Mamara language" label="Mamara"/>
<link wikidata="Q505198" start="7698" end="7705" title="Songhay language" label="Songhay"/>
<link wikidata="Q36660" start="7707" end="7714" title="Soninke language" label="Soninke"/>
<link wikidata="Q35210" start="7716" end="7723" title="Syenara language" label="Syenara"/>
<link wikidata="Q4670066" start="7725" end="7733" title="Tamasheq language" label="Tamasheq"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="7760" end="7766" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q7411" start="7769" end="7774" title="Dutch language" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="7778" end="7785" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="7810" end="7816" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="7821" end="7827" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q234" start="7859" end="7867" title="Flanders" label="Flanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q240" start="7896" end="7904" title="Brussels" label="Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="7911" end="7917" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="7925" end="7936" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q770" start="7986" end="7995" title="Friesland" label="Friesland"/>
<link wikidata="Q27175" start="8003" end="8015" title="West Frisian language" label="West Frisian"/>
<link wikidata="Q27561" start="8039" end="8050" title="BES islands" label="BES islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q21203" start="8101" end="8106" title="Aruba" label="Aruba"/>
<link wikidata="Q33856" start="8113" end="8123" title="Papiamento" label="Papiamento"/>
<link wikidata="Q25279" start="8128" end="8135" title="Curaçao" label="Curaçao"/>
<link wikidata="Q33856" start="8142" end="8152" title="Papiamento" label="Papiamento"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="8157" end="8164" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q26273" start="8169" end="8181" title="Sint Maarten" label="Sint Maarten"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="8188" end="8195" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q730" start="8199" end="8207" title="Suriname" label="Suriname"/>
<link wikidata="Q33081" start="8209" end="8217" title="Dzongkha language" label="Dzongkha"/>
<link wikidata="Q917" start="8221" end="8227" title="Bhutan" label="Bhutan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="8240" end="8247" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190742" start="8258" end="8313" title="List of countries where English is an official language" label="List of countries where English is an official language"/>
<link wikidata="Q781" start="8318" end="8337" title="Antigua and Barbuda" label="Antigua and Barbuda"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="8340" end="8349" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q778" start="8352" end="8363" title="The Bahamas" label="The Bahamas"/>
<link wikidata="Q244" start="8366" end="8374" title="Barbados" label="Barbados"/>
<link wikidata="Q242" start="8377" end="8383" title="Belize" label="Belize"/>
<link wikidata="Q963" start="8386" end="8394" title="Botswana" label="Botswana"/>
<link wikidata="Q319972" start="8404" end="8421" title="national language" label="national language"/>
<link wikidata="Q34137" start="8425" end="8431" title="Tswana language" label="Tswana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009" start="8435" end="8443" title="Cameroon" label="Cameroon"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="8450" end="8456" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="8460" end="8466" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="8473" end="8479" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904" start="8484" end="8491" title="Ontario" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="8522" end="8528" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="8539" end="8545" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="8552" end="8558" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952" start="8563" end="8574" title="Nova Scotia" label="Nova Scotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="8605" end="8611" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542210" start="8618" end="8624" title="Canadian Gaelic" label="Gaelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1965" start="8635" end="8648" title="New Brunswick" label="New Brunswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="8655" end="8661" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q1948" start="8666" end="8674" title="Manitoba" label="Manitoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="8681" end="8687" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973" start="8692" end="8708" title="British Columbia" label="British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="8739" end="8745" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q1978" start="8756" end="8776" title="Prince Edward Island" label="Prince Edward Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="8807" end="8813" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q1989" start="8824" end="8836" title="Saskatchewan" label="Saskatchewan"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="8867" end="8873" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q1951" start="8884" end="8891" title="Alberta" label="Alberta"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="8922" end="8928" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003" start="8939" end="8964" title="Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Newfoundland and Labrador"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="8995" end="9001" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q13351" start="9003" end="9013" title="Innu language" label="Innu-aimun"/>
<link wikidata="Q27796" start="9021" end="9028" title="Inuit languages" label="Inuttut"/>
<link wikidata="Q2007" start="9039" end="9060" title="Northwest Territories" label="Northwest Territories"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9062" end="9076" title="Northwest Territories#Language" label="with 10 others"/>
<link wikidata="Q2009" start="9081" end="9086" title="Yukon" label="Yukon"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="9093" end="9099" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q2023" start="9104" end="9111" title="Nunavut" label="Nunavut"/>
<link wikidata="Q27796" start="9118" end="9123" title="Inuit languages" label="Inuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="9130" end="9136" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q25279" start="9140" end="9147" title="Curaçao" label="Curaçao"/>
<link wikidata="Q7411" start="9154" end="9159" title="Dutch language" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q33856" start="9164" end="9174" title="Papiamento" label="Papiamento"/>
<link wikidata="Q784" start="9178" end="9186" title="Dominica" label="Dominica"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="9189" end="9196" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q986" start="9199" end="9206" title="Eritrea" label="Eritrea"/>
<link wikidata="Q34124" start="9213" end="9221" title="Tigrinya language" label="Tigrinya"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="9226" end="9232" title="Arabic language" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050" start="9236" end="9244" title="Eswatini" label="Eswatini"/>
<link wikidata="Q34014" start="9251" end="9256" title="Swazi language" label="Swati"/>
<link wikidata="Q712" start="9260" end="9264" title="Fiji" label="Fiji"/>
<link wikidata="Q33295" start="9271" end="9281" title="Fijian language" label="Bau Fijian"/>
<link wikidata="Q46728" start="9286" end="9296" title="Fiji Hindi" label="Fiji Hindi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1005" start="9300" end="9306" title="Gambia" label="Gambia"/>
<link wikidata="Q117" start="9309" end="9314" title="Ghana" label="Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q28026" start="9321" end="9325" title="Akan language" label="Akan"/>
<link wikidata="Q30005" start="9361" end="9368" title="Ewe language" label="Ewe-Gbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q35159" start="9370" end="9377" title="Dagaare language" label="Dagaare"/>
<link wikidata="Q32238" start="9379" end="9386" title="Dagbani language" label="Dagbani"/>
<link wikidata="Q35141" start="9388" end="9394" title="Dangme language" label="Dangme"/>
<link wikidata="Q33287" start="9396" end="9398" title="Ga language" label="Ga"/>
<link wikidata="Q35267" start="9400" end="9405" title="Gonja language" label="Gonja"/>
<link wikidata="Q35552" start="9407" end="9412" title="Kasem language" label="Kasem"/>
<link wikidata="Q36337" start="9414" end="9419" title="Nzema language" label="Nzema"/>
<link wikidata="Q769" start="9423" end="9430" title="Grenada" label="Grenada"/>
<link wikidata="Q734" start="9433" end="9439" title="Guyana" label="Guyana"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="9442" end="9451" title="Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q9186" start="9458" end="9467" title="Cantonese" label="Cantonese"/>
<link wikidata="Q9192" start="9472" end="9488" title="Mandarin Chinese" label="Mandarin Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="9492" end="9497" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q27" start="9529" end="9548" title="Republic of Ireland" label="Republic of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q9142" start="9584" end="9589" title="Irish language" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q766" start="9593" end="9600" title="Jamaica" label="Jamaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q114" start="9603" end="9608" title="Kenya" label="Kenya"/>
<link wikidata="Q7838" start="9615" end="9622" title="Swahili language" label="Swahili"/>
<link wikidata="Q710" start="9626" end="9634" title="Kiribati" label="Kiribati"/>
<link wikidata="Q1013" start="9637" end="9644" title="Lesotho" label="Lesotho"/>
<link wikidata="Q34340" start="9651" end="9656" title="Sotho language" label="Sotho"/>
<link wikidata="Q1014" start="9660" end="9667" title="Liberia" label="Liberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020" start="9670" end="9676" title="Malawi" label="Malawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q33273" start="9683" end="9691" title="Chichewa language" label="Chichewa"/>
<link wikidata="Q833" start="9695" end="9703" title="Malaysia" label="Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q9237" start="9737" end="9742" title="Malay language" label="Malay"/>
<link wikidata="Q233" start="9826" end="9831" title="Malta" label="Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q9166" start="9838" end="9845" title="Maltese language" label="Maltese"/>
<link wikidata="Q709" start="9849" end="9865" title="Marshall Islands" label="Marshall Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q36280" start="9872" end="9883" title="Marshallese language" label="Marshallese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027" start="9887" end="9896" title="Mauritius" label="Mauritius"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="9903" end="9909" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q702" start="9913" end="9944" title="Federated States of Micronesia" label="Micronesia, Federated States of"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030" start="9947" end="9954" title="Namibia" label="Namibia"/>
<link wikidata="Q697" start="10014" end="10019" title="Nauru" label="Nauru"/>
<link wikidata="Q13307" start="10026" end="10033" title="Nauruan language" label="Nauruan"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="10037" end="10048" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q36451" start="10055" end="10060" title="Māori language" label="Māori"/>
<link wikidata="Q36239" start="10065" end="10090" title="New Zealand Sign Language" label="New Zealand Sign Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033" start="10094" end="10101" title="Nigeria" label="Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q56475" start="10108" end="10113" title="Hausa language" label="Hausa"/>
<link wikidata="Q33578" start="10115" end="10119" title="Igbo language" label="Igbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q34311" start="10124" end="10130" title="Yoruba language" label="Yoruba"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="10134" end="10142" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617" start="10149" end="10153" title="Urdu" label="Urdu"/>
<link wikidata="Q695" start="10182" end="10187" title="Palau" label="Palau"/>
<link wikidata="Q33776" start="10194" end="10201" title="Palauan language" label="Palauan"/>
<link wikidata="Q691" start="10205" end="10221" title="Papua New Guinea" label="Papua New Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q34159" start="10228" end="10237" title="Tok Pisin" label="Tok Pisin"/>
<link wikidata="Q33617" start="10242" end="10251" title="Hiri Motu" label="Hiri Motu"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="10255" end="10266" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q33298" start="10273" end="10281" title="Filipino language" label="Filipino"/>
<link wikidata="Q1037" start="10285" end="10291" title="Rwanda" label="Rwanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="10298" end="10304" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q33573" start="10309" end="10320" title="Kinyarwanda" label="Kinyarwanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q763" start="10324" end="10345" title="Saint Kitts and Nevis" label="Saint Kitts and Nevis"/>
<link wikidata="Q760" start="10348" end="10359" title="Saint Lucia" label="Saint Lucia"/>
<link wikidata="Q757" start="10362" end="10394" title="Saint Vincent and the Grenadines" label="Saint Vincent and the Grenadines"/>
<link wikidata="Q683" start="10397" end="10402" title="Samoa" label="Samoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q34011" start="10409" end="10415" title="Samoan language" label="Samoan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042" start="10419" end="10429" title="Seychelles" label="Seychelles"/>
<link wikidata="Q34015" start="10436" end="10454" title="Seychellois Creole" label="Seychellois Creole"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="10459" end="10465" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044" start="10469" end="10481" title="Sierra Leone" label="Sierra Leone"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="10484" end="10493" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q9192" start="10500" end="10507" title="Mandarin Chinese" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q9237" start="10509" end="10514" title="Malay language" label="Malay"/>
<link wikidata="Q5885" start="10516" end="10521" title="Tamil language" label="Tamil"/>
<link wikidata="Q26273" start="10525" end="10537" title="Sint Maarten" label="Sint Maarten"/>
<link wikidata="Q7411" start="10544" end="10549" title="Dutch language" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q685" start="10553" end="10568" title="Solomon Islands" label="Solomon Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q34754" start="10571" end="10581" title="Somaliland" label="Somaliland"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="10588" end="10594" title="Arabic language" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q13275" start="10599" end="10605" title="Somali language" label="Somali"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="10635" end="10647" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q14196" start="10654" end="10663" title="Afrikaans language" label="Afrikaans"/>
<link wikidata="Q36785" start="10665" end="10672" title="Southern Ndebele language" label="Ndebele"/>
<link wikidata="Q33890" start="10674" end="10688" title="Northern Sotho language" label="Northern Sotho"/>
<link wikidata="Q34340" start="10690" end="10695" title="Sotho language" label="Sotho"/>
<link wikidata="Q34014" start="10697" end="10702" title="Swati language" label="Swati"/>
<link wikidata="Q34327" start="10704" end="10710" title="Tsonga language" label="Tsonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q34137" start="10712" end="10718" title="Tswana language" label="Tswana"/>
<link wikidata="Q32704" start="10720" end="10725" title="Venda language" label="Venda"/>
<link wikidata="Q13218" start="10727" end="10732" title="Xhosa language" label="Xhosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q10179" start="10734" end="10738" title="Zulu language" label="Zulu"/>
<link wikidata="Q958" start="10742" end="10753" title="South Sudan" label="South Sudan"/>
<link wikidata="Q854" start="10756" end="10765" title="Sri Lanka" label="Sri Lanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q13267" start="10772" end="10779" title="Sinhala language" label="Sinhala"/>
<link wikidata="Q5885" start="10784" end="10789" title="Tamil language" label="Tamil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049" start="10793" end="10798" title="Sudan" label="Sudan"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="10805" end="10811" title="Arabic" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q924" start="10815" end="10823" title="Tanzania" label="Tanzania"/>
<link wikidata="Q7838" start="10830" end="10837" title="Swahili language" label="Swahili"/>
<link wikidata="Q678" start="10841" end="10846" title="Tonga" label="Tonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q34094" start="10853" end="10859" title="Tongan language" label="Tongan"/>
<link wikidata="Q754" start="10863" end="10882" title="Trinidad and Tobago" label="Trinidad and Tobago"/>
<link wikidata="Q672" start="10885" end="10891" title="Tuvalu" label="Tuvalu"/>
<link wikidata="Q34055" start="10898" end="10906" title="Tuvaluan language" label="Tuvaluan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036" start="10910" end="10916" title="Uganda" label="Uganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q7838" start="10923" end="10930" title="Swahili language" label="Swahili"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="10934" end="10948" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="11070" end="11083" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q686" start="11167" end="11174" title="Vanuatu" label="Vanuatu"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="11193" end="11199" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q953" start="11203" end="11209" title="Zambia" label="Zambia"/>
<link wikidata="Q954" start="11212" end="11220" title="Zimbabwe" label="Zimbabwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q34004" start="11227" end="11232" title="Shona language" label="Shona"/>
<link wikidata="Q35613" start="11234" end="11241" title="Northern Ndebele language" label="Ndebele"/>
<link wikidata="Q33273" start="11243" end="11248" title="Chewa language" label="Chewa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2964008" start="11250" end="11258" title="Sena language" label="Chirbawe"/>
<link wikidata="Q33672" start="11260" end="11267" title="Kalanga language" label="Kalanga"/>
<link wikidata="Q963636" start="11269" end="11287" title="Tshuwau language" label="&amp;quot;Koisan&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3553981" start="11299" end="11305" title="Nambya language" label="Nambya"/>
<link wikidata="Q13311" start="11307" end="11311" title="Ndau dialect" label="Ndau"/>
<link wikidata="Q8072097" start="11313" end="11337" title="Zimbabwean sign languages" label="Zimbabwean sign language"/>
<link wikidata="Q34101" start="11339" end="11344" title="Tonga language (Zambia and Zimbabwe)" label="Tonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q34137" start="11346" end="11352" title="Tswana language" label="Tswana"/>
<link wikidata="Q32704" start="11354" end="11359" title="Venda (language)" label="Venda"/>
<link wikidata="Q13218" start="11361" end="11366" title="Xhosa language" label="Xhosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q9072" start="11369" end="11377" title="Estonian language" label="Estonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q191" start="11381" end="11388" title="Estonia" label="Estonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q30005" start="11390" end="11397" title="Ewe language" label="Ewe-Gbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q117" start="11401" end="11406" title="Ghana" label="Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q28026" start="11451" end="11455" title="Akan language" label="Akan"/>
<link wikidata="Q35159" start="11491" end="11498" title="Dagaare language" label="Dagaare"/>
<link wikidata="Q32238" start="11500" end="11507" title="Dagbani language" label="Dagbani"/>
<link wikidata="Q35141" start="11509" end="11515" title="Dangme language" label="Dangme"/>
<link wikidata="Q33287" start="11516" end="11518" title="Ga language" label="Ga"/>
<link wikidata="Q35267" start="11520" end="11525" title="Gonja language" label="Gonja"/>
<link wikidata="Q35552" start="11527" end="11532" title="Kasem language" label="Kasem"/>
<link wikidata="Q36337" start="11534" end="11539" title="Nzema language" label="Nzema"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="11566" end="11573" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q945" start="11577" end="11581" title="Togo" label="Togo"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="11588" end="11594" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q35475" start="11599" end="11604" title="Kabye language" label="Kabye"/>
<link wikidata="Q25258" start="11617" end="11624" title="Faroese language" label="Faroese"/>
<link wikidata="Q4628" start="11629" end="11642" title="Faroe Islands" label="Faroe Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="11645" end="11652" title="Denmark" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q33295" start="11654" end="11660" title="Fijian language" label="Fijian"/>
<link wikidata="Q712" start="11664" end="11668" title="Fiji" label="Fiji"/>
<link wikidata="Q46728" start="11687" end="11697" title="Fiji Hindi" label="Fiji Hindi"/>
<link wikidata="Q33298" start="11700" end="11708" title="Filipino language" label="Filipino"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="11712" end="11723" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="11730" end="11737" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412" start="11740" end="11747" title="Finnish language" label="Finnish"/>
<link wikidata="Q33" start="11751" end="11758" title="Finland" label="Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461092" start="11765" end="11772" title="Finland-Swedish" label="Swedish"/>
<link wikidata="Q33291" start="11775" end="11782" title="Fon language" label="Fon-Gbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q962" start="11786" end="11791" title="Benin" label="Benin"/>
<link wikidata="Q35035" start="11824" end="11831" title="Aja-Gbe language" label="Aja-Gbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q34838" start="11833" end="11837" title="Anii language" label="Anii"/>
<link wikidata="Q34889" start="11839" end="11845" title="Bariba language" label="Bariba"/>
<link wikidata="Q34961" start="11847" end="11852" title="Biali language" label="Biali"/>
<link wikidata="Q34983" start="11854" end="11858" title="Boko language" label="Boko"/>
<link wikidata="Q35164" start="11860" end="11865" title="Dendi language" label="Dendi"/>
<link wikidata="Q33291" start="11867" end="11874" title="Fon language" label="Fon-Gbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465566" start="11876" end="11881" title="Foodo language" label="Foodo"/>
<link wikidata="Q33454" start="11883" end="11887" title="Fula language" label="Fula"/>
<link wikidata="Q33450" start="11889" end="11896" title="Gen language" label="Gen-Gbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3258739" start="11898" end="11903" title="Lukpa language" label="Lukpa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4286473" start="11905" end="11912" title="Mbelime language" label="Mbelime"/>
<link wikidata="Q3070731" start="11914" end="11920" title="Nateni language" label="Nateni"/>
<link wikidata="Q35186" start="11922" end="11929" title="Tammari language" label="Tammari"/>
<link wikidata="Q7958576" start="11931" end="11936" title="Waama language" label="Waama"/>
<link wikidata="Q36987" start="11938" end="11946" title="Waci Gbe language" label="Waci-Gbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q35913" start="11948" end="11952" title="Yobe language" label="Yobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q36893" start="11954" end="11957" title="Yom language" label="Yom"/>
<link wikidata="Q36887" start="11959" end="11968" title="Pherá language" label="Xwela-Gbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q34311" start="11970" end="11976" title="Yoruba language" label="Yoruba"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="12004" end="12010" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465566" start="12013" end="12018" title="Foodo language" label="Foodo"/>
<link wikidata="Q962" start="12022" end="12027" title="Benin" label="Benin"/>
<link wikidata="Q35035" start="12060" end="12067" title="Aja-Gbe language" label="Aja-Gbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q34838" start="12069" end="12073" title="Anii language" label="Anii"/>
<link wikidata="Q34889" start="12075" end="12081" title="Bariba language" label="Bariba"/>
<link wikidata="Q34961" start="12083" end="12088" title="Biali language" label="Biali"/>
<link wikidata="Q34983" start="12090" end="12094" title="Boko language" label="Boko"/>
<link wikidata="Q35164" start="12096" end="12101" title="Dendi language" label="Dendi"/>
<link wikidata="Q33291" start="12103" end="12110" title="Fon language" label="Fon-Gbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q33454" start="12112" end="12116" title="Fula language" label="Fula"/>
<link wikidata="Q33450" start="12118" end="12125" title="Gen language" label="Gen-Gbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3258739" start="12127" end="12132" title="Lukpa language" label="Lukpa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4286473" start="12134" end="12141" title="Mbelime language" label="Mbelime"/>
<link wikidata="Q3070731" start="12143" end="12149" title="Nateni language" label="Nateni"/>
<link wikidata="Q35186" start="12151" end="12158" title="Tammari language" label="Tammari"/>
<link wikidata="Q7958576" start="12160" end="12165" title="Waama language" label="Waama"/>
<link wikidata="Q36987" start="12167" end="12175" title="Waci Gbe language" label="Waci-Gbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q35913" start="12177" end="12181" title="Yobe language" label="Yobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q36893" start="12183" end="12186" title="Yom language" label="Yom"/>
<link wikidata="Q36887" start="12188" end="12197" title="Pherá language" label="Xwela-Gbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q34311" start="12199" end="12205" title="Yoruba language" label="Yoruba"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="12233" end="12239" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q715278" start="12242" end="12250" title="Formosan languages" label="Formosan"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="12254" end="12260" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4380827" start="12301" end="12309" title="Taiwanese Mandarin" label="Mandarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q36778" start="12311" end="12328" title="Taiwanese Hokkien" label="Taiwanese Hokkien"/>
<link wikidata="Q2391532" start="12330" end="12335" title="Taiwanese Hakka" label="Hakka"/>
<link wikidata="Q34019" start="12340" end="12360" title="Taiwan Sign Language" label="Taiwan Sign Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="12364" end="12370" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q262618" start="12381" end="12435" title="List of countries where French is an official language" label="List of countries where French is an official language"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="12440" end="12447" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q7411" start="12472" end="12477" title="Dutch language" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="12482" end="12488" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q231" start="12521" end="12529" title="Wallonia" label="Wallonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2731996" start="12546" end="12561" title="Land of Eupen" label="Canton of Eupen"/>
<link wikidata="Q815504" start="12570" end="12590" title="Belgian Eifel" label="Canton of Sankt Vith"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="12598" end="12604" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q240" start="12659" end="12667" title="Brussels" label="Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q7411" start="12674" end="12679" title="Dutch language" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q962" start="12683" end="12688" title="Benin" label="Benin"/>
<link wikidata="Q35035" start="12723" end="12730" title="Aja-Gbe language" label="Aja-Gbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q34838" start="12732" end="12736" title="Anii language" label="Anii"/>
<link wikidata="Q34889" start="12738" end="12744" title="Bariba language" label="Bariba"/>
<link wikidata="Q34961" start="12746" end="12751" title="Biali language" label="Biali"/>
<link wikidata="Q34983" start="12753" end="12757" title="Boko language" label="Boko"/>
<link wikidata="Q35164" start="12759" end="12764" title="Dendi language" label="Dendi"/>
<link wikidata="Q33291" start="12766" end="12773" title="Fon language" label="Fon-Gbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465566" start="12775" end="12780" title="Foodo language" label="Foodo"/>
<link wikidata="Q33454" start="12782" end="12786" title="Fula language" label="Fula"/>
<link wikidata="Q33450" start="12788" end="12795" title="Gen language" label="Gen-Gbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3258739" start="12797" end="12802" title="Lukpa language" label="Lukpa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4286473" start="12804" end="12811" title="Mbelime language" label="Mbelime"/>
<link wikidata="Q3070731" start="12813" end="12819" title="Nateni language" label="Nateni"/>
<link wikidata="Q35186" start="12821" end="12828" title="Tammari language" label="Tammari"/>
<link wikidata="Q7958576" start="12830" end="12835" title="Waama language" label="Waama"/>
<link wikidata="Q36987" start="12837" end="12845" title="Waci Gbe language" label="Waci-Gbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q35913" start="12847" end="12851" title="Yobe language" label="Yobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q36893" start="12853" end="12856" title="Yom language" label="Yom"/>
<link wikidata="Q36887" start="12858" end="12867" title="Pherá language" label="Xwela-Gbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q34311" start="12869" end="12875" title="Yoruba language" label="Yoruba"/>
<link wikidata="Q965" start="12879" end="12891" title="Burkina Faso" label="Burkina Faso"/>
<link wikidata="Q32706" start="12935" end="12941" title="Dioula language" label="Dioula"/>
<link wikidata="Q33454" start="12943" end="12947" title="Fula language" label="Fula"/>
<link wikidata="Q36096" start="12949" end="12954" title="Mossi language" label="Mossi"/>
<link wikidata="Q967" start="12958" end="12965" title="Burundi" label="Burundi"/>
<link wikidata="Q33583" start="12972" end="12979" title="Kirundi language" label="Kirundi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009" start="12983" end="12991" title="Cameroon" label="Cameroon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="12998" end="13005" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="13009" end="13015" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="13022" end="13029" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="13034" end="13040" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="13061" end="13068" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q1965" start="13079" end="13092" title="New Brunswick" label="New Brunswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="13099" end="13106" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q1948" start="13111" end="13119" title="Manitoba" label="Manitoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="13126" end="13133" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q2007" start="13138" end="13159" title="Northwest Territories" label="Northwest Territories"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13161" end="13175" title="Northwest Territories#Language" label="with 10 others"/>
<link wikidata="Q2009" start="13180" end="13185" title="Yukon" label="Yukon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="13192" end="13199" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q2023" start="13204" end="13211" title="Nunavut" label="Nunavut"/>
<link wikidata="Q27796" start="13218" end="13223" title="Inuit languages" label="Inuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="13230" end="13237" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q929" start="13241" end="13265" title="Central African Republic" label="Central African Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q33954" start="13272" end="13277" title="Sango language" label="Sango"/>
<link wikidata="Q657" start="13281" end="13285" title="Chad" label="Chad"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="13292" end="13298" title="Arabic language" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q970" start="13302" end="13309" title="Comoros" label="Comoros"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="13316" end="13322" title="Arabic language" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q33077" start="13327" end="13335" title="Comorian language" label="Comorian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1008" start="13339" end="13350" title="Ivory Coast" label="Ivory Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q974" start="13353" end="13385" title="Democratic Republic of the Congo" label="Democratic Republic of the Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q977" start="13388" end="13396" title="Djibouti" label="Djibouti"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="13403" end="13409" title="Arabic language" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q983" start="13413" end="13430" title="Equatorial Guinea" label="Equatorial Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="13437" end="13444" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146" start="13449" end="13459" title="Portuguese language" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="13463" end="13469" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q3769" start="13473" end="13486" title="French Guiana" label="French Guiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q30971" start="13490" end="13506" title="French Polynesia" label="French Polynesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q18655787" start="13510" end="13532" title="Loyalty Islands Province" label="French Loyalty Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q129003" start="13536" end="13571" title="French Southern and Antarctic Lands" label="French Southern and Antarctic Lands"/>
<link wikidata="Q190571" start="13575" end="13612" title="Scattered islands in the Indian Ocean" label="Scattered islands in the Indian Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q17012" start="13616" end="13626" title="Guadeloupe" label="Guadeloupe"/>
<link wikidata="Q17054" start="13630" end="13640" title="Martinique" label="Martinique"/>
<link wikidata="Q17063" start="13644" end="13651" title="Mayotte" label="Mayotte"/>
<link wikidata="Q33788" start="13655" end="13668" title="New Caledonia" label="New Caledonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q17070" start="13672" end="13679" title="Réunion" label="Réunion"/>
<link wikidata="Q25362" start="13683" end="13699" title="Saint Barthélemy" label="Saint Barthélemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q126125" start="13703" end="13715" title="Collectivity of Saint Martin" label="Saint Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q34617" start="13719" end="13744" title="Saint Pierre and Miquelon" label="Saint Pierre and Miquelon"/>
<link wikidata="Q35555" start="13748" end="13765" title="Wallis and Futuna" label="Wallis and Futuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q184319" start="13770" end="13781" title="Adélie Land" label="Adélie Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q161258" start="13787" end="13804" title="Clipperton Island" label="Clipperton Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000" start="13808" end="13813" title="Gabon" label="Gabon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3311985" start="13816" end="13824" title="Guernsey" label="Guernsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="13831" end="13838" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006" start="13842" end="13848" title="Guinea" label="Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q33454" start="13883" end="13887" title="Fula language" label="Fula"/>
<link wikidata="Q35696" start="13889" end="13894" title="Kissi language" label="Kissi"/>
<link wikidata="Q35673" start="13896" end="13902" title="Kpelle language" label="Kpelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q36186" start="13904" end="13911" title="Malinke language" label="Malinke"/>
<link wikidata="Q33990" start="13913" end="13917" title="Susu language" label="Susu"/>
<link wikidata="Q35885" start="13919" end="13923" title="Toma language" label="Toma"/>
<link wikidata="Q35098" start="13925" end="13931" title="Oniyan language" label="Oniyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q36935" start="13933" end="13938" title="Wamey language" label="Wamey"/>
<link wikidata="Q790" start="13942" end="13947" title="Haiti" label="Haiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q33491" start="13954" end="13968" title="Haitian Creole" label="Haitian Creole"/>
<link wikidata="Q1222" start="13982" end="13994" title="Aosta Valley" label="Aosta Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q652" start="14001" end="14008" title="Italian language" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q785" start="14012" end="14018" title="Jersey" label="Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="14025" end="14032" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q32" start="14036" end="14046" title="Luxembourg" label="Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="14053" end="14059" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q9051" start="14064" end="14077" title="Luxembourgish language" label="Luxembourgish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1019" start="14081" end="14091" title="Madagascar" label="Madagascar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7930" start="14098" end="14106" title="Malagasy language" label="Malagasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q912" start="14110" end="14114" title="Mali" label="Mali"/>
<link wikidata="Q33243" start="14149" end="14156" title="Bambara language" label="Bambara"/>
<link wikidata="Q35065" start="14158" end="14162" title="Bomu language" label="Bomu"/>
<link wikidata="Q35021" start="14164" end="14168" title="Bozo language" label="Bozo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5397128" start="14170" end="14175" title="Escarpment Dogon" label="Dogon"/>
<link wikidata="Q33454" start="14177" end="14181" title="Fula language" label="Fula"/>
<link wikidata="Q36187" start="14183" end="14189" title="Mamara language" label="Mamara"/>
<link wikidata="Q505198" start="14191" end="14198" title="Songhay language" label="Songhay"/>
<link wikidata="Q36660" start="14200" end="14207" title="Soninke language" label="Soninke"/>
<link wikidata="Q35210" start="14209" end="14216" title="Syenara language" label="Syenara"/>
<link wikidata="Q4670066" start="14218" end="14226" title="Tamasheq language" label="Tamasheq"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027" start="14230" end="14239" title="Mauritius" label="Mauritius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="14246" end="14253" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q235" start="14257" end="14263" title="Monaco" label="Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032" start="14266" end="14271" title="Niger" label="Niger"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="14278" end="14284" title="Arabic language" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q56287" start="14286" end="14292" title="Buduma language" label="Buduma"/>
<link wikidata="Q33454" start="14294" end="14298" title="Fula language" label="Fula"/>
<link wikidata="Q35474" start="14300" end="14310" title="Gourmanché language" label="Gourmanché"/>
<link wikidata="Q56475" start="14312" end="14317" title="Hausa language" label="Hausa"/>
<link wikidata="Q36094" start="14319" end="14325" title="Kanuri language" label="Kanuri"/>
<link wikidata="Q505198" start="14327" end="14334" title="Songhay language" label="Songhay"/>
<link wikidata="Q36990" start="14335" end="14340" title="Zarma language" label="Zarma"/>
<link wikidata="Q4670066" start="14342" end="14350" title="Tamasheq language" label="Tamasheq"/>
<link wikidata="Q36564" start="14352" end="14359" title="Tasawaq language" label="Tasawaq"/>
<link wikidata="Q2967105" start="14361" end="14365" title="Tebu language" label="Tebu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1037" start="14369" end="14375" title="Rwanda" label="Rwanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041" start="14409" end="14416" title="Senegal" label="Senegal"/>
<link wikidata="Q35006" start="14451" end="14458" title="Balanta languages" label="Balanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q35098" start="14460" end="14467" title="Bassari language" label="Bassari"/>
<link wikidata="Q35096" start="14469" end="14474" title="Bedik language" label="Bedik"/>
<link wikidata="Q33454" start="14476" end="14480" title="Fula language" label="Fula"/>
<link wikidata="Q56231" start="14482" end="14491" title="Hassaniya Arabic" label="Hassaniya"/>
<link wikidata="Q35176" start="14493" end="14497" title="Jola language" label="Jola"/>
<link wikidata="Q33678" start="14499" end="14507" title="Mandinka language" label="Mandinka"/>
<link wikidata="Q35822" start="14509" end="14516" title="Mandjak language" label="Mandjak"/>
<link wikidata="Q35789" start="14518" end="14526" title="Mankanya language" label="Mankanya"/>
<link wikidata="Q36304" start="14528" end="14532" title="Noon language" label="Noon"/>
<link wikidata="Q36308" start="14534" end="14539" title="Safen language" label="Safen"/>
<link wikidata="Q36284" start="14541" end="14546" title="Serer language" label="Serer"/>
<link wikidata="Q36660" start="14548" end="14555" title="Soninke language" label="Soninke"/>
<link wikidata="Q34257" start="14557" end="14562" title="Wolof language" label="Wolof"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042" start="14566" end="14576" title="Seychelles" label="Seychelles"/>
<link wikidata="Q34015" start="14583" end="14601" title="Seychellois Creole" label="Seychellois Creole"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="14606" end="14613" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="14617" end="14628" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="14678" end="14684" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q652" start="14686" end="14693" title="Italian language" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q13199" start="14700" end="14707" title="Romansh language" label="Romansh"/>
<link wikidata="Q11917" start="14747" end="14763" title="Canton of Geneva" label="Canton of Geneva"/>
<link wikidata="Q12771" start="14766" end="14780" title="Canton of Vaud" label="Canton of Vaud"/>
<link wikidata="Q12755" start="14783" end="14797" title="Canton of Jura" label="Canton of Jura"/>
<link wikidata="Q12738" start="14800" end="14819" title="Canton of Neuchâtel" label="Canton of Neuchâtel"/>
<link wikidata="Q12640" start="14822" end="14840" title="Canton of Fribourg" label="Canton of Fribourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="14847" end="14853" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q11911" start="14857" end="14871" title="Canton of Bern" label="Canton of Bern"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="14878" end="14884" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q834" start="14888" end="14904" title="Valais" label="Canton of Valais"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="14911" end="14917" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q945" start="14921" end="14925" title="Togo" label="Togo"/>
<link wikidata="Q30005" start="14932" end="14939" title="Ewe language" label="Ewe-Gbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q35475" start="14944" end="14949" title="Kabye language" label="Kabye"/>
<link wikidata="Q686" start="14953" end="14960" title="Vanuatu" label="Vanuatu"/>
<link wikidata="Q35452" start="14967" end="14974" title="Bislama" label="Bislama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="14979" end="14986" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q33454" start="14989" end="14993" title="Fula language" label="Fula"/>
<link wikidata="Q962" start="14997" end="15002" title="Benin" label="Benin"/>
<link wikidata="Q35035" start="15035" end="15042" title="Aja-Gbe language" label="Aja-Gbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q34838" start="15044" end="15048" title="Anii language" label="Anii"/>
<link wikidata="Q34889" start="15050" end="15056" title="Bariba language" label="Bariba"/>
<link wikidata="Q34961" start="15058" end="15063" title="Biali language" label="Biali"/>
<link wikidata="Q34983" start="15065" end="15069" title="Boko language" label="Boko"/>
<link wikidata="Q35164" start="15071" end="15076" title="Dendi language" label="Dendi"/>
<link wikidata="Q33291" start="15078" end="15085" title="Fon language" label="Fon-Gbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465566" start="15087" end="15092" title="Foodo language" label="Foodo"/>
<link wikidata="Q33450" start="15094" end="15101" title="Gen language" label="Gen-Gbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3258739" start="15103" end="15108" title="Lukpa language" label="Lukpa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4286473" start="15110" end="15117" title="Mbelime language" label="Mbelime"/>
<link wikidata="Q3070731" start="15119" end="15125" title="Nateni language" label="Nateni"/>
<link wikidata="Q35186" start="15127" end="15134" title="Tammari language" label="Tammari"/>
<link wikidata="Q7958576" start="15136" end="15141" title="Waama language" label="Waama"/>
<link wikidata="Q36987" start="15143" end="15151" title="Waci Gbe language" label="Waci-Gbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q35913" start="15153" end="15157" title="Yobe language" label="Yobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q36893" start="15159" end="15162" title="Yom language" label="Yom"/>
<link wikidata="Q36887" start="15164" end="15173" title="Pherá language" label="Xwela-Gbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q34311" start="15175" end="15181" title="Yoruba language" label="Yoruba"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="15209" end="15215" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q965" start="15219" end="15231" title="Burkina Faso" label="Burkina Faso"/>
<link wikidata="Q32706" start="15264" end="15270" title="Dioula language" label="Dioula"/>
<link wikidata="Q36096" start="15272" end="15277" title="Mossi language" label="Mossi"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="15324" end="15330" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006" start="15334" end="15340" title="Guinea" label="Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q35696" start="15373" end="15378" title="Kissi language" label="Kissi"/>
<link wikidata="Q35673" start="15380" end="15386" title="Kpelle language" label="Kpelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q36186" start="15388" end="15395" title="Malinke language" label="Malinke"/>
<link wikidata="Q33990" start="15397" end="15401" title="Susu language" label="Susu"/>
<link wikidata="Q35885" start="15403" end="15407" title="Toma language" label="Toma"/>
<link wikidata="Q35098" start="15409" end="15415" title="Oniyan language" label="Oniyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q36935" start="15417" end="15422" title="Wamey language" label="Wamey"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="15449" end="15455" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q912" start="15459" end="15463" title="Mali" label="Mali"/>
<link wikidata="Q33243" start="15496" end="15503" title="Bambara language" label="Bambara"/>
<link wikidata="Q35065" start="15505" end="15509" title="Bomu language" label="Bomu"/>
<link wikidata="Q35021" start="15511" end="15515" title="Bozo language" label="Bozo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5397128" start="15517" end="15522" title="Escarpment Dogon" label="Dogon"/>
<link wikidata="Q36187" start="15524" end="15530" title="Mamara language" label="Mamara"/>
<link wikidata="Q505198" start="15532" end="15539" title="Songhay language" label="Songhay"/>
<link wikidata="Q36660" start="15541" end="15548" title="Soninke language" label="Soninke"/>
<link wikidata="Q35210" start="15550" end="15557" title="Syenara language" label="Syenara"/>
<link wikidata="Q4670066" start="15559" end="15567" title="Tamasheq language" label="Tamasheq"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="15594" end="15600" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025" start="15604" end="15614" title="Mauritania" label="Mauritania"/>
<link wikidata="Q36660" start="15647" end="15654" title="Soninke language" label="Soninke"/>
<link wikidata="Q34257" start="15656" end="15661" title="Wolof language" label="Wolof"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="15688" end="15694" title="Arabic language" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032" start="15698" end="15703" title="Niger" label="Niger"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="15710" end="15716" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="15718" end="15724" title="Arabic language" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q56287" start="15726" end="15732" title="Buduma language" label="Buduma"/>
<link wikidata="Q35474" start="15734" end="15744" title="Gourmanché language" label="Gourmanché"/>
<link wikidata="Q56475" start="15746" end="15751" title="Hausa language" label="Hausa"/>
<link wikidata="Q36094" start="15753" end="15759" title="Kanuri language" label="Kanuri"/>
<link wikidata="Q505198" start="15761" end="15768" title="Songhay language" label="Songhay"/>
<link wikidata="Q36990" start="15769" end="15774" title="Zarma language" label="Zarma"/>
<link wikidata="Q4670066" start="15776" end="15784" title="Tamasheq language" label="Tamasheq"/>
<link wikidata="Q36564" start="15786" end="15793" title="Tasawaq language" label="Tasawaq"/>
<link wikidata="Q2967105" start="15795" end="15799" title="Tebu language" label="Tebu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041" start="15803" end="15810" title="Senegal" label="Senegal"/>
<link wikidata="Q35006" start="15843" end="15850" title="Balanta languages" label="Balanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q35098" start="15852" end="15859" title="Bassari language" label="Bassari"/>
<link wikidata="Q35096" start="15861" end="15866" title="Bedik language" label="Bedik"/>
<link wikidata="Q56231" start="15868" end="15877" title="Hassaniya Arabic" label="Hassaniya"/>
<link wikidata="Q35176" start="15879" end="15883" title="Jola language" label="Jola"/>
<link wikidata="Q33678" start="15885" end="15893" title="Mandinka language" label="Mandinka"/>
<link wikidata="Q35822" start="15895" end="15902" title="Mandjak language" label="Mandjak"/>
<link wikidata="Q35789" start="15904" end="15912" title="Mankanya language" label="Mankanya"/>
<link wikidata="Q36304" start="15914" end="15918" title="Noon language" label="Noon"/>
<link wikidata="Q36308" start="15920" end="15925" title="Safen language" label="Safen"/>
<link wikidata="Q36284" start="15927" end="15932" title="Serer language" label="Serer"/>
<link wikidata="Q36660" start="15934" end="15941" title="Soninke language" label="Soninke"/>
<link wikidata="Q34257" start="15943" end="15948" title="Wolof language" label="Wolof"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="15975" end="15981" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q33287" start="15994" end="15996" title="Ga language" label="Ga"/>
<link wikidata="Q117" start="16000" end="16005" title="Ghana" label="Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q28026" start="16050" end="16054" title="Akan language" label="Akan"/>
<link wikidata="Q30005" start="16090" end="16097" title="Ewe language" label="Ewe-Gbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q35159" start="16099" end="16106" title="Dagaare language" label="Dagaare"/>
<link wikidata="Q32238" start="16108" end="16115" title="Dagbani language" label="Dagbani"/>
<link wikidata="Q35141" start="16117" end="16123" title="Dangme language" label="Dangme"/>
<link wikidata="Q35267" start="16125" end="16130" title="Gonja language" label="Gonja"/>
<link wikidata="Q35552" start="16132" end="16137" title="Kasem language" label="Kasem"/>
<link wikidata="Q36337" start="16139" end="16144" title="Nzema language" label="Nzema"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="16171" end="16178" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q9314" start="16181" end="16189" title="Scottish Gaelic" label="Gàidhlig"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="16193" end="16201" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="16214" end="16221" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q14549" start="16226" end="16231" title="Scots language" label="Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q668284" start="16234" end="16237" title="Gbe languages" label="Gbe"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16251" end="16258" title="#A" label="Aja-Gbe"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16272" end="16279" title="#E" label="Ewe-Gbe"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16293" end="16300" title="#F" label="Fon-Gbe"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16314" end="16321" title="#G" label="Gen-Gbe"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16335" end="16343" title="#W" label="Waci-Gbe"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16357" end="16366" title="#X" label="Xwela-Gbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q33450" start="16374" end="16381" title="Gen language" label="Gen-Gbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q962" start="16385" end="16390" title="Benin" label="Benin"/>
<link wikidata="Q35035" start="16423" end="16430" title="Aja-Gbe language" label="Aja-Gbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q34838" start="16432" end="16436" title="Anii language" label="Anii"/>
<link wikidata="Q34889" start="16438" end="16444" title="Bariba language" label="Bariba"/>
<link wikidata="Q34961" start="16446" end="16451" title="Biali language" label="Biali"/>
<link wikidata="Q34983" start="16453" end="16457" title="Boko language" label="Boko"/>
<link wikidata="Q35164" start="16459" end="16464" title="Dendi language" label="Dendi"/>
<link wikidata="Q33291" start="16466" end="16473" title="Fon language" label="Fon-Gbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465566" start="16475" end="16480" title="Foodo language" label="Foodo"/>
<link wikidata="Q33454" start="16482" end="16486" title="Fula language" label="Fula"/>
<link wikidata="Q3258739" start="16488" end="16493" title="Lukpa language" label="Lukpa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4286473" start="16495" end="16502" title="Mbelime language" label="Mbelime"/>
<link wikidata="Q3070731" start="16504" end="16510" title="Nateni language" label="Nateni"/>
<link wikidata="Q35186" start="16512" end="16519" title="Tammari language" label="Tammari"/>
<link wikidata="Q7958576" start="16521" end="16526" title="Waama language" label="Waama"/>
<link wikidata="Q36987" start="16528" end="16536" title="Waci Gbe language" label="Waci-Gbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q35913" start="16538" end="16542" title="Yobe language" label="Yobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q36893" start="16544" end="16547" title="Yom language" label="Yom"/>
<link wikidata="Q36887" start="16549" end="16558" title="Pherá language" label="Xwela-Gbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q34311" start="16560" end="16566" title="Yoruba language" label="Yoruba"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="16594" end="16600" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q8108" start="16603" end="16611" title="Georgian language" label="Georgian"/>
<link wikidata="Q230" start="16615" end="16622" title="Georgia (country)" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q23427" start="16625" end="16638" title="South Ossetia" label="South Ossetia"/>
<link wikidata="Q33968" start="16645" end="16653" title="Ossetian language" label="Ossetian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737" start="16658" end="16665" title="Russian language" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q31354462" start="16695" end="16703" title="Abkhazia" label="Abkhazia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8108" start="16710" end="16718" title="Georgian language" label="Georgian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2468398" start="16736" end="16757" title="Constitution of Georgia (country)" label="Georgian constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="16786" end="16792" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q9067" start="16810" end="16819" title="Hungarian language" label="Hungarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q35357" start="16821" end="16840" title="Burgenland Croatian" label="Burgenland Croatian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9063" start="16846" end="16853" title="Slovene language" label="Slovene"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="16857" end="16864" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q7411" start="16889" end="16894" title="Dutch language" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="16899" end="16905" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q2731996" start="16938" end="16953" title="Land of Eupen" label="Canton of Eupen"/>
<link wikidata="Q815504" start="16957" end="16977" title="Belgian Eifel" label="Canton of Sankt Vith"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="16980" end="16986" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q22063985" start="16991" end="17005" title="Antônio Carlos, Santa Catarina" label="Antônio Carlos"/>
<link wikidata="Q379483" start="17009" end="17030" title="Santa Maria do Herval" label="Santa Maria do Herval"/>
<link wikidata="Q616475" start="17034" end="17050" title="Domingos Martins" label="Domingos Martins"/>
<link wikidata="Q616506" start="17054" end="17070" title="Laranja da Terra" label="Laranja da Terra"/>
<link wikidata="Q505326" start="17074" end="17080" title="Pancas" label="Pancas"/>
<link wikidata="Q616486" start="17084" end="17105" title="Santa Maria de Jetibá" label="Santa Maria de Jetibá"/>
<link wikidata="Q505266" start="17109" end="17119" title="Vila Pavão" label="Vila Pavão"/>
<link wikidata="Q326651" start="17123" end="17131" title="Pomerode" label="Pomerode"/>
<link wikidata="Q984559" start="17135" end="17142" title="Canguçu" label="Canguçu"/>
<link wikidata="Q347" start="17155" end="17168" title="Liechtenstein" label="Liechtenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q32" start="17171" end="17181" title="Luxembourg" label="Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="17188" end="17194" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q9051" start="17199" end="17212" title="Luxembourgish language" label="Luxembourgish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030" start="17241" end="17248" title="Namibia" label="Namibia"/>
<link wikidata="Q14196" start="17255" end="17264" title="Afrikaans" label="Afrikaans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="17269" end="17276" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="17280" end="17291" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="17341" end="17347" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q652" start="17349" end="17356" title="Italian language" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q13199" start="17363" end="17370" title="Romansh language" label="Romansh"/>
<link wikidata="Q23058" start="17432" end="17442" title="Cantons of Switzerland" label="26 cantons"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="17458" end="17464" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q11925" start="17468" end="17485" title="Canton of Grisons" label="Canton of Grisons"/>
<link wikidata="Q652" start="17492" end="17499" title="Italian language" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q13199" start="17504" end="17511" title="Romansh language" label="Romansh"/>
<link wikidata="Q11911" start="17515" end="17529" title="Canton of Bern" label="Canton of Bern"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="17536" end="17542" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q12640" start="17546" end="17564" title="Canton of Fribourg" label="Canton of Fribourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="17571" end="17577" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q834" start="17581" end="17597" title="Valais" label="Canton of Valais"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="17604" end="17610" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q35267" start="17613" end="17618" title="Gonja language" label="Gonja"/>
<link wikidata="Q117" start="17622" end="17627" title="Ghana" label="Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q28026" start="17672" end="17676" title="Akan language" label="Akan"/>
<link wikidata="Q30005" start="17712" end="17719" title="Ewe language" label="Ewe-Gbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q35159" start="17721" end="17728" title="Dagaare language" label="Dagaare"/>
<link wikidata="Q32238" start="17730" end="17737" title="Dagbani language" label="Dagbani"/>
<link wikidata="Q35141" start="17739" end="17745" title="Dangme language" label="Dangme"/>
<link wikidata="Q33287" start="17747" end="17749" title="Ga language" label="Ga"/>
<link wikidata="Q35552" start="17751" end="17756" title="Kasem language" label="Kasem"/>
<link wikidata="Q36337" start="17758" end="17763" title="Nzema language" label="Nzema"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="17790" end="17797" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q35474" start="17800" end="17810" title="Gourmanché language" label="Gourmanché"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032" start="17813" end="17818" title="Niger" label="Niger"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="17825" end="17831" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="17833" end="17839" title="Arabic language" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q56287" start="17841" end="17847" title="Buduma language" label="Buduma"/>
<link wikidata="Q33454" start="17849" end="17853" title="Fula language" label="Fula"/>
<link wikidata="Q56475" start="17855" end="17860" title="Hausa language" label="Hausa"/>
<link wikidata="Q36094" start="17862" end="17868" title="Kanuri language" label="Kanuri"/>
<link wikidata="Q505198" start="17870" end="17877" title="Songhay language" label="Songhay"/>
<link wikidata="Q36990" start="17878" end="17883" title="Zarma language" label="Zarma"/>
<link wikidata="Q4670066" start="17885" end="17893" title="Tamasheq language" label="Tamasheq"/>
<link wikidata="Q36564" start="17895" end="17902" title="Tasawaq language" label="Tasawaq"/>
<link wikidata="Q2967105" start="17904" end="17908" title="Tebu language" label="Tebu"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="17911" end="17916" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="17920" end="17926" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q229" start="17929" end="17935" title="Cyprus" label="Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q256" start="17942" end="17949" title="Turkish language" label="Turkish"/>
<link wikidata="Q222" start="17953" end="17960" title="Albania" label="Albania"/>
<link wikidata="Q35876" start="18028" end="18035" title="Guaraní language" label="Guaraní"/>
<link wikidata="Q733" start="18039" end="18047" title="Paraguay" label="Paraguay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="18054" end="18061" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q750" start="18065" end="18072" title="Bolivia" label="Bolivia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="18079" end="18086" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q5218" start="18088" end="18095" title="Quechua languages" label="Quechua"/>
<link wikidata="Q4627" start="18097" end="18103" title="Aymara language" label="Aymara"/>
<link wikidata="Q5137" start="18129" end="18137" title="Gujarati language" label="Gujarati"/>
<link wikidata="Q33491" start="18159" end="18173" title="Haitian Creole" label="Haitian Creole"/>
<link wikidata="Q790" start="18177" end="18182" title="Haiti" label="Haiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="18189" end="18195" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q2391532" start="18198" end="18203" title="Taiwanese Hakka" label="Hakka"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="18207" end="18213" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4380827" start="18254" end="18262" title="Taiwanese Mandarin" label="Mandarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q36778" start="18264" end="18281" title="Taiwanese Hokkien" label="Taiwanese Hokkien"/>
<link wikidata="Q715278" start="18283" end="18301" title="Formosan languages" label="Formosan languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q34019" start="18306" end="18326" title="Taiwan Sign Language" label="Taiwan Sign Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q56231" start="18330" end="18339" title="Hassaniya Arabic language" label="Hassaniya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041" start="18343" end="18350" title="Senegal" label="Senegal"/>
<link wikidata="Q35006" start="18383" end="18390" title="Balanta languages" label="Balanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q35098" start="18392" end="18399" title="Bassari language" label="Bassari"/>
<link wikidata="Q35096" start="18401" end="18406" title="Bedik language" label="Bedik"/>
<link wikidata="Q33454" start="18408" end="18412" title="Fula language" label="Fula"/>
<link wikidata="Q35176" start="18414" end="18418" title="Jola language" label="Jola"/>
<link wikidata="Q33678" start="18420" end="18428" title="Mandinka language" label="Mandinka"/>
<link wikidata="Q35822" start="18430" end="18437" title="Mandjak language" label="Mandjak"/>
<link wikidata="Q35789" start="18439" end="18447" title="Mankanya language" label="Mankanya"/>
<link wikidata="Q36304" start="18449" end="18453" title="Noon language" label="Noon"/>
<link wikidata="Q36308" start="18455" end="18460" title="Safen language" label="Safen"/>
<link wikidata="Q36284" start="18462" end="18467" title="Serer language" label="Serer"/>
<link wikidata="Q36660" start="18469" end="18476" title="Soninke language" label="Soninke"/>
<link wikidata="Q34257" start="18478" end="18483" title="Wolof language" label="Wolof"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="18510" end="18516" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q56475" start="18519" end="18524" title="Hausa language" label="Hausa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032" start="18528" end="18533" title="Niger" label="Niger"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="18540" end="18546" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="18548" end="18554" title="Arabic language" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q56287" start="18556" end="18562" title="Buduma language" label="Buduma"/>
<link wikidata="Q33454" start="18564" end="18568" title="Fula language" label="Fula"/>
<link wikidata="Q35474" start="18570" end="18580" title="Gourmanché language" label="Gourmanché"/>
<link wikidata="Q36094" start="18582" end="18588" title="Kanuri language" label="Kanuri"/>
<link wikidata="Q505198" start="18590" end="18597" title="Songhay language" label="Songhay"/>
<link wikidata="Q36990" start="18598" end="18603" title="Zarma language" label="Zarma"/>
<link wikidata="Q4670066" start="18605" end="18613" title="Tamasheq language" label="Tamasheq"/>
<link wikidata="Q36564" start="18615" end="18622" title="Tasawaq language" label="Tasawaq"/>
<link wikidata="Q2967105" start="18624" end="18628" title="Tebu language" label="Tebu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033" start="18632" end="18639" title="Nigeria" label="Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="18646" end="18653" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q33578" start="18655" end="18659" title="Igbo language" label="Igbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q34311" start="18664" end="18670" title="Yoruba language" label="Yoruba"/>
<link wikidata="Q9288" start="18673" end="18679" title="Hebrew language" label="Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="18696" end="18702" title="Arabic language" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568" start="18705" end="18710" title="Hindi language" label="Hindi"/>
<link wikidata="Q29401" start="18814" end="18822" title="Assamese language" label="Assamese"/>
<link wikidata="Q9610" start="18824" end="18831" title="Bengali language" label="Bengali"/>
<link wikidata="Q33223" start="18833" end="18837" title="Bodo language" label="Bodo"/>
<link wikidata="Q32730" start="18839" end="18844" title="Dogri language" label="Dogri"/>
<link wikidata="Q5137" start="18846" end="18854" title="Gujarati language" label="Gujarati"/>
<link wikidata="Q33673" start="18856" end="18863" title="Kannada language" label="Kannada"/>
<link wikidata="Q33552" start="18865" end="18873" title="Kashmiri language" label="Kashmiri"/>
<link wikidata="Q34239" start="18875" end="18882" title="Konkani language" label="Konkani"/>
<link wikidata="Q36109" start="18884" end="18892" title="Maithili Language" label="Maithili"/>
<link wikidata="Q36236" start="18894" end="18903" title="Malayalam" label="Malayalam"/>
<link wikidata="Q33868" start="18905" end="18911" title="Meitei language" label="Meitei"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571" start="18924" end="18931" title="Marathi language" label="Marathi"/>
<link wikidata="Q33823" start="18933" end="18939" title="Nepali language" label="Nepali"/>
<link wikidata="Q33810" start="18941" end="18945" title="Odia language" label="Odia"/>
<link wikidata="Q58635" start="18947" end="18954" title="Punjabi language" label="Punjabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q11059" start="18956" end="18964" title="Sanskrit" label="Sanskrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q33965" start="18966" end="18974" title="Santhali language" label="Santhali"/>
<link wikidata="Q33997" start="18976" end="18982" title="Sindhi language" label="Sindhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5885" start="18984" end="18989" title="Tamil language" label="Tamil"/>
<link wikidata="Q8097" start="18991" end="18997" title="Telugu language" label="Telugu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617" start="18999" end="19003" title="Urdu" label="Urdu"/>
<link wikidata="Q712" start="19007" end="19011" title="Fiji" label="Fiji"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568" start="19120" end="19134" title="Standard Hindi" label="Standard Hindi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617" start="19136" end="19140" title="Urdu language" label="Urdu"/>
<link wikidata="Q33617" start="19181" end="19190" title="Hiri Motu" label="Hiri Motu"/>
<link wikidata="Q691" start="19194" end="19210" title="Papua New Guinea" label="Papua New Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q34159" start="19229" end="19238" title="Tok Pisin" label="Tok Pisin"/>
<link wikidata="Q9067" start="19241" end="19250" title="Hungarian language" label="Hungarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q28" start="19254" end="19261" title="Hungary" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q33578" start="19274" end="19278" title="Igbo language" label="Igbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033" start="19282" end="19289" title="Nigeria" label="Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="19296" end="19303" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q56475" start="19305" end="19310" title="Hausa language" label="Hausa"/>
<link wikidata="Q34311" start="19315" end="19321" title="Yoruba language" label="Yoruba"/>
<link wikidata="Q294" start="19324" end="19333" title="Icelandic language" label="Icelandic"/>
<link wikidata="Q189" start="19337" end="19344" title="Iceland" label="Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q9240" start="19346" end="19356" title="Indonesian language" label="Indonesian"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="19360" end="19369" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q9142" start="19405" end="19410" title="Irish language" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q27" start="19414" end="19433" title="Republic of Ireland" label="Republic of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q652" start="19506" end="19513" title="Italian language" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q224" start="19525" end="19532" title="Croatia" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q58268" start="19536" end="19549" title="Istria County" label="Istria County"/>
<link wikidata="Q6654" start="19556" end="19564" title="Croatian language" label="Croatian"/>
<link wikidata="Q238" start="19568" end="19578" title="San Marino" label="San Marino"/>
<link wikidata="Q215" start="19581" end="19589" title="Slovenia" label="Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3574141" start="19594" end="19610" title="Slovenian Istria" label="Slovenian Istria"/>
<link wikidata="Q9063" start="19617" end="19624" title="Slovene language" label="Slovene"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="19628" end="19639" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="19689" end="19695" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="19697" end="19703" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q13199" start="19710" end="19717" title="Romansh language" label="Romansh"/>
<link wikidata="Q12724" start="19758" end="19774" title="Canton of Ticino" label="Canton of Ticino"/>
<link wikidata="Q11925" start="19777" end="19794" title="Canton of Grisons" label="Canton of Grisons"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="19801" end="19807" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q13199" start="19812" end="19819" title="Romansh language" label="Romansh"/>
<link wikidata="Q237" start="19823" end="19835" title="Vatican City" label="Vatican City"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="19842" end="19847" title="Latin language" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5287" start="19861" end="19869" title="Japanese language" label="Japanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q530813" start="19899" end="19905" title="Angaur" label="Angaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q33549" start="19908" end="19916" title="Javanese language" label="Javanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q35176" start="19979" end="19983" title="Jola language" label="Jola"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041" start="19987" end="19994" title="Senegal" label="Senegal"/>
<link wikidata="Q35006" start="20027" end="20034" title="Balanta languages" label="Balanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q35098" start="20036" end="20043" title="Bassari language" label="Bassari"/>
<link wikidata="Q35096" start="20045" end="20050" title="Bedik language" label="Bedik"/>
<link wikidata="Q33454" start="20052" end="20056" title="Fula language" label="Fula"/>
<link wikidata="Q56231" start="20058" end="20067" title="Hassaniya Arabic" label="Hassaniya"/>
<link wikidata="Q33678" start="20069" end="20077" title="Mandinka language" label="Mandinka"/>
<link wikidata="Q35822" start="20079" end="20086" title="Mandjak language" label="Mandjak"/>
<link wikidata="Q35789" start="20088" end="20096" title="Mankanya language" label="Mankanya"/>
<link wikidata="Q36304" start="20098" end="20102" title="Noon language" label="Noon"/>
<link wikidata="Q36308" start="20104" end="20109" title="Safen language" label="Safen"/>
<link wikidata="Q36284" start="20111" end="20116" title="Serer language" label="Serer"/>
<link wikidata="Q36660" start="20118" end="20125" title="Soninke language" label="Soninke"/>
<link wikidata="Q34257" start="20127" end="20132" title="Wolof language" label="Wolof"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="20159" end="20165" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q35475" start="20179" end="20184" title="Kabye language" label="Kabye"/>
<link wikidata="Q945" start="20188" end="20192" title="Togo" label="Togo"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="20199" end="20205" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q30005" start="20210" end="20217" title="Ewe language" label="Ewe-Gbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q33672" start="20220" end="20227" title="Kalanga language" label="Kalanga"/>
<link wikidata="Q954" start="20231" end="20239" title="Zimbabwe" label="Zimbabwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="20246" end="20253" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q34004" start="20255" end="20260" title="Shona language" label="Shona"/>
<link wikidata="Q35613" start="20262" end="20269" title="Northern Ndebele language" label="Ndebele"/>
<link wikidata="Q33273" start="20271" end="20276" title="Chewa language" label="Chewa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2964008" start="20278" end="20286" title="Sena language" label="Chirbawe"/>
<link wikidata="Q963636" start="20288" end="20295" title="Tshuwau language" label="Tshuwau"/>
<link wikidata="Q3553981" start="20318" end="20324" title="Nambya language" label="Nambya"/>
<link wikidata="Q13311" start="20326" end="20330" title="Ndau dialect" label="Ndau"/>
<link wikidata="Q8072097" start="20332" end="20356" title="Zimbabwean sign languages" label="Zimbabwean sign language"/>
<link wikidata="Q34101" start="20358" end="20363" title="Tonga language (Zambia and Zimbabwe)" label="Tonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q34137" start="20365" end="20371" title="Tswana language" label="Tswana"/>
<link wikidata="Q32704" start="20373" end="20378" title="Venda (language)" label="Venda"/>
<link wikidata="Q13218" start="20380" end="20385" title="Xhosa language" label="Xhosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q33673" start="20388" end="20395" title="Kannada" label="Kannada"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20399" end="20430" title="India in the state of Karnataka" label="India in the state of Karnataka"/>
<link wikidata="Q36094" start="20521" end="20527" title="Kanuri language" label="Kanuri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032" start="20531" end="20536" title="Niger" label="Niger"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="20543" end="20549" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="20551" end="20557" title="Arabic language" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q56287" start="20559" end="20565" title="Buduma language" label="Buduma"/>
<link wikidata="Q33454" start="20567" end="20571" title="Fula language" label="Fula"/>
<link wikidata="Q35474" start="20573" end="20583" title="Gourmanché language" label="Gourmanché"/>
<link wikidata="Q56475" start="20585" end="20590" title="Hausa language" label="Hausa"/>
<link wikidata="Q505198" start="20592" end="20599" title="Songhay language" label="Songhay"/>
<link wikidata="Q36990" start="20600" end="20605" title="Zarma language" label="Zarma"/>
<link wikidata="Q4670066" start="20607" end="20615" title="Tamasheq language" label="Tamasheq"/>
<link wikidata="Q36564" start="20617" end="20624" title="Tasawaq language" label="Tasawaq"/>
<link wikidata="Q2967105" start="20626" end="20630" title="Tebu language" label="Tebu"/>
<link wikidata="Q35552" start="20633" end="20638" title="Kasem language" label="Kasem"/>
<link wikidata="Q117" start="20642" end="20647" title="Ghana" label="Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q28026" start="20692" end="20696" title="Akan language" label="Akan"/>
<link wikidata="Q30005" start="20732" end="20739" title="Ewe language" label="Ewe-Gbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q35159" start="20741" end="20748" title="Dagaare language" label="Dagaare"/>
<link wikidata="Q32238" start="20750" end="20757" title="Dagbani language" label="Dagbani"/>
<link wikidata="Q35141" start="20759" end="20765" title="Dangme language" label="Dangme"/>
<link wikidata="Q33287" start="20767" end="20769" title="Ga language" label="Ga"/>
<link wikidata="Q35267" start="20771" end="20776" title="Gonja language" label="Gonja"/>
<link wikidata="Q36337" start="20778" end="20783" title="Nzema language" label="Nzema"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="20810" end="20817" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q9252" start="20820" end="20826" title="Kazakh language" label="Kazakh"/>
<link wikidata="Q232" start="20830" end="20840" title="Kazakhstan" label="Kazakhstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q9205" start="20857" end="20862" title="Khmer language" label="Khmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q424" start="20866" end="20874" title="Cambodia" label="Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q33573" start="20876" end="20887" title="Kinyarwanda" label="Kinyarwanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1037" start="20891" end="20897" title="Rwanda" label="Rwanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="20904" end="20910" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="20915" end="20922" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q33583" start="20925" end="20932" title="Kirundi" label="Kirundi"/>
<link wikidata="Q967" start="20936" end="20943" title="Burundi" label="Burundi"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="20950" end="20956" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q35696" start="20959" end="20964" title="Kissi language" label="Kissi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006" start="20967" end="20973" title="Guinea" label="Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q33454" start="21006" end="21010" title="Fula language" label="Fula"/>
<link wikidata="Q35673" start="21012" end="21018" title="Kpelle language" label="Kpelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q36186" start="21020" end="21027" title="Malinke language" label="Malinke"/>
<link wikidata="Q33990" start="21029" end="21033" title="Susu language" label="Susu"/>
<link wikidata="Q35885" start="21035" end="21039" title="Toma language" label="Toma"/>
<link wikidata="Q35098" start="21041" end="21047" title="Oniyan language" label="Oniyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q36935" start="21049" end="21054" title="Wamey language" label="Wamey"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="21081" end="21087" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q963636" start="21096" end="21102" title="Tshuwau language" label="Koisan"/>
<link wikidata="Q954" start="21122" end="21130" title="Zimbabwe" label="Zimbabwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="21137" end="21144" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q34004" start="21146" end="21151" title="Shona language" label="Shona"/>
<link wikidata="Q35613" start="21153" end="21160" title="Northern Ndebele language" label="Ndebele"/>
<link wikidata="Q33273" start="21162" end="21167" title="Chewa language" label="Chewa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2964008" start="21169" end="21177" title="Sena language" label="Chirbawe"/>
<link wikidata="Q33672" start="21179" end="21186" title="Kalanga language" label="Kalanga"/>
<link wikidata="Q3553981" start="21188" end="21194" title="Nambya language" label="Nambya"/>
<link wikidata="Q13311" start="21196" end="21200" title="Ndau dialect" label="Ndau"/>
<link wikidata="Q8072097" start="21202" end="21226" title="Zimbabwean sign languages" label="Zimbabwean sign language"/>
<link wikidata="Q34101" start="21228" end="21233" title="Tonga language (Zambia and Zimbabwe)" label="Tonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q34137" start="21235" end="21241" title="Tswana language" label="Tswana"/>
<link wikidata="Q32704" start="21243" end="21248" title="Venda (language)" label="Venda"/>
<link wikidata="Q13218" start="21250" end="21255" title="Xhosa language" label="Xhosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q9176" start="21258" end="21264" title="Korean language" label="Korean"/>
<link wikidata="Q423" start="21268" end="21279" title="North Korea" label="North Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q884" start="21282" end="21293" title="South Korea" label="South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q3073428" start="21300" end="21320" title="Korean Sign Language" label="Korean Sign Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q3073428" start="21323" end="21343" title="Korean Sign Language" label="Korean Sign Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q884" start="21347" end="21358" title="South Korea" label="South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q9176" start="21365" end="21371" title="Korean language" label="Korean"/>
<link wikidata="Q35673" start="21374" end="21380" title="Kpelle language" label="Kpelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006" start="21384" end="21390" title="Guinea" label="Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q33454" start="21423" end="21427" title="Fula language" label="Fula"/>
<link wikidata="Q35696" start="21429" end="21434" title="Kissi language" label="Kissi"/>
<link wikidata="Q36186" start="21436" end="21443" title="Malinke language" label="Malinke"/>
<link wikidata="Q33990" start="21445" end="21449" title="Susu language" label="Susu"/>
<link wikidata="Q35885" start="21451" end="21455" title="Toma language" label="Toma"/>
<link wikidata="Q35098" start="21457" end="21463" title="Oniyan language" label="Oniyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q36935" start="21465" end="21470" title="Wamey language" label="Wamey"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="21497" end="21503" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q36368" start="21506" end="21513" title="Kurdish language" label="Kurdish"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="21517" end="21521" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="21528" end="21534" title="Arabic" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9255" start="21537" end="21543" title="Kyrgyz language" label="Kyrgyz"/>
<link wikidata="Q813" start="21547" end="21557" title="Kyrgyzstan" label="Kyrgyzstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q9211" start="21585" end="21588" title="Lao language" label="Lao"/>
<link wikidata="Q819" start="21592" end="21596" title="Laos" label="Laos"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="21597" end="21602" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q159583" start="21607" end="21615" title="Holy See" label="Holy See"/>
<link wikidata="Q28" start="21618" end="21625" title="Hungary" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q224" start="21628" end="21635" title="Croatia" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="21638" end="21644" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q9078" start="21646" end="21653" title="Latvian language" label="Latvian"/>
<link wikidata="Q211" start="21657" end="21663" title="Latvia" label="Latvia"/>
<link wikidata="Q9083" start="21665" end="21675" title="Lithuanian language" label="Lithuanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q37" start="21679" end="21688" title="Lithuania" label="Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q3258739" start="21690" end="21695" title="Lukpa language" label="Lukpa"/>
<link wikidata="Q962" start="21699" end="21704" title="Benin" label="Benin"/>
<link wikidata="Q35035" start="21737" end="21744" title="Aja-Gbe language" label="Aja-Gbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q34838" start="21746" end="21750" title="Anii language" label="Anii"/>
<link wikidata="Q34889" start="21752" end="21758" title="Bariba language" label="Bariba"/>
<link wikidata="Q34961" start="21760" end="21765" title="Biali language" label="Biali"/>
<link wikidata="Q34983" start="21767" end="21771" title="Boko language" label="Boko"/>
<link wikidata="Q35164" start="21773" end="21778" title="Dendi language" label="Dendi"/>
<link wikidata="Q33291" start="21780" end="21787" title="Fon language" label="Fon-Gbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465566" start="21789" end="21794" title="Foodo language" label="Foodo"/>
<link wikidata="Q33454" start="21796" end="21800" title="Fula language" label="Fula"/>
<link wikidata="Q33450" start="21802" end="21809" title="Gen language" label="Gen-Gbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4286473" start="21811" end="21818" title="Mbelime language" label="Mbelime"/>
<link wikidata="Q3070731" start="21820" end="21826" title="Nateni language" label="Nateni"/>
<link wikidata="Q35186" start="21828" end="21835" title="Tammari language" label="Tammari"/>
<link wikidata="Q7958576" start="21837" end="21842" title="Waama language" label="Waama"/>
<link wikidata="Q36987" start="21844" end="21852" title="Waci Gbe language" label="Waci-Gbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q35913" start="21854" end="21858" title="Yobe language" label="Yobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q36893" start="21860" end="21863" title="Yom language" label="Yom"/>
<link wikidata="Q36887" start="21865" end="21874" title="Pherá language" label="Xwela-Gbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q34311" start="21876" end="21882" title="Yoruba language" label="Yoruba"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="21910" end="21916" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q9051" start="21919" end="21932" title="Luxembourgish language" label="Luxembourgish"/>
<link wikidata="Q32" start="21936" end="21946" title="Luxembourg" label="Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="21953" end="21959" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="21964" end="21970" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q9296" start="21984" end="21994" title="Macedonian language" label="Macedonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q221" start="21998" end="22013" title="North Macedonia" label="North Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8748" start="22020" end="22028" title="Albanian language" label="Albanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7930" start="22031" end="22039" title="Malagasy language" label="Malagasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1019" start="22043" end="22053" title="Madagascar" label="Madagascar"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="22060" end="22066" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q9237" start="22069" end="22074" title="Malay language" label="Malay"/>
<link wikidata="Q833" start="22078" end="22086" title="Malaysia" label="Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="22120" end="22127" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q921" start="22131" end="22137" title="Brunei" label="Brunei"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="22140" end="22149" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q7850" start="22165" end="22172" title="Chinese language" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q5885" start="22177" end="22182" title="Tamil language" label="Tamil"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="22186" end="22195" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q36186" start="22288" end="22295" title="Malinke language" label="Malinke"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22309" end="22316" title="#M" label="Manding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006" start="22325" end="22331" title="Guinea" label="Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q33454" start="22364" end="22368" title="Fula language" label="Fula"/>
<link wikidata="Q35696" start="22370" end="22375" title="Kissi language" label="Kissi"/>
<link wikidata="Q35673" start="22377" end="22383" title="Kpelle language" label="Kpelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q33990" start="22385" end="22389" title="Susu language" label="Susu"/>
<link wikidata="Q35885" start="22391" end="22395" title="Toma language" label="Toma"/>
<link wikidata="Q35098" start="22397" end="22403" title="Oniyan language" label="Oniyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q36935" start="22405" end="22410" title="Wamey language" label="Wamey"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="22437" end="22443" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q9166" start="22446" end="22453" title="Maltese language" label="Maltese"/>
<link wikidata="Q233" start="22457" end="22462" title="Malta" label="Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q36187" start="22479" end="22485" title="Mamara language" label="Mamara"/>
<link wikidata="Q912" start="22489" end="22493" title="Mali" label="Mali"/>
<link wikidata="Q33243" start="22526" end="22533" title="Bambara language" label="Bambara"/>
<link wikidata="Q35065" start="22535" end="22539" title="Bomu language" label="Bomu"/>
<link wikidata="Q35021" start="22541" end="22545" title="Bozo language" label="Bozo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5397128" start="22547" end="22552" title="Escarpment Dogon" label="Dogon"/>
<link wikidata="Q33454" start="22554" end="22558" title="Fula language" label="Fula"/>
<link wikidata="Q505198" start="22560" end="22567" title="Songhay language" label="Songhay"/>
<link wikidata="Q36660" start="22569" end="22576" title="Soninke language" label="Soninke"/>
<link wikidata="Q35210" start="22578" end="22585" title="Syenara language" label="Syenara"/>
<link wikidata="Q4670066" start="22587" end="22595" title="Tamasheq language" label="Tamasheq"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="22622" end="22628" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q35772" start="22631" end="22638" title="Manding languages" label="Manding"/>
<link wikidata="Q33678" start="22640" end="22648" title="Mandinka language" label="Mandinka"/>
<link wikidata="Q36186" start="22650" end="22657" title="Malinke language" label="Malinke"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22672" end="22679" title="#B" label="Bambara"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22693" end="22699" title="#D" label="Dioula"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22713" end="22720" title="#M" label="Malinke"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22734" end="22742" title="#M" label="Mandinka"/>
<link wikidata="Q33678" start="22750" end="22758" title="Mandinka language" label="Mandinka"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22772" end="22779" title="#M" label="Manding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041" start="22788" end="22795" title="Senegal" label="Senegal"/>
<link wikidata="Q35006" start="22828" end="22835" title="Balanta languages" label="Balanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q35098" start="22837" end="22844" title="Bassari language" label="Bassari"/>
<link wikidata="Q35096" start="22846" end="22851" title="Bedik language" label="Bedik"/>
<link wikidata="Q33454" start="22853" end="22857" title="Fula language" label="Fula"/>
<link wikidata="Q56231" start="22859" end="22868" title="Hassaniya Arabic" label="Hassaniya"/>
<link wikidata="Q35176" start="22870" end="22874" title="Jola language" label="Jola"/>
<link wikidata="Q35822" start="22876" end="22883" title="Mandjak language" label="Mandjak"/>
<link wikidata="Q35789" start="22885" end="22893" title="Mankanya language" label="Mankanya"/>
<link wikidata="Q36304" start="22895" end="22899" title="Noon language" label="Noon"/>
<link wikidata="Q36308" start="22901" end="22906" title="Safen language" label="Safen"/>
<link wikidata="Q36284" start="22908" end="22913" title="Serer language" label="Serer"/>
<link wikidata="Q36660" start="22915" end="22922" title="Soninke language" label="Soninke"/>
<link wikidata="Q34257" start="22924" end="22929" title="Wolof language" label="Wolof"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="22956" end="22962" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q35822" start="22965" end="22972" title="Mandjak language" label="Mandjak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041" start="22976" end="22983" title="Senegal" label="Senegal"/>
<link wikidata="Q35006" start="23016" end="23023" title="Balanta languages" label="Balanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q35098" start="23025" end="23032" title="Bassari language" label="Bassari"/>
<link wikidata="Q35096" start="23034" end="23039" title="Bedik language" label="Bedik"/>
<link wikidata="Q33454" start="23041" end="23045" title="Fula language" label="Fula"/>
<link wikidata="Q56231" start="23047" end="23056" title="Hassaniya Arabic" label="Hassaniya"/>
<link wikidata="Q35176" start="23058" end="23062" title="Jola language" label="Jola"/>
<link wikidata="Q33678" start="23064" end="23072" title="Mandinka language" label="Mandinka"/>
<link wikidata="Q35789" start="23074" end="23082" title="Mankanya language" label="Mankanya"/>
<link wikidata="Q36304" start="23084" end="23088" title="Noon language" label="Noon"/>
<link wikidata="Q36308" start="23090" end="23095" title="Safen language" label="Safen"/>
<link wikidata="Q36284" start="23097" end="23102" title="Serer language" label="Serer"/>
<link wikidata="Q36660" start="23104" end="23111" title="Soninke language" label="Soninke"/>
<link wikidata="Q34257" start="23113" end="23118" title="Wolof language" label="Wolof"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="23145" end="23151" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q35789" start="23154" end="23162" title="Mankanya language" label="Mankanya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041" start="23166" end="23173" title="Senegal" label="Senegal"/>
<link wikidata="Q35006" start="23206" end="23213" title="Balanta languages" label="Balanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q35098" start="23215" end="23222" title="Bassari language" label="Bassari"/>
<link wikidata="Q35096" start="23224" end="23229" title="Bedik language" label="Bedik"/>
<link wikidata="Q33454" start="23231" end="23235" title="Fula language" label="Fula"/>
<link wikidata="Q56231" start="23237" end="23246" title="Hassaniya Arabic" label="Hassaniya"/>
<link wikidata="Q35176" start="23248" end="23252" title="Jola language" label="Jola"/>
<link wikidata="Q33678" start="23254" end="23262" title="Mandinka language" label="Mandinka"/>
<link wikidata="Q35822" start="23264" end="23271" title="Mandjak language" label="Mandjak"/>
<link wikidata="Q36304" start="23273" end="23277" title="Noon language" label="Noon"/>
<link wikidata="Q36308" start="23279" end="23284" title="Safen language" label="Safen"/>
<link wikidata="Q36284" start="23286" end="23291" title="Serer language" label="Serer"/>
<link wikidata="Q36660" start="23293" end="23300" title="Soninke language" label="Soninke"/>
<link wikidata="Q34257" start="23302" end="23307" title="Wolof language" label="Wolof"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="23334" end="23340" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q12175" start="23343" end="23354" title="Manx language" label="Manx Gaelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9676" start="23358" end="23369" title="Isle of Man" label="Isle of Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q36451" start="23386" end="23391" title="Māori language" label="Māori"/>
<link wikidata="Q36280" start="23453" end="23464" title="Marshallese language" label="Marshallese"/>
<link wikidata="Q709" start="23468" end="23484" title="Marshall Islands" label="Marshall Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="23491" end="23498" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027" start="23521" end="23530" title="Mauritius" label="Mauritius"/>
<link wikidata="Q4286473" start="23532" end="23539" title="Mbelime language" label="Mbelime"/>
<link wikidata="Q962" start="23543" end="23548" title="Benin" label="Benin"/>
<link wikidata="Q35035" start="23581" end="23588" title="Aja-Gbe language" label="Aja-Gbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q34838" start="23590" end="23594" title="Anii language" label="Anii"/>
<link wikidata="Q34889" start="23596" end="23602" title="Bariba language" label="Bariba"/>
<link wikidata="Q34961" start="23604" end="23609" title="Biali language" label="Biali"/>
<link wikidata="Q34983" start="23611" end="23615" title="Boko language" label="Boko"/>
<link wikidata="Q35164" start="23617" end="23622" title="Dendi language" label="Dendi"/>
<link wikidata="Q33291" start="23624" end="23631" title="Fon language" label="Fon-Gbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465566" start="23633" end="23638" title="Foodo language" label="Foodo"/>
<link wikidata="Q33454" start="23640" end="23644" title="Fula language" label="Fula"/>
<link wikidata="Q33450" start="23646" end="23653" title="Gen language" label="Gen-Gbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3258739" start="23655" end="23660" title="Lukpa language" label="Lukpa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3070731" start="23662" end="23668" title="Nateni language" label="Nateni"/>
<link wikidata="Q35186" start="23670" end="23677" title="Tammari language" label="Tammari"/>
<link wikidata="Q7958576" start="23679" end="23684" title="Waama language" label="Waama"/>
<link wikidata="Q36987" start="23686" end="23694" title="Waci Gbe language" label="Waci-Gbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q35913" start="23696" end="23700" title="Yobe language" label="Yobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q36893" start="23702" end="23705" title="Yom language" label="Yom"/>
<link wikidata="Q36887" start="23707" end="23716" title="Pherá language" label="Xwela-Gbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q34311" start="23718" end="23724" title="Yoruba language" label="Yoruba"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="23752" end="23758" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q33868" start="23761" end="23767" title="Meitei language" label="Meitei"/>
<link wikidata="Q33868" start="23789" end="23797" title="Manipuri language" label="Manipuri"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="23802" end="23807" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q9246" start="23909" end="23918" title="Mongolian language" label="Mongolian"/>
<link wikidata="Q711" start="23922" end="23930" title="Mongolia" label="Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8821" start="23932" end="23943" title="Montenegrin language" label="Montenegrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q236" start="23947" end="23957" title="Montenegro" label="Montenegro"/>
<link wikidata="Q36096" start="23959" end="23964" title="Mossi language" label="Mossi"/>
<link wikidata="Q965" start="23968" end="23980" title="Burkina Faso" label="Burkina Faso"/>
<link wikidata="Q32706" start="24013" end="24019" title="Dioula language" label="Dioula"/>
<link wikidata="Q33454" start="24021" end="24025" title="Fula language" label="Fula"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="24072" end="24078" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q3553981" start="24091" end="24097" title="Nambya language" label="Nambya"/>
<link wikidata="Q954" start="24101" end="24109" title="Zimbabwe" label="Zimbabwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="24116" end="24123" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q34004" start="24125" end="24130" title="Shona language" label="Shona"/>
<link wikidata="Q35613" start="24132" end="24139" title="Northern Ndebele language" label="Ndebele"/>
<link wikidata="Q33273" start="24141" end="24146" title="Chewa language" label="Chewa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2964008" start="24148" end="24156" title="Sena language" label="Chirbawe"/>
<link wikidata="Q33672" start="24158" end="24165" title="Kalanga language" label="Kalanga"/>
<link wikidata="Q963636" start="24167" end="24185" title="Tshuwau language" label="&amp;quot;Koisan&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q13311" start="24197" end="24201" title="Ndau dialect" label="Ndau"/>
<link wikidata="Q8072097" start="24203" end="24227" title="Zimbabwean sign languages" label="Zimbabwean sign language"/>
<link wikidata="Q34101" start="24229" end="24234" title="Tonga language (Zambia and Zimbabwe)" label="Tonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q34137" start="24236" end="24242" title="Tswana language" label="Tswana"/>
<link wikidata="Q32704" start="24244" end="24249" title="Venda (language)" label="Venda"/>
<link wikidata="Q13218" start="24251" end="24256" title="Xhosa language" label="Xhosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3070731" start="24259" end="24265" title="Nateni language" label="Nateni"/>
<link wikidata="Q962" start="24269" end="24274" title="Benin" label="Benin"/>
<link wikidata="Q35035" start="24307" end="24314" title="Aja-Gbe language" label="Aja-Gbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q34838" start="24316" end="24320" title="Anii language" label="Anii"/>
<link wikidata="Q34889" start="24322" end="24328" title="Bariba language" label="Bariba"/>
<link wikidata="Q34961" start="24330" end="24335" title="Biali language" label="Biali"/>
<link wikidata="Q34983" start="24337" end="24341" title="Boko language" label="Boko"/>
<link wikidata="Q35164" start="24343" end="24348" title="Dendi language" label="Dendi"/>
<link wikidata="Q33291" start="24350" end="24357" title="Fon language" label="Fon-Gbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465566" start="24359" end="24364" title="Foodo language" label="Foodo"/>
<link wikidata="Q33454" start="24366" end="24370" title="Fula language" label="Fula"/>
<link wikidata="Q33450" start="24372" end="24379" title="Gen language" label="Gen-Gbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3258739" start="24381" end="24386" title="Lukpa language" label="Lukpa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4286473" start="24388" end="24395" title="Mbelime language" label="Mbelime"/>
<link wikidata="Q35186" start="24397" end="24404" title="Tammari language" label="Tammari"/>
<link wikidata="Q7958576" start="24406" end="24411" title="Waama language" label="Waama"/>
<link wikidata="Q36987" start="24413" end="24421" title="Waci Gbe language" label="Waci-Gbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q35913" start="24423" end="24427" title="Yobe language" label="Yobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q36893" start="24429" end="24432" title="Yom language" label="Yom"/>
<link wikidata="Q36887" start="24434" end="24443" title="Pherá language" label="Xwela-Gbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q34311" start="24445" end="24451" title="Yoruba language" label="Yoruba"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="24479" end="24485" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q13307" start="24488" end="24495" title="Nauruan language" label="Nauruan"/>
<link wikidata="Q697" start="24498" end="24503" title="Nauru" label="Nauru"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="24510" end="24517" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q13311" start="24520" end="24524" title="Ndau dialect" label="Ndau"/>
<link wikidata="Q954" start="24528" end="24536" title="Zimbabwe" label="Zimbabwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="24543" end="24550" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q34004" start="24552" end="24557" title="Shona language" label="Shona"/>
<link wikidata="Q35613" start="24559" end="24566" title="Northern Ndebele language" label="Ndebele"/>
<link wikidata="Q33273" start="24568" end="24573" title="Chewa language" label="Chewa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2964008" start="24575" end="24583" title="Sena language" label="Chirbawe"/>
<link wikidata="Q33672" start="24585" end="24592" title="Kalanga language" label="Kalanga"/>
<link wikidata="Q963636" start="24594" end="24612" title="Tshuwau language" label="&amp;quot;Koisan&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3553981" start="24624" end="24630" title="Nambya language" label="Nambya"/>
<link wikidata="Q8072097" start="24632" end="24656" title="Zimbabwean sign languages" label="Zimbabwean sign language"/>
<link wikidata="Q34101" start="24658" end="24663" title="Tonga language (Zambia and Zimbabwe)" label="Tonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q34137" start="24665" end="24671" title="Tswana language" label="Tswana"/>
<link wikidata="Q32704" start="24673" end="24678" title="Venda (language)" label="Venda"/>
<link wikidata="Q13218" start="24680" end="24685" title="Xhosa language" label="Xhosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q35613" start="24697" end="24705" title="Northern Ndebele language" label="Northern"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="24710" end="24722" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q14196" start="24729" end="24738" title="Afrikaans language" label="Afrikaans"/>
<link wikidata="Q33890" start="24749" end="24763" title="Northern Sotho language" label="Northern Sotho"/>
<link wikidata="Q34340" start="24765" end="24770" title="Sotho language" label="Sotho"/>
<link wikidata="Q34014" start="24772" end="24777" title="Swati language" label="Swati"/>
<link wikidata="Q34327" start="24779" end="24785" title="Tsonga language" label="Tsonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q34137" start="24787" end="24793" title="Tswana language" label="Tswana"/>
<link wikidata="Q32704" start="24795" end="24800" title="Venda language" label="Venda"/>
<link wikidata="Q13218" start="24802" end="24807" title="Xhosa language" label="Xhosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q10179" start="24809" end="24813" title="Zulu language" label="Zulu"/>
<link wikidata="Q954" start="24817" end="24825" title="Zimbabwe" label="Zimbabwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="24832" end="24839" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q34004" start="24841" end="24846" title="Shona language" label="Shona"/>
<link wikidata="Q33273" start="24848" end="24853" title="Chewa language" label="Chewa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2964008" start="24855" end="24863" title="Sena language" label="Chirbawe"/>
<link wikidata="Q33672" start="24865" end="24872" title="Kalanga language" label="Kalanga"/>
<link wikidata="Q963636" start="24874" end="24892" title="Tshuwau language" label="&amp;quot;Koisan&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3553981" start="24904" end="24910" title="Nambya language" label="Nambya"/>
<link wikidata="Q13311" start="24912" end="24916" title="Ndau dialect" label="Ndau"/>
<link wikidata="Q8072097" start="24918" end="24942" title="Zimbabwean sign languages" label="Zimbabwean sign language"/>
<link wikidata="Q34101" start="24944" end="24949" title="Tonga language (Zambia and Zimbabwe)" label="Tonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q34137" start="24951" end="24957" title="Tswana language" label="Tswana"/>
<link wikidata="Q32704" start="24959" end="24964" title="Venda (language)" label="Venda"/>
<link wikidata="Q13218" start="24966" end="24971" title="Xhosa language" label="Xhosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q36785" start="24983" end="24991" title="Southern Ndebele language" label="Southern"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="24996" end="25008" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q14196" start="25015" end="25024" title="Afrikaans language" label="Afrikaans"/>
<link wikidata="Q33890" start="25035" end="25049" title="Northern Sotho language" label="Northern Sotho"/>
<link wikidata="Q34340" start="25051" end="25056" title="Sotho language" label="Sotho"/>
<link wikidata="Q34014" start="25058" end="25063" title="Swati language" label="Swati"/>
<link wikidata="Q34327" start="25065" end="25071" title="Tsonga language" label="Tsonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q34137" start="25073" end="25079" title="Tswana language" label="Tswana"/>
<link wikidata="Q32704" start="25081" end="25086" title="Venda language" label="Venda"/>
<link wikidata="Q13218" start="25088" end="25093" title="Xhosa language" label="Xhosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q10179" start="25095" end="25099" title="Zulu language" label="Zulu"/>
<link wikidata="Q33823" start="25102" end="25108" title="Nepali language" label="Nepali"/>
<link wikidata="Q837" start="25112" end="25117" title="Nepal" label="Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q36239" start="25119" end="25144" title="New Zealand Sign Language" label="New Zealand Sign Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q36304" start="25186" end="25190" title="Noon language" label="Noon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041" start="25194" end="25201" title="Senegal" label="Senegal"/>
<link wikidata="Q35006" start="25234" end="25241" title="Balanta languages" label="Balanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q35098" start="25243" end="25250" title="Bassari language" label="Bassari"/>
<link wikidata="Q35096" start="25252" end="25257" title="Bedik language" label="Bedik"/>
<link wikidata="Q33454" start="25259" end="25263" title="Fula language" label="Fula"/>
<link wikidata="Q56231" start="25265" end="25274" title="Hassaniya Arabic" label="Hassaniya"/>
<link wikidata="Q35176" start="25276" end="25280" title="Jola language" label="Jola"/>
<link wikidata="Q33678" start="25282" end="25290" title="Mandinka language" label="Mandinka"/>
<link wikidata="Q35822" start="25292" end="25299" title="Mandjak language" label="Mandjak"/>
<link wikidata="Q35789" start="25301" end="25309" title="Mankanya language" label="Mankanya"/>
<link wikidata="Q36308" start="25311" end="25316" title="Safen language" label="Safen"/>
<link wikidata="Q36284" start="25318" end="25323" title="Serer language" label="Serer"/>
<link wikidata="Q36660" start="25325" end="25332" title="Soninke language" label="Soninke"/>
<link wikidata="Q34257" start="25334" end="25339" title="Wolof language" label="Wolof"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="25366" end="25372" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q33890" start="25375" end="25389" title="Northern Sotho language" label="Northern Sotho"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="25393" end="25405" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q14196" start="25412" end="25421" title="Afrikaans language" label="Afrikaans"/>
<link wikidata="Q36785" start="25432" end="25439" title="Southern Ndebele language" label="Ndebele"/>
<link wikidata="Q34340" start="25441" end="25446" title="Sotho language" label="Sotho"/>
<link wikidata="Q34014" start="25448" end="25453" title="Swati language" label="Swati"/>
<link wikidata="Q34327" start="25455" end="25461" title="Tsonga language" label="Tsonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q34137" start="25463" end="25469" title="Tswana language" label="Tswana"/>
<link wikidata="Q32704" start="25471" end="25476" title="Venda language" label="Venda"/>
<link wikidata="Q13218" start="25478" end="25483" title="Xhosa language" label="Xhosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q10179" start="25485" end="25489" title="Zulu language" label="Zulu"/>
<link wikidata="Q9043" start="25492" end="25501" title="Norwegian language" label="Norwegian"/>
<link wikidata="Q36337" start="25587" end="25592" title="Nzema language" label="Nzema"/>
<link wikidata="Q117" start="25596" end="25601" title="Ghana" label="Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q28026" start="25646" end="25650" title="Akan language" label="Akan"/>
<link wikidata="Q30005" start="25686" end="25693" title="Ewe language" label="Ewe-Gbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q35159" start="25695" end="25702" title="Dagaare language" label="Dagaare"/>
<link wikidata="Q32238" start="25704" end="25711" title="Dagbani language" label="Dagbani"/>
<link wikidata="Q35141" start="25713" end="25719" title="Dangme language" label="Dangme"/>
<link wikidata="Q33287" start="25721" end="25723" title="Ga language" label="Ga"/>
<link wikidata="Q35267" start="25725" end="25730" title="Gonja language" label="Gonja"/>
<link wikidata="Q35552" start="25732" end="25737" title="Kasem language" label="Kasem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="25764" end="25771" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q35098" start="25784" end="25790" title="Oniyan language" label="Oniyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006" start="25794" end="25800" title="Guinea" label="Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q33454" start="25833" end="25837" title="Fula language" label="Fula"/>
<link wikidata="Q35696" start="25839" end="25844" title="Kissi language" label="Kissi"/>
<link wikidata="Q35673" start="25846" end="25852" title="Kpelle language" label="Kpelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q36186" start="25854" end="25861" title="Malinke language" label="Malinke"/>
<link wikidata="Q33990" start="25863" end="25867" title="Susu language" label="Susu"/>
<link wikidata="Q35885" start="25869" end="25873" title="Toma language" label="Toma"/>
<link wikidata="Q36935" start="25875" end="25880" title="Wamey language" label="Wamey"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="25907" end="25913" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q33810" start="25916" end="25921" title="Oriya language" label="Oriya"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="25923" end="25928" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q33864" start="26002" end="26007" title="Oromo language" label="Oromo"/>
<link wikidata="Q115" start="26011" end="26019" title="Ethiopia" label="Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q33968" start="26021" end="26029" title="Ossetian language" label="Ossetian"/>
<link wikidata="Q23427" start="26033" end="26046" title="South Ossetia" label="South Ossetia"/>
<link wikidata="Q33776" start="26112" end="26119" title="Palauan language" label="Palauan"/>
<link wikidata="Q695" start="26123" end="26128" title="Palau" label="Palau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="26135" end="26142" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q33856" start="26145" end="26155" title="Papiamento" label="Papiamento"/>
<link wikidata="Q21203" start="26159" end="26164" title="Aruba" label="Aruba"/>
<link wikidata="Q7411" start="26171" end="26176" title="Dutch language" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q25279" start="26180" end="26187" title="Curaçao" label="Curaçao"/>
<link wikidata="Q7411" start="26194" end="26199" title="Dutch language" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="26204" end="26211" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="26215" end="26226" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q58680" start="26238" end="26244" title="Pashto language" label="Pashto"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="26248" end="26259" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q178440" start="26266" end="26270" title="Dari (Eastern Persian)" label="Dari"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="26274" end="26285" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q9168" start="26288" end="26295" title="Persian language" label="Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="26299" end="26303" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="26306" end="26317" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q178440" start="26326" end="26330" title="Dari language" label="Dari"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="26334" end="26345" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q58680" start="26352" end="26358" title="Pashto language" label="Pashto"/>
<link wikidata="Q863" start="26362" end="26372" title="Tajikistan" label="Tajikistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q9260" start="26381" end="26387" title="Tajik language" label="Tajiki"/>
<link wikidata="Q863" start="26391" end="26401" title="Tajikistan" label="Tajikistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737" start="26408" end="26415" title="Russian language" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q809" start="26461" end="26467" title="Polish language" label="Polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="26471" end="26477" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146" start="26479" end="26489" title="Portuguese language" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q916" start="26493" end="26499" title="Angola" label="Angola"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="26502" end="26508" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011" start="26511" end="26521" title="Cape Verde" label="Cape Verde"/>
<link wikidata="Q574" start="26524" end="26534" title="East Timor" label="East Timor"/>
<link wikidata="Q34125" start="26541" end="26546" title="Tetum language" label="Tetum"/>
<link wikidata="Q983" start="26550" end="26567" title="Equatorial Guinea" label="Equatorial Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="26574" end="26581" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="26586" end="26592" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q1007" start="26596" end="26609" title="Guinea-Bissau" label="Guinea-Bissau"/>
<link wikidata="Q14773" start="26612" end="26617" title="Macau" label="Macau"/>
<link wikidata="Q9186" start="26624" end="26633" title="Cantonese" label="Cantonese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029" start="26637" end="26647" title="Mozambique" label="Mozambique"/>
<link wikidata="Q45" start="26650" end="26658" title="Portugal" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1039" start="26661" end="26682" title="São Tomé and Príncipe" label="São Tomé and Príncipe"/>
<link wikidata="Q58635" start="26684" end="26691" title="Punjabi language" label="Punjabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="26695" end="26700" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q5218" start="26712" end="26719" title="Quechua language" label="Quechua"/>
<link wikidata="Q750" start="26723" end="26730" title="Bolivia" label="Bolivia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="26737" end="26744" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q33010" start="26746" end="26752" title="Aymara languages" label="Aymara"/>
<link wikidata="Q35876" start="26754" end="26761" title="Guaraní language" label="Guaraní"/>
<link wikidata="Q736" start="26788" end="26795" title="Ecuador" label="Ecuador"/>
<link wikidata="Q419" start="26823" end="26827" title="Peru" label="Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="26834" end="26841" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q7913" start="26883" end="26891" title="Romanian language" label="Romanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="26895" end="26902" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q217" start="26905" end="26912" title="Moldova" label="Moldova"/>
<link wikidata="Q13199" start="26914" end="26921" title="Romansh language" label="Romansh"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="26976" end="26982" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="26984" end="26990" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q652" start="26996" end="27003" title="Italian language" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q11925" start="27029" end="27046" title="canton of Grisons" label="canton of Grisons"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="27053" end="27059" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q652" start="27064" end="27071" title="Italian language" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737" start="27074" end="27081" title="Russian language" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q31354462" start="27145" end="27153" title="Abkhazia" label="Abkhazia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5111" start="27160" end="27166" title="Abkhaz language" label="Abkhaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q184" start="27236" end="27243" title="Belarus" label="Belarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q232" start="27264" end="27274" title="Kazakhstan" label="Kazakhstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q813" start="27291" end="27301" title="Kyrgyzstan" label="Kyrgyzstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q23427" start="27318" end="27331" title="South Ossetia" label="South Ossetia"/>
<link wikidata="Q863" start="27389" end="27399" title="Tajikistan" label="Tajikistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q907112" start="27455" end="27467" title="Transnistria" label="Transnistria"/>
<link wikidata="Q36308" start="27536" end="27541" title="Safen language" label="Safen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041" start="27545" end="27552" title="Senegal" label="Senegal"/>
<link wikidata="Q35006" start="27585" end="27592" title="Balanta languages" label="Balanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q35098" start="27594" end="27601" title="Bassari language" label="Bassari"/>
<link wikidata="Q35096" start="27603" end="27608" title="Bedik language" label="Bedik"/>
<link wikidata="Q33454" start="27610" end="27614" title="Fula language" label="Fula"/>
<link wikidata="Q56231" start="27616" end="27625" title="Hassaniya Arabic" label="Hassaniya"/>
<link wikidata="Q35176" start="27627" end="27631" title="Jola language" label="Jola"/>
<link wikidata="Q33678" start="27633" end="27641" title="Mandinka language" label="Mandinka"/>
<link wikidata="Q35822" start="27643" end="27650" title="Mandjak language" label="Mandjak"/>
<link wikidata="Q35789" start="27652" end="27660" title="Mankanya language" label="Mankanya"/>
<link wikidata="Q36304" start="27662" end="27666" title="Noon language" label="Noon"/>
<link wikidata="Q36284" start="27668" end="27673" title="Serer language" label="Serer"/>
<link wikidata="Q36660" start="27675" end="27682" title="Soninke language" label="Soninke"/>
<link wikidata="Q34257" start="27684" end="27689" title="Wolof language" label="Wolof"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="27716" end="27722" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q34011" start="27725" end="27731" title="Samoan language" label="Samoan"/>
<link wikidata="Q683" start="27734" end="27739" title="Samoa" label="Samoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="27746" end="27753" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q33954" start="27756" end="27761" title="Sango language" label="Sango"/>
<link wikidata="Q929" start="27811" end="27835" title="Central African Republic" label="Central African Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="27842" end="27848" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q2964008" start="27851" end="27855" title="Sena language" label="Sena"/>
<link wikidata="Q954" start="27859" end="27867" title="Zimbabwe" label="Zimbabwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="27898" end="27905" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q34004" start="27907" end="27912" title="Shona language" label="Shona"/>
<link wikidata="Q35613" start="27914" end="27921" title="Northern Ndebele language" label="Ndebele"/>
<link wikidata="Q33273" start="27923" end="27928" title="Chewa language" label="Chewa"/>
<link wikidata="Q33672" start="27930" end="27937" title="Kalanga language" label="Kalanga"/>
<link wikidata="Q963636" start="27939" end="27957" title="Tshuwau language" label="&amp;quot;Koisan&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3553981" start="27969" end="27975" title="Nambya language" label="Nambya"/>
<link wikidata="Q13311" start="27977" end="27981" title="Ndau dialect" label="Ndau"/>
<link wikidata="Q8072097" start="27983" end="28007" title="Zimbabwean sign languages" label="Zimbabwean sign language"/>
<link wikidata="Q34101" start="28009" end="28014" title="Tonga language (Zambia and Zimbabwe)" label="Tonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q34137" start="28016" end="28022" title="Tswana language" label="Tswana"/>
<link wikidata="Q32704" start="28024" end="28029" title="Venda (language)" label="Venda"/>
<link wikidata="Q13218" start="28031" end="28036" title="Xhosa language" label="Xhosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q14549" start="28038" end="28043" title="Scots language" label="Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="28047" end="28055" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="28062" end="28069" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q9314" start="28074" end="28086" title="Scottish Gaelic" label="Scots Gaelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9299" start="28089" end="28096" title="Serbian language" label="Serbian"/>
<link wikidata="Q403" start="28100" end="28106" title="Serbia" label="Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q225" start="28109" end="28131" title="Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246" start="28182" end="28188" title="Kosovo" label="Kosovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q36284" start="28232" end="28237" title="Serer language" label="Serer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041" start="28241" end="28248" title="Senegal" label="Senegal"/>
<link wikidata="Q35006" start="28281" end="28288" title="Balanta languages" label="Balanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q35098" start="28290" end="28297" title="Bassari language" label="Bassari"/>
<link wikidata="Q35096" start="28299" end="28304" title="Bedik language" label="Bedik"/>
<link wikidata="Q33454" start="28306" end="28310" title="Fula language" label="Fula"/>
<link wikidata="Q56231" start="28312" end="28321" title="Hassaniya Arabic" label="Hassaniya"/>
<link wikidata="Q35176" start="28323" end="28327" title="Jola language" label="Jola"/>
<link wikidata="Q33678" start="28329" end="28337" title="Mandinka language" label="Mandinka"/>
<link wikidata="Q35822" start="28339" end="28346" title="Mandjak language" label="Mandjak"/>
<link wikidata="Q35789" start="28348" end="28356" title="Mankanya language" label="Mankanya"/>
<link wikidata="Q36304" start="28358" end="28362" title="Noon language" label="Noon"/>
<link wikidata="Q36308" start="28364" end="28369" title="Safen language" label="Safen"/>
<link wikidata="Q36660" start="28371" end="28378" title="Soninke language" label="Soninke"/>
<link wikidata="Q34257" start="28380" end="28385" title="Wolof language" label="Wolof"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="28412" end="28418" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q34015" start="28421" end="28439" title="Seychellois Creole" label="Seychellois Creole"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042" start="28442" end="28452" title="Seychelles" label="Seychelles"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="28459" end="28465" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="28470" end="28477" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q34004" start="28480" end="28485" title="Shona language" label="Shona"/>
<link wikidata="Q954" start="28489" end="28497" title="Zimbabwe" label="Zimbabwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="28504" end="28511" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q35613" start="28513" end="28520" title="Northern Ndebele language" label="Ndebele"/>
<link wikidata="Q33273" start="28522" end="28527" title="Chewa language" label="Chewa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2964008" start="28529" end="28537" title="Sena language" label="Chirbawe"/>
<link wikidata="Q33672" start="28539" end="28546" title="Kalanga language" label="Kalanga"/>
<link wikidata="Q963636" start="28548" end="28566" title="Tshuwau language" label="&amp;quot;Koisan&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3553981" start="28578" end="28584" title="Nambya language" label="Nambya"/>
<link wikidata="Q13311" start="28586" end="28590" title="Ndau dialect" label="Ndau"/>
<link wikidata="Q8072097" start="28592" end="28616" title="Zimbabwean sign languages" label="Zimbabwean sign language"/>
<link wikidata="Q34101" start="28618" end="28623" title="Tonga language (Zambia and Zimbabwe)" label="Tonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q34137" start="28625" end="28631" title="Tswana language" label="Tswana"/>
<link wikidata="Q32704" start="28633" end="28638" title="Venda (language)" label="Venda"/>
<link wikidata="Q13218" start="28640" end="28645" title="Xhosa language" label="Xhosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q13267" start="28648" end="28655" title="Sinhala language" label="Sinhala"/>
<link wikidata="Q854" start="28659" end="28668" title="Sri Lanka" label="Sri Lanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q5885" start="28675" end="28680" title="Tamil language" label="Tamil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="28691" end="28698" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q9058" start="28720" end="28726" title="Slovak language" label="Slovak"/>
<link wikidata="Q214" start="28730" end="28738" title="Slovakia" label="Slovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q213" start="28741" end="28755" title="Czech Republic" label="Czech Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9063" start="28757" end="28764" title="Slovene language" label="Slovene"/>
<link wikidata="Q215" start="28768" end="28776" title="Slovenia" label="Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q13275" start="28778" end="28784" title="Somali language" label="Somali"/>
<link wikidata="Q977" start="28788" end="28796" title="Djibouti" label="Djibouti"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="28803" end="28809" title="Arabic language" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="28811" end="28817" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q27811" start="28819" end="28823" title="Afar language" label="Afar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045" start="28827" end="28834" title="Somalia" label="Somalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="28841" end="28847" title="Arabic language" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q34754" start="28851" end="28861" title="Somaliland" label="Somaliland"/>
<link wikidata="Q505198" start="28915" end="28922" title="Songhay language" label="Songhay"/>
<link wikidata="Q36990" start="28923" end="28928" title="Zarma language" label="Zarma"/>
<link wikidata="Q912" start="28932" end="28936" title="Mali" label="Mali"/>
<link wikidata="Q33243" start="28969" end="28976" title="Bambara language" label="Bambara"/>
<link wikidata="Q35065" start="28978" end="28982" title="Bomu language" label="Bomu"/>
<link wikidata="Q35021" start="28984" end="28988" title="Bozo language" label="Bozo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5397128" start="28990" end="28995" title="Escarpment Dogon" label="Dogon"/>
<link wikidata="Q33454" start="28997" end="29001" title="Fula language" label="Fula"/>
<link wikidata="Q36187" start="29003" end="29009" title="Mamara language" label="Mamara"/>
<link wikidata="Q36660" start="29011" end="29018" title="Soninke language" label="Soninke"/>
<link wikidata="Q35210" start="29020" end="29027" title="Syenara language" label="Syenara"/>
<link wikidata="Q4670066" start="29029" end="29037" title="Tamasheq language" label="Tamasheq"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="29064" end="29070" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032" start="29074" end="29079" title="Niger" label="Niger"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="29086" end="29092" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="29094" end="29100" title="Arabic language" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q56287" start="29102" end="29108" title="Buduma language" label="Buduma"/>
<link wikidata="Q33454" start="29110" end="29114" title="Fula language" label="Fula"/>
<link wikidata="Q35474" start="29116" end="29126" title="Gourmanché language" label="Gourmanché"/>
<link wikidata="Q56475" start="29128" end="29133" title="Hausa language" label="Hausa"/>
<link wikidata="Q36094" start="29135" end="29141" title="Kanuri language" label="Kanuri"/>
<link wikidata="Q4670066" start="29143" end="29151" title="Tamasheq language" label="Tamasheq"/>
<link wikidata="Q36564" start="29153" end="29160" title="Tasawaq language" label="Tasawaq"/>
<link wikidata="Q2967105" start="29162" end="29166" title="Tebu language" label="Tebu"/>
<link wikidata="Q36660" start="29169" end="29176" title="Soninke language" label="Soninke"/>
<link wikidata="Q912" start="29180" end="29184" title="Mali" label="Mali"/>
<link wikidata="Q33243" start="29217" end="29224" title="Bambara language" label="Bambara"/>
<link wikidata="Q35065" start="29226" end="29230" title="Bomu language" label="Bomu"/>
<link wikidata="Q35021" start="29232" end="29236" title="Bozo language" label="Bozo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5397128" start="29238" end="29243" title="Escarpment Dogon" label="Dogon"/>
<link wikidata="Q33454" start="29245" end="29249" title="Fula language" label="Fula"/>
<link wikidata="Q36187" start="29251" end="29257" title="Mamara language" label="Mamara"/>
<link wikidata="Q505198" start="29259" end="29266" title="Songhay language" label="Songhay"/>
<link wikidata="Q35210" start="29268" end="29275" title="Syenara language" label="Syenara"/>
<link wikidata="Q4670066" start="29277" end="29285" title="Tamasheq language" label="Tamasheq"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="29312" end="29318" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025" start="29322" end="29332" title="Mauritania" label="Mauritania"/>
<link wikidata="Q33454" start="29365" end="29369" title="Fula language" label="Fula"/>
<link wikidata="Q34257" start="29371" end="29376" title="Wolof language" label="Wolof"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="29403" end="29409" title="Arabic language" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041" start="29413" end="29420" title="Senegal" label="Senegal"/>
<link wikidata="Q35006" start="29453" end="29460" title="Balanta languages" label="Balanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q35098" start="29462" end="29469" title="Bassari language" label="Bassari"/>
<link wikidata="Q35096" start="29471" end="29476" title="Bedik language" label="Bedik"/>
<link wikidata="Q33454" start="29478" end="29482" title="Fula language" label="Fula"/>
<link wikidata="Q56231" start="29484" end="29493" title="Hassaniya Arabic" label="Hassaniya"/>
<link wikidata="Q35176" start="29495" end="29499" title="Jola language" label="Jola"/>
<link wikidata="Q33678" start="29501" end="29509" title="Mandinka language" label="Mandinka"/>
<link wikidata="Q35822" start="29511" end="29518" title="Mandjak language" label="Mandjak"/>
<link wikidata="Q35789" start="29520" end="29528" title="Mankanya language" label="Mankanya"/>
<link wikidata="Q36304" start="29530" end="29534" title="Noon language" label="Noon"/>
<link wikidata="Q36308" start="29536" end="29541" title="Safen language" label="Safen"/>
<link wikidata="Q36284" start="29543" end="29548" title="Serer language" label="Serer"/>
<link wikidata="Q34257" start="29550" end="29555" title="Wolof language" label="Wolof"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="29582" end="29588" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q34340" start="29591" end="29596" title="Sotho language" label="Sotho"/>
<link wikidata="Q1013" start="29600" end="29607" title="Lesotho" label="Lesotho"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="29625" end="29637" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q14196" start="29644" end="29653" title="Afrikaans language" label="Afrikaans"/>
<link wikidata="Q36785" start="29664" end="29671" title="Southern Ndebele language" label="Ndebele"/>
<link wikidata="Q33890" start="29673" end="29687" title="Northern Sotho language" label="Northern Sotho"/>
<link wikidata="Q34014" start="29689" end="29694" title="Swati language" label="Swati"/>
<link wikidata="Q34327" start="29696" end="29702" title="Tsonga language" label="Tsonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q34137" start="29704" end="29710" title="Tswana language" label="Tswana"/>
<link wikidata="Q32704" start="29712" end="29717" title="Venda language" label="Venda"/>
<link wikidata="Q13218" start="29719" end="29724" title="Xhosa language" label="Xhosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q10179" start="29726" end="29730" title="Zulu language" label="Zulu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3322093" start="29733" end="29760" title="South African Sign Language" label="South African Sign Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="29763" end="29775" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q14196" start="29782" end="29791" title="Afrikaans language" label="Afrikaans"/>
<link wikidata="Q36785" start="29802" end="29809" title="Southern Ndebele language" label="Ndebele"/>
<link wikidata="Q33890" start="29811" end="29825" title="Northern Sotho language" label="Northern Sotho"/>
<link wikidata="Q34014" start="29827" end="29832" title="Swati language" label="Swati"/>
<link wikidata="Q34327" start="29834" end="29840" title="Tsonga language" label="Tsonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q34137" start="29842" end="29848" title="Tswana language" label="Tswana"/>
<link wikidata="Q32704" start="29850" end="29855" title="Venda language" label="Venda"/>
<link wikidata="Q13218" start="29857" end="29862" title="Xhosa language" label="Xhosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q10179" start="29864" end="29868" title="Zulu language" label="Zulu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="29871" end="29878" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q414" start="29882" end="29891" title="Argentina" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q750" start="29905" end="29912" title="Bolivia" label="Bolivia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4627" start="29919" end="29925" title="Aymara language" label="Aymara"/>
<link wikidata="Q5218" start="29927" end="29934" title="Quechua language" label="Quechua"/>
<link wikidata="Q35876" start="29936" end="29943" title="Guaraní language" label="Guaraní"/>
<link wikidata="Q298" start="29971" end="29976" title="Chile" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q14452" start="29980" end="29993" title="Easter Island" label="Easter Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q36746" start="30000" end="30008" title="Rapa Nui language" label="Rapa Nui"/>
<link wikidata="Q739" start="30012" end="30020" title="Colombia" label="Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q800" start="30023" end="30033" title="Costa Rica" label="Costa Rica"/>
<link wikidata="Q241" start="30036" end="30040" title="Cuba" label="Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q786" start="30043" end="30061" title="Dominican Republic" label="Dominican Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q736" start="30064" end="30071" title="Ecuador" label="Ecuador"/>
<link wikidata="Q5218" start="30078" end="30085" title="Quechuan languages" label="Quechua"/>
<link wikidata="Q617291" start="30090" end="30095" title="Shuar language" label="Shuar"/>
<link wikidata="Q792" start="30099" end="30110" title="El Salvador" label="El Salvador"/>
<link wikidata="Q983" start="30113" end="30130" title="Equatorial Guinea" label="Equatorial Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="30137" end="30143" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146" start="30148" end="30158" title="Portuguese language" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q774" start="30162" end="30171" title="Guatemala" label="Guatemala"/>
<link wikidata="Q783" start="30174" end="30182" title="Honduras" label="Honduras"/>
<link wikidata="Q811" start="30205" end="30214" title="Nicaragua" label="Nicaragua"/>
<link wikidata="Q804" start="30217" end="30223" title="Panama" label="Panama"/>
<link wikidata="Q733" start="30226" end="30234" title="Paraguay" label="Paraguay"/>
<link wikidata="Q35876" start="30241" end="30248" title="Guaraní language" label="Guaraní"/>
<link wikidata="Q419" start="30252" end="30256" title="Peru" label="Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q4627" start="30263" end="30269" title="Aymara language" label="Aymara"/>
<link wikidata="Q5218" start="30271" end="30278" title="Quechua language" label="Quechua"/>
<link wikidata="Q10196" start="30309" end="30316" title="Aranese language" label="Aranese"/>
<link wikidata="Q8752" start="30318" end="30324" title="Basque language" label="Basque"/>
<link wikidata="Q7026" start="30326" end="30333" title="Catalan language" label="Catalan"/>
<link wikidata="Q9307" start="30339" end="30347" title="Galician language" label="Galician"/>
<link wikidata="Q2301077" start="30383" end="30396" title="Spanish language in the United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183" start="30421" end="30432" title="Puerto Rico" label="Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q77" start="30436" end="30443" title="Uruguay" label="Uruguay"/>
<link wikidata="Q717" start="30457" end="30466" title="Venezuela" label="Venezuela"/>
<link wikidata="Q6250" start="30469" end="30483" title="Western Sahara" label="Western Sahara"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="30490" end="30496" title="Arabic language" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q33990" start="30499" end="30503" title="Susu language" label="Susu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006" start="30507" end="30513" title="Guinea" label="Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q33454" start="30546" end="30550" title="Fula language" label="Fula"/>
<link wikidata="Q35696" start="30552" end="30557" title="Kissi language" label="Kissi"/>
<link wikidata="Q35673" start="30559" end="30565" title="Kpelle language" label="Kpelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q36186" start="30567" end="30574" title="Malinke language" label="Malinke"/>
<link wikidata="Q35885" start="30576" end="30580" title="Toma language" label="Toma"/>
<link wikidata="Q35098" start="30582" end="30588" title="Oniyan language" label="Oniyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q36935" start="30590" end="30595" title="Wamey language" label="Wamey"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="30622" end="30628" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q7838" start="30631" end="30638" title="Swahili language" label="Swahili"/>
<link wikidata="Q114" start="30642" end="30647" title="Kenya" label="Kenya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1037" start="30665" end="30671" title="Rwanda" label="Rwanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q924" start="30713" end="30721" title="Tanzania" label="Tanzania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036" start="30749" end="30755" title="Uganda" label="Uganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q34014" start="30784" end="30789" title="Swati language" label="Swati"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050" start="30793" end="30801" title="Eswatini" label="Eswatini"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="30819" end="30831" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q14196" start="30838" end="30847" title="Afrikaans language" label="Afrikaans"/>
<link wikidata="Q36785" start="30858" end="30865" title="Southern Ndebele language" label="Ndebele"/>
<link wikidata="Q33890" start="30867" end="30881" title="Northern Sotho language" label="Northern Sotho"/>
<link wikidata="Q34340" start="30883" end="30888" title="Sotho language" label="Sotho"/>
<link wikidata="Q34327" start="30890" end="30896" title="Tsonga language" label="Tsonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q34137" start="30898" end="30904" title="Tswana language" label="Tswana"/>
<link wikidata="Q32704" start="30906" end="30911" title="Venda language" label="Venda"/>
<link wikidata="Q13218" start="30913" end="30918" title="Xhosa language" label="Xhosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q10179" start="30920" end="30924" title="Zulu language" label="Zulu"/>
<link wikidata="Q9027" start="30927" end="30934" title="Swedish language" label="Swedish"/>
<link wikidata="Q33" start="30947" end="30954" title="Finland" label="Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412" start="30961" end="30968" title="Finnish (language)" label="Finnish"/>
<link wikidata="Q5689" start="30972" end="30977" title="Åland" label="Åland"/>
<link wikidata="Q788176" start="31006" end="31016" title="Autonomous entity" label="autonomous"/>
<link wikidata="Q33" start="31032" end="31039" title="Finland" label="Finnish"/>
<link wikidata="Q42008" start="31040" end="31051" title="sovereignty" label="sovereignty"/>
<link wikidata="Q35210" start="31054" end="31061" title="Syenara language" label="Syenara"/>
<link wikidata="Q912" start="31065" end="31069" title="Mali" label="Mali"/>
<link wikidata="Q33243" start="31102" end="31109" title="Bambara language" label="Bambara"/>
<link wikidata="Q35065" start="31111" end="31115" title="Bomu language" label="Bomu"/>
<link wikidata="Q35021" start="31117" end="31121" title="Bozo language" label="Bozo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5397128" start="31123" end="31128" title="Escarpment Dogon" label="Dogon"/>
<link wikidata="Q33454" start="31130" end="31134" title="Fula language" label="Fula"/>
<link wikidata="Q36187" start="31136" end="31142" title="Mamara language" label="Mamara"/>
<link wikidata="Q505198" start="31144" end="31151" title="Songhay language" label="Songhay"/>
<link wikidata="Q36660" start="31153" end="31160" title="Soninke language" label="Soninke"/>
<link wikidata="Q4670066" start="31162" end="31170" title="Tamasheq language" label="Tamasheq"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="31197" end="31203" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q34019" start="31217" end="31237" title="Taiwan Sign Language" label="Taiwan Sign Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="31241" end="31247" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4380827" start="31288" end="31296" title="Taiwanese Mandarin" label="Mandarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q715278" start="31298" end="31316" title="Formosan languages" label="Formosan languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q2391532" start="31318" end="31323" title="Taiwanese Hakka" label="Hakka"/>
<link wikidata="Q36778" start="31328" end="31345" title="Taiwanese Hokkien" label="Taiwanese Hokkien"/>
<link wikidata="Q36778" start="31349" end="31366" title="Taiwanese Hokkien" label="Taiwanese Hokkien"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="31370" end="31376" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q178528" start="31384" end="31414" title="Traditional Chinese characters" label="Traditional Chinese characters"/>
<link wikidata="Q559173" start="31422" end="31432" title="pe̍h-oē-jī" label="pe̍h-oē-jī"/>
<link wikidata="Q4380827" start="31489" end="31497" title="Taiwanese Mandarin" label="Mandarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q715278" start="31499" end="31517" title="Formosan languages" label="Formosan languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q2391532" start="31519" end="31524" title="Taiwanese Hakka" label="Hakka"/>
<link wikidata="Q34019" start="31529" end="31549" title="Taiwan Sign Language" label="Taiwan Sign Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q9260" start="31553" end="31558" title="Tajik language" label="Tajik"/>
<link wikidata="Q863" start="31562" end="31572" title="Tajikistan" label="Tajikistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q34057" start="31617" end="31624" title="Tagalog language" label="Tagalog"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31638" end="31646" title="#F" label="Filipino"/>
<link wikidata="Q34065" start="31655" end="31663" title="Tuareg language" label="Tamasheq"/>
<link wikidata="Q912" start="31667" end="31671" title="Mali" label="Mali"/>
<link wikidata="Q33243" start="31704" end="31711" title="Bambara language" label="Bambara"/>
<link wikidata="Q35065" start="31713" end="31717" title="Bomu language" label="Bomu"/>
<link wikidata="Q35021" start="31719" end="31723" title="Bozo language" label="Bozo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5397128" start="31725" end="31730" title="Escarpment Dogon" label="Dogon"/>
<link wikidata="Q33454" start="31732" end="31736" title="Fula language" label="Fula"/>
<link wikidata="Q36187" start="31738" end="31744" title="Mamara language" label="Mamara"/>
<link wikidata="Q505198" start="31746" end="31753" title="Songhay language" label="Songhay"/>
<link wikidata="Q36660" start="31755" end="31762" title="Soninke language" label="Soninke"/>
<link wikidata="Q35210" start="31764" end="31771" title="Syenara language" label="Syenara"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="31798" end="31804" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032" start="31808" end="31813" title="Niger" label="Niger"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="31820" end="31826" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="31828" end="31834" title="Arabic language" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q56287" start="31836" end="31842" title="Buduma language" label="Buduma"/>
<link wikidata="Q33454" start="31844" end="31848" title="Fula language" label="Fula"/>
<link wikidata="Q35474" start="31850" end="31860" title="Gourmanché language" label="Gourmanché"/>
<link wikidata="Q56475" start="31862" end="31867" title="Hausa language" label="Hausa"/>
<link wikidata="Q36094" start="31869" end="31875" title="Kanuri language" label="Kanuri"/>
<link wikidata="Q505198" start="31877" end="31884" title="Songhay language" label="Songhay"/>
<link wikidata="Q36990" start="31885" end="31890" title="Zarma language" label="Zarma"/>
<link wikidata="Q36564" start="31892" end="31899" title="Tasawaq language" label="Tasawaq"/>
<link wikidata="Q2967105" start="31901" end="31905" title="Tebu language" label="Tebu"/>
<link wikidata="Q5885" start="31908" end="31913" title="Tamil language" label="Tamil"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31917" end="31965" title="India in the state of Tamil Nadu and Pondicherry" label="India in the state of Tamil Nadu and Pondicherry"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="192825" wikidata="Q9292" url="?curid=192825" title="Azerbaijani language">
<text>Azerbaijani ( ) or Azeri ( ), also referred to as Azeri Turkic or Azeri Turkish, is a Turkic language from the Oghuz sub-branch. It is spoken primarily by the Azerbaijani people, who live mainly in the Republic of Azerbaijan, where the North Azerbaijani variety is spoken, while Iranian Azerbaijanis in the Azerbaijan region of Iran, speak the South Azerbaijani variety. Azerbaijani has official status in the Republic of Azerbaijan and Dagestan (a federal subject of Russia), but it does not have official status in Iran, where the majority of Iranian Azerbaijani people live. Azerbaijani is also spoken to lesser varying degrees in Azerbaijani communities of Georgia and Turkey and by diaspora communities, primarily in Europe and North America.

Although there is a high degree of mutual intelligibility between both forms of Azerbaijani, there are significant differences in phonology, lexicon, morphology, syntax, and sources of loanwords. The standardized form of North Azerbaijani (spoken in the Republic of Azerbaijan and Russia) is based on the Shirvani dialect, while South Azerbaijani uses a variety of regional dialects. Since the Republic of Azerbaijan&#x27;s independence from the Soviet Union in 1991, Northern Azerbaijani has used the Latin script. On the other hand, South Azerbaijani has always used and continues to use the Perso-Arabic script. 

Azerbaijani is closely related to Turkmen, Turkish, Gagauz, and Qashqai, being mutually intelligible with each of these languages to varying degrees.

== Etymology and background ==
Historically, the language was referred to by its native speakers as or , meaning either &quot;Turkish&quot; or &quot;Turkic&quot;. In the early years following the establishment of the Azerbaijan Soviet Socialist Republic, the language was still referred to as &quot;Turkic&quot; in official documents. However, in the 1930s, its name was officially changed to &quot;Azerbaijani&quot;. The language is often still referred to as &quot;Turki&quot; or &quot;Torki&quot; in Iranian Azerbaijan. The term &quot;Azeri&quot;, generally interchangeable with &quot;Azerbaijani&quot;, is from Turkish &quot;Azeri&quot; which is used for the people (&quot;azerice&quot; being used for the language in Turkish), itself from Persian آذری, Āzarī. The term is also used for Old Azeri, the ancient Iranian language spoken in the region until the 17th century.

== History and evolution ==

Azerbaijani evolved from the Eastern branch of Oghuz Turkic (&quot;Western Turkic&quot;) which spread to the Caucasus, in Eastern Europe, and northern Iran, in Western Asia, during the medieval Turkic migrations. Persian and Arabic influenced the language, but Arabic words were mainly transmitted through the intermediary of literary Persian. Azerbaijani is, perhaps after Uzbek, the Turkic language upon which Persian and other Iranian languages have exerted the strongest impact—mainly in phonology, syntax, and vocabulary, less in morphology.

The Turkic language of Azerbaijan gradually supplanted the Iranian languages in what is now northwestern Iran, and a variety of languages of the Caucasus and Iranian languages spoken in the Caucasus, particularly Udi and Old Azeri. By the beginning of the 16th century, it had become the dominant language of the region. It was one of the spoken languages in the court of the Safavids, Afsharids and Qajars.

The historical development of Azerbaijani can be divided into two major periods: early ( to 18th century) and modern (18th century to present). Early Azerbaijani differs from its descendant in that it contained a much larger number of Persian and Arabic loanwords, phrases and syntactic elements. Early writings in Azerbaijani also demonstrate linguistic interchangeability between Oghuz and Kypchak elements in many aspects (such as pronouns, case endings, participles, etc.). As Azerbaijani gradually moved from being merely a language of epic and lyric poetry to being also a language of journalism and scientific research, its literary version has become more or less unified and simplified with the loss of many archaic Turkic elements, stilted Iranisms and Ottomanisms, and other words, expressions, and rules that failed to gain popularity among the Azerbaijani masses.

The Russian annexation of Iran&#x27;s territories in the Caucasus through the Russo-Iranian wars of 1804–1813 and 1826–1828 split the language community across two states. Afterwards, the Tsarist administration encouraged the spread of Azerbaijani in eastern Transcaucasia as a replacement for Persian spoken by the upper classes, and as a measure against Persian influence in the region.

Between and 1930, there were several competing approaches to the unification of the national language in what is now the Azerbaijan Republic, popularized by scholars such as Hasan bey Zardabi and Mammad agha Shahtakhtinski. Despite major differences, they all aimed primarily at making it easy for semi-literate masses to read and understand literature. They all criticized the overuse of Persian, Arabic, and European elements in both colloquial and literary language and called for a simpler and more popular style.

The Soviet Union promoted the development of the language but set it back considerably with two successive script changes – from the Persian to Latin and then to the Cyrillic script – while Iranian Azerbaijanis continued to use the Persian script as they always had. Despite the wide use of Azerbaijani in the Azerbaijan Soviet Socialist Republic, it became the official language of Azerbaijan only in 1956. After independence, the Republic of Azerbaijan decided to switch back to a modified Latin script.

== Azerbaijani literature ==

The development of Azerbaijani literature is closely associated with Anatolian Turkish, written in Perso-Arabic script. Examples of its detachment date to the 14th century or earlier. Kadi Burhan al-Din, Hasanoghlu, and Imadaddin Nasimi helped to establish Azerbaiijani as a literary language in the 14th century through poetry and other works. One ruler of the Qara Qoyunlu state, Jahanshah, wrote poems in Azerbaijani language with the nickname &quot;Haqiqi&quot;. Sultan Yaqub, a ruler of the Aq Qoyunlu state, wrote poems in the Azerbaijani language. The ruler and poet Ismail I wrote under the pen name &quot;Khatā&#x27;ī&quot; (which means &quot;sinner&quot; in Persian) during the fifteenth century. During the 16th century, the poet, writer and thinker Fuzûlî wrote mainly in Azerbaijani but also translated his poems into Arabic and Persian.

Starting in the 1830s, several newspapers were published in Iran during the reign of the Azerbaijani speaking Qajar dynasty, but it is unknown whether any of these newspapers were written in Azerbaijani. In 1875, &quot;Akinchi&quot; (&quot;&quot; / ) (&quot;The Ploughman&quot;) became the first Azerbaijani newspaper to be published in the Russian Empire. It was started by Hasan bey Zardabi, a journalist and education advocate.

Mohammad-Hossein Shahriar is an important figure in Azerbaijani poetry. His most important work is &quot;Heydar Babaya Salam&quot; and it is considered to be a pinnacle of Azerbaijani literature and gained popularity in the Turkic-speaking world. It was translated into more than 30 languages.

In the mid-19th century, Azerbaijani literature was taught at schools in Baku, Ganja, Shaki, Tbilisi, and Yerevan. Since 1845, it has also been taught in the Saint Petersburg State University in Russia. In 2018, Azerbaijani language and literature programs are offered in the United States at several universities, including Indiana University, UCLA, and University of Texas at Austin. The vast majority, if not all Azerbaijani language courses teach North Azerbaijani written in the Latin script and not South Azerbaijani written in the Perso-Arabic script.

Modern literature in the Republic of Azerbaijan is primarily based on the Shirvani dialect, while in the Iranian Azerbaijan region (historic Azerbaijan) it is based on the Tabrizi one.

== Lingua franca ==
An Azerbaijani koine served as a &quot;lingua franca&quot; throughout most parts of Transcaucasia except the Black Sea coast, in southern Dagestan, the Eastern Anatolia Region and all over Iran from the 16th to the early 20th centuries, alongside cultural, administrative, court literature, and most importantly official language (along with Azerbaijani) of all these regions, namely Persian. From the early 16th century up to the course of the 19th century, these regions and territories were all ruled by the Safavids, Afsharids, and Qajars until the cession of Transcaucasia proper and Dagestan by Qajar Iran to the Russian Empire per the 1813 Treaty of Gulistan and the 1828 Treaty of Turkmenchay. Per the 1829 Caucasus School Statute, Azerbaijani was to be taught in all district schools of Ganja, Shusha, Nukha (present-day Shaki), Shamakhi, Quba, Baku, Derbent, Yerevan, Nakhchivan, Akhaltsikhe, and Lankaran. Beginning in 1834, it was introduced as a language of study in Kutaisi instead of Armenian. In 1853, Azerbaijani became a compulsory language for students of all backgrounds in all of Transcaucasia with the exception of the Tiflis Governorate.

== Dialects of Azerbaijani ==
Azerbaijani is one of the Oghuz languages within the Turkic language family. &quot;Ethnologue&quot; lists North Azerbaijani (spoken mainly in the Republic of Azerbaijan and Russia) and South Azerbaijani (spoken in Iran, Iraq, and Syria) as two groups within the Azerbaijani macrolanguage with &quot;significant differences in phonology, lexicon, morphology, syntax, and loanwords&quot; between the two. The International Organization for Standardization (ISO) considers Northern and Southern Azerbaijani to be distinct languages. Linguists Mohammad Salehi and Aydin Neysani write that &quot;there is a high degree of mutual intelligibility&quot; between North and South Azerbaijani.

Svante Cornell wrote in his 2001 book &quot;Small Nations and Great Powers&quot; that &quot;it is certain that Russian and Iranian words (sic), respectively, have entered the vocabulary on either side of the Araxes river, but this has not occurred to an extent that it could pose difficulties for communication&quot;. There are numerous dialects, with 21 North Azerbaijani dialects and 11 South Azerbaijani dialects identified by Ethnologue.

Three varieties have been accorded ISO 639-3 language codes: North Azerbaijani, South Azerbaijani and Qashqai. The &quot;Glottolog&quot; 4.1 database classifies North Azerbaijani, with 20 dialects, and South Azerbaijani, with 13 dialects, under the Modern Azeric family, a branch of Central Oghuz.

In the northern dialects of the Azerbaijani language, linguists find traces of the influence of the Khazar language.

According to Encyclopedia Iranica:
=== North Azerbaijani ===
North Azerbaijani, or Northern Azerbaijani, is the official language of the Republic of Azerbaijan. It is closely related to modern-day Istanbul Turkish, the official language of Turkey. It is also spoken in southern Dagestan, along the Caspian coast in the southern Caucasus Mountains and in scattered regions throughout Central Asia. , there are some 9.23 million speakers of North Azerbaijani including 4 million monolingual speakers (many North Azerbaijani speakers also speak Russian, as is common throughout former USSR countries).

The Shirvan dialect as spoken in Baku is the basis of standard Azerbaijani. Since 1992, it has been officially written with a Latin script in the Republic of Azerbaijan, but the older Cyrillic script was still widely used in the late 1990s.

&quot;Ethnologue&quot; lists 21 North Azerbaijani dialects: &quot;Quba, Derbend, Baku, Shamakhi, Salyan, Lenkaran, Qazakh, Airym, Borcala, Terekeme, Qyzylbash, Nukha, Zaqatala (Mugaly), Qabala, Nakhchivan, Ordubad, Ganja, Shusha (Karabakh), Karapapak, Kutkashen, Kuba&quot;.

=== South Azerbaijani ===
South Azerbaijani, or Iranian Azerbaijani, is widely spoken in Iranian Azerbaijan and, to a lesser extent, in neighboring regions of Turkey and Iraq, with smaller communities in Syria. In Iran, the Persian word for Azerbaijani is borrowed as &quot;&quot; &quot;Turkic&quot;. In Iran, it is spoken mainly in East Azerbaijan, West Azerbaijan, Ardabil and Zanjan. It is also spoken in Tehran and across the Tehran Province, as Azerbaijanis form by far the largest minority in the city and the wider province, comprising about of its total population. The CIA World Factbook reports that in 2010, the percentage of Iranian Azerbaijani speakers was at around 16 percent of the Iranian population, or approximately 13 million people worldwide, and ethnic Azeris form by far the second largest ethnic group of Iran, thus making the language also the second most spoken language in the nation. Ethnologue reports 10.9 million Iranian Azerbaijani in Iran in 2016 and 13,823,350 worldwide.
Dialects of South Azerbaijani include: &quot;Aynallu (often considered a separate language), Karapapakh (often considered a separate language. The second edition of the &quot;Encyclopaedia of Islam&quot; mentions that it is close to both &quot;Āzerī and the Turkish of Turkey&quot;. The historian George Bournoutian only mentions that it is close to present-day Azeri-&quot;Türki&quot;.), Afshari (often considered a separate language), Shahsavani (sometimes considered its own dialect, distinct from other Turkic languages of northwestern Iran), Baharlu (Kamesh), Moqaddam, Nafar, Qaragozlu, Pishagchi, Bayat, Qajar, Tabriz&quot;.

== Comparison with other Turkic languages ==
Russian comparatist calls the Turkmen language the closest relative of Azerbaijani.

=== Azerbaijani and Turkish ===

Speakers of Turkish and Azerbaijani can, to an extent, communicate with each other as both languages have substantial similarity. However, it is easier for many Azerbaijani speakers to understand Turkish than it is for Turkish speakers to understand Azerbaijani. Turkish soap operas are very popular with Azeris in both Iran and Azerbaijan. Reza Shah Pahlavi of Iran (who spoke South Azerbaijani) met with Mustafa Kemal Atatürk of Turkey (who spoke Turkish) in 1934; the two were filmed speaking their respective languages to each other and communicated effectively.

In a 2011 study, 30 Turkish participants were tested to determine how well they understood written and spoken Azerbaijani. It was found that even though Turkish and Azerbaijani are typologically similar languages, on the part of Turkish speakers the intelligibility is not as high as is estimated. In a 2017 study, Iranian Azerbaijanis scored in average 56% of receptive intelligibility in spoken Turkish.

Azerbaijani exhibits a similar stress pattern to Turkish but simpler in some respects. Azerbaijani is a strongly stressed and partially stress-timed language, unlike Turkish which is weakly stressed and syllable-timed.

Below are some cognates with different spelling in Azerbaijani and Turkish:
=== Azerbaijani and Turkmen ===
The 1st person personal pronoun is &quot;mən&quot; in Azerbaijani just as &quot;men&quot; in Turkmen, whereas it is &quot;ben&quot; in Turkish. The same is true for demonstrative pronouns &quot;bu&quot;, where sound &quot;b&quot; is replaced with sound &quot;m&quot;. For example: &quot;bunun&quot;&gt;&quot;munun&quot;/&quot;mının&quot;, &quot;muna&quot;/&quot;mına&quot;, &quot;munu&quot;/&quot;munı&quot;, &quot;munda&quot;/&quot;mında&quot;, &quot;mundan&quot;/&quot;mından&quot;. This is observed in the Turkmen literary language as well, where the demonstrative pronoun &quot;bu&quot; undergoes some changes just as in: &quot;munuñ&quot;, &quot;munı&quot;, &quot;muña&quot;, &quot;munda&quot;, &quot;mundan&quot;, &quot;munça&quot;. &quot;b&quot;&gt;&quot;m&quot; replacement is encountered in many dialects of the Turkmen language and may be observed in such words as: &quot;boyun&quot;&gt;&quot;moyın&quot; in Yomut – Gunbatar dialect, &quot;büdüremek&quot;&gt;&quot;müdüremek&quot; in Ersari and Stavropol Turkmens&#x27; dialects, &quot;bol&quot;&gt;&quot;mol&quot; in Karakalpak Turkmens&#x27; dialects, &quot;buzav&quot;&gt;&quot;mizov&quot; in Kirac dialects.

Here are some words from the Swadesh list to compare Azerbaijani with Turkmen:
=== Oghuric ===

Azerbaijani dialects share paradigms of verbs in some tenses with the Chuvash language, on which linguists also rely in the study and reconstruction of the Khazar language.

== Phonology ==
=== Phonotactics ===
Azerbaijani phonotactics is similar to that of other Oghuz Turkic languages, except:
* Trimoraic syllables with long vowels are permissible.
* There is an ongoing metathesis of neighboring consonants in a word. Speakers tend to reorder consonants in the order of decreasing sonority and back-to-front (for example, iləri becomes irəli, köprü becomes körpü, topraq becomes torpaq). Some of the metatheses are so common in the educated speech that they are reflected in orthography (all the above examples are like that). This phenomenon is more common in rural dialects but observed even in educated young urban speakers, but noticeably absent from some Southern dialects.
* Intramorpheme q becomes .

=== Consonants ===

# The sound is used only in loanwords; the historical unpalatalized became voiced to . In Iran the sound [K] is kept, and [k] did not shift to [g].
# and are realised as and respectively in the areas around Tabriz and to the west, south and southwest of Tabriz (including Kirkuk in Iraq); in the Nakhchivan and Ayrum dialects, in Cəbrayil and some Caspian coastal dialects;.
# Sounds and may also be recognized as separate phonemic sounds in the Tabrizi and southern dialects.
# In most dialects of Azerbaijani, is realized as when it is found in the syllabic coda or is preceded by a voiceless consonant (as in &#x27; – &quot;bread&quot;; &#x27; – &quot;eighty&quot;).
# exists in the Kirkuk dialect as an allophone of in Arabic loanwords.
# In colloquial speech, (but not intramorpheme transformed from ) is usually pronounced as 

====Dialectal consonants====
Works on Azerbaijani dialectology use the following notations for dialectal consonants:
* Ⱪ ⱪ—
* X` x`—
* Ŋ ŋ—
* Ц ц—
* Dz dz—
* Ž ž—
* W w—

Examples:
* —ⱪış 
* —üzüx` 
* —ataŋın 
* —цay 
* —dzan 
* —əžəli 
* —dowşan 
* —töwlə 

=== Vowels ===
The vowels of the Azerbaijani are, in alphabetical order, &#x27; , &#x27; , &#x27; , &#x27; , &#x27; , &#x27; , &#x27; , &#x27; , &quot; .


The typical phonetic quality of South Azerbaijani vowels is as follows:
* are close to cardinal .
* The F1 and F2 formant frequencies overlap for and . Their acoustic quality is more or less close-mid central . The main role in the distinction of two vowels is played by the different F3 frequencies in audition, and rounding in articulation. Phonologically, however, they are more distinct: is phonologically a mid front rounded vowel, the front counterpart of and the rounded counterpart of . is phonologically a close back unrounded vowel, the back counterpart of and the unrounded counterpart of .
* The other mid vowels are closer to close-mid than open-mid .
* is phonetically near-open back .

==== Diphthongs ====
The modern Azerbaijani Latin alphabet contains the digraphs and &#x27; to represent diphthongs present in the language, and the pronunciation of diphthongs is today accepted as the norm in the orthophony of Azerbaijani. Despite this, the number and even the existence of diphthongs in Azerbaijani has been disputed, with some linguists, such as , arguing that they are non-phonemic. Damirchizade&#x27;s view was challenged by others, such as , who argued that Damirchizade was taking orthography as the basis of his judgement, rather than its phonetic value. According to Akhundov, Azerbaijani contains two diphthongs, and , represented by and &#x27; in the alphabet, both of which are phonemic due to their contrast with and , represented by and &quot;. In some cases, a non-syllabic can also be pronounced after the aforementioned diphthongs, to form and , the rules of which are as follows:

* If the letter precedes and then , forming , it should be pronounced as , e.g. , .
* If the letter precedes and then any consonant, it should be pronounced as , with the pronunciation of the being optional, e.g. , .
* If the letter precedes and then any unvoiced consonant, it should be pronounced as , e.g. , .
* If the letter precedes and then any voiced consonant, it should be pronounced as , with the pronunciation of the being optional, e.g. , .

Modern linguists who have examined Azerbaijani&#x27;s vowel system almost unanimously have recognised that diphthongs are phonetically produced in speech.

== Writing systems ==

Before 1929, Azerbaijani was written only in the Perso-Arabic alphabet, an impure abjad that does not represent all vowels (without diacritical marks). In Iran, the process of standardization of orthography started with the publication of Azerbaijani magazines and newspapers such as &quot;Varlıq&quot; ( — &quot;Existence&quot;) from 1979. Azerbaijani-speaking scholars and literarians showed great interest in involvement in such ventures and in working towards the development of a standard writing system. These effort culminated in language seminars being held in Tehran, chaired by the founder of &quot;Varlıq&quot;, Javad Heyat, in 2001 where a document outlining the standard orthography and writing conventions were published for the public. This standard of writing is today canonized by a Persian–Azeri Turkic dictionary in Iran titled .

Between 1929 and 1938, a Latin alphabet was in use for North Azerbaijani, although it was different from the one used now. From 1938 to 1991, the Cyrillic script was used. Lastly, in 1991, the current Latin alphabet was introduced, although the transition to it has been rather slow. For instance, until an Aliyev decree on the matter in 2001, newspapers would routinely write headlines in the Latin script, leaving the stories in Cyrillic. The transition has also resulted in some misrendering of İ as &quot;Ì&quot;. In Dagestan, Azerbaijani is still written in Cyrillic script.

The Azerbaijani Latin alphabet is based on the Turkish Latin alphabet. In turn, the Turkish Latin alphabet was based on former Azerbaijani Latin alphabet because of their linguistic connections and mutual intelligibility. The letters , , and are available only in Azerbaijani for sounds which do not exist as separate phonemes in Turkish.
Northern Azerbaijani, unlike Turkish, respells foreign names to conform with Latin Azerbaijani spelling, e.g. is spelled and Schröder becomes . Hyphenation across lines directly corresponds to spoken syllables, except for geminated consonants which are hyphenated as two separate consonants as morphonology considers them two separate consonants back to back but enunciated in the onset of the latter syllable as a single long consonant, as in other Turkic languages.

== Vocabulary ==
===Interjections===
Some samples include:

Secular:
* &quot;&quot; (&quot;Ugh!&quot;)
* &quot;&quot; (&quot;Be quick!&quot;)
* &quot;&quot; (&quot;Be quick girls, to school!&quot;, a slogan for an education campaign in Azerbaijan)
Invoking deity:
* implicitly:
** &quot;&quot; (&quot;Mercy&quot;)
** &quot;&quot; (&quot;Much thanks&quot;)
* explicitly:
** &#x27; (pronounced as &#x27;) (&quot;Goodness gracious&quot;)
** &#x27;; &#x27; &quot;By God [I swear it]&quot;.
** &quot;&quot; (&quot;Much thanks my God&quot;)

=== Formal and informal ===

Azerbaijani has informal and formal ways of saying things. This is because there is a strong tu-vous distinction in Turkic languages like Azerbaijani and Turkish (as well as in many other languages). The informal &quot;you&quot; is used when talking to close friends, relatives, animals or children. The formal &quot;you&quot; is used when talking to someone who is older than the speaker or to show respect (to a professor, for example).

As in many Turkic languages, personal pronouns can be omitted, and they are only added for emphasis. 

Since 1992, North Azerbaijani has used a phonetic writing system, so pronunciation is easy: most words are pronounced exactly as they are spelled. However, the combination in words is pronounced , as the first voiced velar stop is devoiced when it is geminated, such as in , .

=== Numbers ===
The numbers 11–19 are constructed as &#x27; and &#x27;, literally meaning &quot;ten-one, ten-two&quot; and so on up to &quot;&quot; (&quot;ten-nine&quot;).

Greater numbers are constructed by combining in tens and thousands larger to smaller in the same way, without using a conjunction in between.

== Notes ==


== References ==
== Bibliography ==
* 
* 
* 
* 
== Further reading ==

* “Language Shifts: ‘Gamburger’ Becomes Hamburger” &quot;Azerbaijan International&quot;, Vol. 8:1 (Spring 2000), p. 12.

== External links ==

* A blog on Azerbaijani language resources and translations
* A blog about the Azerbaijani language and lessons

* AZERI.org, Azerbaijani literature and English translations.
* Ismikhan Rahimov: In Defense of My Mother Tongue Azerbaijani (sentenced to the GULAG for eight years), AZER.com at &quot;Azerbaijan International&quot;, Vol. 12:4 (Winter 2004), p. 25. 
* Online bidirectional Azerbaijani-English Dictionary [broken as of 2022]
* Learn Azerbaijani at learn101.org.
* Pre-Islamic roots
* Azerbaijan-Turkish language in Iran by Ahmad Kasravi.
* including sound file.
* Azerbaijani (Arabic script) - Persian Dictionary (2009) (by Mahmud Dast-Pisheh)
* Azerbaijani&lt;&gt;Turkish dictionary (Pamukkale University)
* Azerbaijan Language with Audio
* Azerbaijani thematic vocabulary
* AzConvert, an open source Azerbaijani transliteration program.
* Azerbaijani Alphabet and Language in Transition, the entire issue of &quot;Azerbaijan International&quot;, Vol. 8:1 (Spring 2000) at AZER.com.
** Editorial: Betty Blair, &quot;Alphabet and Language in Transition&quot;
** Chart: Four Alphabet Changes in Azerbaijan in the 20th century &quot;Azerbaijan International&quot;, Vol. 8:1 (Spring 2000), p. 13.
** Chart: Changes in the Azerbaijan Alphabet Sequence in the 20th century &quot;Azerbaijan International&quot;, Vol. 8:1 (Spring 2000), p. 15.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q9292" start="0" end="11" title="Azerbaijani language" label="Azerbaijani"/>
<link wikidata="Q9292" start="19" end="24" title="Azerbaijani language" label="Azeri"/>
<link wikidata="Q9292" start="50" end="62" title="Azerbaijani language" label="Azeri Turkic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9292" start="66" end="79" title="Azerbaijani language" label="Azeri Turkish"/>
<link wikidata="Q34090" start="86" end="101" title="Turkic languages" label="Turkic language"/>
<link wikidata="Q494600" start="111" end="116" title="Oghuz languages" label="Oghuz"/>
<link wikidata="Q482942" start="159" end="177" title="Azerbaijanis" label="Azerbaijani people"/>
<link wikidata="Q227" start="202" end="224" title="Azerbaijan" label="Republic of Azerbaijan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3329375" start="254" end="261" title="Variety (linguistics)" label="variety"/>
<link wikidata="Q2426677" start="279" end="299" title="Iranian Azerbaijanis" label="Iranian Azerbaijanis"/>
<link wikidata="Q274536" start="307" end="317" title="Azerbaijan (Iran)" label="Azerbaijan"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="328" end="332" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q3329375" start="362" end="369" title="Variety (linguistics)" label="variety"/>
<link wikidata="Q23492" start="387" end="395" title="Official language" label="official"/>
<link wikidata="Q5118" start="437" end="445" title="Dagestan" label="Dagestan"/>
<link wikidata="Q43263" start="449" end="474" title="Federal subjects of Russia" label="federal subject of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2426677" start="545" end="564" title="Iranian Azerbaijanis" label="Iranian Azerbaijani"/>
<link wikidata="Q230" start="661" end="668" title="Georgia (country)" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2068067" start="687" end="695" title="Azerbaijani diaspora" label="diaspora"/>
<link wikidata="Q829257" start="784" end="806" title="mutual intelligibility" label="mutual intelligibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q40998" start="879" end="888" title="phonology" label="phonology"/>
<link wikidata="Q8096" start="890" end="897" title="lexicon" label="lexicon"/>
<link wikidata="Q38311" start="899" end="909" title="morphology (linguistics)" label="morphology"/>
<link wikidata="Q37437" start="911" end="917" title="syntax" label="syntax"/>
<link wikidata="Q103808" start="934" end="942" title="loanword" label="loanword"/>
<link wikidata="Q399495" start="949" end="966" title="standard language" label="standardized form"/>
<link wikidata="Q638064" start="1054" end="1061" title="Shirvan" label="Shirvan"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="1195" end="1207" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q744068" start="1343" end="1362" title="Perso-Arabic script" label="Perso-Arabic script"/>
<link wikidata="Q9267" start="1400" end="1407" title="Turkmen language" label="Turkmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q256" start="1409" end="1416" title="Turkish language" label="Turkish"/>
<link wikidata="Q33457" start="1418" end="1424" title="Gagauz language" label="Gagauz"/>
<link wikidata="Q13192" start="1430" end="1437" title="Qashqai language" label="Qashqai"/>
<link wikidata="Q131337" start="1734" end="1770" title="Azerbaijan Soviet Socialist Republic" label="Azerbaijan Soviet Socialist Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q274536" start="2020" end="2038" title="Iranian Azerbaijan" label="Iranian Azerbaijan"/>
<link wikidata="Q434697" start="2308" end="2317" title="Old Azeri" label="Old Azeri"/>
<link wikidata="Q494600" start="2470" end="2482" title="Oghuz languages" label="Oghuz Turkic"/>
<link wikidata="Q27468" start="2545" end="2559" title="Eastern Europe" label="Eastern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q27293" start="2583" end="2595" title="Western Asia" label="Western Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q655561" start="2617" end="2633" title="Turkic migration" label="Turkic migration"/>
<link wikidata="Q9168" start="2636" end="2643" title="Persian language" label="Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="2648" end="2654" title="Arabic" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9264" start="2797" end="2802" title="Uzbek language" label="Uzbek"/>
<link wikidata="Q33527" start="2853" end="2870" title="Iranian languages" label="Iranian languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q12237297" start="3099" end="3124" title="languages of the Caucasus" label="languages of the Caucasus"/>
<link wikidata="Q33527" start="3129" end="3146" title="Iranian languages" label="Iranian languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q18869" start="3161" end="3169" title="Caucasus" label="Caucasus"/>
<link wikidata="Q36867" start="3184" end="3187" title="Udi language" label="Udi"/>
<link wikidata="Q434697" start="3192" end="3201" title="Old Azeri language" label="Old Azeri"/>
<link wikidata="Q18234383" start="3347" end="3355" title="Safavid Iran" label="Safavids"/>
<link wikidata="Q388739" start="3357" end="3366" title="Afsharid dynasty" label="Afsharids"/>
<link wikidata="Q63158027" start="3371" end="3377" title="Qajar Iran" label="Qajars"/>
<link wikidata="Q37484" start="3921" end="3925" title="epic poetry" label="epic"/>
<link wikidata="Q182357" start="3930" end="3942" title="lyric poetry" label="lyric poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q11030" start="3971" end="3981" title="journalism" label="journalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q336" start="3986" end="3996" title="science" label="scientific"/>
<link wikidata="Q42240" start="3997" end="4005" title="research" label="research"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="4262" end="4269" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q63158027" start="4284" end="4288" title="Qajar Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q18869" start="4315" end="4323" title="Caucasus" label="Caucasus"/>
<link wikidata="Q8543350" start="4336" end="4354" title="Russo-Persian Wars" label="Russo-Iranian wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139887" start="4358" end="4367" title="Russo-Persian War (1804–1813)" label="1804–1813"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420115" start="4372" end="4381" title="Russo-Persian War (1826–1828)" label="1826–1828"/>
<link wikidata="Q2275525" start="4822" end="4839" title="Hasan bey Zardabi" label="Hasan bey Zardabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2074808" start="4844" end="4870" title="Mammad agha Shahtakhtinski" label="Mammad agha Shahtakhtinski"/>
<link wikidata="Q8242" start="4990" end="5000" title="literature" label="literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="5171" end="5183" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q744068" start="5300" end="5307" title="Persian alphabet" label="Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q41670" start="5311" end="5316" title="Latin alphabet" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q8209" start="5333" end="5348" title="Cyrillic script" label="Cyrillic script"/>
<link wikidata="Q2426677" start="5357" end="5377" title="Iranian Azerbaijanis" label="Iranian Azerbaijanis"/>
<link wikidata="Q131337" start="5477" end="5513" title="Azerbaijan Soviet Socialist Republic" label="Azerbaijan Soviet Socialist Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q744068" start="5803" end="5822" title="Perso-Arabic script" label="Perso-Arabic script"/>
<link wikidata="Q1392586" start="5888" end="5906" title="Kadi Burhan al-Din" label="Kadi Burhan al-Din"/>
<link wikidata="Q1975865" start="5908" end="5918" title="Izzeddin Hasanoghlu" label="Hasanoghlu"/>
<link wikidata="Q982506" start="5924" end="5940" title="Imadaddin Nasimi" label="Imadaddin Nasimi"/>
<link wikidata="Q482" start="6025" end="6031" title="poetry" label="poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q324470" start="6066" end="6078" title="Qara Qoyunlu" label="Qara Qoyunlu"/>
<link wikidata="Q561219" start="6086" end="6095" title="Jahan Shah" label="Jahanshah"/>
<link wikidata="Q6712721" start="6171" end="6183" title="Yaqub Aq Qoyunlu" label="Sultan Yaqub"/>
<link wikidata="Q555994" start="6200" end="6210" title="Aq Qoyunlu" label="Aq Qoyunlu"/>
<link wikidata="Q214559" start="6278" end="6286" title="Ismail I" label="Ismail I"/>
<link wikidata="Q9168" start="6372" end="6379" title="Persian language" label="Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q178379" start="6465" end="6471" title="Fuzûlî" label="Fuzûlî"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="6535" end="6541" title="Arabic" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9168" start="6546" end="6553" title="Persian language" label="Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q189326" start="6666" end="6679" title="Qajar dynasty" label="Qajar dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2656631" start="6775" end="6782" title="Akinchi" label="Akinchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="6897" end="6911" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2275525" start="6931" end="6948" title="Hasan bey Zardabi" label="Hasan bey Zardabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930187" start="6952" end="6962" title="journalist" label="journalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q535932" start="6988" end="7013" title="Mohammad-Hossein Shahriar" label="Mohammad-Hossein Shahriar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133436" start="7093" end="7112" title="Heydar Babaya Salam" label="Heydar Babaya Salam"/>
<link wikidata="Q724091" start="7160" end="7182" title="Azerbaijani literature" label="Azerbaijani literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q9248" start="7356" end="7360" title="Baku" label="Baku"/>
<link wikidata="Q131290" start="7362" end="7367" title="Ganja, Azerbaijan" label="Ganja"/>
<link wikidata="Q234783" start="7369" end="7374" title="Shaki, Azerbaijan" label="Shaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q994" start="7376" end="7383" title="Tbilisi" label="Tbilisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1953" start="7389" end="7396" title="Yerevan" label="Yerevan"/>
<link wikidata="Q27621" start="7441" end="7474" title="Saint Petersburg State University" label="Saint Petersburg State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="7478" end="7484" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6608367" start="7608" end="7626" title="Indiana University" label="Indiana University"/>
<link wikidata="Q174710" start="7628" end="7632" title="UCLA" label="UCLA"/>
<link wikidata="Q49213" start="7638" end="7667" title="University of Texas at Austin" label="University of Texas at Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q638064" start="7917" end="7924" title="Shirvan" label="Shirvan"/>
<link wikidata="Q274536" start="7948" end="7966" title="Azerbaijan (Iran)" label="Iranian Azerbaijan"/>
<link wikidata="Q80053" start="8015" end="8021" title="Tabriz" label="Tabriz"/>
<link wikidata="Q778873" start="8064" end="8069" title="Koiné language" label="koine"/>
<link wikidata="Q80839" start="8088" end="8101" title="lingua franca" label="lingua franca"/>
<link wikidata="Q200173" start="8133" end="8146" title="Transcaucasia" label="Transcaucasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q166" start="8158" end="8167" title="Black Sea" label="Black Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q5118" start="8187" end="8195" title="Dagestan" label="Dagestan"/>
<link wikidata="Q155542" start="8201" end="8224" title="Eastern Anatolia Region" label="Eastern Anatolia Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q9168" start="8433" end="8440" title="Persian language" label="Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q18234383" start="8560" end="8568" title="Safavids" label="Safavids"/>
<link wikidata="Q63149558" start="8570" end="8579" title="Afsharids" label="Afsharids"/>
<link wikidata="Q189326" start="8585" end="8591" title="Qajar dynasty" label="Qajars"/>
<link wikidata="Q5118" start="8638" end="8646" title="Dagestan" label="Dagestan"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="8668" end="8682" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q926447" start="8696" end="8714" title="Treaty of Gulistan" label="Treaty of Gulistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q875512" start="8728" end="8749" title="Treaty of Turkmenchay" label="Treaty of Turkmenchay"/>
<link wikidata="Q131290" start="8845" end="8850" title="Ganja, Azerbaijan" label="Ganja"/>
<link wikidata="Q158903" start="8852" end="8858" title="Shusha" label="Shusha"/>
<link wikidata="Q234783" start="8879" end="8884" title="Shaki, Azerbaijan" label="Shaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q388224" start="8887" end="8895" title="Shamakhi" label="Shamakhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q647982" start="8897" end="8901" title="Quba" label="Quba"/>
<link wikidata="Q9248" start="8903" end="8907" title="Baku" label="Baku"/>
<link wikidata="Q131416" start="8909" end="8916" title="Derbent" label="Derbent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1953" start="8918" end="8925" title="Yerevan" label="Yerevan"/>
<link wikidata="Q230104" start="8927" end="8937" title="Nakhchivan (city)" label="Nakhchivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q212546" start="8939" end="8950" title="Akhaltsikhe" label="Akhaltsikhe"/>
<link wikidata="Q228811" start="8956" end="8964" title="Lankaran" label="Lankaran"/>
<link wikidata="Q172415" start="9029" end="9036" title="Kutaisi" label="Kutaisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773517" start="9190" end="9208" title="Tiflis Governorate" label="Tiflis Governorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q494600" start="9267" end="9282" title="Oghuz languages" label="Oghuz languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q34090" start="9294" end="9316" title="Turkic languages" label="Turkic language family"/>
<link wikidata="Q14790" start="9324" end="9334" title="Ethnologue" label="Ethnologue"/>
<link wikidata="Q152559" start="9515" end="9528" title="macrolanguage" label="macrolanguage"/>
<link wikidata="Q15028" start="9648" end="9694" title="International Organization for Standardization" label="International Organization for Standardization"/>
<link wikidata="Q8162" start="9771" end="9779" title="Linguist" label="Linguist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6356610" start="9925" end="9939" title="Svante Cornell" label="Svante Cornell"/>
<link wikidata="Q179751" start="10133" end="10139" title="Araxes" label="Araxes"/>
<link wikidata="Q845956" start="10403" end="10412" title="ISO 639-3" label="ISO 639-3"/>
<link wikidata="Q13192" start="10470" end="10477" title="Qashqai language" label="Qashqai"/>
<link wikidata="Q17165062" start="10489" end="10498" title="Glottolog" label="Glottolog"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067986" start="10767" end="10782" title="Khazar language" label="Khazar language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139550" start="10798" end="10818" title="Encyclopedia Iranica" label="Encyclopedia Iranica"/>
<link wikidata="Q23492" start="10897" end="10914" title="official language" label="official language"/>
<link wikidata="Q227" start="10922" end="10944" title="Republic of Azerbaijan" label="Republic of Azerbaijan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5118" start="11063" end="11071" title="Dagestan" label="Dagestan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5484" start="11083" end="11096" title="Caspian Sea" label="Caspian coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q5477" start="11113" end="11131" title="Caucasus Mountains" label="Caucasus Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q27275" start="11168" end="11180" title="Central Asia" label="Central Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3287002" start="11262" end="11273" title="monolingual" label="monolingual"/>
<link wikidata="Q9248" start="11418" end="11422" title="Baku" label="Baku"/>
<link wikidata="Q10985965" start="11766" end="11774" title="Terekeme people" label="Terekeme"/>
<link wikidata="Q60269" start="11776" end="11785" title="Qizilbash" label="Qyzylbash"/>
<link wikidata="Q10985965" start="11868" end="11877" title="Karapapakhs" label="Karapapak"/>
<link wikidata="Q274536" start="11992" end="12010" title="Iranian Azerbaijan" label="Iranian Azerbaijan"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="12073" end="12077" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q858" start="12107" end="12112" title="Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="12117" end="12121" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q9168" start="12127" end="12134" title="Persian language" label="Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q176081" start="12236" end="12251" title="East Azerbaijan Province" label="East Azerbaijan"/>
<link wikidata="Q134411" start="12253" end="12268" title="West Azerbaijan Province" label="West Azerbaijan"/>
<link wikidata="Q134228" start="12270" end="12277" title="Ardabil Province" label="Ardabil"/>
<link wikidata="Q146726" start="12282" end="12288" title="Zanjan Province" label="Zanjan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3616" start="12311" end="12317" title="Tehran" label="Tehran"/>
<link wikidata="Q590866" start="12333" end="12348" title="Tehran Province" label="Tehran Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q10985965" start="13002" end="13012" title="Karapapakhs" label="Karapapakh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145236" start="13084" end="13106" title="Encyclopaedia of Islam" label="Encyclopaedia of Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q4153" start="13206" end="13224" title="George Bournoutian" label="George Bournoutian"/>
<link wikidata="Q34832" start="13298" end="13305" title="Afshar dialect" label="Afshari"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13527" end="13533" title="Azerbaijani dialects#Tabriz dialect" label="Tabriz"/>
<link wikidata="Q950464" start="13595" end="13606" title="Comparative method" label="comparatist"/>
<link wikidata="Q9267" start="13617" end="13633" title="Turkmen language" label="Turkmen language"/>
<link wikidata="Q25295" start="13646" end="13654" title="Genetic relationship (linguistics)" label="relative"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13968" end="13987" title="Turkish television drama#Turkic countries" label="Turkish soap operas"/>
<link wikidata="Q182921" start="14046" end="14063" title="Reza Shah Pahlavi" label="Reza Shah Pahlavi"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="14067" end="14071" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152" start="14111" end="14132" title="Mustafa Kemal Atatürk" label="Mustafa Kemal Atatürk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2426677" start="14588" end="14608" title="Iranian Azerbaijanis" label="Iranian Azerbaijanis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14816" end="14828" title="Isochrony#Stress_timing" label="stress-timed"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14883" end="14897" title="Isochrony#Syllable_timing" label="syllable-timed"/>
<link wikidata="Q9267" start="15101" end="15108" title="Turkmen language" label="Turkmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q282301" start="15562" end="15583" title="demonstrative pronoun" label="demonstrative pronoun"/>
<link wikidata="Q4205925" start="15926" end="15931" title="Yomut" label="Yomut"/>
<link wikidata="Q4532621" start="16002" end="16008" title="Ersari" label="Ersari"/>
<link wikidata="Q276315" start="16086" end="16096" title="Karakalpaks" label="Karakalpak"/>
<link wikidata="Q152392" start="16210" end="16222" title="Swadesh list" label="Swadesh list"/>
<link wikidata="Q4161020" start="16277" end="16297" title="Azerbaijani dialects" label="Azerbaijani dialects"/>
<link wikidata="Q207857" start="16304" end="16313" title="Inflectional paradigm" label="paradigms"/>
<link wikidata="Q33348" start="16347" end="16363" title="Chuvash language" label="Chuvash language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067986" start="16433" end="16448" title="Khazar language" label="Khazar language"/>
<link wikidata="Q512366" start="16500" end="16512" title="phonotactics" label="phonotactics"/>
<link wikidata="Q521164" start="16575" end="16584" title="Mora (linguistics)" label="Trimoraic"/>
<link wikidata="Q191090" start="16651" end="16661" title="Metathesis (linguistics)" label="metathesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q80053" start="17463" end="17469" title="Tabriz" label="Tabriz"/>
<link wikidata="Q173310" start="17481" end="17487" title="Kirkuk" label="Kirkuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q230104" start="17505" end="17515" title="Nakhchivan (city)" label="Nakhchivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q33927" start="17520" end="17525" title="Ayrum" label="Ayrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2394006" start="17539" end="17547" title="Cəbrayil" label="Cəbrayil"/>
<link wikidata="Q8188" start="17760" end="17773" title="syllabic coda" label="syllabic coda"/>
<link wikidata="Q19773264" start="17794" end="17803" title="voicelessness" label="voiceless"/>
<link wikidata="Q146863" start="17916" end="17925" title="allophone" label="allophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="17932" end="17938" title="Arabic" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q103808" start="17939" end="17947" title="loanword" label="loanword"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414685" start="18616" end="18632" title="formant" label="acoustic quality"/>
<link wikidata="Q19773264" start="20330" end="20348" title="unvoiced consonant" label="unvoiced consonant"/>
<link wikidata="Q494510" start="20426" end="20442" title="voiced consonant" label="voiced consonant"/>
<link wikidata="Q744068" start="20757" end="20778" title="Perso-Arabic alphabet" label="Perso-Arabic alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20783" end="20795" title="Abjad#Impure abjads" label="impure abjad"/>
<link wikidata="Q162940" start="20840" end="20857" title="diacritical marks" label="diacritical marks"/>
<link wikidata="Q4808181" start="20998" end="21004" title="Varlyq" label="Varlıq"/>
<link wikidata="Q3616" start="21277" end="21283" title="Tehran" label="Tehran"/>
<link wikidata="Q6414522" start="21331" end="21342" title="Javad Heyat" label="Javad Heyat"/>
<link wikidata="Q8209" start="21704" end="21719" title="Cyrillic script" label="Cyrillic script"/>
<link wikidata="Q157451" start="21865" end="21871" title="Heydar Aliyev" label="Aliyev"/>
<link wikidata="Q13426605" start="22056" end="22057" title="İ" label="İ"/>
<link wikidata="Q2066152" start="22603" end="22611" title="Schröder" label="Schröder"/>
<link wikidata="Q34090" start="22928" end="22944" title="Turkic languages" label="Turkic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124935" start="23605" end="23624" title="T-V distinction" label="tu-vous distinction"/>
<link wikidata="Q507127" start="24265" end="24282" title="voiced velar stop" label="voiced velar stop"/>
<link wikidata="Q494510" start="24286" end="24294" title="devoiced" label="devoiced"/>
<link wikidata="Q852201" start="24306" end="24315" title="geminated" label="geminated"/>
<link wikidata="Q39162" start="25679" end="25690" title="open source" label="open source"/>
<link wikidata="Q134550" start="25703" end="25718" title="transliteration" label="transliteration"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="192826" wikidata="Q633040" url="?curid=192826" title="Morehead State University">
<text>Morehead State University (MSU) is a public university in Morehead, Kentucky, United States. The university began as Morehead Normal School, which opened its doors in 1887. The Craft Academy for Excellence in Science and Mathematics, a two-year residential early college high school on the university&#x27;s campus, was established in 2014.

==History==
The university began as Morehead Normal School, which opened its doors in 1887. One student appeared on the first day of class in October 1887, in a little, rented cottage where the Adron Doran University Center now stands. The private school closed in the spring of 1922 when the Kentucky General Assembly established Morehead State Normal School. The state institution accepted its first students in the fall of 1923, and graduated its first class in 1927. Name changes occurred again 1926, when it was extended to Morehead State Normal School and Teachers College; in 1930, when it was shortened to just Morehead State Teachers College; in 1948, when it was shortened again to Morehead State College; and, finally, to Morehead State University in 1966. Fourteen people, starting with Frank C. Button, have served as president. Joseph A. Morgan assumed office as the 14th president on July 1, 2017.

===Presidents===

# Frank C. Button, 1923–29
# John Howard Payne, 1929–35
# Harvey A. Babb, 1935–40
# William H. Vaughan, 1940–46
# William J. Baird, 1946–51
# Charles R. Spain, 1951–54
# Adron Doran, 1954–77
# Morris L. Norfleet, 1977–84
# Herb. F. Reinhard Jr., 1984–86
# A.D. Albright, 1986–87
# C. Nelson Grote, 1987–92
# Ronald G. Eaglin, 1992–2004
# Wayne D. Andrews, 2005–2017
# Joseph A. Morgan, 2017–present
==Academics==
Morehead State University is accredited by the Commission on Colleges of the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools. It offers over 212 degree programs at the two-year, four-year, and graduate levels through four colleges: Caudill College of Arts, Humanities, &amp; Social Sciences; Elmer R. Smith College of Business and Technology; Ernst &amp; Sara Lane Volgenau College of Education; and College of Science. It was the first institution in Kentucky to offer a complete degree program online, the Master of Business Administration (MBA). MSU is one of five institutions in the U.S. with a bachelor&#x27;s degree in space science. Over 74,000 persons have received degrees from MSU.

===Rankings===

The 2025 &quot;U.S. News &amp; World Report Best Colleges Rankings&quot; listed Morehead State at 14th place among public &quot;regional universities&quot; in the South and 33rd overall among all regional universities in the South.

=== Craft Academy for Excellence in Science and Mathematics ===

The Craft Academy for Excellence in Science and Mathematics was established in 2014. It is a two-year residential early college high school serving approximately 220 high school juniors and seniors at Morehead State University. Students live in Craft Tower residence hall on campus and take MSU classes during their time at the academy, graduating with a Craft Academy high school diploma as well as at least 60 hours of MSU college credit, with tuition, room and board, and meal plan all free of charge. The academy is funded in large part by Joe Craft and Ambassador Kelly Craft, who donated over $10 million to the academy, the largest donation in MSU history.

In 2019, the academy graduated its third class, with an average ACT score of 31.

==Campus==

Morehead State University is located in the foothills of the Daniel Boone National Forest in Rowan County. The more than 700-acre main campus within the city limits of Morehead includes more than 50 major structures with a total replacement value of more than $650 million. Beyond the city, the university&#x27;s real estate holdings include the 320-acre Derrickson Agricultural Complex, Eagle Trace, a par-72, 6,902-yard public golf course, and 166 acres of the Browning Orchard. The instructional plant includes 135 classrooms and 150 laboratories. Housing facilities include space for approximately 2,900 students in a variety of living styles, including traditional residence halls, suites, and apartments. The second component of the Space Science Center opened in 2009—a $16.6 million instruction and research support facility.

==Morehead State University Historic District==
A portion of the campus was named as a historic district on the National Register of Historic Places. The contributing properties include the following buildings: the President&#x27;s Home, Senff Natatorium (demolished in 2008), Button Auditorium, Fields Hall, Camden-Carroll Library, Allie Young Hall, Rader Hall, Grote-Thompson Hall, and the Breckenridge Training School. All designed by the famed Olmstead Brothers.

==Arts==
The Morehead State University Arts and Humanities Council, established in 2003, encourages dialogue and partnerships in the arts. Part of a larger initiative within the Caudill College of Arts, Humanities and Social Sciences, the Council works to develop cultural opportunities both on and off campus. Morehead, long known for its patronage of the arts in Kentucky with such organizations as the Kentucky Folk Art Center and the Kentucky Center for Traditional Music, was the childhood home of philanthropist Lucille Caudill Little. Named after Lucille Little, MSU&#x27;s Little Company is a touring troupe of students in the Theatre Department that performs plays and conducts workshops for up to 100 schools in the area each year. Along with theatre, Morehead State University has a well-developed dance program. The Morehead Dance Ensemble, which one must audition for, presents a Spring Dance Concert, attends dance conferences, and engages in other projects.

==Morehead State Public Radio==
Morehead State Public Radio (MSPR) is governed by the Board of Regents at Morehead State University. MSPR is operated by its flagship station WMKY at 90.3 FM in Morehead. WMKY in Morehead is licensed for 50,000 watts and serves more than 20 counties in Kentucky, Ohio, and West Virginia. The WMKY studios are located in Breckinridge Hall on the campus of Morehead State University. Since 1965, WMKY has served the communities of eastern Kentucky, southern Ohio, and western West Virginia. MSPR&#x27;s mission to the region is to provide programming that is educational, informative, and entertaining. Through the work provided by a staff consisting of a full-time director, student interns, work studies, and community volunteers, MSPR offers regional news, public affairs, and documentary programming, as well as a variety of regional music programs consisting of classical, jazz, and Americana. MSPR produces newscasts and in-depth features on people, places, and events in the region.

==Athletics==


The Morehead State athletic teams are called the Eagles. The eagle mascot is named Beaker, and the school colors are blue and gold. The university is a member of the NCAA Division I ranks (for football, the Football Championship Subdivision), primarily competing in the Ohio Valley Conference (OVC) since the 1948–49 academic year; while its football team competes in the Pioneer Football League (PFL). The Eagles previously competed in the Kentucky Intercollegiate Athletic Conference (KIAC; now currently known as the River States Conference (RSC) since the 2016–17 school year) of the National Association of Intercollegiate Athletics (NAIA) from 1933–34 to 1947–48; and in the defunct West Virginia Intercollegiate Athletic Conference (WVIAC) from 1929–30 to 1932–33.

Morehead State competes in 17 intercollegiate varsity sports: Men&#x27;s sports baseball, basketball, cross country, football, golf and track &amp; field; while women&#x27;s include basketball, beach volleyball, cross country, golf, soccer, softball, track &amp; field and volleyball; and co-ed sports include cheerleading, dance and rifle.

With 2017–18 being its initial season and the OVC not yet sponsoring the sport, the beach volleyball team will compete as an independent. The football team competes as a member of the Pioneer Football League, a non-scholarship Division I (FCS) league.

===Accomplishments===
The MSU Eagles basketball won the 2009 OVC tournament championship, sending them to the NCAA tournament for the first time since 1984. At the 2011 NCAA Division I men&#x27;s basketball tournament, 13th-seeded Morehead State upset Louisville 62–61. It was the second NCAA Tournament win for Morehead State in a three-year span. The Eagles also beat Alabama State in the 2009 Opening Round game. The Eagles then faced 12th-seeded Richmond in the third round, which was only the ninth time in tournament history that a 12–13 match-up occurred in the round of 32. The coed cheerleading squad has won 23 national championships, and the all-female squad has won 10 national titles. The baseball team has won seven OVC conference titles, and the women&#x27;s volleyball team has won the OVC conference title five times. The Eagles have appeared in the College Basketball Invitational (CBI) three times. Their combined record is 5–4.

==Greek life==

== Residence halls ==
Morehead State University&#x27;s Office of Student Housing provides residential options within the following residence halls:

*Andrews Hall
*Cartmell Hall
*Cooper Hall
*Craft Tower
*Eagle Lake Apartments
*East Mignon Hall
*Fields Hall
*Grote-Thompson Hall
*Lundergan Hall
*Mays Hall Apartments
*Mignon Hall
*Mignon Tower
*Normal Hall Apartments
*Nunn Hall
*Padula Hall
*West Mignon Hall
== Campus buildings/property ==


* Academic Athletic Center (AAC)
* Adron Doran University Center (ADUC)
* Alumni Relations and Development(Palmer House)
* Baird Music Hall
* Bert Combs Building
* Breckinridge Hall
* Browning Orchard
* Button Auditorium
* Camden-Carroll Library
* Center for Rural Development
* Challenge Course
* Chi Alpha Fellowship
* Claypool-Young Art Building
* Combs Building
* Cora Wilson Stewart Moonlight School
* Derrickson Agricultural Complex
* Eagle Athletics Guided Learning &amp; Enhancement Center
* Eagle Lake
* Eagle Trace Golf Course
* East Parking Complex and Rocky Adkins Dining Commons (The Rock)
* Education Services Building
* Enrollment Services Center
* Ginger Hall
* Howell-McDowell Administration Building
* Innovation Launchpad
* Intramural/Soccer Practice Field
*Jayne Stadium
* Kentucky Center for Traditional Music
* Kentucky Folk Art Center
* Lappin Hall
* Laughlin Health Building
* Little Bell Tower
* Lloyd Cassity Building
* Lundergan Hall
* Newman Center (Catholic Student Center)
* President&#x27;s Home
* Procurement Services
* Padula Hall
* Rader Hall
* Recreation &amp; Wellness Center
* Reed Hall
* Rice Service Building (Facilities Management)
* Richardson Arena and Equine Health Education Center
* Fazoli&#x27;s Breadstick Beach Volleyball Courts
* Space Science Center (Smith-Booth Hall)
* University Store
* University Farm
* University Softball Field
* Water Testing Laboratory
* Wesley Foundation (Methodist Student Center)
* 21M Space Tracking Antenna
* 342 (Baptist Campus Ministries)

==Notable alumni==
*Rocky Adkins – senior advisor to Governor Andy Beshear, former Kentucky state representative (D-District 99) and House minority floor leader
*Henry Akin – basketball player, drafted by New York Knicks, became one of &quot;Original Sonics&quot; in Seattle, played with ABA&#x27;s Kentucky Colonels
*Nelson Allen – former Kentucky state senator
*Chris Bailey – meteorologist at WKYT-TV
*Desi Banks - Comedian
*William E. Barber – Marine Corps colonel, recipient of Medal of Honor for actions during Korean War
*John Blanton – Kentucky politician
*Dennis M. Cavanaugh-United States District Judge
*Raymond Collins – American politician and educator
*Denny Doyle – MLB second baseman, 1970–1977
*Kenneth Faried – former NBA player for the Denver Nuggets, Brooklyn Nets, and Houston Rockets, selected 22nd overall in 2011 NBA draft
*Mike Gottfried – former head football coach at Kansas, Pittsburgh, Cincinnati, and Murray State, current color commentator and analyst for ESPN
*Steve Hamilton (1934–1997) – former MLB pitcher and professional basketball player
*Demonte Harper (born 1989) - basketball player in the Israeli Basketball Premier League
*Jimmy Higdon – Republican member of Kentucky State Senate since 2009, businessman from Marion County
*David Hyland – defensive back for San Jose SaberCats of Arena Football League
*Steve Inskeep (born 1968) – NPR &quot;Morning Edition&quot; host replacing Kentuckian Bob Edwards
*Liz Johnson – professional bowler
*Steve Kazee – Tony Award–winning actor for Best Musical
*Kelly Kulick – professional bowler and first-ever female winner of regular PBA Tour event (2010 PBA Tournament of Champions)
*Karam Mashour (born 1991) – Israeli basketball player in the Israeli Basketball Premier League
*Terry McBrayer – 1979 candidate for governor of Kentucky, former chairman of Kentucky Democratic Party, attorney in Lexington, Kentucky
*Bob McCann – professional basketball player
*Lori Menshouse – 1997 Miss Kentucky, 1999 Miss Kentucky USA
*Chris Offutt – writer
*Amber Philpott – news anchor at WKYT-TV
*Jon Rauch – MLB pitcher 2002–13, Olympic gold medalist
*Phil Simms – NFL quarterback for New York Giants, MVP of Super Bowl XXI, 15-year pro career, football analyst for CBS television
*Janet Stumbo – first woman elected to Kentucky Supreme Court
*Dan Swartz – former NBA player with Boston Celtics
*David A. Tapp – judge, United States Court of Federal Claims
*Walt Terrell – MLB pitcher, 1982–1992
*Donnie Tyndall (born 1970) – basketball head coach, Tennessee, Southern Miss, Morehead State
*Robin L. Webb – former Kentucky state representative (District 96) and current state senator (18th District) and attorney
*Chuck Woolery – television game show host

==References==
==External links==
* Official athletics website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q633040" start="0" end="25" title="Morehead State University" label="Morehead State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q633040" start="27" end="30" title="Morehead State University" label="MSU"/>
<link wikidata="Q875538" start="37" end="54" title="public university" label="public university"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904491" start="58" end="76" title="Morehead, Kentucky" label="Morehead, Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q633040" start="117" end="139" title="Morehead State University" label="Morehead Normal School"/>
<link wikidata="Q38251417" start="177" end="232" title="Craft Academy for Excellence in Science and Mathematics" label="Craft Academy for Excellence in Science and Mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5326796" start="257" end="282" title="early college high school" label="early college high school"/>
<link wikidata="Q4685812" start="536" end="565" title="Adron Doran University Center" label="Adron Doran University Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q6392265" start="635" end="660" title="Kentucky General Assembly" label="Kentucky General Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q7569646" start="1764" end="1808" title="Southern Association of Colleges and Schools" label="Southern Association of Colleges and Schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195766" start="2310" end="2323" title="space science" label="space science"/>
<link wikidata="Q28368736" start="2409" end="2459" title="U.S. News &amp;amp; World Report Best Colleges Ranking" label="U.S. News &amp;amp; World Report Best Colleges Ranking"/>
<link wikidata="Q38251417" start="2696" end="2751" title="Craft Academy for Excellence in Science and Mathematics" label="Craft Academy for Excellence in Science and Mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5326796" start="2806" end="2831" title="early college high school" label="early college high school"/>
<link wikidata="Q6209275" start="3236" end="3245" title="Joe Craft" label="Joe Craft"/>
<link wikidata="Q28871485" start="3261" end="3272" title="Kelly Craft" label="Kelly Craft"/>
<link wikidata="Q288826" start="3421" end="3424" title="ACT (test)" label="ACT"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160129" start="3512" end="3540" title="Daniel Boone National Forest" label="Daniel Boone National Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q505510" start="3544" end="3556" title="Rowan County, Kentucky" label="Rowan County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904491" start="3619" end="3627" title="Morehead, Kentucky" label="Morehead"/>
<link wikidata="Q1620797" start="4373" end="4390" title="Historic districts in the United States" label="historic district"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719" start="4398" end="4434" title="National Register of Historic Places" label="National Register of Historic Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q76321820" start="4440" end="4463" title="Contributing property" label="contributing properties"/>
<link wikidata="Q1603" start="5119" end="5127" title="Kentucky" label="Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q6392255" start="5159" end="5183" title="Kentucky Folk Art Center" label="Kentucky Folk Art Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q6697268" start="5272" end="5294" title="Lucille Caudill Little" label="Lucille Caudill Little"/>
<link wikidata="Q5758333" start="5814" end="5830" title="Board of Regents" label="Board of Regents"/>
<link wikidata="Q7952902" start="5902" end="5906" title="WMKY" label="WMKY"/>
<link wikidata="Q1603" start="6013" end="6021" title="Kentucky" label="Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397" start="6023" end="6027" title="Ohio" label="Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371" start="6033" end="6046" title="West Virginia" label="West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842604" start="6931" end="6946" title="NCAA Division I" label="NCAA Division I"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842604" start="6972" end="7005" title="NCAA Football Championship Subdivision" label="Football Championship Subdivision"/>
<link wikidata="Q951748" start="7035" end="7057" title="Ohio Valley Conference" label="Ohio Valley Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q2116160" start="7137" end="7160" title="Pioneer Football League" label="Pioneer Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q6392288" start="7206" end="7250" title="River States Conference" label="Kentucky Intercollegiate Athletic Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q927765" start="7353" end="7402" title="National Association of Intercollegiate Athletics" label="National Association of Intercollegiate Athletics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7986857" start="7454" end="7503" title="West Virginia Intercollegiate Athletic Conference" label="West Virginia Intercollegiate Athletic Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q2116160" start="8064" end="8087" title="Pioneer Football League" label="Pioneer Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q6911262" start="8159" end="8180" title="Morehead State Eagles men&amp;#x27;s basketball" label="MSU Eagles basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q996954" start="8243" end="8258" title="NCAA Division I men&amp;#x27;s basketball tournament" label="NCAA tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q2948729" start="8297" end="8350" title="2011 NCAA Division I men&amp;#x27;s basketball tournament" label="2011 NCAA Division I men&amp;#x27;s basketball tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146334" start="9000" end="9031" title="College Basketball Invitational" label="College Basketball Invitational"/>
<link wikidata="Q4685812" start="9577" end="9606" title="Adron Doran University Center" label="Adron Doran University Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q107610856" start="9790" end="9818" title="Center for Rural Development" label="Center for Rural Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q6167912" start="10319" end="10332" title="Jayne Stadium" label="Jayne Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q6392255" start="10375" end="10399" title="Kentucky Folk Art Center" label="Kentucky Folk Art Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399195" start="10770" end="10783" title="Fazoli&amp;#x27;s" label="Fazoli&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q7355722" start="11084" end="11096" title="Rocky Adkins" label="Rocky Adkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q21572825" start="11126" end="11138" title="Andy Beshear" label="Andy Beshear"/>
<link wikidata="Q390274" start="11226" end="11236" title="Henry Akin" label="Henry Akin"/>
<link wikidata="Q131364" start="11269" end="11284" title="New York Knicks" label="New York Knicks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509765" start="11363" end="11380" title="Kentucky Colonels" label="Kentucky Colonels"/>
<link wikidata="Q6990358" start="11382" end="11394" title="Nelson Allen" label="Nelson Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1603" start="11404" end="11412" title="Kentucky" label="Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q7952054" start="11428" end="11440" title="WKYT-TV" label="Chris Bailey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7952054" start="11460" end="11467" title="WKYT-TV" label="WKYT-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q118645875" start="11469" end="11479" title="Desi Banks" label="Desi Banks"/>
<link wikidata="Q8008191" start="11492" end="11509" title="William E. Barber" label="William E. Barber"/>
<link wikidata="Q11218" start="11512" end="11524" title="United States Marine Corps" label="Marine Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q203535" start="11547" end="11561" title="Medal of Honor" label="Medal of Honor"/>
<link wikidata="Q8663" start="11581" end="11591" title="Korean War" label="Korean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q123508561" start="11593" end="11605" title="John Blanton" label="John Blanton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5258669" start="11629" end="11648" title="Dennis M. Cavanaugh" label="Dennis M. Cavanaugh"/>
<link wikidata="Q128887400" start="11679" end="11694" title="Raymond Collins (Kentucky politician)" label="Raymond Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q5259170" start="11731" end="11742" title="Denny Doyle" label="Denny Doyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="11745" end="11748" title="Major League Baseball" label="MLB"/>
<link wikidata="Q928077" start="11776" end="11790" title="Kenneth Faried" label="Kenneth Faried"/>
<link wikidata="Q155223" start="11800" end="11803" title="National Basketball Association" label="NBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q162954" start="11819" end="11833" title="Denver Nuggets" label="Denver Nuggets"/>
<link wikidata="Q572134" start="11835" end="11848" title="Brooklyn Nets" label="Brooklyn Nets"/>
<link wikidata="Q161345" start="11854" end="11869" title="Houston Rockets" label="Houston Rockets"/>
<link wikidata="Q947844" start="11896" end="11910" title="2011 NBA draft" label="2011 NBA draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q6847043" start="11912" end="11926" title="Mike Gottfried" label="Mike Gottfried"/>
<link wikidata="Q217776" start="12051" end="12055" title="ESPN" label="ESPN"/>
<link wikidata="Q6932895" start="12057" end="12071" title="Steve Hamilton (sportsman, born 1934)" label="Steve Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q524895" start="12141" end="12155" title="Demonte Harper" label="Demonte Harper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462454" start="12195" end="12228" title="Israeli Basketball Premier League" label="Israeli Basketball Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q16185382" start="12230" end="12242" title="Jimmy Higdon" label="Jimmy Higdon"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="12245" end="12255" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494879" start="12266" end="12287" title="Kentucky State Senate" label="Kentucky State Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q498148" start="12317" end="12330" title="Marion County, Kentucky" label="Marion County"/>
<link wikidata="Q5235302" start="12332" end="12344" title="David Hyland" label="David Hyland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410858" start="12366" end="12384" title="San Jose SaberCats" label="San Jose SaberCats"/>
<link wikidata="Q2725641" start="12388" end="12409" title="Arena Football League" label="Arena Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q7612908" start="12411" end="12424" title="Steve Inskeep" label="Steve Inskeep"/>
<link wikidata="Q671510" start="12439" end="12442" title="National Public Radio" label="NPR"/>
<link wikidata="Q3088585" start="12449" end="12464" title="Morning Edition" label="Morning Edition"/>
<link wikidata="Q4932360" start="12497" end="12508" title="Bob Edwards" label="Bob Edwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q6660194" start="12510" end="12521" title="Liz Johnson (bowler)" label="Liz Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4951095" start="12537" end="12543" title="Bowler (ten-pin)" label="bowler"/>
<link wikidata="Q7612991" start="12545" end="12556" title="Steve Kazee" label="Steve Kazee"/>
<link wikidata="Q191874" start="12559" end="12569" title="Tony Award" label="Tony Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q6386141" start="12602" end="12614" title="Kelly Kulick" label="Kelly Kulick"/>
<link wikidata="Q7118394" start="12677" end="12685" title="PBA Tour" label="PBA Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q21621975" start="12728" end="12741" title="Karam Mashour" label="Karam Mashour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462454" start="12789" end="12822" title="Israeli Basketball Premier League" label="Israeli Basketball Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q7704756" start="12824" end="12838" title="Terry McBrayer" label="Terry McBrayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4151335" start="12860" end="12880" title="governor of Kentucky" label="governor of Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q6392220" start="12901" end="12926" title="Kentucky Democratic Party" label="Kentucky Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q49241" start="12940" end="12959" title="Lexington, Kentucky" label="Lexington, Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1629965" start="12961" end="12971" title="Bob McCann" label="Bob McCann"/>
<link wikidata="Q6681108" start="13006" end="13020" title="Lori Menshouse" label="Lori Menshouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q6876901" start="13028" end="13041" title="Miss Kentucky" label="Miss Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q5785937" start="13048" end="13065" title="Miss Kentucky USA" label="Miss Kentucky USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q5107639" start="13067" end="13079" title="Chris Offutt" label="Chris Offutt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7952054" start="13090" end="13104" title="WKYT-TV" label="Amber Philpott"/>
<link wikidata="Q7952054" start="13122" end="13129" title="WKYT-TV" label="WKYT-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q3108011" start="13131" end="13140" title="Jon Rauch" label="Jon Rauch"/>
<link wikidata="Q596953" start="13187" end="13197" title="Phil Simms" label="Phil Simms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="13200" end="13203" title="National Football League" label="NFL"/>
<link wikidata="Q622747" start="13204" end="13215" title="quarterback" label="quarterback"/>
<link wikidata="Q190618" start="13220" end="13235" title="New York Giants" label="New York Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q1808572" start="13244" end="13258" title="Super Bowl XXI" label="Super Bowl XXI"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="13301" end="13304" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q23304399" start="13317" end="13329" title="Janet Stumbo" label="Janet Stumbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5477599" start="13355" end="13377" title="Kentucky Supreme Court" label="Kentucky Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q600804" start="13379" end="13389" title="Dan Swartz" label="Dan Swartz"/>
<link wikidata="Q131371" start="13415" end="13429" title="Boston Celtics" label="Boston Celtics"/>
<link wikidata="Q47493077" start="13431" end="13444" title="David A. Tapp" label="David A. Tapp"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889676" start="13454" end="13491" title="United States Court of Federal Claims" label="United States Court of Federal Claims"/>
<link wikidata="Q7964071" start="13493" end="13505" title="Walt Terrell" label="Walt Terrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5296696" start="13532" end="13546" title="Donnie Tyndall" label="Donnie Tyndall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7700234" start="13584" end="13593" title="Tennessee Volunteers basketball" label="Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7570144" start="13595" end="13608" title="Southern Miss Golden Eagles basketball" label="Southern Miss"/>
<link wikidata="Q7352603" start="13626" end="13639" title="Robin L. Webb" label="Robin L. Webb"/>
<link wikidata="Q2967618" start="13749" end="13762" title="Chuck Woolery" label="Chuck Woolery"/>
<link wikidata="Q846662" start="13776" end="13785" title="game show" label="game show"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="192828" wikidata="Q4769579" url="?curid=192828" title="Anno Dracula series">
<text>The &quot;Anno Dracula&quot; series by Kim Newman—named after &quot;Anno Dracula&quot; (1992), the series&#x27; first novel—is a work of fantasy depicting an alternate history in which the heroes of Bram Stoker&#x27;s novel &quot;Dracula&quot; fail to stop Count Dracula&#x27;s conquest of Britain, resulting in a world where vampires are common and increasingly dominant in society. While Dracula is a central figure in the events of the series, he is a minor character in the books and usually appears in only a few climactic pages of each book. While many of the characters from Newman&#x27;s Diogenes Club stories appear in the Anno Dracula novels, they are not the same as the ones in those stories, nor is the Diogenes Club itself the same.

The series is known for its carefully researched historical settings and the author&#x27;s use as supporting characters of historical people and fictional characters of the appropriate period. The metafictional style was inspired by the Wold Newton Universe of Philip José Farmer; Neil Gaiman helped develop the series (and was originally going to be its co-author). Gaiman has also credited the series as being one of the main influences on his short story &quot;A Study in Emerald&quot;. Entries in the series have won the Dracula Society&#x27;s Children of the Night Award, the Lord Ruthven Award and the International Horror Guild Award, and have been short-listed for the Bram Stoker Award and the Sidewise Award for Alternate History. The series consists of six novels and a number of short stories and novellas.

==Vampires in &quot;Anno Dracula&quot;==
Newman&#x27;s series presents vampires as more or less natural beings, passing on a biological change through the sharing of blood. &quot;We are natural beings, like any other,&quot; Geneviève says. &quot;There&#x27;s no magic.&quot; (Though when confronted with the vampire&#x27;s inexplicable inability to cast a reflection, she allows, &quot;Maybe a little magic... Just a touch.&quot;) Despite this, genetic studies have shown that the DNA of an individual before and after becoming a vampire does not change, despite the obvious change in their body and its abilities. Additionally, the vampire Cagliostro is said to be able to perform genuine acts of magic. Vampires are also capable of shapeshifting, and in the case of Dracula himself, to possess the bodies of others if his original is destroyed, as displayed in &quot;Johnny Alucard&quot;, when Dracula, assumed dead after &quot;Dracula Cha Cha Cha&quot;, returns after having lain dormant in a younger vampire he turned at one point.

Newman&#x27;s series brings together characters from a large number of legends and fictional works that portray the vampires in many different ways. He tries to explain this in part through the concept of &quot;bloodline&quot;, in which particular vampiric traits are passed on from vampire to vampire. A characteristic of Dracula&#x27;s bloodline is shape-shifting, however because becoming a vampire isn&#x27;t automatically like Dracula, many vampires experience partial shape-shifting and die because of that. However an interesting sidenote is that to &quot;create&quot; a new bloodline you have to be bitten by many different vampires during your mortal life then when you die as a mortal you resurrect as a new type of vampire, such as a shape-shifting vampire. This is how Dracula became a vampire in the novels, and this explains why his power over shape-shifting is in his complete control, unlike other vampires in his bloodline. Lord Ruthven, the British prime minister, says of Dracula:

Some vampires have an aversion to crucifixes, holy water and the like, but Newman portrays this a superstition; vampires without such &quot;silly ideas&quot; show no ill effects from religious symbols. Garlic, too, is only effective against vampires who believe their own folklore. However, silver is deadly to all of Newman&#x27;s vampires.

One trait that vampires share is an almost instantaneous healing ability. &quot;Vampire physiology is such that wounds inflicted with ordinary weapons heal almost immediately,&quot; vampire expert Dr. Jekyll says in &quot;Anno Dracula&quot;. &quot;Tissue and bone regenerate, just as a lizard may grow a new tail. Silver has a counteractive effect on this process.&quot; In some bloodlines, if silver is used complete regeneration may not be possible, which is what happened to Moldavian who was shot with silver; however certain bloodlines could completely regenerate even if silver is used. Dr. Jekyll also says that &quot;any major breach of the vital organs seems to produce true death,&quot; explaining why a stake through the heart is an effective tactic.

Sunlight is also dangerous to vampires, particularly to the &quot;new-born&quot;—those recently turned into undead. For vampire &quot;elders&quot;, those with years or centuries of experience, sunshine may be tolerable though still strength-sapping. There is no firm agreement on what makes a vampire an elder; a rough consensus was outlasting one&#x27;s natural lifetime followed by another lifetime, or two centuries. Two-thirds of the vampire elders in Newman&#x27;s universe come from the Romanian area of the Southern Carpathians; however, there are non-Caucasian vampires, such as the Chinese Assassin and Prince Mamuwalde.

Newman&#x27;s vampires do need to drink blood for sustenance, though the taking of blood need not be fatal and is often voluntary. However, if the blood has a disease, or is dead blood it can make any vampire sick. Indeed, several characters in &quot;Anno Dracula&quot; are vampiric prostitutes who service &quot;warm&quot; men in exchange for coin or, preferably, quaffs of their blood. Animal blood is also used by vampires as a second-rate substitute for human blood. As Tom Ripley muses:

Nor are vampires the only supernatural beings to inhabit Newman&#x27;s universe. Zombies exist, but are said to be types of vampires caused by an epidemic bloodline that damages the brain and requires the vampire to chew blood from flesh rather than drink it from the vein; like &#x27;normal&#x27; zombies, they spread their infection through simple biting and can only be killed by destroying the brain. Werewolves, ghosts, and non-vampire immortals also exist; as do artificial life such as Dr. Moreau&#x27;s animal-human hybrids, and Frankenstein&#x27;s monster, automaton assassins, and golems; extraterrestrial or genetically-engineered species, such as triffids and Audrey II, also exist. An octopoidal elder claims to be a Martian, and the Great Old Ones are also vaguely hinted at existing in this universe via the existence of the Esoteric Order of Dagon. Griffin&#x27;s invisibility formula and Jekyll&#x27;s ability to transform into Hyde also exist. Several &quot;warms&quot; are also said to have the vampire powers of precognition and telepathy, or the ability to perform acts of genuine magic. However, for the most part, vampires are the center-stage of Newman&#x27;s paranormal setting.

==Novels==

===&quot;Anno Dracula&quot; (1888)===
By 1888, Dracula has married the widowed Queen Victoria, and rules as Prince Consort. Many notable fictional vampires have come out of hiding and gained new social status. But all is not going smoothly for the new regime: Jack the Ripper stalks Whitechapel, murdering vampire prostitutes. Charles Beauregard, a (non-vampire) agent of the Diogenes Club, is sent to track the murderer down, and finds himself enmeshed in a plot to free England from Dracula&#x27;s rule.

Unusually for the series, several of the borrowed characters in &quot;Anno Dracula&quot; have no links to the period. To give just two examples: the heroine Geneviève Dieudonné is recycled from Newman&#x27;s own Warhammer novels (first appearing in 1989 &quot;Drachenfels&quot;, written under the name Jack Yeovil), and has a brief cameo as a reporter following the Ripper case. (Newman has said that if he had realised he would get so many sequels out of the premise, he would have saved Kolchak up for a story set in the character&#x27;s native 1970s.)

First published in October 1992, &quot;Anno Dracula&quot; has won the Dracula Society&#x27;s Children of the Night Award, the Lord Ruthven Assembly&#x27;s Fiction Award, and the International Horror Guild Award for Best Novel, and was short-listed for the Bram Stoker Award for Best Novel.

&quot;The Encyclopedia of Fantasy&quot; classifies &quot;Anno Dracula&quot; as &quot;recursive fantasy&quot;, and further describes the work as not &quot;strictly steampunk, but echoing in gaslight romance terms steampunk&#x27;s dense reworking of a 19th century London.&quot;.

The 30th anniversary edition (Titan Books) includes a new novella, &quot;Anno Dracula 1902: The Chances of Anything Coming From Mars.&quot;

===&quot;Anno Dracula: The Bloody Red Baron&quot; (1917)===
Set during World War I. The Graf von Dracula, after being expelled from the United Kingdom in 1897, spread his brand of unstable vampirism (and with it raging lycanthropy) throughout the Russian Imperial Family. He now leads Germany and the Central Powers against the Entente, with vampires—now a part of everyday life—fighting (and dying) on both sides. The Red Baron of the title is the historical ace fighter pilot Manfred von Richthofen, who in this altered history leads a squadron of monstrous flying vampires.

First published in November 1995, &quot;The Bloody Red Baron&quot; was shortlisted for the Sidewise Award for Alternate History, Long Form.

===&quot;Anno Dracula: Dracula Cha Cha Cha&quot; (or &quot;Judgment of Tears&quot;) (1959)===
Every vampire who is anybody is flocking to Rome for Dracula&#x27;s wedding, but there is a mysterious vampire killer on the loose. Events are complicated by the arrival of a British secret agent called Bond (but not James Bond), on the trail of a Russian spymaster who never goes anywhere without his cat. The films of Federico Fellini are an influence on the setting and atmosphere, and several of his characters appear in the novel.

First published November 1998.

===&quot;Anno Dracula: Johnny Alucard&quot; ===
Set in the 1980s, &quot;Johnny Alucard&quot; tells the tale of the titular vampire in America. The novel is a collection of reworked short stories and novellas written and published by Newman in a variety of ways in between 1998 and 2013, with some new material.

It includes references to &quot;Taxi Driver&quot;, &quot;Ms. 45&quot;, &quot;Spider-Man&quot;, &quot;Blade&quot;, &quot;Buffy the Vampire Slayer&quot;, &quot;The Deathmaster&quot;, &quot;Elvira&quot;, &quot;The Light at the End&quot;, &quot;Death Wish&quot;, &quot;Convoy&quot;, &quot;Vampirella&quot;, &quot;Natural Born Killers&quot;, &quot;Badlands&quot;, &quot;&quot;, &quot;Cruising&quot;, &quot;Vampire Junction&quot;, &quot;The Addiction&quot;, &quot;The Keep&quot;, and &quot;The Lost Boys&quot;, as well as taking its title from a character in the film &quot;Dracula AD 1972&quot;.

Publication of &quot;Johnny Alucard&quot; was extensively delayed, until its eventual release in September 2013.

====&quot;Coppola&#x27;s Dracula&quot; (1976)====

Francis Ford Coppola is making the film for which he will always be remembered—an adaptation of &quot;Dracula&quot; starring Marlon Brando as Dracula and Martin Sheen as Jonathan Harker. (It is a variation of &quot;Apocalypse Now&quot;, complete with all the famous quotes and mishaps during filming, albeit in Romania instead of the Philippines.) The film crew is befriended by a young-looking vampire, who leaves with them when they return to America.
(online)

&quot;Coppola&#x27;s Dracula&quot; won the International Horror Guild Award for Best Long Fiction, and was nominated for the Bram Stoker Award for Best Long Fiction.

First appeared in &quot;The Mammoth Book of Dracula&quot;, 1997.

====&quot;Castle in the Desert&quot; (1977)====

The story&#x27;s first-person narrator, a private investigator, investigates the death of his ex-wife, found at the bottom of her swimming pool with an iron spike driven through her forehead, and the disappearance of her daughter, last seen falling in with a crowd of vampire cultists. (The private investigator, though not named in the story, is clearly Raymond Chandler&#x27;s Philip Marlowe, and his ex-wife is the recurring character Linda Loring, whom Marlowe married in Chandler&#x27;s unfinished final novel &quot;Poodle Springs&quot;—after initially rejecting the idea because he knew it would not last.)
(online)

====&quot;Andy Warhol&#x27;s Dracula&quot; (1978)====

New York. Johnny Pop, the young-looking vampire who came to America with Coppola&#x27;s film crew, finds his place in his new homeland, on his way to becoming the next Dracula. He becomes rich (creating a drug ring that sells &quot;drac&quot;, derived from vampire blood) and socially successful (befriending many successful locals, including Andy Warhol), but risks losing it all when the many enemies he makes along the way join forces against him. (online)

====&quot;Who Dares Wins&quot; (1980)====

April 30, 1980. The Romanian Embassy in London has been taken over by &quot;freedom fighters&quot; who want Transylvania to become a homeland for the undead. As Special Air Service troops mass for an assault, vampire/journalist Kate Reed is invited into the embassy to meet the leader of the terrorists. (The equivalent event in our history involved the Iranian embassy: see Iranian Embassy Siege.)
(online)

&quot;Who Dares Wins&quot; includes an appearance by Richard Jeperson, the central character in one of Newman&#x27;s other main sets of stories, the Diogenes Club series.

====&quot;The Other Side of Midnight&quot; (1981)====

Orson Welles receives funding from a mysterious source to film the ultimate version of &quot;Dracula&quot;, and hires a private detective to find out why. (The title combines those of two of Welles&#x27; movies: &quot;Chimes at Midnight&quot; and &quot;The Other Side of the Wind&quot;, the latter of which was left uncompleted at Welles&#x27; death in 1985. Welles also appeared as a minor character in &quot;Dracula Cha Cha Cha&quot;.)

&quot;The Other Side of Midnight&quot; was shortlisted for the Sidewise Award for Alternate History, Short Form.

====&quot;You Are the Wind Beneath My Wings&quot; (1984)====

1984. A covert mission using undead agents to unseat the Ceaușescu regime in Romania.

====&quot;A Concert for Transylvania&quot; (1990)====

First published as part of &quot;Johnny Alucard&quot;.

===&quot;Anno Dracula 1899 and Other Stories&quot;===
A collection of short stories, the last of which is set in the Anno Dracula universe. It was published on 1 February 2017. The final story of the collection is largely identical to the opening chapter of the novel &quot;One Thousand Monsters&quot;.

===&quot;Anno Dracula: One Thousand Monsters&quot; (1899)===
The fifth instalment in the series, set in Tokyo. A ship of vampires, led by Genevieve Dieudonne, Captain Kostaki, Sergeant Dravot and Princess Christina Light, are exiled from England, seek refuge in Japan, and are trapped in Yōkai Town, a ghetto where Tokyo&#x27;s vampires are kept out of sight and out of mind.

===&quot;Anno Dracula 1999 Daikaiju&quot; (1999)===
Like &quot;One Thousand Monsters&quot;, this novel is set in Tokyo, where vampire schoolgirl Nezumi and other unusual guests arrive to &quot;see in the new millennium&quot; at a party in the town&#x27;s old yōkai ghetto.

==Short stories and novellas==

===&quot;Red Reign&quot; (1888)===

Written in 1991, this novella was the first work in the series. It was later expanded into the novel &quot;Anno Dracula&quot;.

First published in &quot;The Mammoth Book of Vampires&quot;, 1992.

===&quot;Dead Travel Fast&quot;===

Published in the anthology &quot;Dead Travel Fast&quot; (2005), this story features an untold tale of Dracula&#x27;s deeds during the events of the original novel. Although it is not technically an Anno Dracula story, as it occurs before the events of &quot;Anno Dracula&quot; diverge from those in &quot;Dracula&quot;, it may still be considered as an adjunct to the series. In the story, Dracula visits the manufacturers of one of the earliest automobiles.

===&quot;Vampire Romance&quot; (1923)===

Set in 1923, Geneviève Dieudonné is recruited by Winthrop and the Diogenes Club to attend a meeting of elders in Mildew Manor. There, the elders are seeking to elect a new &quot;King of the Cats&quot; to replace Dracula.

First published in the new, Titan Books printing of &quot;The Bloody Red Baron&quot;.

===&quot;Aquarius&quot; (1968)===

Set in the Swinging London of 1968. Kate Reed, in her capacity as an associate member of the Diogenes Club, investigates a series of murders apparently committed by a vampire and targeting living women. The killings fan the flame of anti-vampire hatred, already at a dangerous level due to Enoch Powell&#x27;s recent Rivers of Blood speech (which, in this timeline, is not a metaphorical title).

First published in the new, Titan Books printing of &quot;Dracula Cha Cha Cha&quot;.

== Comics ==
===&quot;Anno Dracula - 1895: Seven Days in Mayhem&quot; (1895)===
In 2017 Titan Comics launched a five-part Anno Dracula comics miniseries, titled &quot;Anno Dracula - 1895: Seven Days in Mayhem&quot; written by Newman with art by Paul McCaffery. It is set in 1895, towards the end of Dracula&#x27;s rule in Great Britain.

==Prospective film adaptations==
In a 2000 interview, Newman said that he had scripted an &quot;Anno Dracula&quot; movie for Stuart Pollok and André Jacquemetton, who originally wanted Daniel Day-Lewis and Isabelle Adjani for Beauregard and Geneviève, and then Ralph Fiennes and Juliette Binoche after they became too old. Other of Newman&#x27;s suggestions were Jane Horrocks as Katie Reed, Helena Bonham Carter as Penelope Churchward, Colin Firth as Arthur Holmwood, Christopher Lee as Mycroft Holmes, Richard E. Grant as John Seward, and Harvey Keitel as Count Dracula.

According to an interview on May 16, 2008, the rights to an &quot;Anno Dracula&quot; movie had been optioned, and Newman had written a script, but &quot;I don&#x27;t know if there&#x27;s much movement on it...Over the years, I&#x27;ve had a few comics people say they&#x27;d be interested and even an occasional game nibble, but no one has ever come up with a solid deal.&quot; Upon publishing extracts of the script in an updated version of the first book, Newman revealed the film would have used the likeness of Peter Cushing to represent the head of the deceased Van Helsing, establishing elements of the Hammer Productions &quot;Dracula&quot; film series as the backdrop for the film adaptation&#x27;s events, specifically an imagined alternate ending to the 1958 &quot;Dracula&quot; film.

In a 2017 interview with fellow critic Mark Kermode while promoting &quot;1895&quot;, Newman expressed hope in an eventual film or television adaptation, but cited the production of other Victorian literary pastiches such as &quot;Penny Dreadful&quot; and &quot;The League of Extraordinary Gentlemen&quot; as having an impact on the viability of the project.

==Notes==
==External links==
*Anno Dracula: The Background by Kim Newman
*Anno Dracula Character Guide: a complete guide to all the fictional characters appearing in the Anno Dracula series
*Anno Dracula: The Vampire State</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4769579" start="4" end="35" title="Anno Dracula series" label="&amp;quot;Anno Dracula&amp;quot; series"/>
<link wikidata="Q717204" start="39" end="49" title="Kim Newman" label="Kim Newman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2917970" start="68" end="80" title="Anno Dracula" label="Anno Dracula"/>
<link wikidata="Q132311" start="137" end="144" title="fantasy" label="fantasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q224989" start="158" end="175" title="alternate history" label="alternate history"/>
<link wikidata="Q36184" start="199" end="210" title="Bram Stoker" label="Bram Stoker"/>
<link wikidata="Q41542" start="230" end="237" title="Dracula" label="Dracula"/>
<link wikidata="Q3266236" start="257" end="270" title="Count Dracula" label="Count Dracula"/>
<link wikidata="Q46721" start="326" end="333" title="vampire" label="vampire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5279174" start="596" end="609" title="Diogenes Club series" label="Diogenes Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q2979919" start="716" end="729" title="Diogenes Club" label="Diogenes Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q3569640" start="985" end="1005" title="Wold Newton family" label="Wold Newton Universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q296256" start="1009" end="1027" title="Philip José Farmer" label="Philip José Farmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q210059" start="1029" end="1040" title="Neil Gaiman" label="Neil Gaiman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4659874" start="1212" end="1230" title="A Study in Emerald" label="A Study in Emerald"/>
<link wikidata="Q5304699" start="1273" end="1288" title="Dracula Society" label="Dracula Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q17102708" start="1329" end="1347" title="Lord Ruthven Award" label="Lord Ruthven Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q6050945" start="1356" end="1388" title="International Horror Guild Award" label="International Horror Guild Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q848963" start="1425" end="1442" title="Bram Stoker Award" label="Bram Stoker Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079400" start="1451" end="1487" title="Sidewise Award for Alternate History" label="Sidewise Award for Alternate History"/>
<link wikidata="Q149537" start="1557" end="1564" title="novella" label="novella"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430" start="2049" end="2052" title="DNA" label="DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q312332" start="2209" end="2219" title="Alessandro Cagliostro" label="Cagliostro"/>
<link wikidata="Q3836784" start="3546" end="3558" title="Lord Ruthven (vampire)" label="Lord Ruthven"/>
<link wikidata="Q14211" start="3564" end="3586" title="Prime Minister of the United Kingdom" label="British prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090" start="3897" end="3903" title="silver" label="silver"/>
<link wikidata="Q3784954" start="4146" end="4156" title="Dr. Jekyll" label="Dr. Jekyll"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="5205" end="5212" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q217202" start="5226" end="5246" title="Southern Carpathians" label="Southern Carpathians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185829" start="5303" end="5319" title="Mr. Vampire" label="Chinese Assassin"/>
<link wikidata="Q881000" start="5324" end="5340" title="Blacula" label="Prince Mamuwalde"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625100" start="5817" end="5827" title="Tom Ripley" label="Tom Ripley"/>
<link wikidata="Q9406" start="5917" end="5923" title="Zombie" label="Zombie"/>
<link wikidata="Q9410" start="6241" end="6251" title="Werewolf" label="Werewolves"/>
<link wikidata="Q45529" start="6253" end="6258" title="ghost" label="ghost"/>
<link wikidata="Q193942" start="6277" end="6285" title="Immortality" label="immortal"/>
<link wikidata="Q718268" start="6329" end="6339" title="Dr. Moreau" label="Dr. Moreau"/>
<link wikidata="Q2021531" start="6373" end="6400" title="Frankenstein&amp;#x27;s monster" label="Frankenstein&amp;#x27;s monster"/>
<link wikidata="Q798227" start="6402" end="6420" title="The Sandman (short story)" label="automaton assassin"/>
<link wikidata="" start="6427" end="6433" title="The Golem: How He Came into the World" label="golems"/>
<link wikidata="Q3561564" start="6495" end="6502" title="triffid" label="triffid"/>
<link wikidata="Q347898" start="6508" end="6517" title="Little Shop of Horrors (disambiguation)" label="Audrey II"/>
<link wikidata="Q6774723" start="6566" end="6573" title="Martian (War of the Worlds)" label="Martian"/>
<link wikidata="Q621431" start="6583" end="6596" title="Great Old One" label="Great Old One"/>
<link wikidata="Q749859" start="6676" end="6699" title="Esoteric Order of Dagon" label="Esoteric Order of Dagon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423956" start="6701" end="6708" title="Griffin (The Invisible Man)" label="Griffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q9439" start="7132" end="7146" title="Queen Victoria" label="Queen Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q43963" start="7313" end="7328" title="Jack the Ripper" label="Jack the Ripper"/>
<link wikidata="Q124539" start="7336" end="7347" title="Whitechapel" label="Whitechapel"/>
<link wikidata="Q15831558" start="7772" end="7781" title="Warhammer Fantasy (setting)" label="Warhammer"/>
<link wikidata="Q191796" start="7892" end="7897" title="cameo role" label="cameo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6050945" start="8294" end="8326" title="International Horror Guild Award" label="International Horror Guild Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q848963" start="8372" end="8389" title="Bram Stoker Award" label="Bram Stoker Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q7732033" start="8413" end="8440" title="The Encyclopedia of Fantasy" label="The Encyclopedia of Fantasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7303349" start="8492" end="8509" title="recursive fantasy" label="recursive fantasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q223685" start="8570" end="8579" title="steampunk" label="steampunk"/>
<link wikidata="Q223685" start="8596" end="8612" title="gaslight romance" label="gaslight romance"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="8898" end="8909" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q9410" start="9046" end="9057" title="lycanthropy" label="lycanthropy"/>
<link wikidata="Q222982" start="9287" end="9290" title="Flying ace" label="ace"/>
<link wikidata="Q618694" start="9291" end="9304" title="fighter pilot" label="fighter pilot"/>
<link wikidata="Q4701" start="9305" end="9327" title="Manfred von Richthofen" label="Manfred von Richthofen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079400" start="9496" end="9532" title="Sidewise Award for Alternate History" label="Sidewise Award for Alternate History"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="9684" end="9688" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q844" start="9857" end="9867" title="James Bond" label="James Bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q7371" start="9960" end="9976" title="Federico Fellini" label="Federico Fellini"/>
<link wikidata="Q47221" start="10453" end="10464" title="Taxi Driver" label="Taxi Driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1212682" start="10478" end="10484" title="Ms. 45" label="Ms. 45"/>
<link wikidata="Q79037" start="10498" end="10508" title="Spider-Man" label="Spider-Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q881024" start="10522" end="10527" title="Blade (comics)" label="Blade"/>
<link wikidata="Q183513" start="10541" end="10565" title="Buffy the Vampire Slayer (TV series)" label="Buffy the Vampire Slayer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10579" end="10594" title="The Deathmaster" label="The Deathmaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q253942" start="10608" end="10614" title="Elvira (character)" label="Elvira"/>
<link wikidata="Q7747275" start="10628" end="10648" title="The Light at the End" label="The Light at the End"/>
<link wikidata="Q841961" start="10662" end="10672" title="Death Wish (1974 film)" label="Death Wish"/>
<link wikidata="Q510388" start="10686" end="10692" title="Convoy (1978 film)" label="Convoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q128429" start="10706" end="10716" title="Vampirella" label="Vampirella"/>
<link wikidata="Q748986" start="10730" end="10750" title="Natural Born Killers" label="Natural Born Killers"/>
<link wikidata="Q799202" start="10764" end="10772" title="Badlands (film)" label="Badlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q952511" start="10800" end="10808" title="Cruising (film)" label="Cruising"/>
<link wikidata="Q7912989" start="10822" end="10838" title="Vampire Junction" label="Vampire Junction"/>
<link wikidata="Q2521217" start="10852" end="10865" title="The Addiction" label="The Addiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754140" start="10879" end="10887" title="The Keep (film)" label="The Keep"/>
<link wikidata="Q506403" start="10905" end="10918" title="The Lost Boys" label="The Lost Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q685126" start="10989" end="11004" title="Dracula AD 1972" label="Dracula AD 1972"/>
<link wikidata="Q56094" start="11178" end="11198" title="Francis Ford Coppola" label="Francis Ford Coppola"/>
<link wikidata="Q34012" start="11303" end="11316" title="Marlon Brando" label="Marlon Brando"/>
<link wikidata="Q184572" start="11332" end="11344" title="Martin Sheen" label="Martin Sheen"/>
<link wikidata="Q182692" start="11393" end="11407" title="Apocalypse Now" label="Apocalypse Now"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="11489" end="11496" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="11512" end="11523" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q6050945" start="11685" end="11717" title="International Horror Guild Award" label="International Horror Guild Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q848963" start="11767" end="11784" title="Bram Stoker Award" label="Bram Stoker Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q180377" start="12279" end="12295" title="Raymond Chandler" label="Raymond Chandler"/>
<link wikidata="Q623732" start="12303" end="12317" title="Philip Marlowe" label="Philip Marlowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3655996" start="12445" end="12459" title="Poodle Springs" label="Poodle Springs"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="12602" end="12610" title="New York City" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q5603" start="12945" end="12956" title="Andy Warhol" label="Andy Warhol"/>
<link wikidata="Q16891035" start="13126" end="13152" title="Embassy of Romania, London" label="Romanian Embassy in London"/>
<link wikidata="Q39473" start="13214" end="13226" title="Transylvania" label="Transylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q239872" start="13256" end="13262" title="undead" label="undead"/>
<link wikidata="Q222883" start="13267" end="13286" title="Special Air Service" label="Special Air Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="13460" end="13464" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q370706" start="13481" end="13502" title="Iranian Embassy Siege" label="Iranian Embassy Siege"/>
<link wikidata="Q7326858" start="13568" end="13584" title="Richard Jeperson" label="Richard Jeperson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5279174" start="13664" end="13684" title="Diogenes Club series" label="Diogenes Club series"/>
<link wikidata="Q24829" start="13742" end="13754" title="Orson Welles" label="Orson Welles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2529482" start="13960" end="13978" title="Chimes at Midnight" label="Chimes at Midnight"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458177" start="13995" end="14021" title="The Other Side of the Wind" label="The Other Side of the Wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079400" start="14244" end="14280" title="Sidewise Award for Alternate History" label="Sidewise Award for Alternate History"/>
<link wikidata="Q80504" start="14414" end="14423" title="Nicolae Ceaușescu" label="Ceaușescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420" start="16256" end="16266" title="automobile" label="automobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q7718697" start="16592" end="16612" title="The Bloody Red Baron" label="The Bloody Red Baron"/>
<link wikidata="Q2037910" start="16667" end="16682" title="Swinging London" label="Swinging London"/>
<link wikidata="Q333028" start="16946" end="16958" title="Enoch Powell" label="Enoch Powell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3030207" start="16973" end="16995" title="Rivers of Blood speech" label="Rivers of Blood speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q5304698" start="17111" end="17130" title="Dracula Cha Cha Cha (novel)" label="Dracula Cha Cha Cha"/>
<link wikidata="Q66731094" start="17227" end="17239" title="Titan Comics" label="Titan Comics"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17384" end="17398" title="Paul McCaffery" label="Paul McCaffery"/>
<link wikidata="Q166389" start="17662" end="17678" title="Daniel Day-Lewis" label="Daniel Day-Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q106383" start="17683" end="17698" title="Isabelle Adjani" label="Isabelle Adjani"/>
<link wikidata="Q28493" start="17738" end="17751" title="Ralph Fiennes" label="Ralph Fiennes"/>
<link wikidata="Q106275" start="17756" end="17772" title="Juliette Binoche" label="Juliette Binoche"/>
<link wikidata="Q237178" start="17840" end="17853" title="Jane Horrocks" label="Jane Horrocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q170428" start="17869" end="17889" title="Helena Bonham Carter" label="Helena Bonham Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q162492" start="17914" end="17925" title="Colin Firth" label="Colin Firth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1884939" start="17929" end="17944" title="Arthur Holmwood" label="Arthur Holmwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q180338" start="17946" end="17961" title="Christopher Lee" label="Christopher Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1616457" start="17965" end="17979" title="Mycroft Holmes" label="Mycroft Holmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q380856" start="17981" end="17997" title="Richard E. Grant" label="Richard E. Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2970639" start="18001" end="18012" title="John Seward" label="John Seward"/>
<link wikidata="Q191132" start="18018" end="18031" title="Harvey Keitel" label="Harvey Keitel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3266236" start="18035" end="18048" title="Count Dracula" label="Count Dracula"/>
<link wikidata="Q309589" start="18566" end="18579" title="Peter Cushing" label="Peter Cushing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1622359" start="18618" end="18629" title="Abraham Van Helsing" label="Van Helsing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433745" start="18660" end="18678" title="Hammer Film Productions" label="Hammer Productions"/>
<link wikidata="Q18611175" start="18679" end="18710" title="Dracula (Hammer film series)" label="&amp;quot;Dracula&amp;quot; film series"/>
<link wikidata="Q4736392" start="18791" end="18807" title="alternate ending" label="alternate ending"/>
<link wikidata="Q642842" start="18815" end="18844" title="Dracula (1958 film)" label="1958 &amp;quot;Dracula&amp;quot; film"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282562" start="18886" end="18898" title="Mark Kermode" label="Mark Kermode"/>
<link wikidata="Q13512243" start="19078" end="19092" title="Penny Dreadful (TV series)" label="Penny Dreadful"/>
<link wikidata="Q567577" start="19109" end="19146" title="The League of Extraordinary Gentlemen (film)" label="The League of Extraordinary Gentlemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q717204" start="19269" end="19279" title="Kim Newman" label="Kim Newman"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="192829" wikidata="Q987307" url="?curid=192829" title="Timeline of Afghan history">
<text>This is a timeline of [[Afghanistan|Afghan]] history, comprising important legal and territorial changes and political events in Afghanistan and its predecessor states. To read about the background to these events, see History of Afghanistan. See also the list of heads of state of Afghanistan and the list of years in Afghanistan.


==Prehistory ==
==16th century BCE ==
==6th century BCE ==
==4th century BCE ==
==1st century BCE ==
==1st century CE ==
==2nd century ==
==4th century ==
==5th century ==
==6th century ==
==7th century ==
==9th century ==
==10th century ==
==11th century ==
==13th century ==
==14th century ==
==16th century ==
==18th century ==
==19th century ==
==20th century==
==21st century==
== See also ==
* List of years in Afghanistan
* Solar Hijri calendar#In Afghanistan

Cities in Afghanistan:
* Timeline of Kabul
* Timeline of Herat

== References ==
== Further reading ==

== External links ==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q987307" start="10" end="52" title="Timeline of Afghan history" label="timeline of [[Afghanistan|Afghan]] history"/>
<link wikidata="Q188872" start="219" end="241" title="History of Afghanistan" label="History of Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2186111" start="256" end="293" title="list of heads of state of Afghanistan" label="list of heads of state of Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6645880" start="302" end="330" title="list of years in Afghanistan" label="list of years in Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6645880" start="734" end="762" title="List of years in Afghanistan" label="List of years in Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="765" end="800" title="Solar Hijri calendar#In Afghanistan" label="Solar Hijri calendar#In Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7805775" start="827" end="844" title="Timeline of Kabul" label="Timeline of Kabul"/>
<link wikidata="Q12071090" start="847" end="864" title="Timeline of Herat" label="Timeline of Herat"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="192837" wikidata="Q56988" url="?curid=192837" title="Mandarin">
<text>Mandarin or The Mandarin may refer to:

==Language==
* Mandarin Chinese, branch of Chinese originally spoken in northern parts of the country
** Standard Chinese or Modern Standard Mandarin, the official language of China
** Taiwanese Mandarin, Standard Chinese as spoken in Taiwan
* Old Mandarin or Early Mandarin was the speech of northern China during the Jurchen-ruled Jin dynasty and the Mongol-led Yuan dynasty (12th to 14th centuries).
* Mandarin (late imperial lingua franca), the spoken standard of the Ming and Qing dynasties of China

==Biological species==
* Mandarin orange (&quot;Citrus reticulata&quot;), a sweet, orange lookalike
* Mandarin duck (&quot;Aix galericulata&quot;), a perching duck species found in East Asia
* Mandarin dogfish, two species of small shark in the genus &quot;Cirrhigaleus&quot; off East Asian coast
* Mandarinfish (disambiguation), various fishes
* Mandarin vole (&quot;Lasiopodomys mandarinus&quot;), a species of vole found in China and the Korean Peninsula
* Spotted mandarin (disambiguation), various species

==Arts, entertainment, and media==
* &quot;The Miraculous Mandarin&quot;, a one-act pantomime ballet composed by Béla Bartók
* Mandarin (character), a supervillain in the Marvel Comics universe
** Wenwu, a version of the Mandarin in the Marvel Cinematic Universe
** Trevor Slattery, a version of the Mandarin in the Marvel Cinematic Universe
** Aldrich Killian (Marvel Cinematic Universe), a version of the Mandarin in the Marvel Cinematic Universe
* Mandarin (SRMTHFG), a character in the animated TV series &quot;Super Robot Monkey Team Hyperforce Go!&quot;
* Mandarins Drum and Bugle Corps, a drum and bugle corps from Sacramento, California, United States
* &quot;The Mandarin&quot; (website), an Australian online magazine
* MTV Mandarin, a 24-hour music channel owned by MTV Networks Asia Pacific

===Novels===
* &quot;The Mandarin&quot; (novel), an 1880 novel by the Portuguese writer José Maria de Eça de Queirós
* &quot;The Mandarins&quot;, 1954 novel by Simone de Beauvoir
* &quot;Mandarin&quot; (Elegant novel), a 1983 novel by Robert Elegant
* &quot;Mandarin&quot; (Havan novel), a 2008 novel by John Havan

==Clothing==
* Mandarin gown or cheongsam, a Chinese style of dress
* Mandarin collar, a short shirt or jacket collar that is not folded from Qing era China
* Mandarin square, a badge worn by officials in Imperial China

==Companies==
* Mandarin Airlines, a subsidiary of China Airlines
* The Mandarin, former name of Mandarin Oriental, Hong Kong, a Hong Kong hotel
* Mandarin Films, a film production company of Hong Kong
* Mandarin Restaurant, an all-you-can-eat Chinese-Canadian buffet chain in Ontario, Canada
* Mandarin Software, a British software developer / publisher

==Other uses==
* Mandarin (bureaucrat), a bureaucrat of Imperial China (the original meaning of the word)
** by extension, any senior government bureaucrat
* Mandarin cuisine, another name for Beijing cuisine
* Mandarin (Jacksonville), a 19th-century community, since absorbed into the city limits of Jacksonville, United States
** Mandarin High School, a high school in the southern part of Jacksonville, Florida, United States
* Mandarin porcelain, a wide range of porcelain that was made and decorated in China exclusively for export to Europe and later to North America
* Mandarin paradox, an ethical parable

==See also==
* &quot;Mandarina&quot;, a genus of land snail
* Korean mandarin (disambiguation)
* Mandrin (disambiguation)
* Mantri, an Indian title for ministers, the etymon for Mandarin</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q56988" start="0" end="8" title="Mandarin" label="Mandarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q56988" start="12" end="24" title="Mandarin" label="The Mandarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q9192" start="55" end="71" title="Mandarin Chinese" label="Mandarin Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q727694" start="145" end="161" title="Standard Chinese" label="Standard Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q4380827" start="225" end="243" title="Taiwanese Mandarin" label="Taiwanese Mandarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q837169" start="284" end="296" title="Old Mandarin" label="Old Mandarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5066" start="373" end="384" title="Jin dynasty (1115–1234)" label="Jin dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q7313" start="404" end="416" title="Yuan dynasty" label="Yuan dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q10948482" start="445" end="483" title="Mandarin (late imperial lingua franca)" label="Mandarin (late imperial lingua franca)"/>
<link wikidata="Q125337" start="571" end="586" title="Mandarin orange" label="Mandarin orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q200339" start="648" end="661" title="Mandarin duck" label="Mandarin duck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1409782" start="739" end="755" title="Mandarin dogfish" label="Mandarin dogfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q41516839" start="845" end="874" title="Mandarinfish (disambiguation)" label="Mandarinfish (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q308769" start="893" end="906" title="Mandarin vole" label="Mandarin vole"/>
<link wikidata="Q16797992" start="1006" end="1039" title="Spotted mandarin (disambiguation)" label="Spotted mandarin (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q464708" start="1101" end="1124" title="The Miraculous Mandarin" label="The Miraculous Mandarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2417914" start="1185" end="1205" title="Mandarin (character)" label="Mandarin (character)"/>
<link wikidata="Q112122181" start="1255" end="1260" title="Wenwu" label="Wenwu"/>
<link wikidata="Q24207018" start="1324" end="1339" title="Trevor Slattery" label="Trevor Slattery"/>
<link wikidata="Q112122179" start="1403" end="1446" title="Aldrich Killian (Marvel Cinematic Universe)" label="Aldrich Killian (Marvel Cinematic Universe)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11819362" start="1509" end="1527" title="Mandarin (SRMTHFG)" label="Mandarin (SRMTHFG)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16950448" start="1620" end="1650" title="Mandarins Drum and Bugle Corps" label="Mandarins Drum and Bugle Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q55635373" start="1720" end="1754" title="The Mandarin (website)" label="&amp;quot;The Mandarin&amp;quot; (website)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6718738" start="1788" end="1800" title="MTV Mandarin" label="MTV Mandarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3285830" start="1877" end="1909" title="The Mandarin (novel)" label="&amp;quot;The Mandarin&amp;quot; (novel)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1214721" start="1987" end="2000" title="The Mandarins" label="The Mandarins"/>
<link wikidata="Q6747840" start="2043" end="2079" title="Mandarin (Elegant novel)" label="&amp;quot;Mandarin&amp;quot; (Elegant novel)"/>
<link wikidata="Q48812582" start="2114" end="2148" title="Mandarin (Havan novel)" label="&amp;quot;Mandarin&amp;quot; (Havan novel)"/>
<link wikidata="Q836934" start="2193" end="2206" title="Mandarin gown" label="Mandarin gown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045372" start="2248" end="2263" title="Mandarin collar" label="Mandarin collar"/>
<link wikidata="Q716488" start="2337" end="2352" title="Mandarin square" label="Mandarin square"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150302" start="2415" end="2432" title="Mandarin Airlines" label="Mandarin Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064758" start="2496" end="2524" title="Mandarin Oriental, Hong Kong" label="Mandarin Oriental, Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q6747844" start="2546" end="2560" title="Mandarin Films" label="Mandarin Films"/>
<link wikidata="Q6747864" start="2603" end="2622" title="Mandarin Restaurant" label="Mandarin Restaurant"/>
<link wikidata="Q17065315" start="2694" end="2711" title="Mandarin Software" label="Mandarin Software"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126165" start="2772" end="2793" title="Mandarin (bureaucrat)" label="Mandarin (bureaucrat)"/>
<link wikidata="Q572700" start="2900" end="2910" title="bureaucrat" label="bureaucrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206613" start="2948" end="2963" title="Beijing cuisine" label="Beijing cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3285429" start="2966" end="2989" title="Mandarin (Jacksonville)" label="Mandarin (Jacksonville)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6747845" start="3087" end="3107" title="Mandarin High School" label="Mandarin High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q383044" start="3186" end="3204" title="Mandarin porcelain" label="Mandarin porcelain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2922622" start="3331" end="3347" title="Mandarin paradox" label="Mandarin paradox"/>
<link wikidata="Q9027338" start="3390" end="3399" title="Mandarina" label="Mandarina"/>
<link wikidata="Q29966453" start="3431" end="3463" title="Korean mandarin (disambiguation)" label="Korean mandarin (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q528733" start="3466" end="3490" title="Mandrin (disambiguation)" label="Mandrin (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6752211" start="3493" end="3499" title="Mantri" label="Mantri"/>
</links>
</doc>
