<doc id="191280" wikidata="Q476115" url="?curid=191280" title="Private equity">
<text>Private equity (PE) is stock in a private company that does not offer stock to the general public. In the field of finance, private equity is offered instead to specialized investment funds and limited partnerships that take an active role in the management and structuring of the companies. In casual usage, &quot;private equity&quot; can refer to these investment firms, rather than the companies in which they invest.

Private-equity capital is invested into a target company either by an investment management company (private equity firm), a venture capital fund, or an angel investor; each category of investor has specific financial goals, management preferences, and investment strategies for profiting from their investments. Private equity provides working capital to finance a target company&#x27;s expansion, including the development of new products and services, operational restructuring, management changes, and shifts in ownership and control.

As a financial product, the private-equity fund is a type of &quot;private capital&quot; for financing a long-term investment strategy in an illiquid business enterprise. Private equity fund investing has been described by the financial press as the superficial rebranding of investment management companies who specialized in the leveraged buyout of financially weak companies.

Evaluations of the returns of private equity are mixed: some find that it outperforms public equity, but others find otherwise.

==Key features==
Some key features of private equity investment include:

* An investment manager (the private equity investor) raises money from institutional investors (e.g., hedge funds, pension funds, university endowments, and ultra-high-net-worth individuals) to pursue a particular investment strategy.
** The fundraise proceeds are placed into an investment fund, in which the investment manager acts as a general partner (GP) and the institutional investors act as limited partners (LPs).
* The investment manager then purchases equity ownership stakes in companies by using a combination of equity and debt financing, with the goal of generating returns on the equity invested, including any subsequent equity investments into the target companies, over a target horizon based on the particular investment fund and strategy (typically 4–7 years).
* From a financial modeling perspective, the primary levers available to private equity investors to drive returns are:
** Revenue growth
** Margin expansion (typically an EBITDA margin)
** Free cash flow generation / debt paydown
** Valuation multiple expansion (typically an Enterprise Value / EBITDA multiple)
* Value creation strategies can vary widely by private equity fund. For example, some investors may target increasing sales in new or existing markets (driving revenue growth), and others may look to reduce costs through headcount reduction (expanding margins). Many strategies incorporate some amount of corporate governance restructuring, for example, setting up a Board of Directors or updating the target&#x27;s managerial reporting structure.
* The use of debt financing in acquiring companies increases an investment&#x27;s return on equity by reducing the amount of initial equity required to purchase the target. Moreover, the interest payments are tax-deductible, so the debt financing reduces corporate taxes and thus increases total after-tax cash flows generated by the business.
** Following a series of high-profile bankruptcies, aggressive leverage usage by private equity funds has declined in recent decades. In 2005, approximately 70% of the average private equity acquisition represented debt, but it was closer to 50% in 2020.
** Firms that assume large operational risks (e.g., &quot;turnarounds&quot;) will usually apply far lower leverage levels to acquired companies in order to provide management with more financial flexibility; firms taking fewer operational risks will often try to maximize available leverage and focus on investments that generate strong, stable cash flows needed to service the higher debt balances.
* Over time, &quot;private equity&quot; has come to refer to many different investment strategies, including leveraged buyout, distressed securities, venture capital, growth capital, and mezzanine capital. One of the most noteworthy differences between leveraged buyouts and the other strategies is that buyouts are generally &quot;control equity positions&quot;, as buyout funds usually purchase majority ownership stakes in their target companies, while other investment strategies typically purchase minority (&quot;non-control&quot;) ownership stakes, reducing their ability to effect transformational changes across target companies.
* For large deals, private-equity investors often invest together in a syndicate, in order to jointly benefit from exposure diversification, complementary investor information and skills, and heightened connectivity for future investments.

==Strategies==
The strategies private-equity firms may use are as follows, leveraged buyout being the most common.

===Leveraged buyout===

Leveraged buyout (LBO) refers to a strategy of making equity investments as part of a transaction in which a company, business unit, or business asset is acquired from the current shareholders typically with the use of financial leverage. The companies involved in these transactions are typically mature and generate operating cash flows.

Private-equity firms view target companies as either Platform companies, which have sufficient scale and a successful business model to act as a stand-alone entity, or as add-on / tuck-in / bolt-on acquisitions, which would include companies with insufficient scale or other deficits.

Leveraged buyouts involve a financial sponsor agreeing to an acquisition without itself committing all the capital required for the acquisition. To do this, the financial sponsor will raise acquisition debt, which looks to the cash flows of the acquisition target to make interest and principal payments. Acquisition debt in an LBO is often non-recourse to the financial sponsor and has no claim on other investments managed by the financial sponsor. Therefore, an LBO transaction&#x27;s financial structure is particularly attractive to a fund&#x27;s limited partners, allowing them the benefits of leverage, but limiting the degree of recourse of that leverage. This kind of financing structure leverage benefits an LBO&#x27;s financial sponsor in two ways: (1) the investor only needs to provide a fraction of the capital for the acquisition, and (2) the returns to the investor will be enhanced, as long as the return on assets exceeds the cost of the debt.

As a percentage of the purchase price for a leverage buyout target, the amount of debt used to finance a transaction varies according to the financial condition and history of the acquisition target, market conditions, the willingness of lenders to extend credit (both to the LBO&#x27;s financial sponsors and the company to be acquired) and the interest costs and the ability of the company to cover those costs. Historically the debt portion of a LBO will range from 60 to 90% of the purchase price. Between 2000 and 2005, debt averaged between 59.4% and 67.9% of total purchase price for LBOs in the United States.

====Simple example of leveraged buyout====
A private-equity fund, ABC Capital II, borrows $9bn from a bank (or other lender). To this, it adds $2bn of &quot;equity&quot; – money from its own partners and from &quot;limited partners&quot;. With this $11bn, it buys all the shares of an underperforming company, XYZ Industrial (after &quot;due diligence&quot;, i.e. checking the books). It replaces the senior management in XYZ Industrial, with others who set out to streamline it. The workforce is reduced, some assets are sold off, etc. The objective is to increase the valuation of the company for an early sale.

The stock market is experiencing a bull market, and XYZ Industrial is sold two years after the buy-out for $13bn, yielding a profit of $2bn. The original loan can now be paid off with interest of, say, $0.5bn. The remaining profit of $1.5bn is shared among the partners. Taxation of such gains is at the capital gains tax rates, which in the United States are lower than ordinary income tax rates.

Note that part of that profit results from turning the company around, and part results from the general increase in share prices in a buoyant stock market, the latter often being the greater component.

Notes:
* The lenders (the people who put up the $9bn in the example) can insure against default by syndicating the loan to spread the risk, or by buying credit default swaps (CDSs) or selling collateralised debt obligations (CDOs) from/to other institutions.
* Often the loan/equity ($11bn in the example) is not paid off after the sale, but left on the books of the company (XYZ Industrial) for it to pay off over time. This can be advantageous since the interest is largely off-settable against the profits of the company, thus reducing, or even eliminating, tax.
* Most buyout deals are much smaller; the global average purchase in 2013 was $89m, for example.
* The target company (XYZ Industrials here) does not have to be floated on the stock market; most buyout exits after 2000 are not IPOs.
* Buy-out operations can go wrong and in such cases, the loss is increased by leverage, just as the profit is if all goes well.

===Growth capital===

Growth capital refers to equity investments, most often minority investments, in relatively mature companies that are looking for capital to expand or restructure operations, enter new markets or finance a major acquisition without a change of control of the business.

Companies that seek growth capital will often do so in order to finance a transformational event in their life cycle. These companies are likely to be more mature than venture capital-funded companies, able to generate revenue and operating profits, but unable to generate sufficient cash to fund major expansions, acquisitions or other investments. Because of this lack of scale, these companies generally can find few alternative conduits to secure capital for growth, so access to growth equity can be critical to pursue necessary facility expansion, sales and marketing initiatives, equipment purchases, and new product development.

The primary owner of the company may not be willing to take the financial risk alone. By selling part of the company to private equity, the owner can take out some value and share the risk of growth with partners. Capital can also be used to effect a restructuring of a company&#x27;s balance sheet, particularly to reduce the amount of leverage (or debt) the company has on its balance sheet.

A private investment in public equity (PIPE), refer to a form of growth capital investment made into a publicly traded company. PIPE investments are typically made in the form of a convertible or preferred security that is unregistered for a certain period of time.

The Registered Direct (RD) is another common financing vehicle used for growth capital. A registered direct is similar to a PIPE, but is instead sold as a registered security.

===Mezzanine capital===

Mezzanine capital refers to subordinated debt or preferred equity securities that often represent the most junior portion of a company&#x27;s capital structure that is senior to the company&#x27;s common equity. This form of financing is often used by private-equity investors to reduce the amount of equity capital required to finance a leveraged buyout or major expansion. Mezzanine capital, which is often used by smaller companies that are unable to access the high yield market, allows such companies to borrow additional capital beyond the levels that traditional lenders are willing to provide through bank loans. In compensation for the increased risk, mezzanine debt holders require a higher return for their investment than secured or other more senior lenders. Mezzanine securities are often structured with a current income coupon.

===Venture capital===

Venture capital (VC) is a broad subcategory of private equity that refers to equity investments made, typically in less mature companies, for the launch of a seed or startup company, early-stage development, or expansion of a business. Venture investment is most often found in the application of new technology, new marketing concepts and new products that do not have a proven track record or stable revenue streams.

Venture capital is often sub-divided by the stage of development of the company ranging from early-stage capital used for the launch of startup companies to late stage and growth capital that is often used to fund expansion of existing business that are generating revenue but may not yet be profitable or generating cash flow to fund future growth.

Entrepreneurs often develop products and ideas that require substantial capital during the formative stages of their companies&#x27; life cycles. Many entrepreneurs do not have sufficient funds to finance projects themselves, and they must, therefore, seek outside financing. The venture capitalist&#x27;s need to deliver high returns to compensate for the risk of these investments makes venture funding an expensive capital source for companies. Being able to secure financing is critical to any business, whether it is a startup seeking venture capital or a mid-sized firm that needs more cash to grow. Venture capital is most suitable for businesses with large up-front capital requirements which cannot be financed by cheaper alternatives such as debt. Although venture capital is often most closely associated with fast-growing technology, healthcare and biotechnology fields, venture funding has been used for other more traditional businesses.

Investors generally commit to venture capital funds as part of a wider diversified private-equity portfolio, but also to pursue the larger returns the strategy has the potential to offer. However, venture capital funds have produced lower returns for investors over recent years compared to other private-equity fund types, particularly buyout.

===Distressed securities===
The category of distressed securities comprises financial strategies for the profitable investment of working capital into the corporate equity and the securities of financially weak companies. The investment of private-equity capital into distressed securities is realised with two financial strategies:
# &quot;Distressed-to-Control&quot; (&quot;Loan-to-Own&quot;) investment whereby the investor buys debt securities in hope of acquiring ownership and control of the company&#x27;s equity after financing the corporate restructuring of the target company;
# &quot;Special Situations&quot; (&quot;Turnaround&quot;) investment wherein the investor buys debt securities and equity investments, to be used as &quot;rescue financing&quot; that will restore the profitability of the financially-weak target company.

Moreover, the private-equity investment strategies of hedge funds also include actively trading the loans held and the bonds issued by the financially-weak target companies.

===Secondaries===

Secondary investments refer to investments made in existing private-equity assets. These transactions can involve the sale of private equity fund interests or portfolios of direct investments in privately held companies through the purchase of these investments from existing institutional investors. By its nature, the private-equity asset class is illiquid, intended to be a long-term investment for buy and hold investors. Secondary investments allow institutional investors, particularly those new to the asset class, to invest in private equity from older vintages than would otherwise be available to them. Secondaries also typically experience a different cash flow profile, diminishing the j-curve effect of investing in new private-equity funds. Often investments in secondaries are made through third-party fund vehicle, structured similar to a fund of funds although many large institutional investors have purchased private-equity fund interests through secondary transactions. Sellers of private-equity fund investments sell not only the investments in the fund but also their remaining unfunded commitments to the funds.

===Other strategies===
Other strategies that can be considered private equity or a close adjacent market include:
* Real estate: in the context of private equity this will typically refer to the riskier end of the investment spectrum including &quot;value-added&quot; and opportunity funds where the investments often more closely resemble leveraged buyouts than traditional real estate investments. Certain investors in private equity consider real estate to be a separate asset class.
* Infrastructure: investments in various public works (e.g., bridges, tunnels, toll roads, airports, public transportation, and other public works) that are made as part of a privatization initiative on the part of a government entity.
* Energy and Power: investments in a wide variety of companies (rather than assets) engaged in the production and sale of energy, including fuel extraction, manufacturing, refining and distribution (Energy) or companies engaged in the production or transmission of electrical power (Power).
* Merchant banking: negotiated private-equity investment by financial institutions in the unregistered securities of either privately or publicly held companies.
* Fund of funds: investments made in a fund whose primary activity is investing in other private-equity funds. The fund of funds model is used by investors looking for:
:* Diversification but have insufficient capital to diversify their portfolio by themselves
:* Access to top-performing funds that are otherwise oversubscribed
:* Experience in a particular fund type or strategy before investing directly in funds in that niche
:* Exposure to difficult-to-reach and/or emerging markets
:* Superior fund selection by high-talent fund of fund managers/teams
* Search fund: A search fund is an investment vehicle through which an entrepreneur (called a &quot;searcher&quot;) raises funds from investors in order to acquire an existing small business. After an acquisition is made, the entrepreneur takes an operating role in the acquired company, such as CEO and President.
* Royalty fund: an investment that purchases a consistent revenue stream deriving from the payment of royalties. One growing subset of this category is the healthcare royalty fund, in which a private-equity fund manager purchases a royalty stream paid by a pharmaceutical company to a drug patent holder. The drug patent holder can be another company, an individual inventor, or some sort of institution, such as a research university.

and this to compensate for private equities not being traded on the public market, a private-equity secondary market has formed, where private-equity investors purchase securities and assets from other private equity investors.

==History and development==

===Early history and the development of venture capital===

The seeds of the US private-equity industry were planted in 1946 with the founding of two venture capital firms: American Research and Development Corporation (ARDC) and J.H. Whitney &amp; Company. Before World War II, venture capital investments (originally known as &quot;development capital&quot;) were primarily the domain of wealthy individuals and families. In 1901 J.P. Morgan arguably managed the first leveraged buyout of the Carnegie Steel Company using private equity. Modern era private equity, however, is credited to Georges Doriot, the &quot;father of venture capitalism&quot; with the founding of ARDC and founder of INSEAD, with capital raised from institutional investors, to encourage private sector investments in businesses run by soldiers who were returning from World War II. ARDC is credited with the first major venture capital success story when its 1957 investment of $70,000 in Digital Equipment Corporation (DEC) would be valued at over $355 million after the company&#x27;s initial public offering in 1968 (a return of over 5,000 times its investment and an annualized rate of return of 101%). It is commonly noted that the first venture-backed startup is Fairchild Semiconductor, which produced the first commercially practicable integrated circuit, funded in 1959 by what would later become Venrock Associates.

===Origins of the leveraged buyout===

The first leveraged buyout may have been the purchase by McLean Industries, Inc. of Pan-Atlantic Steamship Company in January 1955 and Waterman Steamship Corporation in May 1955 Under the terms of that transaction, McLean borrowed $42 million and raised an additional $7 million through an issue of preferred stock. When the deal closed, $20 million of Waterman cash and assets were used to retire $20 million of the loan debt. Lewis Cullman&#x27;s acquisition of Orkin Exterminating Company in 1964 is often cited as the first leveraged buyout. Similar to the approach employed in the McLean transaction, the use of publicly traded holding companies as investment vehicles to acquire portfolios of investments in corporate assets was a relatively new trend in the 1960s popularized by the likes of Warren Buffett (Berkshire Hathaway) and Victor Posner (DWG Corporation) and later adopted by Nelson Peltz (Triarc), Saul Steinberg (Reliance Insurance) and Gerry Schwartz (Onex Corporation). These investment vehicles would utilize a number of the same tactics and target the same type of companies as more traditional leveraged buyouts and in many ways could be considered a forerunner of the later private-equity firms. Posner is often credited with coining the term &quot;leveraged buyout&quot; or &quot;LBO&quot;.

The leveraged buyout boom of the 1980s was conceived by a number of corporate financiers, most notably Jerome Kohlberg Jr. and later his protégé Henry Kravis. Working for Bear Stearns at the time, Kohlberg and Kravis along with Kravis&#x27; cousin George Roberts began a series of what they described as &quot;bootstrap&quot; investments. Many of these companies lacked a viable or attractive exit for their founders as they were too small to be taken public and the founders were reluctant to sell out to competitors and so a sale to a financial buyer could prove attractive. In the following years the three Bear Stearns bankers would complete a series of buyouts including Stern Metals (1965), Incom (a division of Rockwood International, 1971), Cobblers Industries (1971), and Boren Clay (1973) and Thompson Wire, Eagle Motors and Barrows through their investment in Stern Metals. By 1976, tensions had built up between Bear Stearns and Kohlberg, Kravis and Roberts leading to their departure and the formation of Kohlberg Kravis Roberts in that year.

===Private equity in the 1980s===

In January 1982, former United States Secretary of the Treasury William E. Simon and a group of investors acquired Gibson Greetings, a producer of greeting cards, for $80 million, of which only $1 million was rumored to have been contributed by the investors. By mid-1983, just sixteen months after the original deal, Gibson completed a $290 million IPO and Simon made approximately $66 million.

The success of the Gibson Greetings investment attracted the attention of the wider media to the nascent boom in leveraged buyouts. Between 1979 and 1989, it was estimated that there were over 2,000 leveraged buyouts valued in excess of $250 million.

During the 1980s, constituencies within acquired companies and the media ascribed the &quot;corporate raid&quot; label to many private-equity investments, particularly those that featured a hostile takeover of the company, perceived asset stripping, major layoffs or other significant corporate restructuring activities. Among the most notable investors to be labeled corporate raiders in the 1980s included Carl Icahn, Victor Posner, Nelson Peltz, Robert M. Bass, T. Boone Pickens, Harold Clark Simmons, Kirk Kerkorian, Sir James Goldsmith, Saul Steinberg and Asher Edelman. Carl Icahn developed a reputation as a ruthless corporate raider after his hostile takeover of TWA in 1985. Many of the corporate raiders were onetime clients of Michael Milken, whose investment banking firm, Drexel Burnham Lambert helped raise blind pools of capital with which corporate raiders could make a legitimate attempt to take over a company and provided high-yield debt (&quot;junk bonds&quot;) financing of the buyouts.

One of the final major buyouts of the 1980s proved to be its most ambitious and marked both a high-water mark and a sign of the beginning of the end of the boom. In 1989, KKR (Kohlberg Kravis Roberts) closed in on a $31.1 billion takeover of RJR Nabisco. It was, at that time and for over 17 years, the largest leveraged buyout in history. The event was chronicled in the book (and later the movie), &quot;Barbarians at the Gate: The Fall of RJR Nabisco&quot;. KKR would eventually prevail in acquiring RJR Nabisco at $109 per share, marking a dramatic increase from the original announcement that Shearson Lehman Hutton would take RJR Nabisco private at $75 per share. A fierce series of negotiations and horse-trading ensued which pitted KKR against Shearson and later Forstmann Little &amp; Co. Many of the major banking players of the day, including Morgan Stanley, Goldman Sachs, Salomon Brothers, and Merrill Lynch were actively involved in advising and financing the parties. After Shearson&#x27;s original bid, KKR quickly introduced a tender offer to obtain RJR Nabisco for $90 per share—a price that enabled it to proceed without the approval of RJR Nabisco&#x27;s management. RJR&#x27;s management team, working with Shearson and Salomon Brothers, submitted a bid of $112, a figure they felt certain would enable them to outflank any response by Kravis&#x27;s team. KKR&#x27;s final bid of $109, while a lower dollar figure, was ultimately accepted by the board of directors of RJR Nabisco. At $31.1 billion of transaction value, RJR Nabisco was by far the largest leveraged buyouts in history. In 2006 and 2007, a number of leveraged buyout transactions were completed that for the first time surpassed the RJR Nabisco leveraged buyout in terms of nominal purchase price. However, adjusted for inflation, none of the leveraged buyouts of the 2006–2007 period would surpass RJR Nabisco. By the end of the 1980s the excesses of the buyout market were beginning to show, with the bankruptcy of several large buyouts including Robert Campeau&#x27;s 1988 buyout of Federated Department Stores, the 1986 buyout of the Revco drug stores, Walter Industries, FEB Trucking and Eaton Leonard. Additionally, the RJR Nabisco deal was showing signs of strain, leading to a recapitalization in 1990 that involved the contribution of $1.7 billion of new equity from KKR. In the end, KKR lost $700 million on RJR.

Drexel reached an agreement with the government in which it pleaded &quot;nolo contendere&quot; (no contest) to six felonies – three counts of stock parking and three counts of stock manipulation. It also agreed to pay a fine of $650 million – at the time, the largest fine ever levied under securities laws. Milken left the firm after his own indictment in March 1989. On 13 February 1990 after being advised by United States Secretary of the Treasury Nicholas F. Brady, the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), the New York Stock Exchange and the Federal Reserve, Drexel Burnham Lambert officially filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection.

===Age of the mega-buyout: 2005–2007===

The combination of decreasing interest rates, loosening lending standards and regulatory changes for publicly traded companies (specifically the Sarbanes–Oxley Act) would set the stage for the largest boom private equity had seen. Marked by the buyout of Dex Media in 2002, large multibillion-dollar U.S. buyouts could once again obtain significant high yield debt financing, and larger transactions could be completed. By 2004 and 2005, major buyouts were once again becoming common, including the acquisitions of Toys &quot;R&quot; Us, The Hertz Corporation, Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer and SunGard in 2005.

As 2006 began, new &quot;largest buyout&quot; records were set and surpassed several times; nine of the top ten buyouts by the end of 2007 had been announced in an 18-month period from the beginning of 2006 through the middle of 2007. In 2006, private-equity firms bought 654 U.S. companies for $375 billion, representing 18 times the level of transactions closed in 2003. Additionally, U.S.-based private-equity firms raised $215.4 billion in investor commitments to 322 funds, surpassing the previous record set in 2000 by 22% and 33% higher than the 2005 fundraising total The following year, despite the onset of turmoil in the credit markets in the summer, saw yet another record year of fundraising with $302 billion of investor commitments to 415 funds Among the mega-buyouts completed during the 2006 to 2007 boom were: EQ Office, HCA, Alliance Boots and TXU.

In July 2007, the turmoil that had been affecting the mortgage markets, spilled over into the leveraged finance and high-yield debt markets. The markets had been highly robust during the first six months of 2007, with highly issuer friendly developments including PIK and PIK Toggle (interest is &quot;&quot;P&quot;ayable &quot;I&quot;n &quot;K&quot;ind&quot;) and covenant light debt widely available to finance large leveraged buyouts. July and August saw a notable slowdown in issuance levels in the high yield and leveraged loan markets with few issuers accessing the market. Uncertain market conditions led to a significant widening of yield spreads, which coupled with the typical summer slowdown led many companies and investment banks to put their plans to issue debt on hold until the autumn. However, the expected rebound in the market after 1 May 2007 did not materialize, and the lack of market confidence prevented deals from pricing. By the end of September, the full extent of the credit situation became obvious as major lenders including Citigroup and UBS AG announced major writedowns due to credit losses. The leveraged finance markets came to a near standstill during a week in 2007. As 2008 began, lending standards tightened and the era of &quot;mega-buyouts&quot; came to an end. Nevertheless, private equity continues to be a large and active asset class and the private-equity firms, with hundreds of billions of dollars of committed capital from investors are looking to deploy capital in new and different transactions.

As a result of the global financial crisis, private equity has become subject to increased regulation in Europe and is now subject, among other things, to rules preventing asset stripping of portfolio companies and requiring the notification and disclosure of information in connection with buy-out activity.

===2010 onwards: Staying private for longer===

From 2010 to 2014 KKR, Carlyle, Apollo and Ares went public. Starting from 2018 these companies converted from partnerships into corporations with more shareholder rights and the inclusion in stock indices and mutual fund portfolios. But with the increased availability and scope of funding provided by private markets, many companies are staying private simply because they can. McKinsey &amp; Company reports in its Global Private Markets Review 2018 that global private market fundraising increased by $28.2 billion from 2017, for a total of $748 billion in 2018. Thus, given the abundance of private capital available, companies no longer require public markets for sufficient funding. Benefits may include avoiding the cost of an IPO, maintaining more control of the company, and having the &#x27;legroom&#x27; to think long-term rather than focus on short-term or quarterly figures.

A new feature in the 2020s: regulated platforms which fractionalize the assets, making possible individual investments of $10,000 or less.

===2024===

Private equity deal-making in the United Kingdom surged in 2024, with total investment reaching £63 billion, just 7% below the record high of £68 billion in 2021. According to Dealogic, there were 305 private equity deals in 2024, marking a significant increase from 229 deals in 2023. The uptick in activity was driven by improving financial conditions and a rebound in investor confidence after a period of high interest rates in 2022 and 2023, which had slowed deal flow.

Notable acquisitions included:

* Hargreaves Lansdown – a £5.4 billion takeover of the FTSE 100 financial services firm.
* International Distribution Services (Royal Mail&#x27;s parent company) – acquired for £3.6 billion.
* Darktrace – a £4.2 billion acquisition by Thoma Bravo, a private equity firm specializing in technology investments.

The rapid pace of acquisitions also contributed to the decline in the number of listed companies in London, as private equity firms increasingly targeted publicly traded businesses. Research by Goldman Sachs showed that the London Stock Exchange experienced its fastest pace of shrinkage in over a decade due to private equity takeovers.

However, concerns have been raised regarding the financial health of private equity-backed companies. The Bank of England issued a warning in 2024, stating that businesses owned by private equity firms were more vulnerable to default than other large businesses. The central bank’s research found that more than 2 million people in the UK were employed by firms engaged with private equity and that these companies were responsible for 15% of all corporate debt.

Despite these risks, private equity interest in undervalued British companies has continued into 2025. As of early 2025, 19 deals worth a total of £2.9 billion have already been announced, highlighting the sector’s continued expansion. 

==Investments in private equity==
Although the capital for private equity originally came from individual investors or corporations, in the 1970s, private equity became an asset class in which various institutional investors allocated capital in the hopes of achieving risk-adjusted returns that exceed those possible in the public equity markets. In the 1980s, insurers were major private-equity investors. Later, public pension funds and university and other endowments became more significant sources of capital. For most institutional investors, private-equity investments are made as part of a broad asset allocation that includes traditional assets (e.g., public equity and bonds) and other alternative assets (e.g., hedge funds, real estate, commodities).

===Investor categories===
US, Canadian and European public and private pension schemes have invested in the asset class since the early 1980s to diversify away from their core holdings (public equity and fixed income). Today pension investment in private equity accounts for more than a third of all monies allocated to the asset class, ahead of other institutional investors such as insurance companies, endowments, and sovereign wealth funds.

===Direct versus indirect investment===
Most institutional investors do not invest directly in privately held companies, lacking the expertise and resources necessary to structure and monitor the investment. Instead, institutional investors will invest indirectly through a private equity fund. Certain institutional investors have the scale necessary to develop a diversified portfolio of private-equity funds themselves, while others will invest through a fund of funds to allow a portfolio more diversified than one a single investor could construct.

===Investment timescales===
Returns on private-equity investments are created through one or a combination of three factors that include: debt repayment or cash accumulation through cash flows from operations, operational improvements that increase earnings over the life of the investment and multiple expansion, selling the business for a higher price than was originally paid. A key component of private equity as an asset class for institutional investors is that investments are typically realized after some period of time, which will vary depending on the investment strategy. Private-equity investment returns are typically realized through one of the following avenues:
* an &quot;initial public offering&quot; (&quot;IPO&quot;) – shares of the company are offered to the public, typically providing a partial immediate realization to the financial sponsor and a public market into which it can later sell additional shares;
* a &quot;merger&quot; or &quot;acquisition&quot; – the company is sold for either cash or shares in another company;
* a &quot;recapitalization&quot; – cash is distributed to the shareholders (in this case the financial sponsor) and its private-equity funds either from cash flow generated by the company or through raising debt or other securities to fund the distribution.

Large institutional asset owners such as pension funds (with typically long-dated liabilities), insurance companies, sovereign wealth and national reserve funds have a generally low likelihood of facing liquidity shocks in the medium term, and thus can afford the required long holding periods characteristic of private-equity investment.

The median horizon for a LBO transaction is eight years.

==Liquidity in the private-equity market==

The private-equity secondary market (also often called private-equity secondaries) refers to the buying and selling of pre-existing investor commitments to private equity and other alternative investment funds. Sellers of private-equity investments sell not only the investments in the fund but also their remaining unfunded commitments to the funds. By its nature, the private-equity asset class is illiquid, intended to be a long-term investment for buy-and-hold investors. For the vast majority of private-equity investments, there is no listed public market; however, there is a robust and maturing secondary market available for sellers of private-equity assets.

Increasingly, secondaries are considered a distinct asset class with a cash flow profile that is not correlated with other private-equity investments. As a result, investors are allocating capital to secondary investments to diversify their private-equity programs. Driven by strong demand for private-equity exposure, a significant amount of capital has been committed to secondary investments from investors looking to increase and diversify their private-equity exposure.

Investors seeking access to private equity have been restricted to investments with structural impediments such as long lock-up periods, lack of transparency, unlimited leverage, concentrated holdings of illiquid securities and high investment minimums.

Secondary transactions can be generally divided into two primary categories:

=== LP Interest Secondaries (Sale of Fund Interests) ===
This is the most common type of secondary transaction, involving the sale of an investor’s interest in a private-equity fund or a portfolio of multiple fund interests. Transactions may take several forms:

* Traditional Sale – A simple transfer of limited partnership interests in one or more private equity funds. In these transactions, the buyer pays to purchase the interest and assumes any remaining unfunded commitments associated with the interest. The purchase price may be paid entirely upfront in cash or through a deferred payment plan. Often, these deferrals will be fully committed by the buyer to be paid over a period of 6 months to 2 years although. The timing of payments is often a highly negotiated part of this transaction.
* Structured Joint Ventures – A customized transaction where buyers and sellers agree on shared ownership structures, often a waterfall of distributions with various sharing between buyer and seller tied to the performance of the underlying portfolio. Typically, the purchase price, timing of payments as well as the funding of remaining unfunded commitments will also be heavily negotiated. Other variants include the Managed Fund in which the seller retains management of the portfolio in order to retain its relationships with the private equity managers in the portfolio and the buyer acquires the economic ownership of the portfolio.
* Securitization – The seller contributes fund interests into a vehicle that issues notes, generating partial liquidity.
* Early Secondaries or Late Primaries– Involves selling interests in young funds that have called less than one-third of committed capital. In some cases, secondary investors will make a primary commitment to a fund that is already substantially invested (often in excess of 35%) in order to capture an uplift in the valuation in the fund during the fundraising period. In some cases a manager may reopen the fundraising for a fund that had already had a final closing.

=== GP-Led Secondaries ===
Also known as GP-Centered, secondary directs or synthetic secondaries, these transactions involve the sale of a portfolio of direct investments in portfolio companies. Subcategories include:
* Continuation funds - The most common form of GP-led transaction in which the buyer uses a new private equity fund vehicle (the Continuation Fund) to allow a fund manager to extend the holding of one of its existing portfolio companies (Single-Asset Continuation Fund) or several existing portfolio companies (Multi-Asset Continuation Fund) from one or more existing funds. This allows the manager to maintain control of its best-performing assets while giving existing limited partners the option to receive early liquidity. Existing investors will typically have an option to re-invest their investment into the new Continuation Fund. 
* Fund Recapitalization - The buyer uses a new private equity fund vehicle (the Realization Fund) to allow a fund manager to provide liquidity to existing limited partners in a private equity fund purchasing all (or nearly all) of the remaining portfolio companies. Existing investors will typically have an option to rollover their investment into the new Realization Fund. 
* Stapled Secondaries – A secondary buyer acquires interests in an existing fund while also committing capital to a new fund being raised by the manager. In certain cases a manager will sponsor a &quot;tender offer&quot; to all of its limited partners, although this practice has waned in the 2020s with the increasing usage of continuation funds. A cornerstone secondary is a transaction in which the manager coordinates a stapled secondary from one or more of its largest existing investors, who may be choosing not to make a new commitment to the manager&#x27;s successor fund.
* Secondary Directs – The buyer purchases a portfolio of direct private-equity investments from a corporation or institution often through a newly formed private equity fund vehicle typically without an incumbent manager.
* Spinout or Synthetic Secondaries – Investors acquire interests in a newly formed limited partnership holding direct investments often to facilitatie the spinout of a captive private equity investment team from a bank, insurance company or asset management platform.

==Private-equity firms==

According to Private Equity International&#x27;s latest PEI 300 ranking, the largest private-equity firm in the world today is The Blackstone Group based on the amount of private-equity direct-investment capital raised over a five-year window.

As ranked by the PEI 300, the 15 largest private-equity firms in the world in 2024 were:

# Blackstone Inc.
# Kohlberg Kravis Roberts
# EQT AB
# CVC Capital Partners
# TPG Capital
# The Carlyle Group
# Thoma Bravo
# Advent International
# Warburg Pincus
# Hg
# Clayton, Dubilier &amp; Rice
# Silver Lake
# Hellman &amp; Friedman
# Vista Equity Partners
# General Atlantic

Because private-equity firms are continuously in the process of raising, investing and distributing their private equity funds, capital raised can often be the easiest to measure. Other metrics can include the total value of companies purchased by a firm or an estimate of the size of a firm&#x27;s active portfolio plus capital available for new investments. As with any list that focuses on size, the list does not provide any indication as to relative investment performance of these funds or managers.

Preqin, an independent data provider, ranks the 25 largest private-equity investment managers. Among the larger firms in the 2017 ranking were AlpInvest Partners, Ardian (formerly AXA Private Equity), AIG Investments, and Goldman Sachs Capital Partners. Invest Europe publishes a yearbook which analyses industry trends derived from data disclosed by over 1,300 European private-equity funds. Finally, websites such as AskIvy.net provide lists of London-based private-equity firms.

===Versus hedge funds===
The investment strategies of private-equity firms differ from those of hedge funds. Typically, private-equity investment groups are geared towards long-hold, multiple-year investment strategies in illiquid assets (whole companies, large-scale real estate projects, or other tangibles not easily converted to cash) where they have more control and influence over operations or asset management to influence their long-term returns. Hedge funds usually focus on short or medium term liquid securities which are more quickly convertible to cash, and they do not have direct control over the business or asset in which they are investing. Both private-equity firms and hedge funds often specialize in specific types of investments and transactions. Private-equity specialization is usually in specific industry sector asset management while hedge fund specialization is in industry sector risk capital management. Private-equity strategies can include wholesale purchase of a privately held company or set of assets, mezzanine financing for startup projects, growth capital investments in existing businesses or leveraged buyout of a publicly held asset converting it to private control. Finally, private-equity firms only take long positions, for short selling is not possible in this asset class.

==Private-equity funds==
Private-equity fundraising refers to the action of private-equity firms seeking capital from investors for their funds. Typically an investor will invest in a specific fund managed by a firm, becoming a limited partner in the fund, rather than an investor in the firm itself. As a result, an investor will only benefit from investments made by a firm where the investment is made from the specific fund in which it has invested.
* Fund of funds. These are private-equity funds that invest in other private-equity funds in order to provide investors with a lower risk product through exposure to a large number of vehicles often of different type and regional focus. Fund of funds accounted for 14% of global commitments made to private-equity funds in 2006.
* Individuals with substantial net worth. Substantial net worth is often required of investors by the law, since private-equity funds are generally less regulated than ordinary mutual funds. For example, in the US, most funds require potential investors to qualify as accredited investors, which requires $1 million of net worth, $200,000 of individual income, or $300,000 of joint income (with spouse) for two documented years and an expectation that such income level will continue.

As fundraising has grown over the past few years, so too has the number of investors in the average fund. In 2004, there were 26 investors in the average private-equity fund, this figure has now grown to 42 according to Preqin ltd. (formerly known as Private Equity Intelligence).

The managers of private-equity funds will also invest in their own vehicles, typically providing between 1–5% of the overall capital.

Often private-equity fund managers will employ the services of external fundraising teams known as placement agents in order to raise capital for their vehicles. The use of placement agents has grown over the past few years, with 40% of funds closed in 2006 employing their services, according to Preqin ltd. Placement agents will approach potential investors on behalf of the fund manager, and will typically take a fee of around 1% of the commitments that they are able to garner.

The amount of time that a private-equity firm spends raising capital varies depending on the level of interest among investors, which is defined by current market conditions and also the track record of previous funds raised by the firm in question. Firms can spend as little as one or two months raising capital when they are able to reach the target that they set for their funds relatively easily, often through gaining commitments from existing investors in their previous funds, or where strong past performance leads to strong levels of investor interest. Other managers may find fundraising taking considerably longer, with managers of less popular fund types finding the fundraising process more tough. It can take up to two years to raise capital, although the majority of fund managers will complete fundraising within nine months to fifteen months.

Once a fund has reached its fundraising target, it will have a final close. After this point it is not normally possible for new investors to invest in the fund, unless they were to purchase an interest in the fund on the secondary market.

===Size of the industry===
The state of the industry around the end of 2011 was as follows.

Private-equity assets under management probably exceeded $2 trillion at the end of March 2012, and funds available for investment totaled $949bn (about 47% of overall assets under management).

Approximately $246bn of private equity was invested globally in 2011, down 6% on the previous year and around two-thirds below the peak activity in 2006 and 2007. Following on from a strong start, deal activity slowed in the second half of 2011 due to concerns over the global economy and sovereign debt crisis in Europe. There was $93bn in investments during the first half of this year as the slowdown persisted into 2012. This was down a quarter on the same period in the previous year. Private-equity backed buyouts generated some 6.9% of global M&amp;A volume in 2011 and 5.9% in the first half of 2012. This was down on 7.4% in 2010 and well below the all-time high of 21% in 2006.

Global exit activity totalled $252bn in 2011, practically unchanged from the previous year, but well up on 2008 and 2009 as private-equity firms sought to take advantage of improved market conditions at the start of the year to realise investments. Exit activity however, has lost momentum following a peak of $113bn in the second quarter of 2011. TheCityUK estimates total exit activity of some $100bn in the first half of 2012, well down on the same period in the previous year.

The fund raising environment remained stable for the third year running in 2011 with $270bn in new funds raised, slightly down on the previous year&#x27;s total. Around $130bn in funds was raised in the first half of 2012, down around a fifth on the first half of 2011. The average time for funds to achieve a final close fell to 16.7 months in the first half of 2012, from 18.5 months in 2011. Private-equity funds available for investment (&quot;dry powder&quot;) totalled $949bn at the end of q1-2012, down around 6% on the previous year. Including unrealised funds in existing investments, private-equity funds under management probably totalled over $2.0 trillion.

Public pensions are a major source of capital for private-equity funds. Increasingly, sovereign wealth funds are growing as an investor class for private equity.

Private Equity was invested in 13% of the Pharma 1000 in 2021 according to Torreya with Eight Roads Ventures having the highest number of investments in this industry.

===Private-equity fund performance===
Due to limited disclosure, studying the returns to private equity is relatively difficult. Unlike mutual funds, private-equity funds need not disclose performance data. And, as they invest in private companies, it is difficult to examine the underlying investments. It is challenging to compare private-equity performance to public-equity performance, in particular because private-equity fund investments are drawn and returned over time as investments are made and subsequently realized.

An oft-cited academic paper (Kaplan and Schoar, 2005) suggests that the net-of-fees returns to PE funds are roughly comparable to the S&amp;P 500 (or even slightly under). This analysis may actually overstate the returns because it relies on voluntarily reported data and hence suffers from survivorship bias (i.e. funds that fail will not report data). One should also note that these returns are not risk-adjusted. A 2012 paper by Harris, Jenkinson and Kaplan, 2012 found that average buyout fund returns in the U.S. have actually exceeded that of public markets. These findings were supported by earlier work, using a data set from Robinson and Sensoy in 2011.

Commentators have argued that a standard methodology is needed to present an accurate picture of performance, to make individual private-equity funds comparable and so the asset class as a whole can be matched against public markets and other types of investment. It is also claimed that PE fund managers manipulate data to present themselves as strong performers, which makes it even more essential to standardize the industry.

Two other findings in Kaplan and Schoar in 2005: First, there is considerable variation in performance across PE funds. Second, unlike the mutual fund industry, there appears to be performance persistence in PE funds. That is, PE funds that perform well over one period, tend to also perform well the next period. Persistence is stronger for VC firms than for LBO firms.

The application of the Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) in certain states in the United States has made certain performance data more readily available. Specifically, FOIA has required certain public agencies to disclose private-equity performance data directly on their websites.

In the United Kingdom, the second largest market for private equity, more data has become available since the 2007 publication of the David Walker Guidelines for Disclosure and Transparency in Private Equity.

== List of private equity billionaires ==
Below is a partial list of billionaires who acquired their wealth through private equity.

==Taxes==
Income to private equity firms is primarily in the form of &quot;carried interest&quot;, typically 20% of the profits generated by investments made by the firm, and a &quot;management fee&quot;, often 2% of the principal invested in the firm by the outside investors whose money the firm holds. As a result of a tax loophole enshrined in the U.S. tax code, carried interest that accrues to private equity firms is treated as capital gains, which is taxed at a lower rate than is ordinary income. Currently, the long term capital gains tax rate is 20% compared with the 37% top ordinary income tax rate for individuals. This loophole has been estimated to cost the government $130 billion over the next decade in unrealized revenue. Armies of corporate lobbyists and huge private equity industry donations to political campaigns in the United States have ensured that this powerful industry receives this favorable tax treatment by the government. Private equity firms retain close to 200 lobbyists and over the last decade have made almost $600 million in political campaign contributions.

In addition, through an accounting maneuver called &quot;fee waiver&quot;, private equity firms often also treat management fee income as capital gains. The U.S. Internal Revenue Service (IRS) lacks the manpower and the expertise that would be necessary to track compliance with even these already quite favorable legal requirements. In fact, the IRS conducts nearly no income tax audits of the industry. As a result of the complexity of the accounting that arises from the fact that most private equity firms are organized as large partnerships, such that the firm&#x27;s profits are apportioned to each of the many partners, a number of private equity firms fail to comply with tax laws, according to industry whistleblowers.

==Debate==

===Loss of innovation and quality===
When a private equity entity invests in a company, industry or public service, there have been reports of reduced quality, both in terms of services and goods produced. While a private equity investment into a business might result in short-term improvements, such as new staff and equipment, the incentive is to maximize profits, not necessarily the quality of products or services. Over time, cost-cutting has also been common, and deferring further investments. Private equity investors may also be incentivized to make short-term gains by selling a company once a certain level of profitability is achieved or simply selling off its assets if that is not possible. Both of these situations, and others, can result in a loss of innovation and quality.

===Recording private equity===
There is a debate around the distinction between private equity and foreign direct investment (FDI), and whether to treat them separately. The difference is blurred on account of private equity not entering the country through the stock market. Private equity generally flows to unlisted firms and to firms where the percentage of shares is smaller than the promoter- or investor-held shares (also known as free-floating shares). The main point of contention is that FDI is used solely for production, whereas in the case of private equity the investor can reclaim their money after a revaluation period and make investments in other financial assets. At present, most countries report private equity as a part of FDI.

===Healthcare investments===
Private-equity investments in health care and related services, such as nursing homes and hospitals, have decreased the quality of care while driving up costs. Researchers at the Becker Friedman Institute of the University of Chicago found that private-equity ownership of nursing homes increased the short-term mortality of Medicare patients by 10%. Treatment by private-equity owned health care providers tends to be associated with a higher rate of &quot;surprise bills&quot;. Private equity ownership of dermatology practices has led to pressure to increase profitability, concerns about up-charging and patient safety. In a large 2024 study of 51 private equity–acquired hospitals matched with 250 controls, the former had a 25% increase in hospital-acquired conditions, like falls and central line-associated bloodstream infections.

===Wealth capture===
According to conservative Oren Cass, private equity captures wealth rather than creating it, and this capture can be &quot;zero-sum, or even value-destroying, in aggregate.&quot; He describes &quot;assets get shuffled and reshuffled, profits get made, but relatively little flows toward actual productive uses.&quot;

===Influence on inequality===
&quot;Bloomberg Businessweek&quot; states that:PE may contribute to inequality in several ways. First, it offers investors higher returns than those available in public stocks and bonds markets. Yet, to enjoy those returns, it helps to already be rich. Private-equity funds are open solely to &quot;qualified&quot; (read: high-net-worth) individual investors and to institutions such as endowments. Only some workers get indirect exposure via pension funds. Second, PE puts pressure on the lower end of the wealth divide. Companies can be broken up, merged, or generally restructured to increase efficiency and productivity, which inevitably means job cuts.

==See also==
* Common ordinary equity
* History of private equity and venture capital
* Holding company
* List of private equity owned companies that have filed for bankruptcy
* Private equity fund
* Private investment in public equity
* Publicly traded private equity
* Specialized investment fund
* Search fund
* Enshittification

===Organizations===
* Institutional Limited Partners Association – advocacy organization for investors in private equity
* American Investment Council – advocacy and research organization for the industry

==References==
==Further reading==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* Private Inequity by James Surowiecki, The Financial Page, &quot;The New Yorker&quot;, 30 January 2012.
* 

==External links==
* Archive of articles on private equity controversies in the 21-st century, &quot;Naked Capitalism&quot;.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q476115" start="0" end="14" title="Private equity" label="Private equity"/>
<link wikidata="Q476115" start="16" end="18" title="Private equity" label="PE"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196314" start="23" end="28" title="stock" label="stock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1589009" start="34" end="49" title="private company" label="private company"/>
<link wikidata="Q43015" start="115" end="122" title="finance" label="finance"/>
<link wikidata="Q4201895" start="173" end="188" title="investment fund" label="investment fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q909695" start="194" end="213" title="limited partnership" label="limited partnership"/>
<link wikidata="Q8137" start="437" end="444" title="capital (economics)" label="capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q5418962" start="523" end="542" title="private equity firm" label="private equity firm"/>
<link wikidata="Q219409" start="547" end="562" title="venture capital" label="venture capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q778274" start="575" end="589" title="angel investor" label="angel investor"/>
<link wikidata="Q823288" start="759" end="774" title="working capital" label="working capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q2670999" start="1077" end="1096" title="investment strategy" label="investment strategy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11832699" start="1103" end="1111" title="illiquid" label="illiquid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058381" start="1293" end="1309" title="leveraged buyout" label="leveraged buyout"/>
<link wikidata="Q14864997" start="1550" end="1568" title="investment management" label="investment manager"/>
<link wikidata="Q105611" start="1648" end="1659" title="hedge funds" label="hedge funds"/>
<link wikidata="Q182103" start="1661" end="1674" title="pension funds" label="pension funds"/>
<link wikidata="Q2620430" start="1687" end="1697" title="financial endowment" label="endowments"/>
<link wikidata="Q4201895" start="1826" end="1841" title="investment fund" label="investment fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q5532381" start="1885" end="1900" title="general partner" label="general partner"/>
<link wikidata="Q909695" start="1945" end="1961" title="limited partnership" label="limited partners"/>
<link wikidata="Q850210" start="2451" end="2458" title="Revenue" label="Revenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187906" start="2469" end="2475" title="Profit margin" label="Margin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5322573" start="2500" end="2506" title="Earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization" label="EBITDA"/>
<link wikidata="Q9297784" start="2518" end="2532" title="Free cash flow" label="Free cash flow"/>
<link wikidata="Q127473" start="2562" end="2580" title="Price–earnings ratio" label="Valuation multiple"/>
<link wikidata="Q5324590" start="2605" end="2630" title="EV/Ebitda" label="Enterprise Value / EBITDA"/>
<link wikidata="Q188628" start="3008" end="3026" title="Board of directors" label="Board of Directors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148384" start="3102" end="3116" title="Leverage (finance)" label="debt financing"/>
<link wikidata="Q591174" start="3171" end="3187" title="return on equity" label="return on equity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058381" start="4197" end="4213" title="leveraged buyout" label="leveraged buyout"/>
<link wikidata="Q3024792" start="4215" end="4236" title="distressed securities" label="distressed securities"/>
<link wikidata="Q219409" start="4238" end="4253" title="venture capital" label="venture capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q2937377" start="4255" end="4269" title="growth capital" label="growth capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755898" start="4275" end="4292" title="mezzanine capital" label="mezzanine capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q681615" start="4798" end="4807" title="syndicate" label="syndicate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148384" start="5327" end="5345" title="leverage (finance)" label="financial leverage"/>
<link wikidata="Q2025903" start="5426" end="5445" title="operating cash flow" label="operating cash flow"/>
<link wikidata="Q60739868" start="5639" end="5658" title="bolt-on acquisition" label="bolt-on acquisition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058381" start="5735" end="5752" title="Leveraged buyouts" label="Leveraged buyouts"/>
<link wikidata="Q5449752" start="5763" end="5780" title="financial sponsor" label="financial sponsor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7049573" start="6076" end="6088" title="Nonrecourse debt" label="non-recourse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163221" start="6650" end="6666" title="return on assets" label="return on assets"/>
<link wikidata="Q22687" start="6936" end="6943" title="bank" label="lenders"/>
<link wikidata="Q5449752" start="6985" end="7002" title="financial sponsor" label="financial sponsor"/>
<link wikidata="Q205179" start="7093" end="7098" title="interest coverage ratio" label="cover"/>
<link wikidata="Q794134" start="7655" end="7668" title="due diligence" label="due diligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1004322" start="7967" end="7978" title="bull market" label="bull market"/>
<link wikidata="Q5035701" start="8236" end="8259" title="capital gains tax in the United States" label="capital gains tax rates"/>
<link wikidata="Q17141694" start="8303" end="8318" title="ordinary income" label="ordinary income"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756052" start="8634" end="8654" title="Syndicated loan" label="syndicating the loan"/>
<link wikidata="Q624028" start="8688" end="8707" title="credit default swap" label="credit default swap"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108930" start="8727" end="8758" title="Collateralized debt obligation" label="collateralised debt obligations"/>
<link wikidata="Q2937377" start="9485" end="9499" title="Growth capital" label="Growth capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337875" start="10457" end="10471" title="financial risk" label="financial risk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148384" start="10730" end="10748" title="leverage (finance)" label="leverage (or debt)"/>
<link wikidata="Q46834" start="10772" end="10785" title="balance sheet" label="balance sheet"/>
<link wikidata="Q456272" start="10790" end="10825" title="private investment in public equity" label="private investment in public equity"/>
<link wikidata="Q891723" start="10891" end="10914" title="publicly traded company" label="publicly traded company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056625" start="10969" end="10980" title="Convertible bond" label="convertible"/>
<link wikidata="Q622588" start="10984" end="10993" title="preferred stock" label="preferred"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755898" start="11257" end="11274" title="Mezzanine capital" label="Mezzanine capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138875" start="11285" end="11302" title="subordinated debt" label="subordinated debt"/>
<link wikidata="Q622588" start="11306" end="11322" title="Preferred stock" label="preferred equity"/>
<link wikidata="Q950816" start="11399" end="11416" title="capital structure" label="capital structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1081659" start="11454" end="11467" title="Common stock" label="common equity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050279" start="11722" end="11739" title="high-yield debt" label="high yield market"/>
<link wikidata="Q129238" start="12681" end="12698" title="Startup company" label="startup companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914988" start="13570" end="13589" title="capital requirement" label="capital requirement"/>
<link wikidata="Q3196867" start="13648" end="13652" title="debt" label="debt"/>
<link wikidata="Q466410" start="13730" end="13740" title="high-tech" label="technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q31207" start="13742" end="13752" title="healthcare" label="healthcare"/>
<link wikidata="Q7108" start="13757" end="13770" title="biotechnology" label="biotechnology"/>
<link wikidata="Q5340806" start="13947" end="13956" title="Portfolio (finance)" label="portfolio"/>
<link wikidata="Q169489" start="14375" end="14385" title="securities" label="securities"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376796" start="14735" end="14758" title="corporate restructuring" label="corporate restructuring"/>
<link wikidata="Q105611" start="15091" end="15101" title="hedge fund" label="hedge fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q601401" start="15125" end="15132" title="trading" label="trading"/>
<link wikidata="Q189539" start="15137" end="15147" title="loan" label="loans held"/>
<link wikidata="Q11693" start="15156" end="15168" title="Bond (finance)" label="bonds issued"/>
<link wikidata="Q5978114" start="15357" end="15376" title="private equity fund" label="private equity fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q1589009" start="15426" end="15450" title="privately held company" label="privately held companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1665188" start="15507" end="15529" title="institutional investor" label="institutional investor"/>
<link wikidata="Q827009" start="15633" end="15645" title="buy and hold" label="buy and hold"/>
<link wikidata="Q373486" start="15929" end="15936" title="J curve" label="j-curve"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156684" start="16086" end="16099" title="fund of funds" label="fund of funds"/>
<link wikidata="Q121359" start="16856" end="16870" title="Infrastructure" label="Infrastructure"/>
<link wikidata="Q2151621" start="17092" end="17098" title="Energy industry" label="Energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2316331" start="17103" end="17108" title="Electric power industry" label="Power"/>
<link wikidata="Q1921438" start="17383" end="17396" title="Merchant bank" label="Merchant bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156684" start="17545" end="17558" title="Fund of funds" label="Fund of funds"/>
<link wikidata="Q7441676" start="18103" end="18114" title="Search fund" label="Search fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q7441676" start="18118" end="18129" title="search fund" label="search fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q16944999" start="18418" end="18430" title="Royalty fund" label="Royalty fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q16944999" start="18583" end="18595" title="royalty fund" label="royalty fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q15506402" start="18938" end="18969" title="private-equity secondary market" label="private-equity secondary market"/>
<link wikidata="Q2662418" start="19284" end="19329" title="American Research and Development Corporation" label="American Research and Development Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6104119" start="19341" end="19367" title="J.H. Whitney &amp;amp; Company" label="J.H. Whitney &amp;amp; Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q2442802" start="19606" end="19628" title="Carnegie Steel Company" label="Carnegie Steel Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q3102626" start="19702" end="19716" title="Georges Doriot" label="Georges Doriot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136829" start="19804" end="19810" title="INSEAD" label="INSEAD"/>
<link wikidata="Q591763" start="19875" end="19889" title="private sector" label="private sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q690079" start="20077" end="20106" title="Digital Equipment Corporation" label="Digital Equipment Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q507477" start="20259" end="20284" title="internal rate of return" label="annualized rate of return"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096013" start="20357" end="20380" title="Fairchild Semiconductor" label="Fairchild Semiconductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7920201" start="20494" end="20512" title="Venrock Associates" label="Venrock Associates"/>
<link wikidata="Q773543" start="20611" end="20634" title="Malcom McLean" label="McLean Industries, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q1014026" start="20638" end="20668" title="Pan-Atlantic Steamship Company" label="Pan-Atlantic Steamship Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q7974337" start="20689" end="20719" title="Waterman Steamship Corporation" label="Waterman Steamship Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q622588" start="20853" end="20868" title="preferred stock" label="preferred stock"/>
<link wikidata="Q7102943" start="21018" end="21045" title="Orkin" label="Orkin Exterminating Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q891723" start="21171" end="21186" title="publicly traded" label="publicly traded"/>
<link wikidata="Q47213" start="21353" end="21367" title="Warren Buffett" label="Warren Buffett"/>
<link wikidata="Q217583" start="21369" end="21387" title="Berkshire Hathaway" label="Berkshire Hathaway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7926249" start="21393" end="21406" title="Victor Posner" label="Victor Posner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2559267" start="21408" end="21423" title="Triarc" label="DWG Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6990685" start="21446" end="21458" title="Nelson Peltz" label="Nelson Peltz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2559267" start="21460" end="21466" title="Triarc" label="Triarc"/>
<link wikidata="Q7427342" start="21469" end="21483" title="Saul Steinberg (business)" label="Saul Steinberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q5553024" start="21509" end="21523" title="Gerry Schwartz" label="Gerry Schwartz"/>
<link wikidata="Q907435" start="21525" end="21541" title="Onex Corporation" label="Onex Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058381" start="21827" end="21843" title="leveraged buyout" label="leveraged buyout"/>
<link wikidata="Q1687749" start="21974" end="21993" title="Jerome Kohlberg Jr." label="Jerome Kohlberg Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q933721" start="22016" end="22028" title="Henry Kravis" label="Henry Kravis"/>
<link wikidata="Q813018" start="22042" end="22054" title="Bear Stearns" label="Bear Stearns"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508188" start="22119" end="22133" title="George R. Roberts" label="George Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q813018" start="22481" end="22493" title="Bear Stearns" label="Bear Stearns"/>
<link wikidata="Q813018" start="22795" end="22807" title="Bear Stearns" label="Bear Stearns"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570773" start="22889" end="22912" title="Kohlberg Kravis Roberts" label="Kohlberg Kravis Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q4215834" start="22987" end="23026" title="United States Secretary of the Treasury" label="United States Secretary of the Treasury"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006144" start="23027" end="23043" title="William E. Simon" label="William E. Simon"/>
<link wikidata="Q464767" start="23078" end="23094" title="Gibson Greetings" label="Gibson Greetings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134741" start="23704" end="23718" title="corporate raid" label="corporate raid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416898" start="23802" end="23818" title="hostile takeover" label="hostile takeover"/>
<link wikidata="Q3894831" start="23845" end="23860" title="asset stripping" label="asset stripping"/>
<link wikidata="Q981479" start="24020" end="24030" title="Carl Icahn" label="Carl Icahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7926249" start="24032" end="24045" title="Victor Posner" label="Victor Posner"/>
<link wikidata="Q6990685" start="24047" end="24059" title="Nelson Peltz" label="Nelson Peltz"/>
<link wikidata="Q429075" start="24061" end="24075" title="Robert Bass" label="Robert M. Bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q370092" start="24077" end="24093" title="T. Boone Pickens" label="T. Boone Pickens"/>
<link wikidata="Q5662387" start="24095" end="24115" title="Harold Clark Simmons" label="Harold Clark Simmons"/>
<link wikidata="Q356068" start="24117" end="24131" title="Kirk Kerkorian" label="Kirk Kerkorian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3090082" start="24133" end="24152" title="Sir James Goldsmith" label="Sir James Goldsmith"/>
<link wikidata="Q7427342" start="24154" end="24168" title="Saul Steinberg (business)" label="Saul Steinberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q4804833" start="24173" end="24186" title="Asher Edelman" label="Asher Edelman"/>
<link wikidata="Q981479" start="24188" end="24198" title="Carl Icahn" label="Carl Icahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134741" start="24236" end="24250" title="corporate raid" label="corporate raid"/>
<link wikidata="Q527341" start="24283" end="24286" title="Trans World Airlines" label="TWA"/>
<link wikidata="Q918376" start="24350" end="24364" title="Michael Milken" label="Michael Milken"/>
<link wikidata="Q177404" start="24397" end="24419" title="Drexel Burnham Lambert" label="Drexel Burnham Lambert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050279" start="24553" end="24568" title="high-yield debt" label="high-yield debt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570773" start="24797" end="24820" title="Kohlberg Kravis Roberts" label="Kohlberg Kravis Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q3294930" start="24863" end="24874" title="RJR Nabisco" label="RJR Nabisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q4859461" start="25027" end="25049" title="Barbarians at the Gate" label="Barbarians at the Gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q17110160" start="25219" end="25241" title="Shearson Lehman Hutton" label="Shearson Lehman Hutton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570773" start="25361" end="25364" title="Kohlberg Kravis Roberts" label="KKR"/>
<link wikidata="Q5470639" start="25392" end="25418" title="Forstmann Little &amp;amp; Co." label="Forstmann Little &amp;amp; Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q334204" start="25475" end="25489" title="Morgan Stanley" label="Morgan Stanley"/>
<link wikidata="Q193326" start="25491" end="25504" title="Goldman Sachs" label="Goldman Sachs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2034767" start="25506" end="25522" title="Salomon Brothers" label="Salomon Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q334122" start="25528" end="25541" title="Merrill Lynch" label="Merrill Lynch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7342727" start="26656" end="26670" title="Robert Campeau" label="Robert Campeau"/>
<link wikidata="Q5479360" start="26693" end="26720" title="Federated Department Stores" label="Federated Department Stores"/>
<link wikidata="Q17157089" start="26745" end="26750" title="Revco" label="Revco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1733896" start="27105" end="27120" title="nolo contendere" label="nolo contendere"/>
<link wikidata="Q400707" start="27208" end="27226" title="stock manipulation" label="stock manipulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q723444" start="27484" end="27501" title="Nicholas F. Brady" label="Nicholas F. Brady"/>
<link wikidata="Q953944" start="27507" end="27546" title="U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission" label="U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q13677" start="27558" end="27581" title="New York Stock Exchange" label="New York Stock Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q53536" start="27590" end="27605" title="Federal Reserve" label="Federal Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062835" start="27651" end="27661" title="Chapter 11" label="Chapter 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q856418" start="27872" end="27890" title="Sarbanes–Oxley Act" label="Sarbanes–Oxley Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q14914829" start="27982" end="27991" title="Dex Media" label="Dex Media"/>
<link wikidata="Q696334" start="28242" end="28263" title="Toys &amp;quot;R&amp;quot; Us" label="Toys &amp;quot;R&amp;quot; Us"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543874" start="28265" end="28286" title="The Hertz Corporation" label="The Hertz Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q179200" start="28288" end="28307" title="Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer" label="Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q336105" start="28312" end="28319" title="SunGard" label="SunGard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347873" start="29158" end="29167" title="EQ Office" label="EQ Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q1630431" start="29169" end="29172" title="Hospital Corporation of America" label="HCA"/>
<link wikidata="Q676238" start="29174" end="29188" title="Alliance Boots" label="Alliance Boots"/>
<link wikidata="Q30141858" start="29193" end="29196" title="TXU Energy" label="TXU"/>
<link wikidata="Q844541" start="29253" end="29269" title="Subprime mortgage crisis" label="mortgage markets"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969070" start="29463" end="29481" title="PIK loan" label="PIK and PIK Toggle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5178875" start="29564" end="29578" title="Cov-lite" label="covenant light"/>
<link wikidata="Q219508" start="30254" end="30263" title="Citigroup" label="Citigroup"/>
<link wikidata="Q193199" start="30268" end="30274" title="UBS AG" label="UBS AG"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570773" start="31123" end="31126" title="Kohlberg Kravis Roberts" label="KKR"/>
<link wikidata="Q926806" start="31128" end="31135" title="The Carlyle Group" label="Carlyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q619121" start="31137" end="31143" title="Apollo Global Management" label="Apollo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4789079" start="31148" end="31152" title="Ares Management" label="Ares"/>
<link wikidata="Q310207" start="31485" end="31507" title="McKinsey &amp;amp; Company" label="McKinsey &amp;amp; Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q5245924" start="32323" end="32331" title="Dealogic" label="Dealogic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3127437" start="32657" end="32676" title="Hargreaves Lansdown" label="Hargreaves Lansdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q121076325" start="32746" end="32781" title="International Distribution Services" label="International Distribution Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q27907429" start="32848" end="32857" title="Darktrace" label="Darktrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q7786759" start="32890" end="32901" title="Thoma Bravo" label="Thoma Bravo"/>
<link wikidata="Q193326" start="33160" end="33173" title="Goldman Sachs" label="Goldman Sachs"/>
<link wikidata="Q183231" start="33411" end="33426" title="Bank of England" label="Bank of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1665188" start="34208" end="34230" title="institutional investor" label="institutional investor"/>
<link wikidata="Q475000" start="34332" end="34353" title="stock market" label="public equity markets"/>
<link wikidata="Q8137" start="34669" end="34682" title="capital stock" label="public equity"/>
<link wikidata="Q11693" start="34687" end="34692" title="Bond (finance)" label="bonds"/>
<link wikidata="Q4736525" start="34704" end="34722" title="alternative assets" label="alternative assets"/>
<link wikidata="Q105611" start="34730" end="34740" title="hedge fund" label="hedge fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q317088" start="34756" end="34767" title="Commodity" label="commodities"/>
<link wikidata="Q731453" start="34916" end="34925" title="Diversification (finance)" label="diversify"/>
<link wikidata="Q18387515" start="34996" end="35032" title="pension investment in private equity" label="pension investment in private equity"/>
<link wikidata="Q557715" start="35095" end="35106" title="asset class" label="asset class"/>
<link wikidata="Q1589009" start="35312" end="35336" title="privately held companies" label="privately held companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1665188" start="35434" end="35456" title="institutional investor" label="institutional investor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5978114" start="35491" end="35510" title="private equity fund" label="private equity fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q1665188" start="35520" end="35542" title="institutional investor" label="institutional investor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156684" start="35675" end="35688" title="fund of funds" label="fund of funds"/>
<link wikidata="Q185142" start="36462" end="36485" title="initial public offering" label="initial public offering"/>
<link wikidata="Q731112" start="36716" end="36722" title="merger" label="merger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416898" start="36738" end="36749" title="Takeover" label="acquisition"/>
<link wikidata="Q5978114" start="36944" end="36963" title="private-equity fund" label="private-equity fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q15506402" start="38208" end="38219" title="private equity secondary market" label="secondaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q7246075" start="43378" end="43413" title="Private Equity International" label="Private Equity International&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q880942" start="43492" end="43512" title="The Blackstone Group" label="The Blackstone Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q880942" start="43702" end="43717" title="Blackstone Inc." label="Blackstone Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q1570773" start="43720" end="43743" title="Kohlberg Kravis Roberts" label="Kohlberg Kravis Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275733" start="43746" end="43752" title="EQT AB" label="EQT AB"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024566" start="43755" end="43775" title="CVC Capital Partners" label="CVC Capital Partners"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164606" start="43778" end="43789" title="TPG Capital" label="TPG Capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q926806" start="43792" end="43809" title="The Carlyle Group" label="The Carlyle Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q7786759" start="43812" end="43823" title="Thoma Bravo" label="Thoma Bravo"/>
<link wikidata="Q379801" start="43826" end="43846" title="Advent International" label="Advent International"/>
<link wikidata="Q1300943" start="43849" end="43863" title="Warburg Pincus" label="Warburg Pincus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5750082" start="43866" end="43868" title="Hg (equity firm)" label="Hg"/>
<link wikidata="Q5130145" start="43871" end="43899" title="Clayton, Dubilier &amp;amp; Rice" label="Clayton, Dubilier &amp;amp; Rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1676442" start="43902" end="43913" title="Silver Lake (investment firm)" label="Silver Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1602889" start="43916" end="43938" title="Hellman &amp;amp; Friedman" label="Hellman &amp;amp; Friedman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7936440" start="43941" end="43962" title="Vista Equity Partners" label="Vista Equity Partners"/>
<link wikidata="Q5531717" start="43965" end="43981" title="General Atlantic" label="General Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6634956" start="43991" end="44011" title="List of private-equity firms" label="private-equity firms"/>
<link wikidata="Q5978114" start="44089" end="44108" title="private equity fund" label="private equity fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q16967684" start="44490" end="44496" title="Preqin" label="Preqin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156684" start="44538" end="44583" title="Private equity fund of funds" label="25 largest private-equity investment managers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3143770" start="44633" end="44651" title="AlpInvest Partners" label="AlpInvest Partners"/>
<link wikidata="Q15214965" start="44653" end="44659" title="Ardian (company)" label="Ardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q212235" start="44691" end="44706" title="AIG" label="AIG Investments"/>
<link wikidata="Q17109141" start="44712" end="44742" title="Goldman Sachs Capital Partners" label="Goldman Sachs Capital Partners"/>
<link wikidata="Q25054114" start="44744" end="44757" title="Invest Europe" label="Invest Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q105611" start="45069" end="45079" title="hedge fund" label="hedge fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755898" start="46011" end="46030" title="Mezzanine capital" label="mezzanine financing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2937377" start="46053" end="46067" title="growth capital" label="growth capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058381" start="46106" end="46122" title="leveraged buyout" label="leveraged buyout"/>
<link wikidata="Q1869502" start="46222" end="46236" title="Long (finance)" label="long positions"/>
<link wikidata="Q106526" start="46242" end="46255" title="Short (finance)" label="short selling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156684" start="46750" end="46763" title="Fund of funds" label="Fund of funds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933764" start="47108" end="47117" title="net worth" label="net worth"/>
<link wikidata="Q791974" start="47254" end="47265" title="mutual fund" label="mutual fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q4218461" start="47345" end="47364" title="accredited investor" label="accredited investor"/>
<link wikidata="Q16967684" start="47783" end="47789" title="Preqin" label="Preqin"/>
<link wikidata="Q741435" start="49674" end="49697" title="assets under management" label="assets under management"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061648" start="51781" end="51803" title="sovereign wealth funds" label="sovereign wealth funds"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="51946" end="51966" title="Eight Roads Ventures" label="Eight Roads Ventures"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919077" start="52847" end="52864" title="survivorship bias" label="survivorship bias"/>
<link wikidata="Q25113630" start="54046" end="54072" title="Freedom of Information Act" label="Freedom of Information Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q5240781" start="54440" end="54452" title="David Walker (chairman)" label="David Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045036" start="54724" end="54740" title="carried interest" label="carried interest"/>
<link wikidata="Q7062508" start="54832" end="54846" title="management fee" label="management fee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7689411" start="54971" end="54983" title="tax loophole" label="tax loophole"/>
<link wikidata="Q5035701" start="55084" end="55097" title="capital gains tax in the United States" label="capital gains"/>
<link wikidata="Q17141694" start="55138" end="55153" title="ordinary income" label="ordinary income"/>
<link wikidata="Q5027774" start="55454" end="55486" title="Campaign finance in the United States" label="donations to political campaigns"/>
<link wikidata="Q6663608" start="55647" end="55656" title="lobbying in the United States" label="lobbyists"/>
<link wikidata="Q973587" start="55912" end="55936" title="Internal Revenue Service" label="Internal Revenue Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q6015087" start="56120" end="56136" title="income tax audit" label="income tax audit"/>
<link wikidata="Q112983147" start="56462" end="56475" title="whistleblower" label="whistleblower"/>
<link wikidata="Q490513" start="57383" end="57408" title="foreign direct investment" label="foreign direct investment"/>
<link wikidata="Q283747" start="57722" end="57742" title="free float" label="free-floating shares"/>
<link wikidata="Q4878662" start="58243" end="58268" title="Becker Friedman Institute for Research in Economics" label="Becker Friedman Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q131252" start="58276" end="58297" title="University of Chicago" label="University of Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q190404" start="58855" end="58900" title="central line-associated bloodstream infection" label="central line-associated bloodstream infection"/>
<link wikidata="Q96318752" start="58951" end="58960" title="Oren Cass" label="Oren Cass"/>
<link wikidata="Q5153585" start="59947" end="59969" title="Common ordinary equity" label="Common ordinary equity"/>
<link wikidata="Q16843692" start="59972" end="60017" title="History of private equity and venture capital" label="History of private equity and venture capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q219577" start="60020" end="60035" title="Holding company" label="Holding company"/>
<link wikidata="Q130660975" start="60038" end="60107" title="List of private equity owned companies that have filed for bankruptcy" label="List of private equity owned companies that have filed for bankruptcy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5978114" start="60110" end="60129" title="Private equity fund" label="Private equity fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q456272" start="60132" end="60167" title="Private investment in public equity" label="Private investment in public equity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7258078" start="60170" end="60200" title="Publicly traded private equity" label="Publicly traded private equity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1237310" start="60203" end="60230" title="Specialized investment fund" label="Specialized investment fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q7441676" start="60233" end="60244" title="Search fund" label="Search fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q122584861" start="60247" end="60263" title="Enshittification" label="Enshittification"/>
<link wikidata="Q6041161" start="60287" end="60329" title="Institutional Limited Partners Association" label="Institutional Limited Partners Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q7246076" start="60388" end="60415" title="American Investment Council" label="American Investment Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q217305" start="60593" end="60607" title="The New Yorker" label="The New Yorker"/>
<link wikidata="Q6960453" start="60737" end="60753" title="Naked Capitalism" label="Naked Capitalism"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="191282" wikidata="Q605624" url="?curid=191282" title="Coandă effect">
<text>The Coandă effect ( or ) is the tendency of a fluid jet to stay attached to a surface of any form. &quot;Merriam-Webster&quot; describes it as &quot;the tendency of a jet of fluid emerging from an orifice to follow an adjacent flat or curved surface and to entrain fluid from the surroundings so that a region of lower pressure develops.&quot;

It is named after Romanian inventor Henri Coandă, who was the first to recognize the practical application of the phenomenon in aircraft design around 1910. It was first documented explicitly in two patents issued in 1936.

==Discovery==
An early description of this phenomenon was provided by Thomas Young in a lecture given to The Royal Society in 2025:

Eight years later, Henri Coandă identified an application of the effect during experiments with his Coandă-1910 aircraft, which mounted an unusual engine he designed. The motor-driven turbine pushed hot air rearward, and Coandă noticed that the airflow was attracted to nearby surfaces. In 1934, Coandă obtained a patent in France for a &quot;method and apparatus for deviation of a fluid into another fluid&quot;. The effect was described as the &quot;deviation of a plain jet of a fluid that penetrates another fluid in the vicinity of a convex wall&quot;. The first official documents that explicitly mention the Coandă effect were two 1936 patents by Henri Coandă. This name was accepted by the leading aerodynamicist Theodore von Kármán, who had a long scientific relationship with Coandă on aerodynamics problems.

==Mechanism==


A free jet of air entrains molecules of air from its immediate surroundings causing an axisymmetrical &quot;tube&quot; or &quot;sleeve&quot; of low pressure around the jet (see Diagram 1). The resultant forces from this low pressure tube end up balancing any perpendicular flow instability, which stabilises the jet in a straight line. However, if a solid surface is placed close, and approximately parallel to the jet (Diagram 2), then the entrainment (and therefore removal) of air from between the solid surface and the jet causes a reduction in air pressure on that side of the jet that cannot be balanced as rapidly as the low pressure region on the &quot;open&quot; side of the jet. The pressure difference across the jet causes the jet to deviate towards the nearby surface, and then to adhere to it (Diagram 3). The jet adheres even better to curved surfaces (Diagram 4), because each (infinitesimally small) incremental change in direction of the surface brings about the effects described for the initial bending of the jet towards the surface. If the surface is not too sharply curved, the jet can, under the right circumstances, adhere to the surface even after flowing 180° around a cylindrically curved surface, and thus travel in a direction opposite to its initial direction. The forces that cause these changes in the direction of flow of the jet cause an equal and opposite force on the surface along which the jet flows. These Coandă effect induced forces can be harnessed to cause lift and other forms of motion, depending on the orientation of the jet and the surface to which the jet adheres. A small surface &quot;lip&quot; at the point where the jet starts to flow over that surface (Diagram 5) increases the initial deviation of the jet flow direction. This results from the fact that a low pressure vortex forms behind the lip, promoting the dip towards the surface.

The Coandă effect can be induced in any fluid, and is therefore equally effective in water and air. A heated airfoil significantly reduces drag.

== Existence conditions ==

Early sources provide theoretical and experimental information needed to derive a detailed explanation of the effect. The Coandă effect may occur along a curved wall either in a &quot;free-&quot; or &quot;wall-jet&quot;.

On the left image of the preceding section: &quot;The mechanism of Coandă effect&quot;, the effect as described, in the terms of T. Young as &quot;the lateral pressure which eases the inflection of a current of air near an obstacle&quot;, represents a &quot;free jet&quot; emerging from an orifice and an obstacle in the surroundings. It includes the tendency of a free jet emerging from an orifice to entrain fluid from the surroundings confined with limited access, without developing any region of lower pressure when there is no obstacle in the surroundings, as is the case on the opposite side where turbulent mixing occurs at ambient pressure.

On the right image, the effect occurs along the curved wall as a &quot;wall jet&quot;. The image here on the right represents a &quot;two dimensional wall jet&quot; between two parallel plane walls, where the &quot;obstacle&quot; is a quarter cylindrical portion following the flat horizontal rectangular orifice, so that no fluid at all is entrained from the surroundings along the wall, but only on the opposite side in turbulent mixing with ambient air.

===Wall jet===
To compare experiment with a theoretical model, a two-dimensional plane wall jet of width () along a circular wall of radius (&quot;&quot;) is referred to. A wall jet follows a flat horizontal wall, say of infinite radius, or rather whose radius is the radius of the Earth without separation because the surface pressure as well as the external pressure in the mixing zone is everywhere equal to the atmospheric pressure and the boundary layer does not separate from the wall.

With a much smaller radius (12 centimeters in the image on the right) a transverse difference arises between external and wall surface pressures of the jet, creating a pressure gradient depending upon , the relative curvature. This pressure gradient can appear in a zone before and after the origin of the jet where it gradually arises, and disappear at the point where the jet boundary layer separates from the wall, where the wall pressure reaches atmospheric pressure (and the transverse gradient becomes zero).

Experiments made in 1956 with turbulent air jets at a Reynolds number of 106 at various jet widths () show the pressures measured along a circularly curved wall radius () at a series of horizontal distance from the origin of the jet (see the diagram on the right).

Above a critical ratio of 0.5 only local effects at the origin of the jet are seen extending over a small angle of 18° along the curved wall. The jet then immediately separates from the curved wall. A Coandă effect is therefore not seen here but only a local attachment: a pressure smaller than atmospheric pressure appears on the wall along a distance corresponding to a small angle of 9°, followed by an equal angle of 9° where this pressure increases up to atmospheric pressure at the separation of the boundary layer, subject to this positive longitudinal gradient. However, if the ratio is smaller than the critical value of 0.5, the lower than ambient pressure measured on the wall seen at the origin of the jet continues along the wall (until the wall ends; see diagram on the right). This is &quot;a true Coandă effect&quot; as the jet clings to the wall &quot;at a nearly constant pressure&quot; as in a conventional wall jet.

A calculation made by Woods in 1954 of an inviscid flow along a circular wall shows that an inviscid solution exists with any curvature and any given deflection angle up to a separation point on the wall, where a singular point appears with an infinite slope of the surface pressure curve.
Introducing in the calculation the angle at separation found in the preceding experiments for each value of the relative curvature , the image here was recently obtained, and shows inertial effects represented by the inviscid solution: the calculated pressure field is similar to the experimental one described above, outside the nozzle. The flow curvature is caused exclusively by the transverse pressure gradient, as described by T. Young. Then, viscosity only produces a boundary layer along the wall and turbulent mixing with ambient air as in a conventional wall jet—except that this boundary layer separates under the action of the difference between the finally ambient pressure and a smaller surface pressure along the wall. According to Van Dyke, as quoted in Lift, the derivation of his equation (4c) also shows that the contribution of viscous stress to flow turning is negligible.

An alternative way would be to calculate the deflection angle at which the boundary layer subjected to the inviscid pressure field separates. A rough calculation has been tried that gives the separation angle as a function of and the Reynolds number: The results are reported on the image, e.g., 54° calculated instead of 60° measured for = 0.25. More experiments and a more accurate boundary layer calculation would be desirable.

Other experiments made in 2004 with a wall jet along a circular wall show that Coandă effect does not occur in a laminar flow, and the critical ratios for small Reynolds numbers are much smaller than those for turbulent flow. down to = 0.14 with a Reynolds number of 500, and = 0.05 for a Reynolds number of 100.

===Free jet===
L. C. Woods also made the calculation of the inviscid two-dimensional flow of a free jet of width h, deflected round a circularly cylindrical surface of radius r, between a first contact A and separation at B, including a deflection angle . Again a solution exists for any value of the relative curvature and angle .
Moreover, in the case of a free jet the equation can be solved in closed form, giving the distribution of velocity along the circular wall. The surface pressure distribution is then calculated using Bernoulli equation. Let us note the pressure () and the velocity () along the free streamline at the ambient pressure, and the angle along the wall which is zero in A and in B. Then the velocity () is found to be:
:formula_1

An image of the surface pressure distribution of the jet round the cylindrical surface using the same values of the relative curvature , and the same angle as those found for the wall jet reported in the image on the right side here has been established: it may be found in reference (15) p. 104 and both images are quite similar: the Coandă effect of a free jet is inertial, the same as Coandă effect of a wall jet. However, an experimental measurement of the corresponding surface pressure distribution is not known.

Experiments in 1959 by Bourque and Newmann concerning the reattachment of a two-dimensional turbulent jet to an offset parallel plate after enclosing a separation bubble where a low pressure vortex is confined (as in the image 5 in the preceding section) and also for a two-dimensional jet followed by a single flat plate inclined at an angle instead of the circularly curved wall in the diagram on the right here describing the experience of a wall jet: the jet separates from the plate, then curves towards the plate when the surrounding fluid is entrained and pressure lowered, and eventually reattaches to it, enclosing a separation bubble. The jet remains free if the angle is greater than 62°.

In this last case which is the geometry proposed by Coandă, the claim of the inventor is that the quantity of fluid entrained by the jet from the surroundings is increased when the jet is deflected, a feature exploited to improve the scavenging of internal combustion engines, and to increase the maximum lift coefficient of a wing, as indicated in the applications below.

The surface pressure distribution as well as the reattachment distance have been duly measured in both cases, and two approximate theories have been developed for the mean pressure within the separation bubble, the position of reattachment and the increase in volume flow from the orifice: the agreement with experiment was satisfactory.

==Applications==

=== Aircraft ===
The Coandă effect has applications in various high-lift devices on aircraft, where air moving over the wing can be &quot;bent down&quot; towards the ground using flaps and a jet sheet blowing over the curved surface of the top of the wing. The bending of the flow results in aerodynamic lift. The flow from a high-speed jet engine mounted in a pod over the wing produces increased lift by dramatically increasing the velocity gradient in the shear flow in the boundary layer. In this velocity gradient, particles are blown away from the surface, thus lowering the pressure there. Closely following the work of Coandă on applications of his research, and in particular the work on his &quot;Aerodina Lenticulară,&quot; John Frost of Avro Canada also spent considerable time researching the effect, leading to a series of &quot;inside out&quot; hovercraft-like aircraft from which the air exited in a ring around the outside of the aircraft and was directed by being &quot;attached&quot; to a flap-like ring.

This is, as opposed to a traditional hovercraft design, in which the air is blown into a central area, the &quot;plenum&quot;, and directed down with the use of a fabric &quot;skirt&quot;. Only one of Frost&#x27;s designs was ever built, the Avro Canada VZ-9 Avrocar.

The Avrocar (often listed as &#x27;VZ-9&#x27;) was a Canadian vertical takeoff and landing (VTOL) aircraft developed by Avro Aircraft Ltd. as part of a secret United States military project carried out in the early years of the Cold War. The Avrocar intended to exploit the Coandă effect to provide lift and thrust from a single &quot;turborotor&quot; blowing exhaust out the rim of the disk-shaped aircraft to provide anticipated VTOL-like performance. In the air, it would have resembled a flying saucer. Two prototypes were built as &quot;proof-of-concept&quot; test vehicles for a more advanced U.S. Air Force fighter and also for a U.S. Army tactical combat aircraft requirement.

Avro&#x27;s 1956 Project 1794 for the U.S. military designed a larger-scale flying saucer based on the Coandă effect and intended to reach speeds between Mach 3 and Mach 4. Project documents remained classified until 2012.

The effect was also implemented during the U.S. Air Force&#x27;s Advanced Medium STOL Transport (AMST) project. Several aircraft, notably the Boeing YC-14 (the first modern type to exploit the effect), NASA&#x27;s Quiet Short-Haul Research Aircraft, and the National Aerospace Laboratory of Japan&#x27;s Asuka research aircraft have been built to take advantage of this effect, by mounting turbofans on the top of the wings to provide high-speed air even at low flying speeds, but to date only one aircraft has gone into production using this system to a major degree which is the Antonov An-72. The Shin Meiwa US-1A flying boat utilizes a similar system, only it directs the propwash from its four turboprop engines over the top of the wing to generate low-speed lift. More uniquely, it incorporates a fifth turboshaft engine inside of the wing center-section solely to provide air for powerful blown flaps. The addition of these two systems gives the aircraft an impressive STOL capability.


The experimental McDonnell Douglas YC-15 and its production derivative, the Boeing C-17 Globemaster III, also employ the effect. The NOTAR helicopter replaces the conventional propeller tail rotor with a Coandă effect tail (diagram on the left).

A better understanding of Coandă effect was provided by the scientific literature produced by ACHEON EU FP7 project. This project utilized a particular symmetric nozzle to produce an effective modeling of the Coandă effect, and determined innovative STOL aircraft configurations based on the effect. This activity has been expanded by Dragan in the turbomachinery sector, with the objective of better optimizing the shape of rotating blades by Romanian Comoti Research Centre&#x27;s work on turbomachinery.

A practical use of the Coandă effect is for inclined hydropower screens, which separate debris, fish, etc., otherwise in the input flow to the turbines. Due to the slope, the debris falls from the screens without mechanical clearing, and due to the wires of the screen optimizing the Coandă effect, the water flows through the screen to the penstocks leading the water to the turbines.

The Coandă effect is used in dual-pattern fluid dispensers in automobile windshield washers.

The operation principle of oscillatory flowmeters also relies on the Coandă phenomenon. The incoming liquid enters a chamber that contains two &quot;islands&quot;. Due to the Coandă effect, the main stream splits up and goes under one of the islands. This flow then feeds itself back into the main stream making it split up again, but in the direction of the second isle. This process repeats itself as long as the liquid circulates the chamber, resulting in a self-induced oscillation that is directly proportional to the velocity of the liquid and consequently the volume of substance flowing through the meter. A sensor picks up the frequency of this oscillation and transforms it into an analog signal yielding volume passing through.

=== Air conditioning ===
In air conditioning, the Coandă effect is exploited to increase the throw of a ceiling mounted diffuser. Because the Coandă effect causes air discharged from the diffuser to &quot;stick&quot; to the ceiling, it travels farther before dropping for the same discharge velocity than it would if the diffuser were mounted in free air, without the neighbouring ceiling. Lower discharge velocity means lower noise levels and, in the case of variable air volume (VAV) air conditioning systems, permits greater turndown ratios. Linear diffusers and slot diffusers that present a greater length of contact with the ceiling exhibit a greater Coandă effect.

=== Health care ===
In cardiovascular medicine, the Coandă effect accounts for the separate streams of blood in the fetal right atrium. It also explains why eccentric mitral regurgitation jets are attracted and dispersed along adjacent left atrial wall surfaces (so called &quot;wall-hugging jets&quot; as seen on echocardiographic color-doppler interrogation). This is clinically relevant because the visual area (and thus severity) of these eccentric wall-hugging jets is often underestimated compared to the more readily apparent central jets. In these cases, volumetric methods such as the proximal isovelocity surface area (PISA) method are preferred to quantify the severity of mitral regurgitation.

In medicine, the Coandă effect is used in ventilators.

=== Meteorology ===
In meteorology, the Coandă effect theory has also been applied to some air streams flowing out of mountain ranges such as the Carpathian Mountains and Transylvanian Alps, where effects on agriculture and vegetation have been noted. It also appears to be an effect in the Rhone Valley in France and near Big Delta in Alaska.

=== Auto-racing ===
In Formula One automobile racing, the Coandă effect has been exploited by the McLaren, Sauber, Ferrari and Lotus teams, after the first introduction by Adrian Newey (Red Bull Team) in 2011, to help redirect exhaust gases to run through the rear diffuser with the intention of increasing downforce at the rear of the car. Due to changes in regulations set in place by the FIA from the beginning of the 2014 Formula One season, the intention of redirecting exhaust gases to use the Coandă effect have been negated, due to the mandatory requirement that the car exhaust not have bodywork intended to contribute to aerodynamic effect situated directly behind it.

=== Fluidics ===
In fluidics, the Coandă effect was used to build bistable multivibrators, where the working stream (compressed air) stuck to one curved wall or another and control beams could switch the stream between the walls.

=== Mixer ===
The Coandă effect is also used to mix two different fluids in a mixer.

== Demonstration ==
The Coandă effect can be demonstrated by directing a small jet of air upwards at an angle over a ping pong ball. The jet is drawn to and follows the upper surface of the ball curving around it, due to the (radial) acceleration (slowing and turning) of the air around the ball. With enough airflow, this change in momentum is balanced by the equal and opposite force on the ball supporting its weight. This demonstration can be performed using a hairdryer on the lowest setting or a vacuum cleaner if the outlet can be attached to the pipe and aimed upwards at an angle.

A common misconception is that the Coandă effect is demonstrated when a stream of tap water flows over the back of a spoon held lightly in the stream and the spoon is pulled into the stream (for example, uses the Coandă effect to explain the deflection of water around a cylinder). While the flow looks very similar to the air flow over the ping pong ball above (if one could see the air flow), the cause is not really the Coandă effect. Here, because it is a flow of water into air, there is little entrainment of the surrounding fluid (the air) into the jet (the stream of water). This particular demonstration is dominated by surface tension. ( states that the water deflection &quot;actually demonstrates molecular attraction and surface tension.&quot;)

Another demonstration is to direct the air flow from, e.g., a vacuum cleaner operating in reverse, tangentially past a round cylinder. A waste basket works well. The air flow seems to &quot;wrap around&quot; the cylinder and can be detected at more than 180° from the incoming flow. Under the right conditions, flow rate, weight of the cylinder, smoothness of the surface it sits on, the cylinder actually moves. Note that the cylinder does not move directly into the flow as a misapplication of the Bernoulli effect would predict, but at a diagonal.

The Coandă effect can also be demonstrated by placing a can in front of a lit candle, such that when one&#x27;s line of sight is along the top of the can, the candle flame is completely hidden from view behind it. If one then blows directly at the can, the candle will be extinguished despite the can being &quot;in the way&quot;. This is because the airflow directed at the can bends &quot;around&quot; it and still reaches the candle to extinguish it, in accordance with the Coandă effect.

==Problems caused==
The engineering use of Coandă effect has disadvantages as well as advantages.

In marine propulsion, the efficiency of a propeller or thruster can be severely curtailed by the Coandă effect. The force on the vessel generated by a propeller is a function of the speed, volume and direction of the water jet leaving the propeller. Under certain conditions (e.g., when a ship moves through water) the Coandă effect changes the direction of a propeller jet, causing it to follow the shape of the ship&#x27;s hull. The side force from a tunnel thruster at the bow of a ship decreases rapidly with forward speed. The side thrust may completely disappear at speeds above about 3 knots.
If the Coandă effect is applied to symmetrically shaped nozzles, it presents resonance problems.

== See also ==

* Aerodynamics
* Airfoil
* Boundary layer
* Circulation control wing
* Fluid dynamics
* Fluid friction
* Lift (force)
* Magnus effect
* Microelectromechanical systems
* Microfluidics
* NOTAR
* Teapot effect
* Tesla valve
* Trench effect
==References==
===Notes===
===Citations===
===Sources===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

== External links ==
* &quot;Flight&quot; 1945
* Coandă effect video (1)
* Coandă effect video (2)
* Information on the patents of Coandă
* New UK based UAV project utilising the Coandă effect
* Report on the Coandă Effect and lift
* How to see the Coandă effect at home (www.physics.org comic)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q605624" start="4" end="17" title="Coandă effect" label="Coandă effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q5596635" start="46" end="55" title="jet (fluid)" label="fluid jet"/>
<link wikidata="Q585329" start="105" end="120" title="Merriam-Webster" label="Merriam-Webster"/>
<link wikidata="Q328760" start="381" end="393" title="Henri Coandă" label="Henri Coandă"/>
<link wikidata="Q25820" start="639" end="651" title="Thomas Young (scientist)" label="Thomas Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q123885" start="674" end="691" title="The Royal Society" label="The Royal Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1104362" start="802" end="813" title="Coandă-1910" label="Coandă-1910"/>
<link wikidata="Q253623" start="1016" end="1022" title="patent" label="patent"/>
<link wikidata="Q164384" start="1424" end="1443" title="Theodore von Kármán" label="Theodore von Kármán"/>
<link wikidata="Q593950" start="1626" end="1640" title="axisymmetrical" label="axisymmetrical"/>
<link wikidata="Q190132" start="5977" end="5986" title="turbulent" label="turbulent"/>
<link wikidata="Q178932" start="6001" end="6016" title="Reynolds number" label="Reynolds number"/>
<link wikidata="Q128709" start="7192" end="7200" title="inviscid" label="inviscid"/>
<link wikidata="Q194433" start="8209" end="8213" title="Lift (force)" label="Lift"/>
<link wikidata="Q189452" start="8879" end="8891" title="laminar flow" label="laminar flow"/>
<link wikidata="Q40595" start="11852" end="11868" title="high-lift device" label="high-lift device"/>
<link wikidata="Q11436" start="11873" end="11881" title="aircraft" label="aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q194433" start="12081" end="12097" title="aerodynamic lift" label="aerodynamic lift"/>
<link wikidata="Q7206687" start="12150" end="12153" title="podded engines" label="pod"/>
<link wikidata="Q7621125" start="12223" end="12240" title="velocity gradient" label="velocity gradient"/>
<link wikidata="Q2250602" start="12248" end="12258" title="shear flow" label="shear flow"/>
<link wikidata="Q6225413" start="12524" end="12534" title="John Carver Meadows Frost" label="John Frost"/>
<link wikidata="Q791481" start="12538" end="12549" title="Avro Canada" label="Avro Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q185757" start="12649" end="12659" title="hovercraft" label="hovercraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q580255" start="13056" end="13080" title="Avro Canada VZ-9 Avrocar" label="Avro Canada VZ-9 Avrocar"/>
<link wikidata="Q320599" start="13145" end="13173" title="vertical takeoff and landing" label="vertical takeoff and landing"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="13311" end="13319" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5401971" start="13575" end="13588" title="flying saucer" label="flying saucer"/>
<link wikidata="Q580255" start="13786" end="13798" title="Project 1794" label="Project 1794"/>
<link wikidata="Q379617" start="14058" end="14088" title="Advanced Medium STOL Transport" label="Advanced Medium STOL Transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q795324" start="14135" end="14141" title="Boeing Integrated Defense Systems" label="Boeing"/>
<link wikidata="Q890232" start="14142" end="14147" title="Boeing YC-14" label="YC-14"/>
<link wikidata="Q911404" start="14207" end="14241" title="Quiet Short-Haul Research Aircraft" label="Quiet Short-Haul Research Aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q4988947" start="14251" end="14289" title="National Aerospace Laboratory of Japan" label="National Aerospace Laboratory of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1737305" start="14297" end="14302" title="Kawasaki C-1" label="Asuka"/>
<link wikidata="Q654051" start="14383" end="14391" title="turbofan" label="turbofan"/>
<link wikidata="Q212268" start="14574" end="14581" title="Antonov" label="Antonov"/>
<link wikidata="Q572590" start="14582" end="14587" title="Antonov An-72" label="An-72"/>
<link wikidata="Q1701483" start="14593" end="14609" title="Shin Meiwa US-1A" label="Shin Meiwa US-1A"/>
<link wikidata="Q4928621" start="14889" end="14899" title="blown flap" label="blown flap"/>
<link wikidata="Q182178" start="15005" end="15028" title="McDonnell Douglas YC-15" label="McDonnell Douglas YC-15"/>
<link wikidata="Q211369" start="15071" end="15091" title="C-17 Globemaster III" label="C-17 Globemaster III"/>
<link wikidata="Q385472" start="15121" end="15126" title="NOTAR" label="NOTAR"/>
<link wikidata="Q922654" start="15164" end="15173" title="Propeller (aircraft)" label="propeller"/>
<link wikidata="Q170196" start="15796" end="15806" title="hydropower" label="hydropower"/>
<link wikidata="Q1260995" start="16084" end="16092" title="penstock" label="penstock"/>
<link wikidata="Q173725" start="16992" end="17008" title="air conditioning" label="air conditioning"/>
<link wikidata="Q905299" start="17084" end="17092" title="diffuser (thermodynamics)" label="diffuser"/>
<link wikidata="Q7915706" start="17424" end="17443" title="variable air volume" label="variable air volume"/>
<link wikidata="Q7855852" start="17492" end="17506" title="turndown ratio" label="turndown ratio"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17509" end="17524" title="Linear diffuser" label="Linear diffuser"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17530" end="17543" title="slot diffuser" label="slot diffuser"/>
<link wikidata="Q10379" start="17660" end="17683" title="cardiovascular medicine" label="cardiovascular medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q26513" start="17753" end="17758" title="fetal" label="fetal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074839" start="17765" end="17771" title="Atrium (heart)" label="atrium"/>
<link wikidata="Q268292" start="17804" end="17824" title="mitral regurgitation" label="mitral regurgitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q268292" start="18321" end="18341" title="mitral regurgitation" label="mitral regurgitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q25261" start="18423" end="18434" title="meteorology" label="meteorology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1288" start="18546" end="18566" title="Carpathian Mountains" label="Carpathian Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q217202" start="18571" end="18589" title="Transylvanian Alps" label="Transylvanian Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q602" start="18691" end="18703" title="Rhone Valley" label="Rhone Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q691255" start="18723" end="18732" title="Big Delta" label="Big Delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="18768" end="18779" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q173380" start="18917" end="18929" title="Adrian Newey" label="Adrian Newey"/>
<link wikidata="Q179412" start="19136" end="19139" title="FIA" label="FIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q69969" start="19166" end="19189" title="2014 Formula One season" label="2014 Formula One season"/>
<link wikidata="Q185571" start="19445" end="19453" title="fluidics" label="fluidics"/>
<link wikidata="Q259838" start="19491" end="19513" title="bistable multivibrator" label="bistable multivibrator"/>
<link wikidata="Q41273" start="20075" end="20083" title="momentum" label="momentum"/>
<link wikidata="Q170749" start="20962" end="20977" title="surface tension" label="surface tension"/>
<link wikidata="Q181328" start="21588" end="21608" title="Bernoulli effect" label="the Bernoulli effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q205451" start="22278" end="22287" title="propeller" label="propeller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1510756" start="22291" end="22299" title="bow thruster" label="thruster"/>
<link wikidata="Q6750281" start="22661" end="22665" title="hull (watercraft)" label="hull"/>
<link wikidata="Q1510756" start="22689" end="22704" title="bow thruster" label="tunnel thruster"/>
<link wikidata="Q8424" start="22952" end="22964" title="Aerodynamics" label="Aerodynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698744" start="22967" end="22974" title="Airfoil" label="Airfoil"/>
<link wikidata="Q752193" start="22977" end="22991" title="Boundary layer" label="Boundary layer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5121691" start="22994" end="23018" title="Circulation control wing" label="Circulation control wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q216320" start="23021" end="23035" title="Fluid dynamics" label="Fluid dynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q82580" start="23038" end="23052" title="Fluid friction" label="Fluid friction"/>
<link wikidata="Q194433" start="23055" end="23067" title="Lift (force)" label="Lift (force)"/>
<link wikidata="Q622975" start="23070" end="23083" title="Magnus effect" label="Magnus effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q175561" start="23086" end="23116" title="Microelectromechanical systems" label="Microelectromechanical systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q138845" start="23119" end="23132" title="Microfluidics" label="Microfluidics"/>
<link wikidata="Q385472" start="23135" end="23140" title="NOTAR" label="NOTAR"/>
<link wikidata="Q2400002" start="23143" end="23156" title="Teapot effect" label="Teapot effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q1162662" start="23159" end="23170" title="Tesla valve" label="Tesla valve"/>
<link wikidata="Q833460" start="23173" end="23186" title="Trench effect" label="Trench effect"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="191285" wikidata="Q488353" url="?curid=191285" title="Natalie Imbruglia">
<text>Natalie Jane Imbruglia ( , ; born 4 February 1975) is an Australian and British singer-songwriter and actress. 

Born and raised in New South Wales, Imbruglia became widely known in the early 1990s playing Beth Brennan in the soap opera &quot;Neighbours&quot;. After leaving the series, she moved to the UK to begin a recording career. Her 1997 debut single, a cover of Ednaswap&#x27;s song &quot;Torn&quot;, quickly became a worldwide hit, topped the US &quot;Billboard&quot; Radio Songs Chart for eleven weeks in 1998, and was listed on the 50 Best Songs of the 1990s by &quot;Rolling Stone&quot;. Her debut album, &quot;Left of the Middle&quot; (1997), was a commercial success — earning multi-platinum certifications in the US, the UK and Australia, and selling seven million copies worldwide. Subsequent albums, including &quot;White Lilies Island&quot; (2001) and &quot;Counting Down the Days&quot; (2005), were both met with commercial declines, but received gold certifications by the British Phonographic Industry (BPI). As of 2021, Imbruglia has released six studio albums and sold over ten million album equivalent units worldwide. Imbruglia has received various accolades, including eight ARIA Awards, two Brit Awards, one &quot;Billboard&quot; Music Award, one Silver Clef Award and three Grammy Award nominations.

Imbruglia has appeared in several films, including &quot;Johnny English&quot; (2003) and Australian indie film &quot;Closed for Winter&quot; (2009). She has modelled for several brands, such as L&#x27;Oreal, Gap, and Kailis. Among other philanthropic work, Imbruglia served as a longtime spokesperson for Virgin Unite and campaigns to raise awareness of obstetric fistula.

== Life and career ==

=== 1975–1994: Early life and career beginnings ===
Imbruglia was born on 4 February 1975, in Sydney, Australia, second of four daughters of Maxene (née Anderson) and Elliot Imbruglia. Her father is of Italian descent, a Sicilian from Lipari who immigrated to Australia with his family aged five, and her mother is of Irish, Scottish and English descent, with an ancestor who arrived in Australia as a convict in the First Fleet. Imbruglia grew up in Berkeley Vale, New South Wales and attended Mater Dei College. At fifteen, she moved to Sydney with her family and studied ballet, tap and Highland dancing.

Imbruglia appeared in Australian television commercials for Coca-Cola and the Australian snack Twisties. She left school at the age of sixteen, to pursue acting. She secured a role as Beth Brennan on the Australian soap opera &quot;Neighbours&quot; where she shared a house with Ben Mitchell who played the part of Cameron Hudson. By the end of her second year, she left the show to move to London in 1994. She met Anne Barret, who became her manager and convinced her to record a demo of four songs. She signed a record deal with BMG, after a demo of &quot;Torn&quot; impressed RCA Records.

=== 1997–2000: &quot;Left of the Middle&quot; and international breakthrough ===
Imbruglia&#x27;s first international single, &quot;Torn&quot;, was a cover of a song whose first English version was made by Ednaswap, an American 1990s rock band, but it was earlier a Danish song released by Lis Sørensen The song was released on 27 October 1997 in the United Kingdom, and peaked at number two for three weeks on the UK Singles Chart. &quot;Torn&quot; eventually sold over one million copies in the UK alone and became one of the bestselling singles of the 1990s in the UK. Following the success in the UK, the song was getting heavy airplay around the world since late 1997 but not in North America. &quot;Torn&quot; finally made its debut in the United States in January 1998 when a radio station, Los Angeles KROQ, who sensed the buzz and popularity of the song in international markets, started playing an import version of the song, which was quickly followed by other stations. MTV followed by playing its music video, and &quot;Saturday Night Live (SNL)&quot; booked Imbruglia for a live performance even before her album was available.

&quot;Torn&quot; debuted at the Top 40 on &quot;Billboard&quot; Radio Songs Chart on 14 February 1998 and finally reached number one spot on 16 May 1998 and stayed at the summit for eleven consecutive weeks. To promote the album sales in the US, the record label decided not to release the physical single of the song, thus the song did not appear on the &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100 Chart during its popularity peak in mid-1998. The rule was changed due to the public and industry outcry in late-1998, and the song made its appearance on the chart for two weeks, and peaked at number 42. In other markets, &quot;Torn&quot; was a number one song in Canada, Denmark, and number two in her home country, Australia.

Imbruglia performed &quot;Torn&quot; to promote the album and made several appearances on TV shows, including &quot;The Rosie O&#x27;Donnell Show&quot;, &quot;Saturday Night Live (SNL)&quot;, &quot;The Tonight Show with Jay Leno&quot;, and &quot;MTV Movie Awards&quot; in the United States, &quot;The Prince&#x27;s Trust Party in the Park&quot; and &quot;Later... with Jools Holland&quot; in the United Kingdom, as well as &quot;Hey Hey It&#x27;s Saturday&quot; in Australia.

Imbruglia&#x27;s debut album, &quot;Left of the Middle&quot;, was released on 24 November 1997. It sold 350,000 in the UK three weeks after release and was certified platinum. It has sold 7 million copies. The second single in the UK after &quot;Torn&quot; was &quot;Big Mistake&quot;, which debuted at No. 2. &quot;Wishing I Was There&quot; was less successful, peaking at No. 19. &quot;Wishing I Was There&quot; only peaked at No. 2 on UK radio in summer 1998, and in the US peaked at No. 14 on the Top 40 Show. The final single from &quot;Left of the Middle&quot; was &quot;Smoke&quot;, which had a more divided reception. It was a hit in the UK and made the top five, while in Australia it missed the top 40. Eventually, the album became a million-seller after charting well in many countries and entering the Top 10 in the US and UK. In 1999, she recorded a cover of &quot;Never Tear Us Apart&quot; by INXS with Tom Jones, which appeared on his album &quot;Reload&quot;.

The &quot;Torn&quot; single and &quot;Left of the Middle&quot; album earned Imbruglia an MTV Video Music Award for Best New Artist, MTV Europe Music Award for Best Song, six trophies at 12th ARIA Music Award in 1998, including Best New Talent, Best Australian Debut Album, Best Female Artist, and Single of the Year, and two more trophies at 13th ARIA Music Award in 1999, including the Outstanding Achievement Award, as well as two Brit Awards for Best International Newcomer and Best International Female.

=== 2001–2004: &quot;White Lilies Island&quot; ===
Imbruglia&#x27;s next album, &quot;White Lilies Island&quot;, in 2001, was named after where she lived beside the River Thames at Windsor. Imbruglia co-wrote every track over three years. The album&#x27;s first single, &quot;That Day&quot;, was stylistically different from her singles but did not reach the UK Top 10. In the US, &quot;Wrong Impression&quot; was the first single and charted in the Hot 100 Singles and adult contemporary charts. In the UK it did slightly better than &quot;That Day&quot;. &quot;Beauty on the Fire&quot;, the final single, barely entered charts worldwide, and did not make the top 50 in Australia. The album, briefly notorious in the Sony BMG copy protection rootkit scandal, sold 1 million but did not repeat the success of &quot;Left of the Middle&quot;.
Imbruglia&#x27;s third album was ready by November 2003; however her record label refused to release it. She was given songs to record with Swedish pop producers, Bloodshy &amp; Avant. She and the record label separated at the beginning of 2004. Four months later she signed with Brightside Recordings, formed by a former Innocent Records executive, Hugh Goldsmith.
In 2003, she appeared in the spy parody film &quot;Johnny English&quot;, playing Rowan Atkinson&#x27;s love interest, Lorna Campbell, in a Bond girl–style role.

=== 2005–2008: &quot;Counting Down the Days&quot; ===
In April 2005, Imbruglia&#x27;s third album &quot;Counting Down the Days&quot; had &quot;Shiver&quot; as its first single. &quot;Shiver&quot; became her longest-charting single in the UK since &quot;Torn.&quot; It topped UK airplay charts for several weeks, reaching eighth in the UK. It became the most-played song of 2005. &quot;Counting Down The Days&quot; became her first album to reach the top spot on the album charts.

&quot;Sanctuary&quot; was the second single from the album and singles sent to radio stations. The decision was later changed to the title track &quot;Counting Down the Days&quot;, with stations asked to play the album version, because the radio mix was not finished. The single on 25 July did not have as much success in the singles chart as &quot;Shiver,&quot; although it reignited interest in its album and received airplay in the UK. Due to the single, the album re-entered the top 40 in the UK charts.

Imbruglia made a small European tour, her first since &quot;Left of the Middle&quot;, in late October and November. Though the album never entered UK Top 40 again, several concerts sold out, notably London.

The album was the 100th-best-selling album in 2005, selling 204,877 copies in the UK alone.

Imbruglia started on her fourth album in late 2005. In mid-2007, plans changed and her record company released a compilation of Imbruglia&#x27;s 10 years in music. The only single from the album—&quot;Glorious&quot;—premiered in BBC Radio 1 on &quot;The Chris Moyles Show&quot;. The Singles Collection debuted at No. 5 in the UK, including the single &quot;Glorious&quot; as well as a DVD of Imbruglia&#x27;s videos. The album sold 600,000 copies.

=== 2009–2014: &quot;Come to Life&quot;, musical hiatus and stage debut ===

In late-2008, in the second year of work on her eventual 2009 album &quot;Come to Life&quot;, Imbruglia parted with her label, Brightside/Sony BMG. She obtained the rights to songs recorded for the album and planned to record on her own label, Malabar Records. Songs were co-written with Ben Hillier, Dave McCracken, her then-husband Daniel Johns, Gary Clark, Jamie Hartman, Paul Harris, Shep Solomon and Chris Martin of Coldplay. Some tracks were produced by Hillier and mixed by Danton Supple.

Accompanied by an extensive television advertising campaign and press campaign, &quot;Come to Life&quot; was released, through Island Records, on 2 October 2009 in Australia. It entered the Australian albums chart at No. 67 on 19 October 2009, making it Imbruglia&#x27;s worst performing album to date, selling just 750 copies in its first week of release and spending only two weeks in the Top 100. It had been announced that the album would be released in the United Kingdom (UK) on 3 May 2010, preceded by the track &quot;Scars&quot; to be released as a single on 22 March 2010. Following the disappointing reaction on the Australian charts, the official UK launch of the album, and the single, was delayed, then cancelled. All plans to launch the album in the United States were also cancelled, with the album eventually made available online through Amazon Music.

After the failure of &quot;Come to Life&quot;, Imbruglia took a six-year hiatus from music, shifting her focus back to acting. Imbruglia moved to Los Angeles and hired acting coach Ivana Chubbuck. She appeared in three movies over the next five years, &quot;Closed for Winter&quot; (2009), &quot;Underdogs&quot; (2013) and &quot;Among Ravens&quot; (2014).

In April 2014, Imbruglia made her stage debut in a UK production of &quot;Things We Do For Love&quot;, at the Theatre Royal, Bath.

=== 2014–2018: &quot;Male&quot; ===

On 3 December 2014, Imbruglia signed with Sony Masterworks and planned to make her first album in five years, covering famous songs by a range of male artists. The first single is a cover of &quot;Instant Crush&quot;, originally by Daft Punk featuring Julian Casablancas. &quot;Male&quot; was released on 31 July 2015, her fifth studio album. During the spring of 2017, Imbruglia took her Acoustic Tour to Europe in support of the album. In 2018 she continued with a tour around the UK.

=== 2018–present: &quot;Firebird&quot; and &quot;Neighbours&quot; finale===
In an Instagram post in November 2018, Imbruglia stated that new music was due in 2019. In February 2019 it was announced that Albert Hammond Jr. of the Strokes was in the studio with Imbruglia working on new music, along with Strokes producer Gus Oberg.

Imbruglia signed to BMG in July 2019, her original record label from 1997 to 2007, with plans to release an album of new material sometime in 2020. This was subsequently pushed back to 2021.

On 18 June 2021, Imbruglia released &quot;Build It Better&quot;, the first single from her sixth studio album &quot;Firebird&quot;, which was released on 24 September 2021. The official video for &quot;Build It Better&quot; was directed by Amy Becker-Burnett, with choreography by Gregory Haney and Alex Sarmiento. &quot;Build It Better&quot; did not enter the Official UK Top 100 Chart, but peaked at No. 67 on the Official Singles Sales Chart Top 100 and at number 66 on the Official Singles Download Chart Top 100.

In 2022, Imbruglia won the third series of the British version of &quot;The Masked Singer&quot; as &quot;Panda&quot;. Imbruglia released her version of &quot;Story of My Life&quot; (a song she performed on the show) on 12 February 2022. It debuted on the UK Official Singles Sales Chart Top 100 at number 49. The &quot;Firebird&quot; album re-entered the UK Official Album Downloads chart at number 32.

On 28 July 2022, Imbruglia made a cameo appearance as Beth in the final-ever &quot;Neighbours&quot; episode. Her appearance was filmed alongside Holly Valance&#x27;s character, Felicity Scully.

In February 2024, it was announced that Imbruglia would embark on a UK and Ireland tour with the Irish group the Corrs. Also in 2024, Imbruglia competed in season twelve of &quot;The Masked Singer&quot; as &quot;Bluebell&quot; where Kelly Osbourne (who competed as &quot;Ladybug&quot; in season two) served as her Mask Ambassador. She was eliminated in the Group B Finals.

== Other activities ==
In May 2010, Imbruglia became a judge on the second season of the Australian version of &quot;The X Factor&quot;. She mentored the Girls category, in which her final act Sally Chatfield was the runner up of the series. In 2011, she did not return for the third season and was replaced by Natalie Bassingthwaighte.

In June 2010, Imbruglia appeared on the original British version of the show, where she was a guest judge for the Birmingham auditions on its seventh series.

In 2016 Imbruglia was cast in the second season of SBS TV series &quot;First Contact&quot;.

In 2024, she released an Audible Original podcast, &quot;Sleep Sound with Natalie Imbruglia&quot;. In the podcast she recites poetry by the late Australian poet, Dorothea Mackellar.

== Personal life ==
=== Relationships and citizenship ===
Natalie Imbruglia is the elder sister of singer-songwriter Laura Imbruglia. During her time on &quot;Neighbours&quot; she briefly dated her co-star Stefan Dennis. Imbruglia dated American actor David Schwimmer in the late 1990s.

In 1999, Imbruglia met Silverchair frontman Daniel Johns backstage at his band&#x27;s concert in London. They started dating after meeting again at the ARIA awards after-party at the Gazebo Hotel in Sydney in October of the same year. After years of an on-and-off relationship, they announced their engagement shortly before Christmas 2002 and they married on New Year&#x27;s Eve 2003 in a beach ceremony in Port Douglas, Queensland. Imbruglia stated in a 2002 interview that meeting Johns saved her from depression. Johns wrote the song &quot;Satisfied&quot; for Imbruglia&#x27;s 2005 album &quot;Counting Down the Days&quot;, which he also produced and co-wrote the song &quot;Want&quot; from Imbruglia&#x27;s 2009 album &quot;Come to Life&quot;. Imbruglia wrote her 2005 single &quot;Counting Down the Days&quot; about their long-distance relationship, as Imbruglia was based in London and Johns lived in Newcastle, Australia. They announced their divorce on 4 January 2008, stating, &quot;We have simply grown apart through not being able to spend enough time together.&quot;

Imbruglia became a naturalised British citizen in 2013.

On 9 October 2019, Imbruglia announced on Instagram that she had given birth to a baby boy. The child was conceived using IVF and sperm from an unnamed donor.

=== Philanthropy ===
Imbruglia is an ambassador for Virgin Unite, supporting campaigns to end poverty and to bring attention to obstetric fistula.

She appeared in a sketch at the Secret Policeman&#x27;s Ball for Amnesty International on 31 October 2006. Imbruglia has also spoken of clinical depression to raise awareness about the disorder.

In 2008, she supported the Fashion Targets Breast Cancer campaign in support of Breakthrough Breast Cancer, alongside comedian Alan Carr, presenter Edith Bowman, actress Anna Friel, and model Twiggy.

== Awards and nominations ==
== References ==
== External links ==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q488353" start="0" end="22" title="Natalie Imbruglia" label="Natalie Jane Imbruglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224" start="132" end="147" title="New South Wales" label="New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q4897451" start="206" end="218" title="Beth Brennan" label="Beth Brennan"/>
<link wikidata="Q908708" start="243" end="253" title="Neighbours" label="Neighbours"/>
<link wikidata="Q1287264" start="370" end="378" title="Ednaswap" label="Ednaswap"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193181" start="397" end="401" title="Torn (Natalie Imbruglia song)" label="Torn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2356902" start="455" end="494" title="Radio Songs (chart)" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Radio Songs Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="573" end="598" title="Rolling Stone Magazine" label="&amp;quot;Rolling Stone&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2520380" start="623" end="641" title="Left of the Middle" label="Left of the Middle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2705852" start="833" end="852" title="White Lilies Island" label="White Lilies Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137092" start="876" end="898" title="Counting Down the Days" label="Counting Down the Days"/>
<link wikidata="Q751895" start="993" end="1022" title="British Phonographic Industry" label="British Phonographic Industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q25305599" start="1109" end="1131" title="album equivalent units" label="album equivalent units"/>
<link wikidata="Q1862932" start="1201" end="1212" title="ARIA Awards" label="ARIA Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q3632234" start="1218" end="1229" title="Brit Awards 1999" label="Brit Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q392565" start="1235" end="1268" title="Billboard Music Awards" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Music Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q3483987" start="1274" end="1291" title="Silver Clef Award" label="Silver Clef Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q990545" start="1302" end="1314" title="41st Annual Grammy Awards" label="Grammy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q337881" start="1386" end="1400" title="Johnny English" label="Johnny English"/>
<link wikidata="Q3283639" start="1446" end="1463" title="Closed for Winter" label="Closed for Winter"/>
<link wikidata="Q156077" start="1523" end="1535" title="L&amp;#x27;Oreal" label="L&amp;#x27;Oreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q420822" start="1537" end="1540" title="Gap Inc." label="Gap"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189079" start="1634" end="1646" title="Virgin Unite" label="Virgin Unite"/>
<link wikidata="Q679020" start="1683" end="1700" title="obstetric fistula" label="obstetric fistula"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130" start="1820" end="1826" title="Sydney" label="Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q2257191" start="1928" end="1943" title="Italian Australian" label="Italian descent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="1947" end="1955" title="Sicily" label="Sicilian"/>
<link wikidata="Q496389" start="1961" end="1967" title="Lipari" label="Lipari"/>
<link wikidata="Q3154488" start="2044" end="2049" title="Irish Australian" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q4065203" start="2064" end="2071" title="English Australian" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q913919" start="2128" end="2135" title="Convicts in Australia" label="convict"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419429" start="2143" end="2154" title="First Fleet" label="First Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4892124" start="2177" end="2207" title="Berkeley Vale, New South Wales" label="Berkeley Vale, New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q48781072" start="2221" end="2238" title="St Peter&amp;#x27;s Catholic College, Tuggerah" label="Mater Dei College"/>
<link wikidata="Q244475" start="2308" end="2311" title="Tap dance" label="tap"/>
<link wikidata="Q842835" start="2316" end="2332" title="Scottish highland dancing" label="Highland dancing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2813" start="2395" end="2404" title="Coca-Cola" label="Coca-Cola"/>
<link wikidata="Q3747526" start="2430" end="2438" title="Twisties" label="Twisties"/>
<link wikidata="Q4897451" start="2519" end="2531" title="Beth Brennan" label="Beth Brennan"/>
<link wikidata="Q23739" start="2550" end="2560" title="soap opera" label="soap opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q908708" start="2567" end="2577" title="Neighbours" label="Neighbours"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="2726" end="2732" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q770103" start="2866" end="2869" title="Bertelsmann Music Group" label="BMG"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193181" start="2893" end="2897" title="Torn (Natalie Imbruglia song)" label="Torn"/>
<link wikidata="Q202585" start="2914" end="2925" title="RCA Records" label="RCA Records"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3060" end="3064" title="Torn (Ednaswap song)#Natalie Imbruglia version" label="Torn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1287264" start="3134" end="3142" title="Ednaswap" label="Ednaswap"/>
<link wikidata="Q9035" start="3194" end="3200" title="Danish language" label="Danish"/>
<link wikidata="Q512336" start="3218" end="3230" title="Lis Sørensen" label="Lis Sørensen"/>
<link wikidata="Q16987479" start="3961" end="3986" title="Saturday Night Live (season 23)" label="Saturday Night Live (SNL)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2356902" start="4113" end="4152" title="Radio Songs (chart)" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Radio Songs Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q180072" start="4426" end="4455" title="Billboard Hot 100" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q3047206" start="4902" end="4931" title="The Rosie O&amp;#x27;Donnell Show" label="The Rosie O&amp;#x27;Donnell Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q16987479" start="4945" end="4970" title="Saturday Night Live (season 23)" label="Saturday Night Live (SNL)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3107406" start="4984" end="5014" title="The Tonight Show with Jay Leno" label="The Tonight Show with Jay Leno"/>
<link wikidata="Q133603" start="5032" end="5048" title="1998 MTV Movie Awards" label="MTV Movie Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q7758242" start="5083" end="5124" title="Prince&amp;#x27;s Trust" label="The Prince&amp;#x27;s Trust Party in the Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q616417" start="5141" end="5168" title="Later... with Jools Holland" label="Later... with Jools Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5749290" start="5215" end="5241" title="Hey Hey It&amp;#x27;s Saturday" label="Hey Hey It&amp;#x27;s Saturday"/>
<link wikidata="Q2520380" start="5299" end="5317" title="Left of the Middle" label="Left of the Middle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152520" start="5530" end="5541" title="Big Mistake" label="Big Mistake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152524" start="5579" end="5598" title="Wishing I Was There" label="Wishing I Was There"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154817" start="5840" end="5845" title="Smoke (Natalie Imbruglia song)" label="Smoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q2708325" start="6141" end="6160" title="Never Tear Us Apart" label="Never Tear Us Apart"/>
<link wikidata="Q180850" start="6180" end="6189" title="Tom Jones (singer)" label="Tom Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q2279062" start="6225" end="6231" title="Reload (Tom Jones album)" label="Reload"/>
<link wikidata="Q849504" start="6329" end="6350" title="1998 MTV Video Music Awards" label="MTV Video Music Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q595693" start="6355" end="6370" title="MTV Video Music Award for Best New Artist" label="Best New Artist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2760898" start="6372" end="6394" title="1998 MTV Europe Music Awards" label="MTV Europe Music Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q4653747" start="6426" end="6447" title="ARIA Music Awards of 1998" label="12th ARIA Music Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q4653748" start="6582" end="6603" title="ARIA Music Awards of 1999" label="13th ARIA Music Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q3632234" start="6673" end="6684" title="Brit Awards 1999" label="Brit Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q2705852" start="6835" end="6854" title="White Lilies Island" label="White Lilies Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q19686" start="6914" end="6926" title="River Thames" label="River Thames"/>
<link wikidata="Q464955" start="6930" end="6937" title="Windsor, Berkshire" label="Windsor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152516" start="7025" end="7033" title="That Day (Natalie Imbruglia song)" label="That Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152564" start="7136" end="7152" title="Wrong Impression" label="Wrong Impression"/>
<link wikidata="Q180072" start="7199" end="7214" title="Hot 100 Singles" label="Hot 100 Singles"/>
<link wikidata="Q378988" start="7219" end="7237" title="adult contemporary" label="adult contemporary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152510" start="7312" end="7330" title="Beauty on the Fire" label="Beauty on the Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5367562" start="7467" end="7507" title="Sony BMG copy protection rootkit scandal" label="Sony BMG copy protection rootkit scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2520380" start="7564" end="7582" title="Left of the Middle" label="Left of the Middle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2907007" start="7753" end="7773" title="Bloodshy &amp;amp; Avant" label="Bloodshy &amp;amp; Avant"/>
<link wikidata="Q337881" start="8007" end="8021" title="Johnny English" label="Johnny English"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649366" start="8095" end="8104" title="Bond girl" label="Bond girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137092" start="8222" end="8244" title="Counting Down the Days" label="Counting Down the Days"/>
<link wikidata="Q749141" start="8261" end="8267" title="Shiver (Natalie Imbruglia)" label="Shiver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152492" start="8744" end="8778" title="Counting Down the Days (song)" label="&amp;quot;Counting Down the Days&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2520380" start="9168" end="9186" title="Left of the Middle" label="Left of the Middle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152512" start="9610" end="9618" title="Glorious (Natalie Imbruglia song)" label="Glorious"/>
<link wikidata="Q795585" start="9638" end="9649" title="BBC Radio 1" label="BBC Radio 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q7722699" start="9659" end="9680" title="The Chris Moyles Show" label="The Chris Moyles Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933459" start="10009" end="10021" title="Come to Life (Natalie Imbruglia album)" label="Come to Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q3001888" start="10062" end="10081" title="Sony BMG" label="Brightside/Sony BMG"/>
<link wikidata="Q2658164" start="10223" end="10234" title="Ben Hillier" label="Ben Hillier"/>
<link wikidata="Q5229334" start="10236" end="10250" title="Dave McCracken" label="Dave McCracken"/>
<link wikidata="Q983410" start="10269" end="10281" title="Daniel Johns" label="Daniel Johns"/>
<link wikidata="Q5524849" start="10283" end="10293" title="Gary Clark (musician)" label="Gary Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q7151146" start="10310" end="10321" title="Paul Harris (musician)" label="Paul Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q712860" start="10340" end="10352" title="Chris Martin" label="Chris Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q45188" start="10356" end="10364" title="Coldplay" label="Coldplay"/>
<link wikidata="Q190585" start="10559" end="10573" title="Island Records" label="Island Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q275029" start="10622" end="10645" title="ARIA Charts" label="Australian albums chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="10894" end="10908" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933459" start="10957" end="10962" title="Scars (Natalie Imbruglia song)" label="Scars"/>
<link wikidata="Q4740860" start="11287" end="11299" title="Amazon Music" label="Amazon Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="11448" end="11459" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q3283639" start="11560" end="11577" title="Closed for Winter" label="Closed for Winter"/>
<link wikidata="Q18170588" start="11598" end="11607" title="Underdogs (2013 drama film)" label="Underdogs"/>
<link wikidata="Q25646523" start="11631" end="11643" title="Among Ravens" label="Among Ravens"/>
<link wikidata="Q7784402" start="11733" end="11754" title="Things We Do for Love (play)" label="Things We Do For Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q12407055" start="11769" end="11788" title="Theatre Royal, Bath" label="Theatre Royal, Bath"/>
<link wikidata="Q7562494" start="11870" end="11886" title="Sony Masterworks" label="Sony Masterworks"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12025" end="12038" title="Instant Crush#Natalie Imbruglia version" label="Instant Crush"/>
<link wikidata="Q185828" start="12060" end="12069" title="Daft Punk" label="Daft Punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q350511" start="12080" end="12098" title="Julian Casablancas" label="Julian Casablancas"/>
<link wikidata="Q19824781" start="12106" end="12110" title="Male (Natalie Imbruglia album)" label="Male"/>
<link wikidata="Q209330" start="12398" end="12407" title="Instagram" label="Instagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q597936" start="12519" end="12537" title="Albert Hammond Jr." label="Albert Hammond Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q211583" start="12541" end="12552" title="the Strokes" label="the Strokes"/>
<link wikidata="Q101421766" start="12636" end="12645" title="Gus Oberg" label="Gus Oberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q796316" start="12668" end="12671" title="BMG Rights Management" label="BMG"/>
<link wikidata="Q107393702" start="12956" end="12964" title="Firebird (Natalie Imbruglia album)" label="Firebird"/>
<link wikidata="Q110094956" start="13386" end="13398" title="The Masked Singer (British TV series) series 3" label="third series"/>
<link wikidata="Q81522459" start="13406" end="13454" title="The Masked Singer (British TV series)" label="British version of &amp;quot;The Masked Singer&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q229353" start="13908" end="13921" title="Holly Valance" label="Holly Valance"/>
<link wikidata="Q5441803" start="13940" end="13955" title="Felicity Scully" label="Felicity Scully"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="14033" end="14040" title="Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q192915" start="14067" end="14076" title="the Corrs" label="the Corrs"/>
<link wikidata="Q129407663" start="14114" end="14127" title="The Masked Singer (American TV series) season 12" label="season twelve"/>
<link wikidata="Q56276004" start="14137" end="14154" title="The Masked Singer (American TV series)" label="The Masked Singer"/>
<link wikidata="Q231182" start="14191" end="14205" title="Kelly Osbourne" label="Kelly Osbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q65069888" start="14246" end="14256" title="The Masked Singer (American TV series) season 2" label="season two"/>
<link wikidata="Q7776433" start="14400" end="14413" title="The X Factor (Australia season 2)" label="second season"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772901" start="14421" end="14439" title="The X Factor Australia" label="Australian version"/>
<link wikidata="Q5453652" start="14449" end="14461" title="The X Factor" label="The X Factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1837039" start="14643" end="14667" title="Natalie Bassingthwaighte" label="Natalie Bassingthwaighte"/>
<link wikidata="Q4431988" start="14710" end="14734" title="The X Factor (UK TV series)" label="original British version"/>
<link wikidata="Q752254" start="14812" end="14826" title="The X Factor (UK series 7)" label="seventh series"/>
<link wikidata="Q18577977" start="14900" end="14913" title="First Contact (Australian TV series)" label="First Contact"/>
<link wikidata="Q366651" start="14947" end="14954" title="Audible (service)" label="Audible"/>
<link wikidata="Q963058" start="15084" end="15102" title="Dorothea Mackellar" label="Dorothea Mackellar"/>
<link wikidata="Q448575" start="15222" end="15237" title="Laura Imbruglia" label="Laura Imbruglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q908708" start="15264" end="15274" title="Neighbours" label="Neighbours"/>
<link wikidata="Q2409263" start="15311" end="15324" title="Stefan Dennis" label="Stefan Dennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q188792" start="15357" end="15372" title="David Schwimmer" label="David Schwimmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q157327" start="15416" end="15427" title="Silverchair" label="Silverchair"/>
<link wikidata="Q983410" start="15437" end="15449" title="Daniel Johns" label="Daniel Johns"/>
<link wikidata="Q1862932" start="15545" end="15556" title="ARIA awards" label="ARIA awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364325" start="15801" end="15825" title="Port Douglas, Queensland" label="Port Douglas, Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137092" start="15991" end="16013" title="Counting Down the Days" label="Counting Down the Days"/>
<link wikidata="Q4018134" start="16072" end="16076" title="Want (Natalie Imbruglia song)" label="Want"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933459" start="16122" end="16134" title="Come to Life (Natalie Imbruglia album)" label="Come to Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152492" start="16180" end="16202" title="Counting Down the Days (song)" label="Counting Down the Days"/>
<link wikidata="Q57278" start="16301" end="16321" title="Newcastle, Australia" label="Newcastle, Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q918305" start="16493" end="16520" title="British citizenship by naturalisation" label="naturalised British citizen"/>
<link wikidata="Q200117" start="16653" end="16656" title="IVF" label="IVF"/>
<link wikidata="Q857158" start="16661" end="16688" title="sperm donation" label="sperm from an unnamed donor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189079" start="16743" end="16755" title="Virgin Unite" label="Virgin Unite"/>
<link wikidata="Q679020" start="16819" end="16836" title="obstetric fistula" label="obstetric fistula"/>
<link wikidata="Q7763070" start="16871" end="16899" title="The Secret Policeman&amp;#x27;s Ball (2006)" label="Secret Policeman&amp;#x27;s Ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q42970" start="16904" end="16925" title="Amnesty International" label="Amnesty International"/>
<link wikidata="Q42844" start="16975" end="16994" title="clinical depression" label="clinical depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q5436757" start="17062" end="17091" title="Fashion Targets Breast Cancer" label="Fashion Targets Breast Cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4959675" start="17115" end="17141" title="Breakthrough Breast Cancer" label="Breakthrough Breast Cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q32795" start="17162" end="17171" title="Alan Carr" label="Alan Carr"/>
<link wikidata="Q4351984" start="17183" end="17195" title="Edith Bowman" label="Edith Bowman"/>
<link wikidata="Q237594" start="17205" end="17215" title="Anna Friel" label="Anna Friel"/>
<link wikidata="Q229442" start="17227" end="17233" title="Twiggy" label="Twiggy"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="191291" wikidata="Q81473" url="?curid=191291" title="Methodist Central Hall, Westminster">
<text>The Methodist Central Hall (also known as Central Hall Westminster) is a multi-purpose venue in the City of Westminster, London, serving primarily as a Methodist church and a conference centre. The building also houses an art gallery, a restaurant, and office spaces (used formerly as the headquarters of the Methodist Church of Great Britain until 2000). It contains 22 conference, meeting and seminar rooms, the largest being the &quot;Great Hall&quot;, which seats 2,300. Central Hall also acts as an important spiritual and sacred place for Methodists.

Methodist Central Hall occupies the corner of Tothill Street and Storeys Gate just off Victoria Street in London, near the junction with The Sanctuary next to the Queen Elizabeth II Conference Centre and facing Westminster Abbey.

==History==
Methodist Central Hall was erected by Wesleyan Methodists as one of their mixed-purpose &#x27;central halls&#x27;. Central Hall was to act not only as a church, but to be of &quot;great service for conferences on religious, educational, scientific, philanthropic and social questions&quot;. The hall was built in 1905–1911 on the site of the Royal Aquarium, Music Hall and Imperial Theatre, an entertainment complex that operated with varying success from 1876 to 1903. Construction was funded between 1898 and 1908 by the &quot;Wesleyan Methodist Twentieth Century Fund&quot; (or the &quot;Million Guinea Fund&quot;, as it became more commonly known), whose aim was to raise one million guineas from one million Methodists. The fund closed in 1904 having raised 1,024,501 guineas (£1,075,727).

The building played host to several important events; meetings of the suffragette movement took place at Methodist Central Hall in 1914. Scenes were re-enacted in the 2015 film &quot;Suffragette&quot;, some of which was shot in the hall.
Methodist Central Hall hosted the first meeting of the United Nations General Assembly in 1946. In return for the use of the hall, the assembly voted to fund the repainting of the walls of the church in a light blue. While it was being used by the UN General Assembly, the congregation relocated to the Coliseum Theatre.

It has been regularly used for political rallies—famous speakers have included Winnie Mandela, Mahatma Gandhi and Mikhail Gorbachev. In September 1972 the Conservative Monday Club held a much publicised &quot;Halt Immigration Now!&quot; public meeting in the main hall, addressed by several prominent speakers including members of parliament Ronald Bell, John Biggs-Davison, Harold Soref, and John Stokes. The Monday Club continued its use of the building until 1991 when it held two seminars there.

In 1968, Central Hall hosted the first public performance of Andrew Lloyd Webber&#x27;s &quot;Joseph and the Amazing Technicolor Dreamcoat&quot; in a concert that also included his father (organist William Lloyd Webber who was musical director at Central Hall), his brother the cellist Julian Lloyd Webber and pianist John Lill.

In early 1966 the FIFA World Cup Jules Rimet Trophy was on display at Central Hall in preparation for the football tournament being held in England that summer. It was stolen from the hall on 20 March 1966 and was recovered seven days later in south London, but the thief was never caught. England won the trophy four months later. The Jules Rimet Trophy was stolen again in Brazil and never recovered, and so had to be replaced.

In 2017, Central Hall was host to the first FIFA Interactive World Cup final where Spencer Ealing (known as Gorilla) beat Kai Wollin (known as DETO).

In 2005, Central Hall controversially applied for a licence to sell alcohol in its café and conference venues. As the Methodist Church has traditionally promoted abstinence and usually forbids consumption of alcohol on church premises, many Methodists argued that the application was in defiance of church rules and a written objection was compiled.

It is frequently used for public enquiries, including those into the Ladbroke Grove rail crash, the sinking of the &quot;Marchioness&quot; pleasure boat, and the Bloody Sunday incident in Northern Ireland.

==Architecture==
The Methodist Central Hall is a Grade II* listed building. It was designed by Edwin Alfred Rickards, of the firm Lanchester, Stewart and Rickards. This company also designed the City Hall building in Cathays Park, Cardiff, with which it shares many similarities. Although clad in an elaborate baroque style, to contrast with Westminster Abbey, it is an early example of the use of a reinforced concrete frame for a building in Britain. The interior was similarly planned on a Piranesian scale, although the execution was rather more economical.

The original 1904 design included two small towers on the main (east) façade, facing Westminster Abbey. These were never built, supposedly because of an outcry that they would reduce the dominance of Nicholas Hawksmoor&#x27;s west towers at Westminster Abbey in views from St James&#x27;s Park. The hall was eventually finished in 1911.

The domed ceiling of the Great Hall is reputed to be the second largest of its type in the world. The vast scale of the self-supporting ferro-concrete structure reflects the original intention that Central Hall was intended to be a meeting place for &quot;open-air preaching with the roof on&quot;.

The angels in the exterior spandrels were designed by Henry Poole.

=== Organ ===
The organ was built in 1912 by William Hill &amp; Sons and rebuilt and revised in 1970 by Rushworth and Dreaper. In 2011, Harrison &amp; Harrison revised the layout, provided new slider soundboards and actions and painted the front pipes. The organ has 57 stops/68 ranks and 3,789 speaking pipes on four manuals and pedal. The stoplist since 2011:

* Couplers: III-I, IV-I, I-II, III-II, IV-II, IV-III, Sub and Super III, Sub and Super III, Unison off III, Unison off IV, I-P, II-P, III-P, IV-P.
* 8 General Combinations, 8 Divisional Combinations for each Manual and the Pedal (on 256 Memory Levels); Continental Stepper (General Piston Sequencer + and -).

==References==
==External links==

* Methodist Central Hall – Church website
* Central Hall Westminster – Conference centre website
* The Sanctuary Westminster</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q81473" start="4" end="26" title="Methodist Central Hall, Westminster" label="Methodist Central Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q81473" start="42" end="66" title="Methodist Central Hall, Westminster" label="Central Hall Westminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q179351" start="100" end="119" title="City of Westminster" label="City of Westminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q33203" start="152" end="161" title="Methodist" label="Methodist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378975" start="175" end="192" title="conference centre" label="conference centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q769691" start="309" end="342" title="Methodist Church of Great Britain" label="Methodist Church of Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q124000" start="645" end="660" title="Victoria Street, London" label="Victoria Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q3918339" start="721" end="757" title="Queen Elizabeth II Conference Centre" label="Queen Elizabeth II Conference Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q5933" start="769" end="786" title="Westminster Abbey" label="Westminster Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7984057" start="839" end="858" title="Wesleyan Methodist Church (Great Britain)" label="Wesleyan Methodists"/>
<link wikidata="Q7373667" start="1143" end="1190" title="Royal Aquarium" label="Royal Aquarium, Music Hall and Imperial Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q918094" start="1489" end="1496" title="Guinea (British coin)" label="guineas"/>
<link wikidata="Q322170" start="1667" end="1678" title="suffragette" label="suffragette"/>
<link wikidata="Q17021589" start="1780" end="1791" title="Suffragette (film)" label="Suffragette"/>
<link wikidata="Q47423" start="1890" end="1921" title="United Nations General Assembly" label="United Nations General Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1868965" start="2138" end="2154" title="Coliseum Theatre" label="Coliseum Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q239062" start="2236" end="2250" title="Winnie Mandela" label="Winnie Mandela"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001" start="2252" end="2266" title="Mahatma Gandhi" label="Mahatma Gandhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q30487" start="2271" end="2288" title="Mikhail Gorbachev" label="Mikhail Gorbachev"/>
<link wikidata="Q5163053" start="2312" end="2336" title="Conservative Monday Club" label="Conservative Monday Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q7364676" start="2499" end="2510" title="Ronald Bell (UK politician)" label="Ronald Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6221875" start="2512" end="2530" title="John Biggs-Davison" label="John Biggs-Davison"/>
<link wikidata="Q5662417" start="2532" end="2544" title="Harold Soref" label="Harold Soref"/>
<link wikidata="Q6239169" start="2550" end="2561" title="John Stokes (Conservative politician)" label="John Stokes"/>
<link wikidata="Q180975" start="2719" end="2738" title="Andrew Lloyd Webber" label="Andrew Lloyd Webber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146264" start="2752" end="2796" title="Joseph and the Amazing Technicolor Dreamcoat" label="Joseph and the Amazing Technicolor Dreamcoat"/>
<link wikidata="Q687061" start="2856" end="2876" title="William Lloyd Webber" label="William Lloyd Webber"/>
<link wikidata="Q319434" start="2944" end="2963" title="Julian Lloyd Webber" label="Julian Lloyd Webber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1700846" start="2976" end="2985" title="John Lill" label="John Lill"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3006" end="3039" title="FIFA World Cup Trophy#Jules Rimet Trophy" label="FIFA World Cup Jules Rimet Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q15131448" start="3732" end="3742" title="Teetotalism" label="abstinence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2728539" start="3990" end="4015" title="Ladbroke Grove rail crash" label="Ladbroke Grove rail crash"/>
<link wikidata="Q6757026" start="4042" end="4053" title="Marchioness disaster" label="Marchioness"/>
<link wikidata="Q190819" start="4083" end="4096" title="Bloody Sunday (1972)" label="Bloody Sunday"/>
<link wikidata="Q26" start="4109" end="4125" title="Northern Ireland" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q20639551" start="4223" end="4244" title="Edwin Alfred Rickards" label="Edwin Alfred Rickards"/>
<link wikidata="Q5729524" start="4258" end="4290" title="Henry Vaughan Lanchester" label="Lanchester, Stewart and Rickards"/>
<link wikidata="Q2974562" start="4323" end="4332" title="City Hall, Cardiff" label="City Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q5052162" start="4345" end="4357" title="Cathays Park" label="Cathays Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q10690" start="4359" end="4366" title="Cardiff" label="Cardiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q840829" start="4438" end="4445" title="baroque architecture" label="baroque"/>
<link wikidata="Q5933" start="4470" end="4487" title="Westminster Abbey" label="Westminster Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q316307" start="4621" end="4631" title="Giovanni Battista Piranesi" label="Piranesian"/>
<link wikidata="Q366674" start="4891" end="4909" title="Nicholas Hawksmoor" label="Nicholas Hawksmoor"/>
<link wikidata="Q216914" start="4964" end="4984" title="St James&amp;#x27;s Park" label="St James&amp;#x27;s Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q244556" start="5356" end="5364" title="spandrel" label="spandrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5727134" start="5383" end="5394" title="Henry Poole (sculptor)" label="Henry Poole"/>
<link wikidata="Q1444" start="5415" end="5420" title="organ (music)" label="organ"/>
<link wikidata="Q16994056" start="5442" end="5465" title="William Hill &amp;amp; Sons" label="William Hill &amp;amp; Sons"/>
<link wikidata="Q7380890" start="5501" end="5522" title="Rushworth and Dreaper" label="Rushworth and Dreaper"/>
<link wikidata="Q5665465" start="5533" end="5556" title="Harrison &amp;amp; Harrison" label="Harrison &amp;amp; Harrison"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="191295" wikidata="Q38891" url="?curid=191295" title="Aswan Dam">
<text>The Aswan Dam, or Aswan High Dam, is one of the world&#x27;s largest embankment dams, which was built across the Nile in Aswan, Egypt, between 1960 and 1970. When it was completed, it was the tallest earthen dam in the world, surpassing the Chatuge Dam in the United States. The dam, which created the Lake Nasser reservoir, was built upstream of the Aswan Low Dam, which had been completed in 1902 and was already at its maximum utilization. Construction of the High Dam became a key objective of the military regime that took power following the 1952 Egyptian revolution. With its ability to better control flooding, provide increased water storage for irrigation and generate hydroelectricity, the dam was seen as pivotal to Egypt&#x27;s planned industrialization. Like the earlier implementation, the High Dam has had a significant effect on the economy and culture of Egypt.

Before the High Dam was built, even with the old dam in place, the annual flooding of the Nile during late summer had continued to pass largely unimpeded down the valley from its East African drainage basin. These floods brought high water with natural nutrients and minerals that annually enriched the fertile soil along its floodplain and delta; this predictability had made the Nile valley ideal for farming since ancient times. However, this natural flooding varied, since high-water years could destroy the whole crop, while low-water years could create widespread drought and consequently famine. Both these events had continued to occur periodically. As Egypt&#x27;s population grew and technology increased, both a desire and the ability developed to completely control the flooding, and thus both protect and support farmland and its economically important cotton crop. With the greatly increased reservoir storage provided by the High Aswan Dam, the floods could be controlled and the water could be stored for later release over multiple years.

The Aswan Dam was designed by Nikolai Aleksandrovich Malyshev of the Moscow-based Hydroproject Institute. Designed for both irrigation and power generation, the dam incorporates a number of relatively new features, including a very deep grout curtain below its base. Although the reservoir will eventually silt in, even the most conservative estimates indicate the dam will give at least 200 years of service.

==Construction history==
The earliest recorded attempt to build a dam near Aswan was in the 11th century, when the Arab polymath and engineer Ibn al-Haytham (known as &quot;Alhazen&quot; in the West) was summoned to Egypt by the Fatimid Caliph, Al-Hakim bi-Amr Allah, to regulate the flooding of the Nile, a task requiring an early attempt at an Aswan Dam. His field work convinced him of the impracticality of this scheme.

===Aswan Low Dam, 1898–1902===

The British began construction of the first dam across the Nile in 1898. Construction lasted until 1902 and the dam was opened on 10 December 1902. The project was designed by Sir William Willcocks and involved several eminent engineers, including Sir Benjamin Baker and Sir John Aird, whose firm, John Aird &amp; Co., was the main contractor.

===Aswan High Dam prelude, 1954–1960===
In 1952, the Greek-Egyptian engineer Adrian Daninos began to develop the plan of the new Aswan Dam. Although the Low Dam was almost overtopped in 1946, the government of King Farouk showed no interest in Daninos&#x27;s plans. Instead the Nile Valley Plan by the British hydrologist Harold Edwin Hurst was favored, which proposed to store water in Sudan and Ethiopia, where evaporation is much lower. The Egyptian position changed completely after the overthrow of the monarchy, led by the Free Officers Movement including Gamal Abdel Nasser. The Free Officers were convinced that the Nile Waters had to be stored in Egypt for political reasons, and within two months, the plan of Daninos was accepted. Initially, both the United States and the USSR were interested in helping development of the dam. Complications ensued due to their rivalry during the Cold War, as well as growing intra-Arab tensions.

In 1955, Nasser was claiming to be the leader of Arab nationalism, in opposition to the traditional monarchies, especially the Hashemite Kingdom of Iraq following its signing of the 1955 Baghdad Pact. At that time the U.S. feared that communism would spread to the Middle East, and it saw Nasser as a natural leader of an anticommunist procapitalist Arab League. America and the United Kingdom offered to help finance construction of the High Dam, with a loan of $270 million, in return for Nasser&#x27;s leadership in resolving the Arab-Israeli conflict. While opposed to communism, capitalism, and imperialism, Nasser identified as a tactical neutralist, and sought to work with both the U.S. and the USSR for Egyptian and Arab benefit. After the UN criticized a raid by Israel against Egyptian forces in Gaza in 1955, Nasser realized that he could not portray himself as the leader of pan-Arab nationalism if he could not defend his country militarily against Israel. In addition to his development plans, he looked to quickly modernize his military, and he turned first to the U.S. for aid.
American Secretary of State John Foster Dulles and President Dwight Eisenhower told Nasser that the U.S. would supply him with weapons only if they were used for defensive purposes and if he accepted American military personnel for supervision and training. Nasser did not accept these conditions, and consulted the USSR for support.

Although Dulles believed that Nasser was only bluffing and that the USSR would not aid Nasser, he was wrong: the USSR promised Nasser a quantity of arms in exchange for a deferred payment of Egyptian grain and cotton. On 27 September 1955, Nasser announced an arms deal, with Czechoslovakia acting as a middleman for the Soviet support. Instead of attacking Nasser for turning to the Soviets, Dulles sought to improve relations with him. In December 1955, the US and the UK pledged $56 and $14 million, respectively, toward construction of the High Aswan Dam.

Though the Czech arms deal created an incentive for the US to invest at Aswan, the UK cited the deal as a reason for repealing its promise of dam funds. Dulles was angered more by Nasser&#x27;s diplomatic recognition of China, which was in direct conflict with Dulles&#x27;s policy of containment of communism.

Several other factors contributed to the US deciding to withdraw its offer of funding for the dam. Dulles believed that the USSR would not fulfill its commitment of military aid. He was also irritated by Nasser&#x27;s neutrality and attempts to play both sides of the Cold War. At the time, other Western allies in the Middle East, including Turkey and Iraq, were resentful that Egypt, a persistently neutral country, was being offered so much aid.

In June 1956, the Soviets offered Nasser $1.12 billion at 2% interest for the construction of the dam. On 19 July the U.S. State Department announced that American financial assistance for the High Dam was &quot;not feasible in present circumstances.&quot;

On 26 July 1956, with wide Egyptian acclaim, Nasser announced the nationalization of the Suez Canal that included fair compensation for the former owners. Nasser planned on the revenues generated by the canal to help fund construction of the High Dam. When the Suez War broke out, the United Kingdom, France, and Israel seized the canal and the Sinai. But pressure from the U.S. and the USSR at the United Nations and elsewhere forced them to withdraw.

In 1958, the USSR proceeded to provide support for the High Dam project.

In the 1950s, archaeologists began raising concerns that several major historical sites, including the famous temple of Abu Simbel were about to be submerged by waters collected behind the dam. A rescue operation began in 1960 under UNESCO (for details see below under Effects).

Despite its size, the Aswan project has not materially hurt the Egyptian balance of payments. The three Soviet credits covered virtually all of the project&#x27;s foreign exchange requirements, including the cost of technical services, imported power generating and transmission equipment and some imported equipment for land reclamation. Egypt was not seriously burdened by payments on the credits, most of which were extended for 12 years with interest at the very low rate of 2-1/2%. Repayments to the USSR constituted only a small net drain during the first half of the 1960s, and increased export earnings derived from crops grown on newly reclaimed land have largely offset the modest debt service payments in recent years. During 1965–1970, these export earnings amounted to an estimated $126 million, compared with debt service payments of $113 million.

===Construction and filling, 1960–1976===
The Soviets also provided technicians and heavy machinery. The enormous rock and clay dam was designed by Nikolai Aleksandrovich Malyshev of the Moscow-based Hydroproject Institute, along with some Egyptian engineers. 25,000 Egyptian engineers and workers contributed to the construction of the dams.

Originally designed by West German and French engineers in the early 1950s and slated for financing with Western credits, the Aswan High Dam became the USSR&#x27;s largest and most famous foreign aid project after the United States, the United Kingdom, and the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) withdrew their support in 1956. The first Soviet loan of $100 million to cover construction of coffer dams for diversion of the Nile was extended in 1958. An additional $225 million was extended in 1960 to complete the dam and construct power-generating facilities, and subsequently about $100 million was made available for land reclamation. These credits of some $425 million covered only the foreign exchange costs of the project, including salaries of Soviet engineers who supervised the project and were responsible for the installation and testing of Soviet equipment. Actual construction, which began in 1960, was done by Egyptian companies on contract to the High Dam Authority, and all domestic costs were borne by the Egyptians. Egyptian participation in the venture has raised the construction industry&#x27;s capacity and reputation significantly.

On the Egyptian side, the project was led by Osman Ahmed Osman&#x27;s Arab Contractors. The relatively young Osman underbid his only competitor by one-half.
* 1960: Start of construction on 9 January
* 1964: First dam construction stage completed, reservoir started filling
* 1970: The High Dam, &quot;as-Sad al-&#x27;Aali&quot;, completed on 21 July
* 1976: Reservoir reached capacity.

==Specifications==

The Aswan High Dam is long, wide at the base, wide at the crest and tall. It contains of material. At maximum, of water can pass through the dam. There are further emergency spillways for an extra , and the Toshka Canal links the reservoir to the Toshka Depression. The reservoir, named Lake Nasser, is long and at its widest, with a surface area of . It holds of water.
==Irrigation scheme==

Due to the absence of appreciable rainfall, Egypt&#x27;s agriculture depends entirely on irrigation. With irrigation, two harvests per year are possible, except for sugar cane which has a growing period of almost one year.

The high dam at Aswan releases, on average, water per year, of which some are diverted into the irrigation canals.

In the Nile valley and delta, almost benefit from these waters producing on average 1.8 crops per year. The annual crop consumptive use of water is about . Hence, the overall irrigation efficiency is 38/46 = 0.826 or 83%. This is a relatively high irrigation efficiency. The field irrigation efficiencies are much less, but the losses are reused downstream. This continuous reuse accounts for the high overall efficiency.

The following table shows the distribution of irrigation water over the branch canals taking off from the one main irrigation canal, the Mansuriya Canal near Giza.
:* Period 1 March to 31 July. 1 feddan is 0.42 ha or about 1 acre.
:* Data from the Egyptian Water Use Management Project (EWUP)

The salt concentration of the water in the Aswan reservoir is about , a very low salinity level. At an annual inflow of , the annual salt influx reaches 14 million tons. The average salt concentration of the drainage water evacuated into the sea and the coastal lakes is . At an annual discharge of (not counting the of salt intrusion from the sea and the lakes, see figure &quot;Water balances&quot;), the annual salt export reaches 27 million ton. In 1995, the output of salt was higher than the influx, and Egypt&#x27;s agricultural lands were desalinizing. Part of this could be due to the large number of subsurface drainage projects executed in the last decades to control the water table and soil salinity.

Drainage through subsurface drains and drainage channels is essential to prevent a deterioration of crop yields from waterlogging and soil salinization caused by irrigation. By 2003, more than have been equipped with a subsurface drainage system and approximately of water is drained annually from areas with these systems. The total investment cost in agricultural drainage over 27 years from 1973 to 2002 was about $3.1 billion covering the cost of design, construction, maintenance, research and training. During this period 11 large-scale projects were implemented with financial support from World Bank and other donors.

==Effects==
The High Dam has resulted in protection from floods and droughts, an increase in agricultural production and employment, electricity production, and improved navigation that also benefits tourism. Conversely, the dam flooded a large area, causing the relocation of over 100,000 people. Many archaeological sites were submerged while others were relocated. The dam is blamed for coastline erosion, soil salinity, and health problems.

The assessment of the costs and benefits of the dam remains controversial decades after its completion. According to one estimate, the annual economic benefit of the High Dam immediately after its completion was , $587 million using the exchange rate in 1970 of $2.30 per : from agricultural production, from hydroelectric generation, from flood protection, and from improved navigation. At the time of its construction, total cost, including unspecified &quot;subsidiary projects&quot; and the extension of electric power lines, amounted to . Not taking into account the negative environmental and social effects of the dam, its costs are thus estimated to have been recovered within only two years. One observer notes: &quot;The impacts of the Aswan High Dam (...) have been overwhelmingly positive. Although the Dam has contributed to some environmental problems, these have proved to be significantly less severe than was generally expected, or currently believed by many people.&quot; Another observer disagreed and he recommended that the dam should be torn down. Tearing it down would cost only a fraction of the funds required for &quot;continually combating the dam&#x27;s consequential damage&quot; and of fertile land could be reclaimed from the layers of mud on the bed of the drained reservoir. Samuel C. Florman wrote about the dam: &quot;As a structure it is a success. But in its effect on the ecology of the Nile Basin – most of which could have been predicted – it is a failure&quot;.

Periodic floods and droughts have affected Egypt since ancient times. The dam mitigated the effects of floods, such as those in 1964, 1973, and 1988. Navigation along the river has been improved, both upstream and downstream of the dam. Sailing along the Nile is a favorite tourism activity, which is mainly done during the winter when the natural flow of the Nile would have been too low to allow navigation of cruise ships. A new fishing industry has been created around Lake Nasser, though it is struggling due to its distance from any significant markets. The annual production was about 35,000 tons in the mid-1990s. Factories for the fishing industry and packaging have been set up near the Lake.

According to a 1971 CIA declassified report, although the High Dam has not created ecological problems as serious as some observers have charged, its construction has brought economic losses as well as gains. These losses derive largely from the settling in dam&#x27;s lake of the rich silt traditionally borne by the Nile. To date (1971), the main impact has been on the fishing industry. Egypt&#x27;s Mediterranean catch, which once averaged 35,000–40,000 tons annually, has shrunk to 20,000 tons or less, largely because the loss of plankton nourished by the silt has eliminated the sardine population in Egyptian waters. Fishing in high dam&#x27;s lake may in time at least partly offset the loss of saltwater fish, but only the most optimistic estimates place the eventual catch as high as 15,000–20,000 tons. Lack of continuing silt deposits at the mouth of the river also has contributed to a serious erosion problem. Commercial fertilizer requirements and salination and drainage difficulties, already large in perennially irrigated areas of Lower and Middle Egypt, will be somewhat increased in Upper Egypt by the change to perennial irrigation.

===Drought protection, agricultural production and employment===

The dams also protected Egypt from the droughts in 1972–1973 and 1983–1987 that devastated East and West Africa. The High Dam allowed Egypt to reclaim about 2.0 million feddan (840,000 hectares) in the Nile Delta and along the Nile Valley, increasing the country&#x27;s irrigated area by a third. The increase was brought about both by irrigating what used to be desert and by bringing under cultivation of that were previously used as flood retention basins. About half a million families were settled on these new lands. In particular the area under rice and sugar cane cultivation increased. In addition, about 1 million feddan (420,000 hectares), mostly in Upper Egypt, were converted from flood irrigation with only one crop per year to perennial irrigation allowing two or more crops per year. On other previously irrigated land, yields increased because water could be made available at critical low-flow periods. For example, wheat yields in Egypt tripled between 1952 and 1991 and better availability of water contributed to this increase. Most of the 32 km3 of freshwater, or almost 40 percent of the average flow of the Nile that were previously lost to the sea every year could be put to beneficial use. While about 10 km3 of the water saved is lost due to evaporation in Lake Nasser, the amount of water available for irrigation still increased by 22 km3. Other estimates put evaporation from Lake Nasser at between 10 and 16 cubic km per year.

===Electricity production===
The dam powers twelve generators each rated at , with a total of . Power generation began in 1967. When the High Dam first reached peak output in 1970, it produced around half of Egypt&#x27;s production of electric power (about 15 percent by 1998), and it gave most Egyptian villages the use of electricity for the first time. The High Dam has also improved the efficiency and the extension of the Old Aswan Hydropower stations by regulating upstream flows. At the time of completion, it was the largest power station in Africa and the 6th largest hydroelectric power station in the world.

All High Dam power facilities were completed ahead of schedule. Twelve turbines were installed and tested, giving the plant an installed capacity of 2,100 megawatts (MW), or more than twice the national total in 1960. With this capacity, the Aswan plant can produce 10 billion kWh of energy yearly. Two 500-kilovolt trunk lines to Cairo have been completed, and initial transmission problems, stemming mainly from poor insulators, were solved. Also, the damage inflicted on a main transformer station in 1968 by Israeli commandos has been repaired, and the Aswan plant is fully integrated with the power network in Lower Egypt. By 1971 estimation, power output at Aswan won&#x27;t reach much more than half of the plant&#x27;s theoretical capacity, because of limited water supplies and the differing seasonal water-use patterns for irrigation and power production. Agricultural demand for water in the summer far exceeds the amount needed to meet the comparatively low summer demand for electric power. Heavy summer irrigation use, however, will leave insufficient water under Egyptian control to permit hydroelectric power production at full capacity in the winter. Technical studies indicate that a maximum annual output of 5 billion kWh appears to be all that can be sustained due to fluctuations in Nile flows. Aswan High Dam electricity production is expected to be impacted by upstream mega-dams during extended drought periods. 
===Resettlement and compensations===

Lake Nasser flooded much of lower Nubia and 100,000 to 120,000 people were resettled in Sudan and Egypt.
In Sudan, 50,000 to 70,000 Sudanese Nubians were moved from the old town of Wadi Halfa and its surrounding villages. Some were moved to a newly created settlement on the shore of Lake Nasser called New Wadi Halfa, and some were resettled approximately south to the semi-arid Butana plain near the town of Khashm el-Girba up the Atbara River. The climate there had a regular rainy season as opposed to their previous desert habitat in which virtually no rain fell. The government developed an irrigation project, called the New Halfa Agricultural Development Scheme to grow cotton, grains, sugar cane and other crops. The Nubians were resettled in twenty five planned villages that included schools, medical facilities, and other services, including piped water and some electrification.

In Egypt, the majority of the 50,000 Nubians were moved three to ten kilometers from the Nile near Edna and Kom Ombo, downstream from Aswan in what was called &quot;New Nubia&quot;. Housing and facilities were built for 47 village units whose relationship to each other approximated that in Old Nubia. Irrigated land was provided to grow mainly sugar cane.

In 2019–20, Egypt started to compensate the Nubians who lost their homes following the dam impoundment.

===Archaeological sites===

Twenty-two monuments and architectural complexes that were threatened by flooding from Lake Nasser, including the Abu Simbel temples, were preserved by moving them to the shores of the lake under the UNESCO Nubia Campaign. Also moved were Philae, Kalabsha and Amada.

These monuments were granted to countries that helped with the works:
* The Debod temple to Madrid
* The Temple of Dendur to the Metropolitan Museum of Art of New York
* The Temple of Taffeh to the Rijksmuseum van Oudheden of Leiden
* The Temple of Ellesyia to the Museo Egizio of Turin

These items were removed to the garden area of the Sudan National Museum of Khartoum:
* The temple of Ramses II at Aksha
* The temple of Hatshepsut at Buhen
* The temple of Khnum at Kumma
* The tomb of the Nubian prince Djehuti-hotep at Debeira
* The temples of Dedwen and Sesostris III at Semna
* The granite columns from the Faras Cathedral
* A part of the paintings of the Faras Cathedral; the other part is in the National Museum of Warsaw.

The Temple of Ptah at Gerf Hussein had its free-standing section reconstructed at New Kalabsha, alongside the Temple of Kalabsha, Beit el-Wali, and the Kiosk of Qertassi.

The remaining archaeological sites, including the Buhen fort and the cemetery of Fadrus have been flooded by Lake Nasser.

===Loss of sediments===

Before the construction of the High Dam, the Nile deposited sediments of various particle size – consisting of fine sand, silt and clay – on fields in Upper Egypt through its annual flood, contributing to soil fertility. However, the nutrient value of the sediment has often been overestimated. 88 percent of the sediment was carried to the sea before the construction of the High Dam. The nutrient value added to the land by the sediment was only 6,000 tons of potash, 7,000 tons of phosphorus pentoxide and 17,000 tons of nitrogen. These amounts are insignificant compared to what is needed to reach the yields achieved today in Egypt&#x27;s irrigation. Also, the annual spread of sediment due to the Nile floods occurred along the banks of the Nile. Areas far from the river which never received the Nile floods before are now being irrigated.

A more serious issue of trapping of sediment by the dam is that it has increased coastline erosion surrounding the Nile Delta. There is a lack of reliable statistics.

===Waterlogging and increase in soil salinity===
Before the construction of the High Dam, groundwater levels in the Nile Valley fluctuated per year with the water level of the Nile. During summer when evaporation was highest, the groundwater level was too deep to allow salts dissolved in the water to be pulled to the surface through capillary action. With the disappearance of the annual flood and heavy year-round irrigation, groundwater levels remained high with little fluctuation leading to waterlogging. Soil salinity also increased because the distance between the surface and the groundwater table was small enough (1–2 m depending on soil conditions and temperature) to allow water to be pulled up by evaporation so that the relatively small concentrations of salt in the groundwater accumulated on the soil surface over the years. Since most of the farmland did not have proper subsurface drainage to lower the groundwater table, salinization gradually affected crop yields. Drainage through sub-surface drains and drainage channels is essential to prevent a deterioration of crop yields from soil salinization and waterlogging. By 2003, more than 2 million hectares have been equipped with a subsurface drainage system at a cost from 1973 to 2002 of about $3.1 billion.

===Health===

Contrary to many predictions made prior to the Aswan High Dam construction and publications that followed, that the prevalence of schistosomiasis (bilharzia) would increase, it did not. This assumption did not take into account the extent of perennial irrigation that was already present throughout Egypt decades before the high dam closure. By the 1950s only a small proportion of Upper Egypt had not been converted from basin (low transmission) to perennial (high transmission) irrigation. Expansion of perennial irrigation systems in Egypt did not depend on the high dam. In fact, within 15 years of the high dam closure there was solid evidence that bilharzia was declining in Upper Egypt. &quot;S. haematobium&quot; has since disappeared altogether. Suggested reasons for this include improvements in irrigation practice. In the Nile Delta, schistosomiasis had been highly endemic, with prevalence in the villages 50% or higher for almost a century before. This was a consequence of the conversion of the Delta to perennial irrigation to grow long staple cotton by the British. This has changed. Large-scale treatment programmes in the 1990s using single-dose oral medication contributed greatly to reducing the prevalence and severity of &quot;S. mansoni&quot; in the Delta.

===Other effects===
Sediment deposited in the reservoir is lowering the water storage capacity of Lake Nasser. The reservoir storage capacity is 162 km3, including 31 km3 dead storage at the bottom of the lake below above sea level, 90 km3 live storage, and 41 km3 of storage for high flood waters above above sea level. The annual sediment load of the Nile is about 134 million tons. This means that the dead storage volume would be filled up after 300–500 years if the sediment accumulated at the same rate throughout the area of the lake. Obviously sediment accumulates much faster at the upper reaches of the lake, where sedimentation has already affected the live storage zone.

Before the construction of the High Dam, the of irrigation and drainage canals in Egypt had to be dredged regularly to remove sediments. After construction of the dam, aquatic weeds grew much faster in the clearer water, helped by fertilizer residues. The total length of the infested waterways was about in the mid-1990s. Weeds have been gradually brought under control by manual, mechanical and biological methods.
Mediterranean fishing and brackish water lake fishery declined after the dam was finished because nutrients that flowed down the Nile to the Mediterranean were trapped behind the dam. For example, the sardine catch off the Egyptian coast declined from 18,000 tons in 1962 to a mere 460 tons in 1968, but then gradually recovered to 8,590 tons in 1992. A scientific article in the mid-1990s noted that &quot;the mismatch between low primary productivity and relatively high levels of fish production in the region still presents a puzzle to scientists.&quot;

A concern before the construction of the High Dam had been the potential drop in river-bed level downstream of the Dam as the result of erosion caused by the flow of sediment-free water. Estimates by various national and international experts put this drop at between and . However, the actual drop has been measured at , much less than expected.

The red-brick construction industry, which consisted of hundreds of factories that used Nile sediment deposits along the river, has also been negatively affected. Deprived of sediment, they started using the older alluvium of otherwise arable land taking out of production up to annually, with an estimated destroyed by 1984 when the government prohibited, &quot;with only modest success,&quot; further excavation. According to one source, bricks are now being made from new techniques which use a sand-clay mixture and it has been argued that the mud-based brick industry would have suffered even if the dam had not been built.

Because of the lower turbidity of the water sunlight penetrates deeper in the Nile water. Because of this and the increased presence of nutrients from fertilizers in the water, more algae grow in the Nile. This in turn increases the costs of drinking water treatment. Apparently few experts had expected that water quality in the Nile would actually decrease because of the High Dam.

==See also==

* Closure of the Suez Canal (1967–1975)
* Energy in Egypt
* Egyptian Public Works
* List of conventional hydroelectric power stations
* List of largest dams
* List of power stations in Egypt
* Water politics in the Nile Basin

==References==
==External links==
* View the official opening of the Aswan Dam in 1971
* Aswan Dam Sixth biggest dam
* LIFE Magazine Feb. 12, 1971 Overview of problems created by Aswan Dam</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q38891" start="4" end="13" title="Aswan Dam" label="Aswan Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q38891" start="18" end="32" title="Aswan Dam" label="Aswan High Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1244922" start="69" end="83" title="embankment dam" label="embankment dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q3392" start="113" end="117" title="Nile" label="Nile"/>
<link wikidata="Q29888" start="121" end="126" title="Aswan" label="Aswan"/>
<link wikidata="Q14221928" start="241" end="252" title="Chatuge Dam" label="Chatuge Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q182796" start="302" end="313" title="Lake Nasser" label="Lake Nasser"/>
<link wikidata="Q921582" start="351" end="364" title="Aswan Low Dam" label="Aswan Low Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780431" start="548" end="572" title="1952 Egyptian revolution" label="1952 Egyptian revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q80638" start="679" end="695" title="hydroelectricity" label="hydroelectricity"/>
<link wikidata="Q202398" start="749" end="766" title="industrialization" label="industrialization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987090" start="850" end="857" title="Economy of Egypt" label="economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2655498" start="862" end="878" title="culture of Egypt" label="culture of Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519552" start="955" end="975" title="flooding of the Nile" label="flooding of the Nile"/>
<link wikidata="Q27407" start="1060" end="1071" title="East Africa" label="East Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2887548" start="1073" end="1087" title="Nile Basin" label="drainage basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q181394" start="1134" end="1142" title="nutrient" label="nutrient"/>
<link wikidata="Q7946" start="1148" end="1155" title="mineral" label="mineral"/>
<link wikidata="Q36133" start="1192" end="1196" title="soil" label="soil"/>
<link wikidata="Q193110" start="1207" end="1217" title="floodplain" label="floodplain"/>
<link wikidata="Q179528" start="1222" end="1227" title="Nile delta" label="delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q11768" start="1298" end="1311" title="Ancient Egypt" label="ancient times"/>
<link wikidata="Q235352" start="1399" end="1403" title="crop" label="crop"/>
<link wikidata="Q43059" start="1451" end="1458" title="drought" label="drought"/>
<link wikidata="Q168247" start="1476" end="1482" title="famine" label="famine"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1542" end="1565" title="Demographics of Egypt#Population" label="Egypt&amp;#x27;s population"/>
<link wikidata="Q843920" start="1707" end="1715" title="Arable land" label="farmland"/>
<link wikidata="Q11457" start="1747" end="1753" title="cotton" label="cotton"/>
<link wikidata="Q131681" start="1787" end="1796" title="reservoir" label="reservoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810796" start="2020" end="2042" title="Hydroproject Institute" label="Hydroproject Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q383973" start="2077" end="2093" title="Electricity generation" label="power generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209582" start="2175" end="2188" title="grout curtain" label="grout curtain"/>
<link wikidata="Q11104" start="2491" end="2505" title="Ibn al-Haytham" label="Ibn al-Haytham"/>
<link wikidata="Q160307" start="2578" end="2592" title="Fatimid Caliphate" label="Fatimid Caliph"/>
<link wikidata="Q342137" start="2594" end="2615" title="Al-Hakim bi-Amr Allah" label="Al-Hakim bi-Amr Allah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519552" start="2633" end="2653" title="flooding of the Nile" label="flooding of the Nile"/>
<link wikidata="Q386694" start="2986" end="3003" title="William Willcocks" label="William Willcocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q817394" start="3058" end="3072" title="Benjamin Baker (engineer)" label="Benjamin Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q3809029" start="3081" end="3090" title="John Aird (engineer)" label="John Aird"/>
<link wikidata="Q16988163" start="3104" end="3123" title="John Aird &amp;amp; Co." label="John Aird &amp;amp; Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q213001" start="3361" end="3372" title="King Farouk" label="King Farouk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585818" start="3473" end="3491" title="Harold Edwin Hurst" label="Harold Edwin Hurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780431" start="3642" end="3667" title="Egyptian Revolution of 1952" label="overthrow of the monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q781607" start="3680" end="3702" title="Free Officers Movement (Egypt)" label="Free Officers Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q39524" start="3713" end="3731" title="Gamal Abdel Nasser" label="Gamal Abdel Nasser"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="3913" end="3926" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="3935" end="3939" title="Soviet Union" label="USSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="4044" end="4052" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4783165" start="4073" end="4092" title="Arab Cold War" label="intra-Arab tensions"/>
<link wikidata="Q114213" start="4144" end="4160" title="Arab nationalism" label="Arab nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774915" start="4222" end="4231" title="Hashemite" label="Hashemite"/>
<link wikidata="Q149805" start="4232" end="4247" title="Kingdom of Iraq" label="Kingdom of Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q379850" start="4282" end="4294" title="Baghdad Pact" label="Baghdad Pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="4330" end="4339" title="communism" label="communism"/>
<link wikidata="Q182121" start="4417" end="4430" title="Anticommunism" label="anticommunist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6206" start="4431" end="4444" title="capitalist" label="procapitalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7172" start="4445" end="4456" title="Arab League" label="Arab League"/>
<link wikidata="Q7260" start="4695" end="4706" title="imperialism" label="imperialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q83201" start="4731" end="4750" title="Non-Aligned Movement" label="tactical neutralist"/>
<link wikidata="Q4121521" start="4844" end="4857" title="United Nations Security Council Resolution 106" label="UN criticized"/>
<link wikidata="Q193476" start="4983" end="5003" title="Pan-Arabism" label="pan-Arab nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q223677" start="5218" end="5236" title="John Foster Dulles" label="John Foster Dulles"/>
<link wikidata="Q9916" start="5251" end="5268" title="Dwight Eisenhower" label="Dwight Eisenhower"/>
<link wikidata="Q2909843" start="5782" end="5794" title="Egyptian-Czech arms deal" label="an arms deal"/>
<link wikidata="Q33946" start="5801" end="5815" title="Czechoslovakia" label="Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058726" start="6280" end="6302" title="diplomatic recognition" label="diplomatic recognition"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="6306" end="6311" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q29071" start="6371" end="6382" title="containment" label="containment"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="6666" end="6674" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q789915" start="6966" end="6987" title="U.S. State Department" label="U.S. State Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q49101" start="7168" end="7205" title="Suez Crisis" label="the nationalization of the Suez Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q49101" start="7367" end="7375" title="Suez War" label="Suez War"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="7493" end="7497" title="USSR" label="USSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="7505" end="7519" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q134140" start="7754" end="7764" title="Abu Simbel" label="Abu Simbel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="7867" end="7873" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q140845" start="7987" end="8006" title="balance of payments" label="balance of payments"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="8419" end="8423" title="Soviet Union" label="USSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q12323" start="8905" end="8908" title="dam" label="dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810796" start="8977" end="8999" title="Hydroproject Institute" label="Hydroproject Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q713750" start="9144" end="9155" title="West Germany" label="West German"/>
<link wikidata="Q191384" start="9382" end="9435" title="International Bank for Reconstruction and Development" label="International Bank for Reconstruction and Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q4166461" start="10349" end="10366" title="Osman Ahmed Osman" label="Osman Ahmed Osman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4783172" start="10374" end="10390" title="Arab Contractors (company)" label="Arab Contractors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1982996" start="10919" end="10925" title="Toshka" label="Toshka"/>
<link wikidata="Q182796" start="10999" end="11010" title="Lake Nasser" label="Lake Nasser"/>
<link wikidata="Q11453" start="11195" end="11205" title="irrigation" label="irrigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q36940" start="11271" end="11281" title="sugar cane" label="sugar cane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399890" start="12065" end="12071" title="feddan" label="feddan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282811" start="12577" end="12588" title="Dissolved load" label="salt export"/>
<link wikidata="Q3776499" start="12710" end="12722" title="Leaching (agriculture)" label="desalinizing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7481418" start="12773" end="12792" title="Drainage system (agriculture)" label="subsurface drainage"/>
<link wikidata="Q12208418" start="12834" end="12857" title="Watertable control" label="control the water table"/>
<link wikidata="Q661665" start="12862" end="12875" title="Soil salinity control" label="soil salinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7481320" start="12878" end="12886" title="Drainage" label="Drainage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430825" start="12995" end="13007" title="waterlogging (agriculture)" label="waterlogging"/>
<link wikidata="Q754836" start="13012" end="13029" title="soil salinity" label="soil salinization"/>
<link wikidata="Q7481418" start="13108" end="13123" title="Drainage system (agriculture)" label="drainage system"/>
<link wikidata="Q8068" start="13562" end="13568" title="floods" label="floods"/>
<link wikidata="Q43059" start="13573" end="13581" title="drought protection" label="droughts"/>
<link wikidata="Q5381280" start="14532" end="14564" title="environmental issues in Egypt" label="environmental and social effects"/>
<link wikidata="Q5381280" start="14794" end="14816" title="environmental issues in Egypt" label="environmental problems"/>
<link wikidata="Q16090042" start="15259" end="15276" title="Samuel C. Florman" label="Samuel C. Florman"/>
<link wikidata="Q270699" start="16445" end="16449" title="silt" label="silt"/>
<link wikidata="Q25367" start="16695" end="16703" title="plankton" label="plankton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5141254" start="16745" end="16752" title="sardine" label="sardine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399890" start="17550" end="17556" title="feddan" label="feddan"/>
<link wikidata="Q179528" start="17583" end="17593" title="Nile Delta" label="Nile Delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q11453" start="20293" end="20303" title="irrigation" label="irrigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="20326" end="20338" title="Agriculture" label="Agricultural"/>
<link wikidata="Q135028" start="20969" end="20974" title="Nubia" label="Nubia"/>
<link wikidata="Q15140604" start="21076" end="21083" title="Nubians" label="Nubians"/>
<link wikidata="Q740865" start="21116" end="21126" title="Wadi Halfa" label="Wadi Halfa"/>
<link wikidata="Q753897" start="21368" end="21380" title="Atbara River" label="Atbara River"/>
<link wikidata="Q3178923" start="21563" end="21604" title="New Halfa Scheme" label="New Halfa Agricultural Development Scheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q138833" start="21936" end="21944" title="Kom Ombo" label="Kom Ombo"/>
<link wikidata="Q134140" start="22433" end="22443" title="Abu Simbel" label="Abu Simbel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="22519" end="22525" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503673" start="22558" end="22564" title="Philae" label="Philae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1721920" start="22566" end="22574" title="Kalabsha" label="Kalabsha"/>
<link wikidata="Q117156468" start="22579" end="22584" title="Amada" label="Amada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140249" start="22663" end="22675" title="Temple of Debod" label="Debod temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q22350866" start="22692" end="22708" title="Temple of Dendur" label="Temple of Dendur"/>
<link wikidata="Q160236" start="22716" end="22742" title="Metropolitan Museum of Art" label="Metropolitan Museum of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q978503" start="22761" end="22777" title="Temple of Taffeh" label="Temple of Taffeh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860378" start="22785" end="22809" title="Rijksmuseum van Oudheden" label="Rijksmuseum van Oudheden"/>
<link wikidata="Q43631" start="22813" end="22819" title="Leiden" label="Leiden"/>
<link wikidata="Q3517517" start="22826" end="22844" title="Temple of Ellesyia" label="Temple of Ellesyia"/>
<link wikidata="Q19877" start="22852" end="22864" title="Museo Egizio" label="Museo Egizio"/>
<link wikidata="Q495" start="22868" end="22873" title="Turin" label="Turin"/>
<link wikidata="Q643453" start="22926" end="22947" title="Sudan National Museum" label="Sudan National Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1963" start="22951" end="22959" title="Khartoum" label="Khartoum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1523" start="22977" end="22986" title="Ramses II" label="Ramses II"/>
<link wikidata="Q421454" start="22990" end="22995" title="Aksha, Sudan" label="Aksha"/>
<link wikidata="Q129234" start="23012" end="23022" title="Hatshepsut" label="Hatshepsut"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002656" start="23026" end="23031" title="Buhen" label="Buhen"/>
<link wikidata="Q183097" start="23048" end="23053" title="Khnum" label="Khnum"/>
<link wikidata="Q926195" start="23057" end="23062" title="Kumma (Nubia)" label="Kumma"/>
<link wikidata="Q11917108" start="23112" end="23119" title="Debeira" label="Debeira"/>
<link wikidata="Q421672" start="23137" end="23143" title="Dedwen" label="Dedwen"/>
<link wikidata="Q19248" start="23148" end="23161" title="Sesostris III" label="Sesostris III"/>
<link wikidata="Q1485667" start="23165" end="23170" title="Semna (Nubia)" label="Semna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227931" start="23251" end="23266" title="Faras Cathedral" label="Faras Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q153306" start="23293" end="23308" title="National Museum, Warsaw" label="National Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q270" start="23312" end="23318" title="Warsaw" label="Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q267700" start="23343" end="23355" title="Gerf Hussein" label="Gerf Hussein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1721920" start="23403" end="23415" title="New Kalabsha" label="New Kalabsha"/>
<link wikidata="Q11704302" start="23431" end="23449" title="Temple of Kalabsha" label="Temple of Kalabsha"/>
<link wikidata="Q3517508" start="23451" end="23463" title="Beit el-Wali" label="Beit el-Wali"/>
<link wikidata="Q925318" start="23473" end="23490" title="Kiosk of Qertassi" label="Kiosk of Qertassi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002656" start="23543" end="23548" title="Buhen" label="Buhen"/>
<link wikidata="Q48772542" start="23574" end="23580" title="Fadrus" label="Fadrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q180184" start="23701" end="23709" title="sediment" label="sediment"/>
<link wikidata="Q270699" start="23763" end="23767" title="silt" label="silt"/>
<link wikidata="Q42302" start="23772" end="23776" title="clay" label="clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q10564271" start="24103" end="24109" title="potash" label="potash"/>
<link wikidata="Q369309" start="24125" end="24145" title="phosphorus pentoxide" label="phosphorus pentoxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q188603" start="24992" end="25008" title="capillary action" label="capillary action"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430825" start="25154" end="25166" title="Waterlogging (agriculture)" label="waterlogging"/>
<link wikidata="Q7481320" start="25643" end="25651" title="Drainage" label="Drainage"/>
<link wikidata="Q754836" start="25761" end="25778" title="soil salinity" label="soil salinization"/>
<link wikidata="Q7481418" start="25872" end="25887" title="Drainage system (agriculture)" label="drainage system"/>
<link wikidata="Q221159" start="26084" end="26099" title="schistosomiasis" label="schistosomiasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q11453" start="26206" end="26216" title="irrigation" label="irrigation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27407" end="27419" title="Reservoir#Terminology" label="dead storage"/>
<link wikidata="Q5141254" start="28538" end="28545" title="sardine" label="sardine"/>
<link wikidata="Q113903698" start="30275" end="30312" title="Closure of the Suez Canal (1967–1975)" label="Closure of the Suez Canal (1967–1975)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4531917" start="30315" end="30330" title="Energy in Egypt" label="Energy in Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5348437" start="30333" end="30354" title="Egyptian Public Works" label="Egyptian Public Works"/>
<link wikidata="Q6613563" start="30357" end="30406" title="List of conventional hydroelectric power stations" label="List of conventional hydroelectric power stations"/>
<link wikidata="Q8216428" start="30409" end="30429" title="List of largest dams" label="List of largest dams"/>
<link wikidata="Q6634618" start="30432" end="30463" title="List of power stations in Egypt" label="List of power stations in Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2822832" start="30466" end="30498" title="Water politics in the Nile Basin" label="Water politics in the Nile Basin"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="191300" wikidata="Q1348048" url="?curid=191300" title="Glossary of Buddhism">
<text>Some Buddhist terms and concepts lack direct translations into English that cover the breadth of the original term. Below are given a number of important Buddhist terms, short definitions, and the languages in which they appear. In this list, an attempt has been made to organize terms by their original form and give translations and synonyms in other languages along with the definition.

Languages and traditions dealt with here:
* English (Eng.)
* Pāli: Theravada Buddhism
* Sanskrit (or Buddhist Hybrid Sanskrit): primarily Mahayana Buddhism
* Bengali (Bgd): Buddhism in Bangladesh
* Sinhala (Sri): Buddhism in Sri Lanka
* Burmese (Bur): Buddhism in Myanmar
* Karen (Kar): Theravada Buddhism
* Khmer: Buddhism in Cambodia
* Mon (Mon): Theravada Buddhism
* Mongolian (Mn): Buddhism in Mongolia
* Shan (Shan): Theravada Buddhism
* Tibetan (Tib): Tibetan Buddhism
* Dzongkha ༼རྫོང་ཁ༽ (Dzo): Buddhism in Bhutan
* Thai: Buddhism in Thailand
* Lao: Buddhism in Laos
* CJKV languages
** Chinese (Cn): Chinese Buddhism
** Cantonese (Hk): Buddhism in Hong Kong
** Japanese (Jp): Buddhism in Japan
** Korean (Ko): Korean Buddhism
** Taiwanese Hokkien (Tw): Buddhism in Taiwan
** Vietnamese (Vi): Buddhism in Vietnam (Mahayana and Theravada)
* Javanese (Jv): Buddhism in Indonesia

==A==

==B==

==C==
==D==

==F==

==G==

==H==

==I==

==J==

==K==

==L==

==M==

==N==

==O==

==P==

==R==

==S==

==T==

==U==

==V==

==Y==

==Z==

==See also==
* Buddhism
* Buddhist texts
* Glossary of Japanese Buddhism
* Diamond Realm

==References==
==External links==
* Pali Text Society Dictionary (Be sure to check the &quot;Unicode font&quot; option, and to have one; also, if looking for a word, choose &quot;words that match&quot;)
* Monier-Williams Sanskrit-English Dictionary
* Digital Dictionary of Buddhism (Login with userid &quot;guest&quot;)
* Kadampa Glossary of Buddhist Terms
*Fo Guang Shan Glossary of Buddhist Terms (with Chinese translation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="5" end="13" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="435" end="442" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q36727" start="452" end="456" title="Pāli" label="Pāli"/>
<link wikidata="Q132265" start="458" end="467" title="Theravada" label="Theravada"/>
<link wikidata="Q11059" start="479" end="487" title="Sanskrit" label="Sanskrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q248758" start="492" end="516" title="Buddhist Hybrid Sanskrit" label="Buddhist Hybrid Sanskrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q48362" start="529" end="537" title="Mahayana" label="Mahayana"/>
<link wikidata="Q9610" start="549" end="556" title="Bengali language" label="Bengali"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000869" start="564" end="586" title="Buddhism in Bangladesh" label="Buddhism in Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q13267" start="589" end="596" title="Sinhala language" label="Sinhala"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000970" start="604" end="625" title="Buddhism in Sri Lanka" label="Buddhism in Sri Lanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q9228" start="628" end="635" title="Burmese language" label="Burmese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044604" start="643" end="662" title="Buddhism in Myanmar" label="Buddhism in Myanmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q56410" start="665" end="670" title="S&amp;#x27;gaw Karen language" label="Karen"/>
<link wikidata="Q9205" start="699" end="704" title="Khmer language" label="Khmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044106" start="706" end="726" title="Buddhism in Cambodia" label="Buddhism in Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q13349" start="729" end="732" title="Mon language" label="Mon"/>
<link wikidata="Q9246" start="761" end="770" title="Mongolian language" label="Mongolian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000928" start="777" end="797" title="Buddhism in Mongolia" label="Buddhism in Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q56482" start="800" end="804" title="Shan language" label="Shan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641150" start="834" end="841" title="Tibetic languages" label="Tibetan"/>
<link wikidata="Q483889" start="849" end="865" title="Tibetan Buddhism" label="Tibetan Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q33081" start="868" end="885" title="Dzongkha languages" label="Dzongkha ༼རྫོང་ཁ༽"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000886" start="893" end="911" title="Buddhism in Bhutan" label="Buddhism in Bhutan"/>
<link wikidata="Q9217" start="914" end="918" title="Thai language" label="Thai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209722" start="920" end="940" title="Buddhism in Thailand" label="Buddhism in Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q9211" start="943" end="946" title="Lao language" label="Lao"/>
<link wikidata="Q4097998" start="948" end="964" title="Buddhism in Laos" label="Buddhism in Laos"/>
<link wikidata="Q53764732" start="967" end="981" title="CJK characters" label="CJKV languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q7850" start="985" end="992" title="Chinese language" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q847618" start="999" end="1015" title="Chinese Buddhism" label="Chinese Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9186" start="1019" end="1028" title="Cantonese" label="Cantonese"/>
<link wikidata="Q2603664" start="1035" end="1056" title="Buddhism in Hong Kong" label="Buddhism in Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q5287" start="1060" end="1068" title="Japanese language" label="Japanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q736311" start="1075" end="1092" title="Buddhism in Japan" label="Buddhism in Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q9176" start="1096" end="1102" title="Korean language" label="Korean"/>
<link wikidata="Q593427" start="1109" end="1124" title="Korean Buddhism" label="Korean Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q36778" start="1128" end="1145" title="Taiwanese Hokkien" label="Taiwanese Hokkien"/>
<link wikidata="Q712510" start="1152" end="1170" title="Buddhism in Taiwan" label="Buddhism in Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q9199" start="1174" end="1184" title="Vietnamese language" label="Vietnamese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132490" start="1191" end="1210" title="Buddhism in Vietnam" label="Buddhism in Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q33549" start="1238" end="1246" title="Javanese language" label="Javanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q2514699" start="1253" end="1274" title="Buddhism in Indonesia" label="Buddhism in Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="1444" end="1452" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001051" start="1455" end="1469" title="Buddhist texts" label="Buddhist texts"/>
<link wikidata="Q16056316" start="1472" end="1501" title="Glossary of Japanese Buddhism" label="Glossary of Japanese Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q518314" start="1504" end="1517" title="Diamond Realm" label="Diamond Realm"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="191302" wikidata="Q127448" url="?curid=191302" title="Municipalities of Sweden">
<text>The municipalities of Sweden () are its lower-level local government entities. There are 290 municipalities which are responsible for a large proportion of local services, including schools, emergency services and physical planning.

==Foundation==
The Local Government Act of 1991 specifies several responsibilities for the municipalities, and provides outlines for local government, such as the process for electing the municipal assembly. It also regulates a process (&quot;laglighetsprövning&quot;, &quot;legality trial&quot;) through which any citizen can appeal the decisions of a local government to a county court.

Municipal government in Sweden is similar to city commission government and cabinet-style council government. A legislative municipal assembly &quot;(kommunfullmäktige)&quot; of between 31 and 101 members (always an odd number) is elected from party-list proportional representation at municipal elections, held every four years in conjunction with the national general elections. The assembly in turn appoints a municipal executive committee &quot;(kommunstyrelse)&quot; from its members. The executive committee is headed by its chairman, (). Swedish municipalities generally employ one or more politicians as Municipal Commissioners, () one of which is usually the chairman of the executive committee.

The government of the Stockholm municipality is partially based on its own, separate municipal government law.

==History==
The first local government acts were implemented on 1 January 1863. There were two acts, one for the cities and one for the countryside. The total number of municipalities was about 2,500. 

The rural municipalities were based on the country-side civil parishes or administrative parishes (&quot;socknar&quot;), often formed in the Middle Ages around a church. The municipality acts of 1862 formally separated the civil municipalities from the parishes, establishing the municipality assembly as the decision-making body of rural municipalities and the church assembly as the decision-making body of parishes. 

The then 89 cities/towns (&quot;städer&quot;) (the same word is used for both city and town in Swedish) were based on the old chartered cities. There was also a third type, &quot;köping&quot; or market town. The status of these was somewhere between the rural municipalities and the cities. There were only eight of them in 1863, rising to a peak of 96 in 1959.

Up until 1930, when the total number of municipalities reached its peak (2,532 entities), there were more partitions than amalgamations.

In 1943 more than 500 of Sweden&#x27;s municipalities had fewer than 500 inhabitants, and the &quot;1943 års kommunindelningskommitté&quot; (&quot;Municipal subdivision commission of 1943&quot;) proposed that the number of rural municipalities should be drastically reduced.

After years of preparations the first of the two nationwide municipal reforms of the 20th century was implemented in 1952. The number of rural municipalities was reduced from 2,281 to 816. The cities (by then 133) were not affected.

Rather soon it was established that the reform of 1952 was not radical enough. A new commission, &quot;1959 års indelningssakkunniga&quot; (&quot;Subdivision experts of 1959&quot;) concluded that the next municipal reform should create new larger mixed rural/urban municipalities.

The Riksdag decided in 1962 that the new reform should be implemented on a voluntary basis. The process started in January 1964, when all municipalities were grouped in 282 &quot;kommunblock&quot;(&quot;municipal blocks&quot;). The co-operation within the blocks should ultimately lead to amalgamations. The target year was 1971, when all municipalities should be of uniform type and all the remaining formal differences in government and privileges between cities and rural municipalities should be abolished.

The amalgamations within the &quot;blocks&quot; started in 1965 and more were accomplished in 1967 and 1969, when the number of municipalities dropped from 1006 to 848. The Riksdag, however, found the amalgamation process too slow, and decided to speed it up by ending the voluntary aspect. In 1971 the unitary municipality (&quot;kommun&quot;) was introduced and the number of entities went down to 464; three years later it was 278. In one case (Svedala Municipality) the process was not accomplished until 1977.

Most of the municipalities were soon consolidated, but in some cases the antagonism within the new unities was so strong that it led to &quot;divorces&quot;. The total number of municipalities has today risen to 290.

The question of whether a new municipality will be created is at the discretion of the central Swedish government. It is recommended that the lower limit of a new municipality shall be 5,000 inhabitants.

Some municipalities still use the term &quot;City&quot; (Swedish: &quot;stad&quot;) when referring to themselves, a practice adopted by the largest and most urban municipalities Stockholm, Gothenburg and Malmö. Thirteen municipalities altogether, some of them including considerable rural areas, have made this choice, which is unofficial and has no effect on the administrative status of the municipality. The practice can, however, create some confusion as the term &quot;stad&quot; nowadays normally refers to a larger built-up area and not to an administrative entity.

==Geographical boundaries==
The municipalities in Sweden cover the entire territory of the nation. Unlike the United States or Canada, there are no unincorporated areas. The municipalities in the north cover large areas of sparsely populated land. Kiruna, at 19,446 km2, is sometimes held to be the world&#x27;s largest &quot;city&quot; by area, although places like La Tuque, Quebec (28,421 km2, official style &quot;Ville&quot;), the City of Kalgoorlie-Boulder in Western Australia (95,575.1 km2 and the Altamira in Northern Brazil (159,533 km2) are larger. (By comparison, the total area of the state of Lebanon is 10,452 km2.) At any rate, several northern municipalities are larger than many counties in the more densely populated southern part of the country.

===Sub-division===
The municipalities were earlier also divided into parishes, or &quot;församlingar&quot;. As these were subdivisions of the Church of Sweden, the separation of church and state along with a shift in responsibility for the population registration in Sweden transferring to the Swedish Tax Agency led to a new formal subdivision called district. Districts have been in force since 2016. These districts correspond by and large to the previous parishes as they existed on 31 December 1999, without later amalgamations. Many of the districts still correspond to the earlier 17th century division &quot;socknar&quot;, though the Swedish municipality reforms of 1862–63, 1952 and to some extent 1971, did perform some amalgamations and transferals of land (including populations) between municipalities.

==Duties==
According to law, the municipalities are responsible for:
*Childcare and pre-school
*Primary and secondary schools
*Social service
*Elderly care
*Support to people with disabilities
*Health and environmental issues
*Emergency services (not policing, which is the responsibility of the central government)
*Urban planning
*Sanitation (waste, sewage)

Many municipalities in addition have services like leisure activities for youths and housing services to make them attractive in getting residents.

==See also==
* List of municipalities of Sweden
* List of former municipalities of Sweden
* List of Swedish municipalities by wealth
* Local federation, when two or more municipalities form a joint organ to which they transfer some of their responsibilities, like a joint powers authority.

==References==
==External links==

*Swedish Association of Local Authorities and Regions
*The Local Government Act in English translation
*Swedish GovernmentOfficial site</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q127448" start="4" end="28" title="Municipalities of Sweden" label="municipalities of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501447" start="52" end="68" title="local government" label="local government"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778211" start="69" end="77" title="Legal entity" label="entities"/>
<link wikidata="Q4263267" start="422" end="440" title="Municipal assembly (Sweden)" label="municipal assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137280" start="609" end="621" title="county court" label="county court"/>
<link wikidata="Q15284" start="624" end="633" title="Municipality" label="Municipal"/>
<link wikidata="Q19592272" start="669" end="695" title="city commission government" label="city commission government"/>
<link wikidata="Q5015449" start="700" end="732" title="cabinet-style council" label="cabinet-style council government"/>
<link wikidata="Q4263267" start="774" end="791" title="kommunfullmäktige" label="kommunfullmäktige"/>
<link wikidata="Q31764" start="868" end="906" title="party-list proportional representation" label="party-list proportional representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q106107349" start="1074" end="1088" title="kommunstyrelse" label="kommunstyrelse"/>
<link wikidata="Q506250" start="1352" end="1374" title="Stockholm municipality" label="Stockholm municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q2261863" start="1555" end="1561" title="cities in Sweden" label="cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q20826981" start="1649" end="1669" title="rural municipality" label="rural municipalities"/>
<link wikidata="Q60495698" start="1701" end="1715" title="socken" label="civil parishes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4976993" start="1719" end="1740" title="administrative parish" label="administrative parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q727002" start="2192" end="2199" title="charter" label="charter"/>
<link wikidata="Q10571400" start="2245" end="2251" title="köping" label="köping"/>
<link wikidata="Q272930" start="3363" end="3370" title="Riksdag" label="Riksdag"/>
<link wikidata="Q515706" start="4319" end="4339" title="Svedala Municipality" label="Svedala Municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q930729" start="4700" end="4718" title="Government of Sweden" label="Swedish government"/>
<link wikidata="Q2261863" start="4882" end="4886" title="Stad (Sweden)" label="stad"/>
<link wikidata="Q506250" start="4988" end="4997" title="Stockholm Municipality" label="Stockholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q52502" start="4999" end="5009" title="Gothenburg Municipality" label="Gothenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q503361" start="5014" end="5019" title="Malmö Municipality" label="Malmö"/>
<link wikidata="Q269528" start="5532" end="5551" title="unincorporated area" label="unincorporated area"/>
<link wikidata="Q83232" start="5632" end="5638" title="Kiruna" label="Kiruna"/>
<link wikidata="Q141769" start="5751" end="5767" title="La Tuque, Quebec" label="La Tuque, Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q203327" start="5820" end="5846" title="City of Kalgoorlie-Boulder" label="City of Kalgoorlie-Boulder"/>
<link wikidata="Q434285" start="5890" end="5898" title="Altamira, Pará" label="Altamira"/>
<link wikidata="Q478465" start="5902" end="5917" title="Northern Brazil" label="Northern Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q822" start="5991" end="5998" title="Lebanon" label="Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q615980" start="6220" end="6228" title="Parishes of Sweden" label="parishes"/>
<link wikidata="Q749243" start="6293" end="6309" title="Church of Sweden" label="Church of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q15914395" start="6391" end="6424" title="population registration in Sweden" label="population registration in Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q836916" start="6445" end="6463" title="Swedish Tax Agency" label="Swedish Tax Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455871" start="7038" end="7047" title="Childcare" label="Childcare"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076052" start="7052" end="7062" title="pre-school" label="pre-school"/>
<link wikidata="Q975085" start="7064" end="7071" title="primary education" label="Primary"/>
<link wikidata="Q13006147" start="7076" end="7093" title="secondary education" label="secondary schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q11588306" start="7095" end="7109" title="Social service" label="Social service"/>
<link wikidata="Q437458" start="7111" end="7123" title="Elderly care" label="Elderly care"/>
<link wikidata="Q12131" start="7148" end="7160" title="Disability" label="disabilities"/>
<link wikidata="Q189603" start="7162" end="7168" title="Public health" label="Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q932068" start="7173" end="7186" title="Environmental health" label="environmental"/>
<link wikidata="Q814610" start="7195" end="7212" title="Emergency service" label="Emergency service"/>
<link wikidata="Q11995938" start="7219" end="7227" title="Swedish Police" label="policing"/>
<link wikidata="Q69883" start="7285" end="7299" title="Urban planning" label="Urban planning"/>
<link wikidata="Q949149" start="7301" end="7311" title="Sanitation" label="Sanitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q180388" start="7313" end="7318" title="Waste management" label="waste"/>
<link wikidata="Q221275" start="7320" end="7326" title="Sewage treatment" label="sewage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328114" start="7493" end="7525" title="List of municipalities of Sweden" label="List of municipalities of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q5477020" start="7528" end="7567" title="List of former municipalities of Sweden" label="List of former municipalities of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q6629692" start="7570" end="7610" title="List of Swedish municipalities by wealth" label="List of Swedish municipalities by wealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q6664371" start="7613" end="7629" title="Local federation" label="Local federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6269326" start="7744" end="7766" title="joint powers authority" label="joint powers authority"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="191304" wikidata="Q221159" url="?curid=191304" title="Schistosomiasis">
<text>Schistosomiasis, also known as snail fever, bilharzia, and Katayama fever is a disease caused by parasitic flatworms called schistosomes. It affects the urinary tract or the intestines. Symptoms include abdominal pain, diarrhea, bloody stool, or blood in the urine. Those who have been infected for a long time may experience liver damage, kidney failure, infertility, or bladder cancer. In children, schistosomiasis may cause poor growth and learning difficulties.
Schistosomiasis is spread by contact with fresh water contaminated with parasites. These parasites are released from infected freshwater snails. The disease is especially common among children in underdeveloped and developing countries because they are more likely to play in contaminated water. Schistosomiasis is also common among women, who may have greater exposure through daily chores that involve water, such as washing clothes and fetching water. Other high-risk groups include farmers, fishermen, and people using unclean water during daily living. Schistosomiasis belongs to the group of helminth infections. Diagnosis is made by finding the parasite’s eggs in a person&#x27;s urine or stool. It can also be confirmed by finding antibodies against the disease in the blood.
Methods of preventing the disease include improving access to clean water and reducing the number of snails. In areas where the disease is common, the medication praziquantel may be given once a year to the entire group. This is done to decrease the number of people infected, and consequently, the spread of the disease. Praziquantel is also the treatment recommended by the World Health Organization (WHO) for those who are known to be infected.

In 2019, schistosomiasis impacted approximately 236.6 million individuals across the globe. Each year, it is estimated that between 4,400 and 200,000 individuals succumb to it. The illness predominantly occurs in regions of Africa, Asia, and South America. Approximately 700 million individuals across over 70 nations reside in regions where the disease is prevalent. In tropical regions, schistosomiasis ranks as the second most economically significant parasitic disease, following malaria. Schistosomiasis is classified as a neglected tropical disease.
==Signs and symptoms==

Many individuals do not experience symptoms. If symptoms do appear, they usually have an incubation period of about 4–6 weeks. The first symptom of the disease may be a general feeling of illness. Within 12 hours of infection, an individual may develop cercarial dermatitis due to irritation at the point of entrance, commonly referred to as &quot;swimmer&#x27;s itch&quot;. The rash that may develop can mimic scabies and other rashes.

The manifestation of a schistosomal infection varies over time as cercariae, (the larval form of the parasite) and later the adult worms and their eggs, migrate through the body. If eggs migrate to the brain or spinal cord, seizures, paralysis, or spinal cord inflammation are possible.

===Acute infection===
Manifestation of acute infection from schistosomiasis includes cercarial dermatitis (hours to days) and acute systemic schistosomiasis (2–8 weeks) which can include symptoms of fever, myalgia, a cough, bloody diarrhea, chills, or lymph node enlargement. Some patients may also experience dyspnea and hypoxia associated with the development of pulmonary infiltrates.

=== Cercarial dermatitis ===
The first potential reaction is an itchy, maculopapular rash that, within the first 12 hours to days of penetration, results from cercariae penetrating the skin. The first time a non-sensitized person is exposed, the rashes are usually mild with an associated prickling sensation that quickly disappears on its own since this is a type of hypersensitivity reaction. In sensitized people who have previously been infected, the rash can develop into itchy, red, raised lesions (papules) with some turning into fluid-filled lesions (vesicles). Previous infections with cercariae causes a faster developing and worse presentation of dermatitis due to the stronger immune response. The round bumps are usually one to three centimeters across. Because people living in affected areas have often been repeatedly exposed, acute reactions are more common in tourists and migrants. The rash can occur between the first few hours and a week after exposure, and they normally resolve on their own in around 7–10 days. For human schistosomiasis, a similar type of dermatitis called &quot;swimmer&#x27;s itch&quot; can also be caused by cercariae from animal trematodes that often infect birds. Cercarial dermatitis is not contagious and can not be transmitted from person-to-person.

Symptoms may include:
* Flat, red rash
* Small red, raised pimples
* Small red blisters
* Prickling or tingling sensation, burning, itching of the skin

Scratching the rash can lead to secondary bacterial infection of the skin, thus it is important to refrain from scratching. Common treatments for itching include corticosteroid cream, anti-itch lotion, application of cool compresses to rash, bathing in Epsom salts or baking soda, and in severe cases, prescription strength cream and lotions. Oral antihistamines can also help relieve the itching.

====Acute schistosomiasis (Katayama fever)====
Acute schistosomiasis (Katayama fever) may occur weeks or months (around 2–8 weeks) after the initial infection as a systemic reaction against migrating schistosomulae as they pass through the bloodstream, through the lungs, and to the liver; and also against the antigens of eggs. Similarly to swimmer&#x27;s itch, Katayama fever is more commonly seen in people with their first infection such as migrants and tourists, and it is associated with heavy infection. However, it is also seen in native residents of China infected with &quot;S. japonicum&quot;. &quot;S. japonicum&quot; can cause acute schistosomiasis in a chronically infected population, and can lead to a more severe form of acute schistosomiasis.

Symptoms may include:
* Dry cough with changes on chest X-ray
* Fever
* Fatigue
* Muscle aches
* Headache
* Malaise
* Abdominal pain
* Diarrhea
* Enlargement of the liver (hepatomegaly), the spleen (splenomegaly), or both (hepatosplenomegaly)
* Hives
Acute schistosomiasis self-resolves within 2–8 weeks in most cases, but a small proportion of people have persistent weight loss, diarrhea, diffuse abdominal pain, and rash.

Neurological complications may include: 
* Spinal cord inflammation (transverse myelitis) may occur if worms or eggs travel to the spinal cord during this acute phase of infection.
* Headaches 
* Disturbances of sensorium
* Hemiplegia
* Tetraplegia
* Visual impairment
* Ataxia/ speech impairment 
* Motor paralysis
Cardiac complications may include:

*Myocarditis
* Pericarditis
* Asymptomatic myocardial ischemia

Treatment may include:
* Corticosteroid such as prednisone is used to alleviate the hypersensitivity reaction and reduce inflammation.
* Praziquantel can be administered to kill adult schistosomes and prevent chronic infection in addition to corticosteroid therapy. It is ineffective for recent infections as it only targets adult worms rather than premature schistosomulae. Therefore, a repeat praziquantel treatment several weeks after initial infection may be warranted. It is recommended to treat with praziquantel 4–6 weeks after initial exposure since it targets adult worms. For acute schistosomiasis (AS), praziquantel is ineffective on schistosomulae after 7 days and does not prevent the chronic phase of the disease. Too early treatment can worsen symptoms of AS. In some cases, this worsening of symptoms can be life-threatening by causing encephalitis related to vasculitis, myocarditis, or pulmonary events.
* Oxamniquine (50 mg/kg once) can be administered in the early phase of schistosomiasis. It is more effective against schistsomulae than praziquantel, but only with &quot;S. mansoni&quot;. This prevents the chronic &quot;S. mansoni&quot; infection and egg-laying stages.
* Artemether is an artemisin derivative efficient against schistosomulae aged 7–21 days, but only reduces &quot;S. mansoni&quot; infection by 50% in exposed children.

===Chronic infection===
In long-established schistosomiasis, adult worms lay eggs that can cause inflammatory reactions. The eggs secrete proteolytic enzymes that help them migrate to the bladder and intestines to be shed. The enzymes also cause an eosinophilic inflammatory reaction when eggs get trapped in tissues or embolize to the liver, spleen, lungs, or brain. The long-term manifestations are dependent on the species of schistosome, as the adult worms of different species migrate to different areas. Many infections are mildly symptomatic, with anemia and malnutrition being common in endemic areas.

====Intestinal schistosomiasis====
The worms of &quot;S. mansoni&quot; and &quot;S. japonicum&quot; migrate to the gastrointestinal tract and liver veins. Eggs in the gut wall can lead to pain, bloody stool, and diarrhea (especially in children). Severe disease can lead to narrowing of the colon or rectum.

In intestinal schistosomiasis, eggs become lodged in the intestinal wall during their migration from the mesenteric venules to the intestinal lumen, and the trapped eggs cause an immune system reaction called a granulomatous reaction. They mostly affect the large bowel and rectum, and involvement of the small bowel is rare. This immune response can lead to colonic obstruction and blood loss. The infected individual may have what appears to be a potbelly. There is a strong correlation between the morbidity of intestinal schistosomiasis and the intensity of infection. In light infections, symptoms may be mild and can go unrecognized. The most common species to cause intestinal schistosomiasis are &quot;S. mansoni&quot; and &quot;S. japonicum&quot;, however, &quot;S. mekongi&quot; and &quot;S. intercalatum&quot; can also cause this disease.

Symptoms may include:
* Abdominal pain and discomfort
* Loss of appetite
* Mucous diarrhea with or without gross blood
* Blood in feces that is not visibly present (fecal occult blood)
* Abdominal distention

Complications may include:
* Intestinal polyps
* Intestinal ulcers
* Iron-deficient anemia
* Fistula
* Bowel strictures (narrowing of colon or rectum)
* Protein-losing enteropathy
* Partial or complete bowel obstruction
* Appendicitis (rare)
Approximately 10-50% of people living in endemic regions of &quot;S. mansoni&quot; and &quot;S. japonicum&quot; develop intestinal schistosomiasis. &quot;S. mansoni&quot; infection epidemiologically overlaps with high HIV prevalence in Sub-Saharan Africa, where gastrointestinal schistosomiasis has been linked to increased HIV transmission.

==== Hepatosplenic schistosomiasis ====
Eggs also migrate to the liver, leading to fibrosis in 4 to 8% of people with chronic infection, mainly those with long-term heavy infection.

Eggs can become lodged in the liver, leading to portal hypertension, splenomegaly, the buildup of fluid in the abdomen, and potentially life-threatening dilations or swollen areas in the esophagus or gastrointestinal tract that can tear and bleed profusely (esophageal varices). This condition can be separated into two phases: inflammatory hepatic schistosomiasis (early inflammatory reaction) and chronic hepatic schistosomiasis. Most common species to cause this condition are &quot;S. mansoni&quot;, &quot;S. japonicum&quot;, and &quot;S. mekongi&quot;.

Inflammatory hepatic schistosomiasis occurs mainly in children and adolescents due to early immune reaction to eggs trapped within the periportal and presinusoidal spaces of the liver creating numerous granulomas. Liver function is unaffected, and the severity of liver and spleen enlargement is correlated to the intensity of the infection. It is characterized by an enlarged left lobe of the liver with a sharp edge and an enlarged spleen with nodules. The liver and spleen enlargement is usually mild, but in severe cases, they can enlarge to the level of the belly button and even into the pelvis.
Chronic (fibrotic) hepatic schistosomiasis is a late-stage liver disease that occurs mainly in young and middle-aged adults who have been chronically infected with a heavy infection and whose immune regulation of fibrosis is not functioning properly. It affects only a small proportion of infected people. It does not affect liver function or architecture, unlike cirrhosis. The pathogenesis of this disease is caused by deposition of collagen and extracellular matrix proteins within the periportal space, which leads to liver portal fibrosis and enlarged fibrotic portal tracts (Symmer&#x27;s pipe stem fibrosis). The periportal fibrosis physically compress the portal vein leading to portal hypertension (increased portal venous pressure), increased pressure of the splenic vein, and subsequent enlargement of the spleen. Portal hypertension can also increase the pressure in portosystemic anastomoses (vessel connections between the portal circulation and systemic circulation) leading to esophageal varices and caput medusae. These portosystemic anastomoses also allows a pathway for the eggs to travel to locations such as the lungs, spinal cord, or brain. Co-infection with hepatitis is common in regions endemic to schistosomiasis with hepatitis B or hepatitis C, and co-infection with hepatitis C is associated with more rapid liver deterioration and worse outcomes. Fibrotic hepatic schistosomiasis caused by &quot;S. mansoni&quot; usually develops in around 5–15 years, however, this can take less time for &quot;S. japonicum&quot;.

Symptoms may include:
* Esophageal varices (can cause life-threatening esophageal variceal bleed)
* Ascites (end-stage)
* Caput medusae
* Enlarged spleen and liver
Complications may include:
* Neuroschistosomiasis due to portosystemic anastomoses from portal hypertension
* Pulmonary schistosomiasis due to portosystemic anastomoses from portal hypertension

==== Pulmonary schistosomiasis ====
Portal hypertension secondary to hepatosplenic schistosomiasis can cause vessel connections between the portal (liver and gut) circulation and systemic circulation to develop, which creates a pathway for the eggs and worms to travel to the lungs. The eggs can be deposited around the alveolar capillary beds and cause granulomatous inflammation of the pulmonary arterioles followed by fibrosis. This leads to high blood pressure in the pulmonary circulation system (pulmonary hypertension), increased pressure in the right heart, enlargement of the pulmonary artery and right atria, and thickening of the right ventricular wall.

Symptoms of pulmonary hypertension include shortness of breath, chest pain, lethargy, and fainting during physical exertion.
====Urogenital schistosomiasis====
The worms of &quot;S. haematobium&quot; migrate to the veins around the bladder and ureters where they reproduce. &quot;S. haematobium&quot; can produce up to 3000 eggs per day. These eggs migrate from the veins to the bladder and ureter lumens, but up to 50 percent of them can become trapped in the surrounding tissues causing granulomatous inflammation, formation of polyps, and ulceration of bladder, ureter, and genital tract tissues. This can lead to blood in the urine (hematuria) 10 to 12 weeks after infection. Over time, fibrosis can lead to obstruction of the urinary tract, hydronephrosis, and kidney failure. Bladder cancer diagnosis and mortality are generally elevated in affected areas; efforts to control schistosomiasis in Egypt have led to decreases in the bladder cancer rate. The risk of bladder cancer appears to be especially high in male smokers, perhaps due to chronic irritation of the bladder lining allowing it to be exposed to carcinogens from smoking.

In women, the genitourinary disease can also include genital lesions that may lead to increased rates of HIV transmission. If lesions involve the fallopian tubes or ovaries, it may lead to infertility. If the reproductive organs in males are affected, there could be blood in the sperm.

Urinary symptoms may include:
* Hematuria - blood is usually seen at the end of a urine stream (most common symptom)
* Painful urination (dysuria)
* Increase frequency of urination
* Protein in the urine (proteinuria)
* Secondary urinary tract infection
* Secondary kidney infection
* Calcification of the bladder wall
Genital symptoms may include:
* Inflammation and ulceration of uterine cervix, vagina, or vulva
* Blood in the sperm
* Infertility in females

Kidney function is unaffected in many cases, and the lesions are reversible with proper treatment to eliminate the worms.

==== Neuroschistosomiasis ====
Central nervous system lesions occur occasionally due to inflammation and granuloma development around eggs or worms that migrate to the brain or spinal cord through the circulatory system. They can potentially develop irreversible scarring without proper treatment. Cerebral granulomatous disease may be caused by &quot;S. japonicum&quot; eggs in the brain during the acute and chronic phases of the disease. Communities in China affected by &quot;S. japonicum&quot; have rates of seizures eight times higher than baseline. Cerebral granulomatous infection may also be caused by &quot;S. mansoni&quot;. &quot;in situ&quot; egg deposition following the anomalous migration of the adult worm, which appears to be the only mechanism by which &quot;Schistosoma&quot; can reach the central nervous system in people with schistosomiasis. The destructive action on the nervous tissue and the mass effect produced by a large number of eggs surrounded by multiple, large granulomas in circumscribed areas of the brain characterize the pseudotumoral form of neuroschistosomiasis and are responsible for the appearance of clinical manifestations: headache, hemiparesis, altered mental status, vertigo, visual abnormalities, seizures, and ataxia. Similarly, granulomatous lesions from &quot;S. mansoni&quot; and &quot;S. haematobium&quot; eggs in the spinal cord can lead to transverse myelitis (inflammation of the spinal cord) with flaccid paraplegia. In cases with advanced hepatosplenic and urinary schistosomiasis, the continuous embolization of eggs from the portal mesenteric system (&quot;S. mansoni&quot;) or portal mesenteric-pelvic system (&quot;S. haematobium&quot;) to the brain, results in a sparse distribution of eggs associated with scant periovular inflammatory reaction, usually with little or no clinical significance.

Spinal cord inflammation (transverse myelitis) symptoms may include:
* Paralysis of the lower extremities
* Loss of bowel or urinary control
* Loss of sensation below the level of the lesion
* Pain below the level of the lesion

Cerebral granulomatous infection symptoms may include:

* Seizures
* Headaches
* Motor impairment
* Sensory impairment
* Unsteady gait
* Inability to stand or sit without support
* Uncoordinated movements
* Scanning speech
* Irregular eye movements

Corticosteroids are used to prevent permanent neurological damage from the inflammatory response to the eggs, and sometimes anticonvulsants are needed to stop the seizures. Corticosteroids are given prior to administration of praziquantel.

==Transmission and life cycle==

Individuals infected with &quot;Schistosoma&quot; release eggs into water via their feces or urine. A collection of stool samples under a microscope will show the eggs of &quot;S. intercalatum&quot;, &quot;S. mansori&quot;, and &quot;S. japonicum&quot;. Looking at a urine sample under a microscope would reveal the eggs of &quot;S. haematobium&quot; and rarely, the eggs of &quot;S. mansori.&quot; After larvae hatch from these eggs, the larvae infect a very specific type of freshwater snail. For example, in &quot;S. haematobium&quot; and &quot;S. intercalatum&quot; it is snails of the genus &quot;Bulinus&quot;, in &quot;S. mansoni&quot; it is &quot;Biomphalaria&quot;, and in &quot;S. japonicum&quot; it is &quot;Oncomelania&quot;. The schistosome larvae undergo the next phase of their lifecycles in these snails, spending their time reproducing and developing. Once this step has been completed, the parasite leaves the snail and enters the water column. The parasite can live in the water for only 48 hours without a mammalian host. Once a host has been found, the worm enters its blood vessels. For several weeks, the worm remains in the vessels, continuing its development into its adult phase. When maturity is reached, mating occurs and eggs are produced. Eggs enter the bladder/intestine and are excreted through urine and feces and the process repeats. If the eggs are not excreted, they can become engrained in the body tissues and cause myriad problems such as immune reactions and organ damage. While transmission typically occurs only in countries where the freshwater snails are native, a case in Germany was reported where a man got schistosomiasis from an infected snail in his aquarium.

Humans encounter larvae of the schistosome parasite when they enter contaminated water while bathing, playing, swimming, washing, fishing, or walking through the water.
=== Life cycle ===
The life cycle stages are as follows:
# The excretion of schistosome eggs in urine or feces depending on the species
# The hatching of the eggs leads to the release of the free-swimming, ciliated larvae called miracidia
# Miracidia find and penetrate the snails, which are the intermediate hosts (specific species of snails are dependent on the species of Schistosoma)
# Within the snails, two successive generations of sporocysts occur
# Sporocysts give rise to the infective free-swimming larvae with forked tails called cercariae, and they leave the snails to enter the water
# Cercariae find the human hosts and penetrate their skin
# Upon entrance into the human hosts, cercariae lose their tails and become schistosomulae
# The schistosomulae travel to the lungs and heart via venous circulation
# They migrate to the portal venous system of the liver where they mature into their adult form with two separate sexes
# The adult male and female are paired together, exit the liver via the portal venous system, travel to the venous systems of the intestines or bladder (species dependent), and produce eggs.
Each species lays its eggs in specific parts of the body.
# &quot;S. japonicum&quot; - superior mesenteric veins (but can also inhabit inferior mesenteric veins)
# &quot;S. mansoni&quot; - inferior mesenteric veins (but can also inhabit superior mesenteric veins)
# &quot;S. haematobium&quot; - vesicular and pelvic venous plexus of the bladder (occasionally rectal venules)
# &quot;S. intercalatum&quot; and &quot;S. guineensis&quot; - inferior mesenteric plexus (lower portion of the bowels compared to &quot;S. mansoni&quot;)
Schistosomes can live an average of 3–5 years, and the eggs can survive for more than 30 years after infection.

=== Other hosts ===
Schistosomiasis is also a concern of cattle husbandry and mice. O-methylthreonine is weakly effective in mouse schistosomiasis but is not in use.

== Pathogenesis ==
The infectious stage starts when the free-swimming larval form of the schistosome, cercariae, penetrates the human skin using their suckers, proteolytic enzymes, and tail movements; the cercariae transformed into schistosomulae by losing its tail and subsequently travels to the heart and lungs through the venous system until it eventually reaches the liver where it will mature into the adult form. The diseases caused by the schistomes are characterized into acute schistosomiasis and chronic schistosomiasis, and can vary dependent on the species of schistosome.

=== Acute infection ===
Minutes to days after initial infection:

* Cercerial dermatitis (Swimmer&#x27;s itch) - swimmer&#x27;s itch is caused by a localized allergic reaction at the sites of skin penetration by the cercariae causing an inflammatory reaction that is characterized by itchy red pimples and blisters.

Weeks to months after initial infection:

* Acute Schistosomiasis (Katayama&#x27;s Fever) - the exact pathophysiology of this disease remains unknown. It has been hypothesized to be caused by a systemic immune response due to immune complex formation (Type III hypersensivity) with the foreign antigens on the migratory schistosomula and the eggs and the subsequent deposition of these complexes on various tissues leading to activation of an autoimmune response. Acute schistosomiasis caused by &quot;S. mansoni&quot; and &quot;S. haematobium&quot; generally affect people who have been infected for the first time such as tourists visiting endemic regions. In contrast, cases of acute schistosomiasis caused by &quot;S. japonicum&quot; can occur in reinfection to population who reside in endemic regions, and they occur in higher incidences and can have worse prognosis. It was proposed that the large amount of egg antigens released by &quot;S. japonicum&quot; interact with antibodies leading to the formation of a high volume of immune complexes, which cause enlargement of the lymph tissues. This sequence of events can lead to clinical manifestation of fever, enlargement of the spleen and liver due to fibrosis, portal hypertension, and death.

=== Chronic infection ===
The clinical manifestations of chronic infection are mainly caused by immune reaction to the eggs&#x27; entrapment within tissues resulting in granuloma formation and chronic inflammation. Adult worms live together in pairs (one male and female), sexually reproduce, and lay eggs in the veins around the intestines and bladder depending on the species, and these eggs can rupture the wall of the veins to escape to the surrounding tissues. The eggs make their way through the tissues to the intestinal or bladder lumen with proteolytic enzymes, however, a large number of eggs are unable to finish their journey and remained stuck within the tissues where they can elicit an immune response. The miracidia in these eggs can release antigens that stimulate an inflammatory immune response. The miracidia within the eggs live for around 6–8 weeks before they die and stop releasing the antigens. The granulomatous response is a cellular immune response mediated by CD4+ T cells, neutrophils, eosinophils, lymphocytes, macrophages, and monocytes, and this chronic inflammatory response elicited by the eggs can cause fibrosis, tissue destruction, and granuloma nodules that disrupt the functions of the organs involved. Th1 helper cell response is prominent releasing cytokines such as IFN-γ during the early phases of infection, and it transitions to Th2 response leading to increase in level of IgE, IL-4, and eosinophils as egg production progresses. In chronic infections, the Th2 response shifts to increasing the level of IL-10, IL-13, and IgG4, which reverses the progression of the granulomas and leads to collagen deposition at the sites of the granulomas. The specific clinical symptoms and severity of the disease this causes depends on the type of schistosome infection, duration of infection, number of eggs, and the organ at which the eggs are deposited. The number of eggs entrapped in the tissues will continue to increase if the Schistosoma are not eliminated.

==Diagnosis==

===Identification of eggs in stools===

Diagnosis of infection is confirmed by the identification of eggs in stools. Eggs of &quot;S. mansoni&quot; are about 140 by 60 μm in size and have a lateral spine. The diagnosis is improved through the use of the Kato-Katz technique, a semiquantitative stool examination technique. Other methods that can be used are enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay, circumoval precipitation test, and alkaline phosphatase immunoassay.

Microscopic identification of eggs in stool or urine is the most practical method for diagnosis. A stool examination should be performed when infection with &quot;S. mansoni&quot; or &quot;S. japonicum&quot; is suspected, and a urine examination should be performed if &quot;S. haematobium&quot; is suspected. Eggs can be present in the stool in infections with all &quot;Schistosoma&quot; species. The examination can be performed on a simple smear (1 to 2 mg of fecal material). Because eggs may be passed intermittently or in small numbers, their detection is enhanced by repeated examinations or concentration procedures, or both. In addition, for field surveys and investigational purposes, the egg output can be quantified by using the Kato-Katz technique (20 to 50 mg of fecal material) or the Ritchie technique. Eggs can be found in the urine in infections with &quot;S. haematobium&quot; (recommended time for collection: between noon and 3 PM) and with &quot;S. japonicum&quot;. Quantification is possible by using filtration through a nucleopore filter membrane of a standard volume of urine followed by egg counts on the membrane. Tissue biopsy (rectal biopsy for all species and biopsy of the bladder for &quot;S. haematobium&quot;) may demonstrate eggs when stool or urine examinations are negative.

Confirming microhematuria in urine using urine reagent strips is more accurate than circulating antigen tests to identify active schistosomiasis in endemic areas.

===Antibody detection===

Antibody detection can be useful to indicate schistosome infection in people who have traveled to areas where schistosomiasis is common and in whom eggs cannot be demonstrated in fecal or urine specimens. Test sensitivity and specificity vary widely among the many tests reported for the serologic diagnosis of schistosomiasis and depend on the type of antigen preparations used (crude, purified, adult worm, egg, cercarial) and the test procedure.

At the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, a combination of tests with purified adult worm antigens is used for antibody detection. All serum specimens are tested by FAST-ELISA using &quot;S. mansoni&quot; adult microsomal antigen. A positive reaction (greater than 9 units/μL serum) indicates infection with &quot;Schistosoma&quot; species. Sensitivity for &quot;S. mansoni&quot; infection is 99%, 95% for &quot;S. haematobium&quot; infection, and less than 50% for &quot;S. japonicum&quot; infection. The specificity of this assay for detecting schistosome infection is 99%. Because test sensitivity with the FAST-ELISA is reduced for species other than &quot;S. mansoni&quot;, immunoblots of the species appropriate to the person&#x27;s travel history are also tested to ensure detection of &quot;S. haematobium&quot; and &quot;S. japonicum&quot; infections. Immunoblots with adult worm microsomal antigens are species-specific, so a positive reaction indicates the infecting species. The antibody&#x27;s presence only indicates that schistosome infection occurred at some time and cannot be correlated with clinical status, worm burden, egg production, or prognosis. Where a person has traveled can help determine which &quot;Schistosoma&quot; species to test for by immunoblot.

In 2005, a field evaluation of a novel handheld microscope was undertaken in Uganda for the diagnosis of intestinal schistosomiasis by a team led by Russell Stothard from the Natural History Museum of London, working with the Schistosomiasis Control Initiative, London.

===Molecular diagnostics===
Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) based testing is accurate and rapid. However, it is not frequently used in countries where the disease is common due to the cost of the equipment and the technical expertise required to run the tests. Using a microscope to detect eggs costs about US$0.40 per test whereas PCR is about $US 7 per test as of 2019. Loop-mediated isothermal amplification are being studied as they are lower cost. LAMP testing is not commercially available as of 2019.

=== Laboratory testing ===
&quot;S. haematobium&quot; screening in the community can be done by using urine dip-stick to check for hematuria, and the stool guaiac test can be used to test for blood in the stool for potential &quot;S. mansoni&quot; and &quot;S. japonicum&quot; infection. For travelers or migrants in endemic regions, complete blood count with differential can be used to identify a high level of eosinophil in the blood, which could be indicative of an acute infection. Liver function test can be ordered if hepatosplenic schistosomiasis is suspected, and a subsequent hepatitis test panel can be ordered if liver function test is abnormal.

Like most parasitic infections, schistosomiasis will usually cause significant eosinophilia that can be identified on a complete blood count with differential.

=== Tissue biopsy ===
If other diagnostic methods of schistosomiasis have failed to detect the infection, but there is still a high suspicion for schistosomiasis, tissue biopsy from the rectum, bladder, and liver can be obtained to look for schistosome eggs within the tissue samples.

=== Imaging ===
Imaging modalities such as X-rays, ultrasound, computed tomography (CT), and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) can be utilized to evaluate for severity of schistosomiasis and damages of the infected organs. For example, X-ray and CT scans of the chest can be used to detect lesions in the lungs from pulmonary schistosomiasis, and pelvic X-ray can reveal calcification of the bladder in chronic urinary schistosomiasis. Ultrasound may be used to look for abnormalities in the liver and spleen in hepatosplenic schistosomiasis, and CT scan of the liver is a good tool to look for calcification in the liver associated with &quot;S. japonicum&quot; infection. CT scan can also be used to assess damages from the schistosomiasis infection in the intestinal, urogenital, and central nervous system. MRI is used to evaluate schistosomiasis of the central nervous system, liver, and genital.

PET/CT scans that identify tissues with higher metabolic activity have been used to help diagnose schistosomiasis in rare cases. This is due to the high level of inflammation caused by the schistosomal eggs, which increases the metabolic rate of the surrounding tissues.

==Prevention==

Many countries are working towards eradicating the disease. The World Health Organization is promoting these efforts. In some cases, urbanization, pollution, and the consequent destruction of snail habitat have reduced exposure, with a subsequent decrease in new infections. The elimination of snail populations using molluscicides had been attempted to prevent schistosomiasis in the past, but it was an expensive process that often only reduced but did not eliminate the snail population. The drug praziquantel is used for prevention in high-risk populations living in areas where the disease is common. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention advises avoiding drinking or coming into contact with contaminated water in areas where schistosomiasis is common.

A 2014 review found tentative evidence that increasing access to clean water and sanitation reduces schistosome infection.

Other important preventive measures include hygiene education leading to behavioral change and sanitary engineering to ensure a safe water supply.

=== Preventive anthelminthic administration ===
For schistosomiasis control, the World Health Organization recommends preventive anthelminthic administration, which is the treatment of an entire affected population and the periodic treatment of all groups at high risk of acquiring schistosomiasis by using Praziquantel. In 2019, 44.5% of people with schistosomiasis were treated globally, and 67.2% of school-aged children needing preventive chemotherapy received treatment.

===Snails, dams, and prawns===
For many years from the 1950s onwards, vast dams and irrigation schemes were constructed, causing a massive rise in water-borne infections from schistosomiasis. The detailed specifications in various United Nations documents since the 1950s could have minimized this problem. Irrigation schemes can be designed to make it hard for the snails to colonize the water and to reduce contact with the local population. Even though guidelines on how to design these schemes to minimise the spread of the disease had been published years before, the designers were unaware of them. The dams appear to have reduced the population of the large migratory prawn &quot;Macrobrachium&quot;, which eats the snails. After the construction of fourteen large dams, greater increases in schistosomiasis occurred in the historical habitats of native prawns than in other areas. Further, at the 1986 Diama Dam on the Senegal River, restoring prawns upstream of the dam reduced both snail density and the human schistosomiasis reinfection rate.

===Integrated strategy in China===
In China, the national strategy for schistosomiasis control has shifted three times since it was first initiated: transmission control strategy (from mid-1950s to early 1980s), morbidity control strategy (from mid-1980s to 2003), and the &quot;new integrated strategy&quot; (2004 to present). The morbidity control strategy focused on synchronous chemotherapy for humans and bovines and the new strategy developed in 2004 intervenes in the transmission pathway of schistosomiasis, mainly including replacement of bovines with machines, prohibition of grazing cattle in the grasslands, improving sanitation, installation of fecal-matter containers on boats, praziquantel drug therapy, snail control, and health education. A 2018 review found that the &quot;new integrated strategy&quot; was highly effective in reducing the rate of &quot;S. japonicum&quot; infection in both humans and the intermediate host snails and reduced the infection risk by 3–4 times relative to the conventional strategy.

==Treatment==

Two drugs, praziquantel and oxamniquine, are available for the treatment of schistosomiasis. They are considered equivalent in relation to efficacy against &quot;S. mansoni&quot; and safety. Historically, antimony potassium tartrate remained the treatment of choice for schistosomiasis until the development of praziquantel in the 1980s. Because of praziquantel&#x27;s lower cost per treatment, and oxaminiquine&#x27;s lack of efficacy against the urogenital form of the disease caused by &quot;S. haematobium&quot;, in general praziquantel is considered the first option for treatment. Praziquantel can be safely used in pregnant women and young children. The treatment objective is to cure the disease and prevent the progression of the acute to chronic form of the disease. All cases of suspected schistosomiasis should be treated regardless of presentation because the adult parasite can live in the host for years.

Schistosomiasis is treatable by taking a single dose of the drug praziquantel by mouth annually.

Praziquantel eliminates the adult schistosomes but does not kill the eggs and immature worms. Live eggs can be excreted by the infected individuals for weeks after treatment with praziquantel. The immature worms can survive and grow into adult schistosomes after praziquantel therapy. Thus, it is important to have repeated schistosomiasis testing of the stool and/or urine around 4–6 weeks after praziquantel therapy. Praziquantel treatment may be repeated to ensure complete parasite elimination.

The WHO has developed guidelines for community treatment based on the impact the disease has on children in villages in which it is common:
* When a village reports more than 50 percent of children have blood in their urine, everyone in the village receives treatment.
* When 20 to 50 percent of children have bloody urine, only school-age children are treated.
* When fewer than 20 percent of children have symptoms, mass treatment is not implemented.

Other possible treatments include a combination of praziquantel with metrifonate, artesunate, or mefloquine. A Cochrane review found tentative evidence that when used alone, metrifonate was as effective as praziquantel. Mefloquine, which has previously been used to treat and prevent malaria, was recognised in 2008–2009 to be effective against schistosomes.

Post-treatment monitoring
Osteopontin (OPN) is a promising tool for monitoring praziquantel efficacy and post-treatment fibrosis regression as (OPN) expression is modulated by &quot;S. mansoni&quot; egg antigens and its levels correlate with the severity of schistosomiasis fibrosis and portal hypertension in mice and humans. Praziquantel pharmacotherapy reduces systemic OPN levels and liver collagen content in mice.

==Epidemiology==


The disease is found in tropical countries in Africa, the Caribbean, eastern South America, Southeast Asia, and the Middle East. &quot;S. mansoni&quot; is found in parts of South America and the Caribbean, Africa, and the Middle East; &quot;S. haematobium&quot; in Africa and the Middle East; and &quot;S. japonicum&quot; in the Far East. &quot;S. mekongi&quot; and &quot;S. intercalatum&quot; are found locally in Southeast Asia and central West Africa, respectively.

The disease is endemic in about 75 developing countries and mainly affects people living in rural agricultural and peri-urban areas.
===Infection estimates===
In 2010, approximately 238 million people were infected with schistosomiasis, 85 percent of whom live in Africa. An earlier estimate from 2006 had put the figure at 200 million people infected. As of the latest WHO record, 236.6 million people were infected in 2019. In many affected areas, schistosomiasis infects a large proportion of children under 14 years of age. An estimated 600 to 700 million people worldwide are at risk from the disease because they live in countries where the organism is common. In 2012, 249 million people needed treatment to prevent the disease. This likely makes it the most common parasitic infection with malaria second and causing about 207 million cases in 2013.

&quot;S. haematobium&quot;, the infectious agent responsible for urogenital schistosomiasis, infects over 112 million people annually in Sub-Saharan Africa alone. It is responsible for 32 million cases of dysuria, 10 million cases of hydronephrosis, and 150,000 deaths from kidney failure annually, making &quot;S. haematobium&quot; the world&#x27;s deadliest schistosome.

===Deaths===
Estimates regarding the number of deaths vary. Worldwide, the Global Burden of Disease Study issued in 2010 estimated 12,000 direct deaths while the WHO in 2014 estimated more than 200,000 annual deaths related to schistosomiasis. According to the Global Burden of Disease Study 2021, the number of deaths related to schistosomiasis in 2021 was 12,858 people. Another 20 million have severe consequences from the disease. It is the most deadly of the neglected tropical diseases.

==History==
The most ancient evidence of schistosomiasis dates back to more than 6,000 years ago. Studies conducted on human skeletal remains found in northern Syria (5800–4000 BC) demonstrated evidence of a terminal spined schistosome from the pelvic sediment of skeletal remains. Even though this evidence comes from the Middle East, it has been suggested that the &#x27;cradle&#x27; of schistosomes lies in the region of the African Great Lakes, an area in which both the parasites and their intermediate hosts are in an active state of evolution. Subsequently, it is believed that schistosomiasis spread to Egypt as a result of the importation of monkeys and slaves during the reign of the fifth dynasty of the Pharaohs (ca. 2494–2345 BC).

Schistosomiasis is known as bilharzia or bilharziosis in many countries, after German physician Theodor Bilharz, who first described the cause of urinary schistosomiasis in 1851.

The first physician who described the entire disease cycle was the Brazilian parasitologist Pirajá da Silva in 1908. The earliest case known of infection was discovered in 2014, belonging to a child who lived 6,200 years ago.

The disease was a common cause of death for Egyptians in the Greco-Roman Period.

In 2016, more than 200 million people needed treatment, but only 88 million people were actually treated for schistosomiasis.

===Etymology===

Schistosomiasis is named for the genus of parasitic flatworm &quot;Schistosoma&quot;, a term which means &#x27;split body&#x27;. The name Bilharzia comes from Theodor Bilharz, a German pathologist working in Egypt in 1851 who first discovered these worms. The name Katayama disease comes from the Katayama district of Hiroshima Prefecture in Japan, where schistosomiasis was once endemic.

==Society and culture==
Schistosomiasis is endemic in Egypt, exacerbated by the country&#x27;s dam and irrigation projects along the Nile. From the late 1950s through the early 1980s, infected villagers were treated with repeated injections of tartar emetic. Epidemiological evidence suggests that this campaign unintentionally contributed to the spread of hepatitis C via unclean needles. Egypt has the world&#x27;s highest hepatitis C infection rate, and the infection rates in various regions of the country closely track the timing and intensity of the anti-schistosomiasis campaign.

By the early 20th century, schistosomiasis&#x27; symptom of blood in the urine was seen as a male version of menstruation in Egypt and was thus viewed as a rite of passage for boys.

Among human parasitic diseases, schistosomiasis ranks second behind malaria in socio-economic and public health importance in tropical and subtropical areas.

==Research==

A proposed vaccine against &quot;S. haematobium&quot; infection called &quot;Bilhvax&quot; underwent a phase 3 clinical trial among children in Senegal. The results, reported in 2018, showed that it was ineffective despite provoking some immune response. Using CRISPR gene editing technology, researchers decreased the symptoms due to schistosomiasis in an animal model.

Using thromboelastography, researchers at Tufts University observed that murine blood incubated by adult worms for one hour has a coagulation profile similar to that of patients that have hemophilia or on anti-coagulant drugs, suggesting that schistosomes could possess anti-coagulant properties. Inhibiting schistosome activity in blood coagulation could potentially serve as a therapeutic option for schistosomiasis.

== See also ==
* Angiostrongyliasis, another disease transmitted by snails

== References ==
== External links ==

* &quot;River of Hope&quot; — documentary about the rise of schistosomiasis along the Senegal river (video, 47 mins)
* Schistosomiasis information for travellers from IAMAT (International Association for Medical Assistance to Travellers)
* by Facts in Motion</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q221159" start="0" end="15" title="Schistosomiasis" label="Schistosomiasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q221159" start="31" end="42" title="Schistosomiasis" label="snail fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q221159" start="44" end="53" title="Schistosomiasis" label="bilharzia"/>
<link wikidata="Q221159" start="59" end="73" title="Schistosomiasis" label="Katayama fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q578994" start="79" end="86" title="helminthiasis" label="disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q186517" start="97" end="106" title="parasitism" label="parasitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q124900" start="107" end="115" title="flatworm" label="flatworm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1457418" start="124" end="135" title="schistosome" label="schistosome"/>
<link wikidata="Q181100" start="153" end="166" title="urinary tract" label="urinary tract"/>
<link wikidata="Q11829360" start="174" end="184" title="intestines" label="intestines"/>
<link wikidata="Q183425" start="203" end="217" title="abdominal pain" label="abdominal pain"/>
<link wikidata="Q40878" start="219" end="227" title="diarrhea" label="diarrhea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1214063" start="229" end="241" title="blood in stool" label="bloody stool"/>
<link wikidata="Q373597" start="246" end="264" title="hematuria" label="blood in the urine"/>
<link wikidata="Q166231" start="286" end="294" title="Infection" label="infected"/>
<link wikidata="Q476921" start="340" end="354" title="kidney failure" label="kidney failure"/>
<link wikidata="Q179399" start="356" end="367" title="infertility" label="infertility"/>
<link wikidata="Q504775" start="372" end="386" title="bladder cancer" label="bladder cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497481" start="427" end="438" title="failure to thrive" label="poor growth"/>
<link wikidata="Q860740" start="443" end="464" title="learning disability" label="learning difficulties"/>
<link wikidata="Q102192" start="508" end="519" title="fresh water" label="fresh water"/>
<link wikidata="Q4500803" start="592" end="608" title="freshwater snail" label="freshwater snail"/>
<link wikidata="Q12136" start="615" end="622" title="disease" label="disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q177323" start="662" end="691" title="Developing country" label="underdeveloped and developing"/>
<link wikidata="Q131512" start="952" end="958" title="farmer" label="farmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q331432" start="961" end="970" title="Fisherman" label="fishermen"/>
<link wikidata="Q578994" start="1064" end="1083" title="helminthiasis" label="helminth infections"/>
<link wikidata="Q16644043" start="1085" end="1094" title="Diagnosis" label="Diagnosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q79460" start="1205" end="1215" title="antibodies" label="antibodies"/>
<link wikidata="Q424145" start="1412" end="1424" title="praziquantel" label="praziquantel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="1626" end="1651" title="World Health Organization" label="World Health Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q12156" start="2183" end="2190" title="malaria" label="malaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q929451" start="2227" end="2253" title="neglected tropical disease" label="neglected tropical disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q2673323" start="2456" end="2474" title="malaise" label="feeling of illness"/>
<link wikidata="Q191672" start="2532" end="2552" title="cercarial dermatitis" label="cercarial dermatitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q167178" start="2690" end="2697" title="scabies" label="scabies"/>
<link wikidata="Q191665" start="2783" end="2792" title="cercariae" label="cercariae"/>
<link wikidata="Q38933" start="3204" end="3209" title="fever" label="fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q474959" start="3211" end="3218" title="myalgia" label="myalgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q35805" start="3222" end="3227" title="cough" label="cough"/>
<link wikidata="Q40878" start="3236" end="3244" title="diarrhea" label="diarrhea"/>
<link wikidata="Q170758" start="3257" end="3267" title="lymph node" label="lymph node"/>
<link wikidata="Q188008" start="3315" end="3322" title="dyspnea" label="dyspnea"/>
<link wikidata="Q105688" start="3327" end="3334" title="Hypoxia (medicine)" label="hypoxia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16903097" start="3370" end="3390" title="pulmonary infiltrate" label="pulmonary infiltrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q6725808" start="3465" end="3483" title="maculopapular rash" label="maculopapular rash"/>
<link wikidata="Q997862" start="3899" end="3905" title="papule" label="papule"/>
<link wikidata="Q949302" start="3953" end="3961" title="Vesicle (dermatology)" label="vesicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q229256" start="4474" end="4484" title="dermatitis" label="dermatitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q207547" start="4568" end="4578" title="trematodes" label="trematodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q210420" start="5009" end="5023" title="corticosteroid" label="corticosteroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146414" start="5064" end="5079" title="Ice pack" label="cool compresses"/>
<link wikidata="Q411430" start="5100" end="5111" title="Epsom salts" label="Epsom salts"/>
<link wikidata="Q324089" start="5195" end="5208" title="antihistamine" label="antihistamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q103537" start="5557" end="5565" title="Antigen" label="antigens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256989" start="5831" end="5843" title="Schistosoma japonicum" label="S. japonicum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283318" start="6058" end="6069" title="Chest radiograph" label="chest X-ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q9690" start="6080" end="6087" title="Fatigue (medical)" label="Fatigue"/>
<link wikidata="Q474959" start="6090" end="6102" title="Myalgia" label="Muscle aches"/>
<link wikidata="Q86" start="6105" end="6113" title="Headache" label="Headache"/>
<link wikidata="Q2673323" start="6116" end="6123" title="Malaise" label="Malaise"/>
<link wikidata="Q183425" start="6126" end="6140" title="Abdominal pain" label="Abdominal pain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362864" start="6180" end="6192" title="hepatomegaly" label="hepatomegaly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129121" start="6207" end="6219" title="splenomegaly" label="splenomegaly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1260186" start="6231" end="6249" title="hepatosplenomegaly" label="hepatosplenomegaly"/>
<link wikidata="Q187440" start="6253" end="6258" title="Hives" label="Hives"/>
<link wikidata="Q202217" start="6503" end="6522" title="transverse myelitis" label="transverse myelitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7451096" start="6646" end="6655" title="sensorium" label="sensorium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2291130" start="6658" end="6668" title="Hemiparesis" label="Hemiplegia"/>
<link wikidata="Q944758" start="6671" end="6682" title="Tetraplegia" label="Tetraplegia"/>
<link wikidata="Q213373" start="6705" end="6711" title="Ataxia" label="Ataxia"/>
<link wikidata="Q186235" start="6787" end="6798" title="Myocarditis" label="Myocarditis"/>
<link wikidata="Q501561" start="6801" end="6813" title="Pericarditis" label="Pericarditis"/>
<link wikidata="Q844935" start="6829" end="6848" title="myocardial ischemia" label="myocardial ischemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q424972" start="6898" end="6908" title="prednisone" label="prednisone"/>
<link wikidata="Q682497" start="7774" end="7785" title="Oxamniquine" label="Oxamniquine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2324689" start="7937" end="7959" title="Schistosoma mansoni" label="&amp;quot;S. mansoni&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q416199" start="8045" end="8055" title="Artemether" label="Artemether"/>
<link wikidata="Q27105849" start="8062" end="8071" title="artemisin" label="artemisin"/>
<link wikidata="Q101991" start="8308" end="8320" title="Inflammation" label="inflammatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q33123" start="8349" end="8360" title="Proteolysis" label="proteolytic"/>
<link wikidata="Q8047" start="8361" end="8367" title="enzyme" label="enzyme"/>
<link wikidata="Q2106364" start="8460" end="8472" title="eosinophilic" label="eosinophilic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144114" start="8531" end="8539" title="Embolization" label="embolize"/>
<link wikidata="Q7886" start="8562" end="8566" title="lung" label="lung"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073" start="8572" end="8577" title="brain" label="brain"/>
<link wikidata="Q5445" start="8766" end="8772" title="anemia" label="anemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12167" start="8777" end="8789" title="malnutrition" label="malnutrition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1214063" start="9016" end="9028" title="bloody stool" label="bloody stool"/>
<link wikidata="Q11083" start="9113" end="9118" title="Large intestine" label="colon"/>
<link wikidata="Q158716" start="9122" end="9128" title="rectum" label="rectum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135563" start="9236" end="9246" title="Mesentery" label="mesenteric"/>
<link wikidata="Q388209" start="9247" end="9254" title="Venule" label="venules"/>
<link wikidata="Q11829360" start="9262" end="9278" title="intestinal lumen" label="intestinal lumen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129338" start="9342" end="9364" title="granuloma" label="granulomatous reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q166019" start="9514" end="9524" title="blood loss" label="blood loss"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304365" start="9903" end="9913" title="Schistosoma mekongi" label="S. mekongi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1409072" start="9930" end="9945" title="Schistosoma intercalatum" label="S. intercalatum"/>
<link wikidata="Q254327" start="10038" end="10054" title="Loss of appetite" label="Loss of appetite"/>
<link wikidata="Q2488276" start="10147" end="10165" title="fecal occult blood" label="fecal occult blood"/>
<link wikidata="Q2536390" start="10169" end="10189" title="Abdominal distension" label="Abdominal distention"/>
<link wikidata="Q657665" start="10220" end="10237" title="Polyp (medicine)" label="Intestinal polyps"/>
<link wikidata="Q172941" start="10240" end="10256" title="Intestinal ulcer" label="Intestinal ulcer"/>
<link wikidata="Q954674" start="10260" end="10281" title="Iron-deficiency anemia" label="Iron-deficient anemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q189470" start="10284" end="10291" title="Fistula" label="Fistula"/>
<link wikidata="Q2343082" start="10294" end="10341" title="Stenosis" label="Bowel strictures (narrowing of colon or rectum)"/>
<link wikidata="Q284070" start="10344" end="10370" title="Protein losing enteropathy" label="Protein-losing enteropathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q16244733" start="10393" end="10410" title="bowel obstruction" label="bowel obstruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q121041" start="10413" end="10425" title="Appendicitis" label="Appendicitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q132959" start="10669" end="10687" title="Sub-Saharan Africa" label="Sub-Saharan Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q605709" start="10859" end="10867" title="fibrosis" label="fibrosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q124604" start="11007" end="11026" title="portal hypertension" label="portal hypertension"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129121" start="11028" end="11040" title="splenomegaly" label="splenomegaly"/>
<link wikidata="Q298278" start="11217" end="11235" title="esophageal varices" label="esophageal varices"/>
<link wikidata="Q11611496" start="11653" end="11663" title="Periportal space" label="periportal"/>
<link wikidata="Q147778" start="12484" end="12493" title="cirrhosis" label="cirrhosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q372016" start="12499" end="12511" title="pathogenesis" label="pathogenesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q124604" start="12807" end="12826" title="portal hypertension" label="portal hypertension"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035226" start="13136" end="13149" title="caput medusae" label="caput medusae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1243018" start="13283" end="13295" title="Co-infection" label="Co-infection"/>
<link wikidata="Q131742" start="13301" end="13310" title="hepatitis" label="hepatitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6853" start="13364" end="13375" title="hepatitis B" label="hepatitis B"/>
<link wikidata="Q154869" start="13379" end="13390" title="hepatitis C" label="hepatitis C"/>
<link wikidata="Q298278" start="13689" end="13707" title="Esophageal varices" label="Esophageal varices"/>
<link wikidata="Q193889" start="13765" end="13772" title="Ascites" label="Ascites"/>
<link wikidata="Q1260186" start="13803" end="13828" title="Hepatosplenomegaly" label="Enlarged spleen and liver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129338" start="14378" end="14404" title="granulomatous inflammation" label="granulomatous inflammation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128595" start="14526" end="14548" title="pulmonary hypertension" label="pulmonary hypertension"/>
<link wikidata="Q2014808" start="14647" end="14687" title="Right ventricular hypertrophy" label="thickening of the right ventricular wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q188008" start="14733" end="14752" title="shortness of breath" label="shortness of breath"/>
<link wikidata="Q693058" start="14754" end="14764" title="chest pain" label="chest pain"/>
<link wikidata="Q15637420" start="14766" end="14774" title="lethargy" label="lethargy"/>
<link wikidata="Q134582" start="14869" end="14883" title="Schistosoma haematobium" label="S. haematobium"/>
<link wikidata="Q9382" start="14922" end="14929" title="Urinary bladder" label="bladder"/>
<link wikidata="Q9385" start="14934" end="14940" title="ureter" label="ureter"/>
<link wikidata="Q373597" start="15327" end="15336" title="hematuria" label="hematuria"/>
<link wikidata="Q730877" start="15436" end="15450" title="hydronephrosis" label="hydronephrosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q476921" start="15456" end="15470" title="Renal failure" label="kidney failure"/>
<link wikidata="Q504775" start="15472" end="15486" title="Bladder cancer" label="Bladder cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="15591" end="15596" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q187661" start="15806" end="15816" title="carcinogen" label="carcinogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q15787" start="15938" end="15941" title="HIV" label="HIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269399" start="16240" end="16257" title="Dysuria" label="Painful urination"/>
<link wikidata="Q352585" start="16270" end="16301" title="Frequent urination" label="Increase frequency of urination"/>
<link wikidata="Q570197" start="16304" end="16324" title="Proteinuria" label="Protein in the urine"/>
<link wikidata="Q933382" start="16406" end="16419" title="Calcification" label="Calcification"/>
<link wikidata="Q47273" start="16737" end="16759" title="Central nervous system" label="Central nervous system"/>
<link wikidata="Q6279182" start="17219" end="17227" title="Epileptic seizure" label="seizures"/>
<link wikidata="Q216681" start="17347" end="17354" title="in situ" label="in situ"/>
<link wikidata="Q10686316" start="17920" end="17927" title="vertigo" label="vertigo"/>
<link wikidata="Q9606" start="18077" end="18088" title="spinal cord" label="spinal cord"/>
<link wikidata="Q202217" start="18101" end="18120" title="transverse myelitis" label="transverse myelitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049655" start="18168" end="18178" title="paraplegia" label="paraplegia"/>
<link wikidata="Q213373" start="18976" end="18999" title="Ataxia" label="Uncoordinated movements"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430080" start="19002" end="19017" title="Scanning speech" label="Scanning speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q220989" start="19020" end="19043" title="Nystagmus" label="Irregular eye movements"/>
<link wikidata="Q1409072" start="19496" end="19511" title="S. intercalatum" label="S. intercalatum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2324689" start="19525" end="19535" title="S. mansoni" label="S. mansori"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256989" start="19553" end="19565" title="S japonicum" label="S. japonicum"/>
<link wikidata="Q134582" start="19649" end="19663" title="S. haematobium" label="S. haematobium"/>
<link wikidata="Q129270" start="19724" end="19729" title="larva" label="larva"/>
<link wikidata="Q291487" start="19921" end="19928" title="Bulinus" label="Bulinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3075178" start="19974" end="19986" title="Biomphalaria" label="Biomphalaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q5225925" start="20038" end="20049" title="Oncomelania" label="Oncomelania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933665" start="21428" end="21437" title="miracidia" label="miracidia"/>
<link wikidata="Q125012496" start="21638" end="21648" title="Trematode life cycle stages" label="sporocysts"/>
<link wikidata="Q191665" start="21741" end="21750" title="Cercaria" label="cercariae"/>
<link wikidata="Q751322" start="22418" end="22442" title="superior mesenteric vein" label="superior mesenteric vein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135563" start="22475" end="22485" title="Mesentery" label="mesenteric"/>
<link wikidata="Q3176575" start="22520" end="22544" title="inferior mesenteric vein" label="inferior mesenteric vein"/>
<link wikidata="Q7920194" start="22647" end="22660" title="venous plexus" label="venous plexus"/>
<link wikidata="Q388209" start="22697" end="22704" title="Venule" label="venules"/>
<link wikidata="Q6029373" start="22768" end="22794" title="inferior mesenteric plexus" label="inferior mesenteric plexus"/>
<link wikidata="Q509028" start="23030" end="23046" title="cattle husbandry" label="cattle husbandry"/>
<link wikidata="Q191665" start="23242" end="23251" title="Cercaria" label="cercariae"/>
<link wikidata="Q212410" start="23300" end="23319" title="proteolytic enzymes" label="proteolytic enzymes"/>
<link wikidata="Q191672" start="23795" end="23837" title="Swimmer&amp;#x27;s itch" label="Cercerial dermatitis (Swimmer&amp;#x27;s itch)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5898315" start="24296" end="24319" title="Type III hypersensitivity" label="Type III hypersensivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129338" start="25467" end="25476" title="granuloma" label="granuloma"/>
<link wikidata="Q632518" start="26541" end="26565" title="T helper cell" label="Th1 helper cell response"/>
<link wikidata="Q632518" start="26673" end="26685" title="T helper cell" label="Th2 response"/>
<link wikidata="Q6377762" start="27569" end="27588" title="Kato technique" label="Kato-Katz technique"/>
<link wikidata="Q332126" start="27673" end="27706" title="ELISA" label="enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay"/>
<link wikidata="Q496" start="27816" end="27821" title="feces" label="stool"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28579" end="28596" title="Ritchie technique" label="Ritchie technique"/>
<link wikidata="Q7068243" start="28824" end="28841" title="nucleopore filter" label="nucleopore filter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1534492" start="29104" end="29118" title="microhematuria" label="microhematuria"/>
<link wikidata="Q583725" start="29745" end="29787" title="Centers for Disease Control and Prevention" label="Centers for Disease Control and Prevention"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036" start="31107" end="31113" title="Uganda" label="Uganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q176996" start="31329" end="31354" title="Polymerase chain reaction" label="Polymerase chain reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q6675780" start="31673" end="31711" title="Loop-mediated isothermal amplification" label="Loop-mediated isothermal amplification"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637044" start="31912" end="31927" title="Urine test strip" label="urine dip-stick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1552640" start="31960" end="31977" title="stool guaiac test" label="stool guaiac test"/>
<link wikidata="Q886518" start="32144" end="32182" title="Complete blood count" label="complete blood count with differential"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359801" start="32297" end="32316" title="Liver function tests" label="Liver function test"/>
<link wikidata="Q505142" start="32548" end="32560" title="eosinophilia" label="eosinophilia"/>
<link wikidata="Q886518" start="32589" end="32609" title="complete blood count" label="complete blood count"/>
<link wikidata="Q34777" start="32959" end="32965" title="X-rays" label="X-rays"/>
<link wikidata="Q162564" start="32967" end="32977" title="ultrasound" label="ultrasound"/>
<link wikidata="Q32566" start="32979" end="33003" title="CT scan" label="computed tomography (CT)"/>
<link wikidata="Q161238" start="33009" end="33041" title="Magnetic resonance imaging" label="magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3488638" start="33818" end="33824" title="PET-CT" label="PET/CT"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="34170" end="34195" title="World Health Organization" label="World Health Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061108" start="34940" end="34951" title="water supply" label="clean water"/>
<link wikidata="Q949149" start="34956" end="34966" title="sanitation" label="sanitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q424145" start="35454" end="35466" title="Praziquantel" label="Praziquantel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2703271" start="36311" end="36324" title="Macrobrachium" label="Macrobrachium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2885103" start="36534" end="36543" title="Diama Dam" label="Diama Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q3569" start="36551" end="36564" title="Senegal River" label="Senegal River"/>
<link wikidata="Q682497" start="37755" end="37766" title="oxamniquine" label="oxamniquine"/>
<link wikidata="Q423129" start="37932" end="37959" title="antimony potassium tartrate" label="antimony potassium tartrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q422991" start="39769" end="39780" title="metrifonate" label="metrifonate"/>
<link wikidata="Q707939" start="39782" end="39792" title="artesunate" label="artesunate"/>
<link wikidata="Q736270" start="39797" end="39807" title="mefloquine" label="mefloquine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1105187" start="39811" end="39826" title="Cochrane review" label="Cochrane review"/>
<link wikidata="Q411994" start="40086" end="40097" title="Osteopontin" label="Osteopontin"/>
<link wikidata="Q42530" start="40524" end="40532" title="tropics" label="tropical"/>
<link wikidata="Q664609" start="40558" end="40567" title="Caribbean" label="Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="40592" end="40606" title="Southeast Asia" label="Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="40616" end="40627" title="Middle East" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q42225" start="40829" end="40837" title="Far East" label="Far East"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="40915" end="40929" title="Southeast Asia" label="Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4412" start="40942" end="40953" title="West Africa" label="West Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q123452" start="40985" end="40992" title="endemic" label="endemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269399" start="42034" end="42041" title="dysuria" label="dysuria"/>
<link wikidata="Q730877" start="42063" end="42077" title="hydronephrosis" label="hydronephrosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q476921" start="42103" end="42117" title="kidney failure" label="kidney failure"/>
<link wikidata="Q499419" start="42278" end="42308" title="Global Burden of Disease Study" label="Global Burden of Disease Study"/>
<link wikidata="Q499419" start="42464" end="42494" title="Global Burden of Disease Study" label="Global Burden of Disease Study"/>
<link wikidata="Q858" start="42857" end="42862" title="Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q87982" start="43125" end="43144" title="African Great Lakes" label="African Great Lakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q37110" start="43412" end="43420" title="Pharaohs" label="Pharaohs"/>
<link wikidata="Q76858" start="43538" end="43553" title="Theodor Bilharz" label="Theodor Bilharz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408769" start="43714" end="43729" title="Pirajá da Silva" label="Pirajá da Silva"/>
<link wikidata="Q11768" start="43893" end="43928" title="Ancient Egypt" label="Egyptians in the Greco-Roman Period"/>
<link wikidata="Q76858" start="44234" end="44249" title="Theodor Bilharz" label="Theodor Bilharz"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="44253" end="44259" title="Germany" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q7208" start="44260" end="44271" title="Pathology" label="pathologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="44283" end="44288" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q617375" start="44393" end="44413" title="Hiroshima Prefecture" label="Hiroshima Prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="44417" end="44422" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3392" start="44598" end="44602" title="Nile" label="Nile"/>
<link wikidata="Q423129" start="44709" end="44722" title="tartar emetic" label="tartar emetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q154869" start="44822" end="44833" title="hepatitis C" label="hepatitis C"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131696" start="45210" end="45225" title="rite of passage" label="rite of passage"/>
<link wikidata="Q17310682" start="45671" end="45701" title="CRISPR gene editing" label="CRISPR gene editing technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2558586" start="46219" end="46237" title="Angiostrongyliasis" label="Angiostrongyliasis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="46491" end="46553" title="International Association for Medical Assistance to Travellers" label="International Association for Medical Assistance to Travellers"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="46560" end="46575" title="Facts in Motion (YouTuber)" label="Facts in Motion"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="191305" wikidata="Q58702" url="?curid=191305" title="Mortality rate">
<text>Mortality rate, or death rate, is a measure of the number of deaths (in general, or due to a specific cause) in a particular population, scaled to the size of that population, per unit of time. Mortality rate is typically expressed in units of deaths per 1,000 individuals per year; thus, a mortality rate of 9.5 (out of 1,000) in a population of 1,000 would mean 9.5 deaths per year in that entire population, or 0.95% out of the total. It is distinct from &quot;morbidity&quot;, which is either the prevalence or incidence of a disease, and also from the incidence rate (the number of newly appearing cases of the disease per unit of time).

An important specific mortality rate measure is the crude death rate, which looks at mortality from all causes in a given time interval for a given population. , for instance, the CIA estimates that the crude death rate globally will be 7.7 deaths per 1,000 people in a population per year. In a generic form, mortality rates can be seen as calculated using formula_1, where &quot;d&quot; represents the deaths from whatever cause of interest is specified that occur within a given time period, &quot;p&quot; represents the size of the population in which the deaths occur (however this population is defined or limited), and formula_2 is the conversion factor from the resulting fraction to another unit (e.g., multiplying by formula_3 to get mortality rate per 1,000 individuals).

==Crude death rate, globally==
The crude death rate is defined as &quot;the mortality rate from all causes of death for a population,&quot; calculated as the &quot;total number of deaths during a given time interval&quot; divided by the &quot;mid-interval population&quot;, per 1,000 or 100,000; for instance, the population of the United States was around 290,810,000 in 2003, and in that year, approximately 2,419,900 deaths occurred in total, giving a crude death (mortality) rate of 832 deaths per 100,000. , the CIA estimates the U.S. crude death rate will be 8.3 per 1,000, while it estimates that the global rate will be 7.7 per 1,000.

According to the World Health Organization, the ten leading causes of death, globally, in 2016, for both sexes and all ages, were as presented in the table below.

Crude death rate, per 100,000 population
# Ischaemic heart disease, 126
# Stroke, 77
# Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, 41
# Lower respiratory infections, 40
# Alzheimer&#x27;s disease and other dementias, 27
# Trachea, bronchus, and lung cancers, 23
# Diabetes mellitus, 21
# Road injury, 19
# Diarrhoeal diseases, 19
# Tuberculosis, 17
Mortality rate is also measured per thousand. It is determined by how many people of a certain age die per thousand people. Decrease of mortality rate is one of the reasons for increase of population. Development of medical science and other technologies has resulted in the decrease of mortality rate in all the countries of the world for some decades. In 1990, the mortality rate of children under five years of age was 144 per thousand, but in 2015 the child mortality rate was 38 per thousand.

==Related measures of mortality==
Other specific measures of mortality include:
For any of these, a &quot;sex-specific mortality rate&quot; refers to &quot;a mortality rate among either males or females&quot;, where the calculation involves both &quot;numerator and denominator... limited to the one sex&quot;.

==Use in epidemiology==
In most cases there are few if any ways to obtain exact mortality rates, so epidemiologists use estimation to predict correct mortality rates. Mortality rates are usually difficult to predict due to language barriers, health infrastructure related issues, conflict, and other reasons. Maternal mortality has additional challenges, especially as they pertain to stillbirths, abortions, and multiple births. In some countries, during the 1920s, a stillbirth was defined as &quot;a birth of at least twenty weeks&#x27; gestation in which the child shows no evidence of life after complete birth&quot;. In most countries, however, a stillbirth was defined as &quot;the birth of a fetus, after 28 weeks of pregnancy, in which pulmonary respiration does not occur&quot;.

===Census data and vital statistics===
Ideally, all mortality estimation would be done using vital statistics and census data. Census data will give detailed information about the population at risk of death. The vital statistics provide information about live births and deaths in the population. Often, either census data and vital statistics data is not available. This is common in developing countries, countries that are in conflict, areas where natural disasters have caused mass displacement, and other areas where there is a humanitarian crisis 

===Household surveys===
Household surveys or interviews are another way in which mortality rates are often assessed. There are several methods to estimate mortality in different segments of the population. One such example is the sisterhood method, which involves researchers estimating maternal mortality by contacting women in populations of interest and asking whether or not they have a sister, if the sister is of child-bearing age (usually 15) and conducting an interview or written questions about possible deaths among sisters. The sisterhood method, however, does not work in cases where sisters may have died before the sister being interviewed was born.

Orphanhood surveys estimate mortality by questioning children are asked about the mortality of their parents. It has often been criticized as an adult mortality rate that is very biased for several reasons. The adoption effect is one such instance in which orphans often do not realize that they are adopted. Additionally, interviewers may not realize that an adoptive or foster parent is not the child&#x27;s biological parent. There is also the issue of parents being reported on by multiple children while some adults have no children, thus are not counted in mortality estimates.

Widowhood surveys estimate adult mortality by responding to questions about the deceased husband or wife. One limitation of the widowhood survey surrounds the issues of divorce, where people may be more likely to report that they are widowed in places where there is the great social stigma around being a divorcee. Another limitation is that multiple marriages introduce biased estimates, so individuals are often asked about first marriage. Biases will be significant if the association of death between spouses, such as those in countries with large AIDS epidemics.

===Sampling===
Sampling refers to the selection of a subset of the population of interest to efficiently gain information about the entire population. Samples should be representative of the population of interest. Cluster sampling is an approach to non-probability sampling; this is an approach in which each member of the population is assigned to a group (cluster), and then clusters are randomly selected, and all members of selected clusters are included in the sample. Often combined with stratification techniques (in which case it is called multistage sampling), cluster sampling is the approach most often used by epidemiologists. In areas of forced migration, there is more significant sampling error. Thus cluster sampling is not the ideal choice.

==Mortality statistics==

Causes of death vary greatly between developed and less developed countries; see also list of causes of death by rate for worldwide statistics.

According to Jean Ziegler (the United Nations Special Rapporteur on the Right to Food for 2000 to March 2008), mortality due to malnutrition accounted for 58% of the total mortality in 2006: &quot;In the world, approximately 62 million people, all causes of death combined, die each year. In 2006, more than 36 million died of hunger or diseases due to deficiencies in micronutrients&quot;.

Of the roughly 150,000 people who die each day across the globe, about two thirds—100,000 per day—die of age-related causes.&lt;ref name=&quot;doi10.2202/1941-6008.1011&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; In industrialized nations, the proportion is much higher, reaching 90%.

==Economics==
Scholars have stated that there is a significant relationship between a low standard of living that results from low income; and increased mortality rates. A low standard of living is more likely to result in malnutrition, which can make people more susceptible to disease and more likely to die from these diseases. A lower standard of living may lead to as a lack of hygiene and sanitation, increased exposure to and the spread of disease, and a lack of access to proper medical care and facilities. Poor health can in turn contribute to low and reduced incomes, which can create a loop known as the health-poverty trap. Indian economist and philosopher Amartya Sen has stated that mortality rates can serve as an indicator of economic success and failure.

Historically, mortality rates have been adversely affected by short term price increases. Studies have shown that mortality rates increase at a rate concurrent with increases in food prices. These effects have a greater impact on vulnerable, lower-income populations than they do on populations with a higher standard of living.

In more recent times, higher mortality rates have been less tied to socio-economic levels within a given society, but have differed more between low and high-income countries. It is now found that national income, which is directly tied to standard of living within a country, is the largest factor in mortality rates being higher in low-income countries.

=== Preventable mortality ===
These rates are especially pronounced for children under 5 years old, particularly in lower-income, developing countries. These children have a much greater chance of dying of diseases that have become mostly preventable in higher-income parts of the world. More children die of malaria, respiratory infections, diarrhea, perinatal conditions, and measles in developing nations. Data shows that after the age of 5 these preventable causes level out between high and low-income countries.

==See also==

* Biodemography
* Compensation law of mortality
* Demography
* Gompertz–Makeham law of mortality
* Life table
* List of causes of death by rate
* List of countries by birth rate
* List of countries by death rate
* List of countries by life expectancy
* Maximum life span
* Medical statistics
* Micromort
* Mortality displacement
* Risk adjusted mortality rate
* Vital statistics
* Weekend effect
* World population
==References==
===Sources===

* Crude death rate (per 1,000 population) based on &quot;World Population Prospects The 2008 Revision&quot;, United Nations. Retrieved 22 June 2010
* Rank Order – Death rate in &quot;CIA World Factbook&quot;
* Mortality in &quot;The Medical Dictionary&quot;, Medterms. Retrieved 22 June 2010
* &quot;WISQARS Leading Causes of Death Reports, 1999–2007&quot;, US Centers for Disease Control Retrieved 22 June 2010
* Edmond Halley, &quot;An Estimate of the Degrees of the Mortality of Mankind&quot; (1693)
==External links==
* Data regarding death rates by age and cause in the United States (from Data360)
* Complex Emergency Database (CE-DAT): Mortality data from conflict-affected populations 
* Human Mortality Database: Historic mortality data from developed nations 
* Deaths this year
* OUR WORLD IN DATA: Number of deaths per year, World</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q58702" start="0" end="14" title="Mortality rate" label="Mortality rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q58702" start="19" end="29" title="Mortality rate" label="death rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q4" start="61" end="66" title="death" label="death"/>
<link wikidata="Q49918" start="125" end="135" title="Statistical population" label="population"/>
<link wikidata="Q12136" start="464" end="473" title="morbidity" label="morbidity"/>
<link wikidata="Q719602" start="501" end="511" title="prevalence" label="prevalence"/>
<link wikidata="Q217690" start="515" end="524" title="Incidence (epidemiology)" label="incidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q12136" start="530" end="537" title="disease" label="disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q217690" start="557" end="571" title="incidence rate" label="incidence rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q58702" start="696" end="712" title="Mortality rate" label="crude death rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="824" end="827" title="Central Intelligence Agency" label="CIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="1760" end="1773" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="1945" end="1948" title="Central Intelligence Agency" label="CIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="2089" end="2114" title="World Health Organization" label="World Health Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q844935" start="2279" end="2302" title="Ischaemic heart disease" label="Ischaemic heart disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q12202" start="2310" end="2316" title="Stroke" label="Stroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q199804" start="2323" end="2360" title="Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease" label="Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q3631290" start="2367" end="2395" title="Lower respiratory infections" label="Lower respiratory infections"/>
<link wikidata="Q11081" start="2402" end="2426" title="Alzheimer&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Alzheimer&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q83030" start="2437" end="2446" title="dementias" label="dementias"/>
<link wikidata="Q47912" start="2453" end="2488" title="Lung cancer" label="Trachea, bronchus, and lung cancers"/>
<link wikidata="Q12206" start="2495" end="2512" title="Diabetes mellitus" label="Diabetes mellitus"/>
<link wikidata="Q9687" start="2519" end="2530" title="Road traffic accidents" label="Road injury"/>
<link wikidata="Q40878" start="2537" end="2556" title="Diarrhoeal diseases" label="Diarrhoeal diseases"/>
<link wikidata="Q12204" start="2563" end="2575" title="Tuberculosis" label="Tuberculosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q17012192" start="4967" end="4984" title="sisterhood method" label="sisterhood method"/>
<link wikidata="Q1776598" start="6773" end="6789" title="Cluster sampling" label="Cluster sampling"/>
<link wikidata="Q3652044" start="7107" end="7126" title="multistage sampling" label="multistage sampling"/>
<link wikidata="Q3306280" start="7254" end="7268" title="sampling error" label="sampling error"/>
<link wikidata="Q132453" start="7400" end="7419" title="developed countries" label="developed countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q16879561" start="7430" end="7461" title="list of causes of death by rate" label="list of causes of death by rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q123706" start="7502" end="7514" title="Jean Ziegler" label="Jean Ziegler"/>
<link wikidata="Q15143900" start="7520" end="7553" title="United Nations Special Rapporteur" label="United Nations Special Rapporteur"/>
<link wikidata="Q12167" start="7617" end="7629" title="malnutrition" label="malnutrition"/>
<link wikidata="Q531507" start="7858" end="7872" title="micronutrients" label="micronutrients"/>
<link wikidata="Q132489" start="8815" end="8826" title="Amartya Sen" label="Amartya Sen"/>
<link wikidata="Q24886253" start="9097" end="9108" title="food prices" label="food prices"/>
<link wikidata="Q4914754" start="10141" end="10154" title="Biodemography" label="Biodemography"/>
<link wikidata="Q5156264" start="10157" end="10186" title="Compensation law of mortality" label="Compensation law of mortality"/>
<link wikidata="Q37732" start="10189" end="10199" title="Demography" label="Demography"/>
<link wikidata="Q2734378" start="10202" end="10235" title="Gompertz–Makeham law of mortality" label="Gompertz–Makeham law of mortality"/>
<link wikidata="Q632184" start="10238" end="10248" title="Life table" label="Life table"/>
<link wikidata="Q16879561" start="10251" end="10282" title="List of causes of death by rate" label="List of causes of death by rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q863995" start="10285" end="10316" title="List of countries by birth rate" label="List of countries by birth rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2369367" start="10319" end="10350" title="List of countries by death rate" label="List of countries by death rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q842790" start="10353" end="10389" title="List of countries by life expectancy" label="List of countries by life expectancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q13419831" start="10392" end="10409" title="Maximum life span" label="Maximum life span"/>
<link wikidata="Q1252929" start="10412" end="10430" title="Medical statistics" label="Medical statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390401" start="10433" end="10442" title="Micromort" label="Micromort"/>
<link wikidata="Q6914399" start="10445" end="10467" title="Mortality displacement" label="Mortality displacement"/>
<link wikidata="Q7336253" start="10470" end="10498" title="Risk adjusted mortality rate" label="Risk adjusted mortality rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131372" start="10501" end="10517" title="Vital statistics (government records)" label="Vital statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q18394758" start="10520" end="10534" title="Weekend effect" label="Weekend effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q11188" start="10537" end="10553" title="World population" label="World population"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="10693" end="10707" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q583725" start="10942" end="10972" title="US Centers for Disease Control" label="US Centers for Disease Control"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="191311" wikidata="Q797108" url="?curid=191311" title="Jeu de paume">
<text>Jeu de paume (, ; originally spelled ; ), nowadays known as [[real tennis]], (US) court tennis or (in France) courte paume, is a ball-and-court game that originated in France. It was an indoor precursor of tennis played without racquets, and so &quot;game of the hand&quot;, though these were eventually introduced. It is a former Olympic sport, and has the oldest ongoing annual world championship in sport, first established over 250 years ago. The term also refers to the court on which the game is played and its building, which in the 17th century was sometimes converted into a theatre.

==History==
In the earliest versions of the game, the players hit the ball with their hands, as in palla, volleyball, Fives, or certain varieties of pelota. &quot;Jeu de paume&quot;, or &quot;jeu de paulme&quot; as it was formerly spelled, literally means &quot;palm game&quot;. In time, gloves replaced bare hands. Even when paddle-like bats, and finally racquets, became standard equipment for the game by the late 17th century, the name did not change. It became known as &quot;tennis&quot; in English &quot;(see History of tennis)&quot;, and later &quot;real tennis&quot; after the derived game of lawn tennis became the more widely known sport.

The term is used in France today to denote the game of tennis on a court in which the ancient or modern game might be played. The indoor version is sometimes called &quot;jeu de courte paume&quot; or just &quot;courte paume&quot; (&quot;short palm&quot;) to distinguish it from the outdoor version, &quot;longue paume&quot; (&quot;long palm&quot;), played on a field of variable length.

At the 1908 Summer Olympics, jeu de paume was a medal event: American Jay Gould II won the gold medal.

Since 1740, jeu de paume has been the subject of an amateur world championship, held each year in September. It is the oldest active trophy in international sport.
== Derived sports ==

===Hand===
* Fistball
* Fives
* Frisian handball
* Pallone
* Basque pelota
* Gaelic handball
* Hoodae

Various other forms of handball may be related to one degree or another; this is generally difficult to ascertain with certainty, and some, like the Mesoamerican ballgame clearly have an independent origin.

===Racquet===
* Real tennis
* Longue paume (outdoor version of &quot;jeu de paume&quot; without net)
* Lawn tennis (what is usually meant by the term &quot;tennis&quot; today)
Various other racquet games (squash, badminton, etc.) may be related to one degree or another.

===Basket===
* Jai alai, a variation of Basque pelota using a hand-held basket known as a or .

==Cultural references==
Étienne Pasquier, a writer and a historian, published an essay regarding jeu de paume in his &quot;Recherches&quot;; late 16th century. Pasquier was addicted to the sport.

The Galerie nationale du Jeu de Paume, a museum of contemporary art, is housed in a former court on the north side of the Tuileries park in the centre of Paris.

The painter Jacques-Louis David&#x27;s famous sketch, &quot;le Serment du jeu de paume&quot; (&#x27;the Tennis Court Oath&#x27;) now hangs in the court of the Palace of Versailles. It depicts a seminal moment of the French Revolution, when, on 20 June 1789, deputies of the Estates-General met at the court and vowed that they would not disband before the proclamation of a formal Constitution for France.

&quot;Le Jeu de Paume&quot; is a moral ode published in 1791 by André Chénier.

In the 1981 film &quot;The French Lieutenant&#x27;s Woman&quot;, socialite Charles Smithson (Jeremy Irons) is seen playing &quot;jeu de paume&quot; in London.

In the &quot;Agatha Christie&#x27;s Poirot&quot; TV series episode &quot;Death in the Clouds&quot;, Poirot mentions that tennis, considered an English game, originated in 11th-century France as &quot;jeu de paume.&quot;

The 2014 Whitney Biennial exhibition featured the premiere of the stop-motion film &quot;Jeu de Paume&quot; by Joshua Mosley.

==See also==
* Basque pelota
* Valencian pilota

==References==
==External links==

* Historical Picture: A Jeu de Paume Before a Country Palace
* Oratory Real Tennis Club
* Jeu de Paume History
* Official site of the French Jeu de Paume Comité
* Animated stop motion film of Jeu de Paume match</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q797108" start="60" end="75" title="Jeu de paume" label="[[real tennis]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q797108" start="82" end="94" title="Jeu de paume" label="court tennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="168" end="174" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q847" start="206" end="212" title="tennis" label="tennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q240502" start="228" end="235" title="racquet" label="racquet"/>
<link wikidata="Q212434" start="331" end="344" title="Olympic sport" label="Olympic sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q24354" start="584" end="591" title="Theater (structure)" label="theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q478897" start="693" end="698" title="Palla (game)" label="palla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1734" start="700" end="710" title="volleyball" label="volleyball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421910" start="712" end="717" title="Fives" label="Fives"/>
<link wikidata="Q212845" start="743" end="749" title="Basque pelota" label="pelota"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1110" end="1127" title="Tennis#History" label="History of tennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2360406" start="1152" end="1163" title="real tennis" label="real tennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q847" start="1196" end="1207" title="Tennis" label="lawn tennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210038" start="1550" end="1562" title="longue paume" label="longue paume"/>
<link wikidata="Q672223" start="1633" end="1660" title="Jeu de paume at the 1908 Summer Olympics" label="At the 1908 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="1694" end="1702" title="United States" label="American"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332543" start="1703" end="1715" title="Jay Gould II" label="Jay Gould II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050588" start="1936" end="1944" title="Fistball" label="Fistball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421910" start="1947" end="1952" title="Fives" label="Fives"/>
<link wikidata="Q1899731" start="1955" end="1971" title="Frisian handball" label="Frisian handball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055193" start="1974" end="1981" title="Pallone" label="Pallone"/>
<link wikidata="Q212845" start="1984" end="1997" title="Basque pelota" label="Basque pelota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672856" start="2000" end="2015" title="Gaelic handball" label="Gaelic handball"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2018" end="2024" title="Hoodae" label="Hoodae"/>
<link wikidata="Q8418" start="2049" end="2057" title="team handball" label="handball"/>
<link wikidata="Q610098" start="2175" end="2196" title="Mesoamerican ballgame" label="Mesoamerican ballgame"/>
<link wikidata="Q2360406" start="2250" end="2261" title="Real tennis" label="Real tennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210038" start="2264" end="2276" title="Longue paume" label="Longue paume"/>
<link wikidata="Q847" start="2337" end="2348" title="Lawn tennis" label="Lawn tennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q133201" start="2439" end="2445" title="Squash (sport)" label="squash"/>
<link wikidata="Q7291" start="2447" end="2456" title="badminton" label="badminton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193361" start="2521" end="2529" title="Jai alai" label="Jai alai"/>
<link wikidata="Q290040" start="2626" end="2642" title="Étienne Pasquier" label="Étienne Pasquier"/>
<link wikidata="Q656296" start="2803" end="2836" title="Galerie nationale du Jeu de Paume" label="Galerie nationale du Jeu de Paume"/>
<link wikidata="Q234364" start="2921" end="2930" title="Tuileries" label="Tuileries"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="2953" end="2958" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q83155" start="2973" end="2992" title="Jacques-Louis David" label="Jacques-Louis David"/>
<link wikidata="Q60022" start="3065" end="3082" title="Tennis Court Oath" label="Tennis Court Oath"/>
<link wikidata="Q2946" start="3120" end="3140" title="Palace of Versailles" label="Palace of Versailles"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="3177" end="3194" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q295548" start="3432" end="3445" title="André Chénier" label="André Chénier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1212928" start="3471" end="3505" title="The French Lieutenant&amp;#x27;s Woman (film)" label="The French Lieutenant&amp;#x27;s Woman"/>
<link wikidata="Q171745" start="3541" end="3553" title="Jeremy Irons" label="Jeremy Irons"/>
<link wikidata="Q391101" start="3621" end="3650" title="Agatha Christie&amp;#x27;s Poirot" label="Agatha Christie&amp;#x27;s Poirot"/>
<link wikidata="Q170534" start="3708" end="3714" title="Hercule Poirot" label="Poirot"/>
<link wikidata="Q677294" start="3838" end="3854" title="Whitney Biennial" label="Whitney Biennial"/>
<link wikidata="Q6290075" start="3940" end="3953" title="Joshua Mosley" label="Joshua Mosley"/>
<link wikidata="Q212845" start="3971" end="3984" title="Basque pelota" label="Basque pelota"/>
<link wikidata="Q2483334" start="3987" end="4003" title="Valencian pilota" label="Valencian pilota"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="191312" wikidata="Q128969" url="?curid=191312" title="Calimero">
<text>Calimero is an animated television series about a charming but hapless anthropomorphized chicken; the only black one in a family of yellow chickens. He wears half of his egg shell still on his head. Calimero originally appeared on the Italian television show &quot;Carosello&quot; on July 14, 1963, and soon became a popular icon in Italy.

The characters were created by the animation studio Organizzazione Pagot and originated as a series of animated advertisements for Miralanza AVA soap products shown throughout Italy. The creators of the main character were Nino Pagot, Toni Pagot and Ignazio Colnaghi. At the end of each episode, it turns out that Calimero is not actually black, but only very dirty, and becomes white after being washed by the advertised soap products.

The characters were later licensed in Japan as an anime series twice, titled . The first was produced by K&amp;S and animated by Toei Animation and ran from October 15, 1972, to September 30, 1975; the second, with new settings and characters, was made by Telescreen in 1992. Altogether, 99 Japanese episodes were made (47 in the 1972 Toei series, and 52 in the 1992 Telescreen series). The series mostly consists of the many adventures of Calimero and his friends as they solve mysteries and make documentaries. However, their adventures usually get them into quite a bit of trouble. The second series was never renewed for a second season. English dubbed versions for the first two anime series were never officially released, though dubbed pilot episodes do exist. However, the series did come out in other languages. The original 1970s shorts and the third CGI series were released in English, however. The first series was also broadcast on European networks such as TROS (The Netherlands), ZDF and RTL II (Germany) or TVE (Spain).

A third animation series about the character, in computer animation, premiered in TF1 in 2013. The production team includes France’s Gaumont Animation, rights owner Calidra, Italy’s Studio Campedelli and Japanese partners TV Tokyo and Kodansha. The series also aired on several other TV channels, including on Disney Junior in the United Kingdom and Australia.

==Characters==

===1974 series===
* – The hero of the show. 
* – Calimero&#x27;s girlfriend, a shy bird with common sense. 
* – 
* – 
* – 

===1992 series===
*Calimero – 
*Priscilla – 
* – 
* – a wealthy girl duck. 
* – 

===2013 series===
*Calimero - Voiced by: Rachel Berger (English) / Fanny Bloc (French) / Ayaka Asai (Japanese)
*Priscilla -Voiced by: Naïke Fauveau (French) / Rumi Ōkubo (Japanese)
*Giuliano (Valeriano in UK English dub)- Voiced by Georges de Vitis (French) / Kokoro Kikuchi (Japanese)
*Peter (Pierrot in UK English dub) - Voiced by: Pascal Sellem (French) / Tōru Sakurai (Japanese)
*Susie - Voiced by: Ren Kato (Japanese)
*Pepe - Voiced by: Tōmoyuki Maruyama (Japanese)

==Mobile game==
A mobile game titled &quot;Calimero&#x27;s Village&quot; was released for iOS and Android in 2015 by BulkyPix.

==Impact in popular culture==
The main character in the anime series has had a lasting impact in the vocabulary of some countries, either because of his looks, with an egg shell on his head, or because of his frequent complaining about being unfairly treated by others:

* &quot;Calimero&quot; is the name and subject of a Welsh language song by the band Super Furry Animals
* French singer Brigitte Fontaine collaborated with the band Stereolab on a song of the same name
* In the Netherlands and Belgium, the term &quot;&quot; is used to denote people who are staunchly convinced that their position as an underdog is due to their smaller size, either literally or symbolically, which covers up for their own shortcomings. Often the character&#x27;s lines from the show are cited, &quot;They are big and I is small and that is not fair, oh no!&quot; (translated back from Dutch, with intentional error).
* The slang nickname during the 1970s and 1980s for military policemen in the Israeli Army was &quot;Calimero&quot;, due to their egg-shaped white helmet; the same was the case in Spain, where &quot;calimero&quot; was also a name for a type of helmet for motorbikers.
* In parts of Yugoslavia, the Polski Fiat 126p was nicknamed &quot;Kalimero&quot; in reference to the character.
* Italian luxury fashion house Bottega Veneta introduced the &quot;Kalimero&quot; bucket bag in 2022, taking inspiration from the bindle that the character carries.

==References==
==External links==
* Official website
* Calimero&#x27;s first commercial (1963)
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1052463" start="265" end="274" title="Carosello" label="Carosello"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="564" end="574" title="Nino Pagot" label="Nino Pagot"/>
<link wikidata="Q3993082" start="576" end="586" title="Toni Pagot" label="Toni Pagot"/>
<link wikidata="Q16564682" start="591" end="607" title="Ignazio Colnaghi" label="Ignazio Colnaghi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107" start="829" end="834" title="anime" label="anime"/>
<link wikidata="Q730179" start="908" end="922" title="Toei Animation" label="Toei Animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3517276" start="1035" end="1045" title="Telescreen (company)" label="Telescreen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2038168" start="1751" end="1755" title="TROS" label="TROS"/>
<link wikidata="Q48989" start="1775" end="1778" title="ZDF" label="ZDF"/>
<link wikidata="Q594177" start="1783" end="1789" title="RTL II" label="RTL II"/>
<link wikidata="Q544560" start="1803" end="1806" title="Televisión Española" label="TVE"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401416" start="1866" end="1884" title="computer animation" label="computer animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q214683" start="1899" end="1902" title="TF1" label="TF1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402977" start="1950" end="1967" title="Gaumont Animation" label="Gaumont Animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q734663" start="2039" end="2047" title="TV Tokyo" label="TV Tokyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q726081" start="2052" end="2060" title="Kodansha" label="Kodansha"/>
<link wikidata="Q313621" start="2127" end="2140" title="Disney Junior" label="Disney Junior"/>
<link wikidata="Q7279154" start="2442" end="2455" title="Rachel Berger" label="Rachel Berger"/>
<link wikidata="Q17685820" start="2490" end="2500" title="Ayaka Asai" label="Ayaka Asai"/>
<link wikidata="Q902038" start="2560" end="2570" title="Rumi Ōkubo" label="Rumi Ōkubo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6426809" start="2661" end="2675" title="Kokoro Kikuchi" label="Kokoro Kikuchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2927965" start="2990" end="2998" title="BulkyPix" label="BulkyPix"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3324" end="3343" title="Hermann Hearts Pauline#Track listing" label="Welsh language song"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135582" start="3356" end="3375" title="Super Furry Animals" label="Super Furry Animals"/>
<link wikidata="Q563" start="3392" end="3409" title="Brigitte Fontaine" label="Brigitte Fontaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q334652" start="3437" end="3446" title="Stereolab" label="Stereolab"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3452" end="3473" title="Stereolab discography#Discography" label="song of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q8102" start="3913" end="3918" title="slang" label="slang"/>
<link wikidata="Q210815" start="3959" end="3977" title="military policemen" label="military policemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1674702" start="3985" end="3997" title="Israeli Army" label="Israeli Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q173603" start="4054" end="4060" title="helmet" label="helmet"/>
<link wikidata="Q36704" start="4189" end="4199" title="Yugoslavia" label="Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q933646" start="4205" end="4221" title="Polski Fiat 126p" label="Polski Fiat 126p"/>
<link wikidata="Q894874" start="4319" end="4333" title="Bottega Veneta" label="Bottega Veneta"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="191314" wikidata="Q53393" url="?curid=191314" title="Jimmy Connors">
<text>James Scott Connors (born September 2, 1952) is an American former professional tennis player. He was ranked as the world No. 1 in men&#x27;s singles by the Association of Tennis Professionals (ATP) for 268 weeks (fifth-most of all time), and finished as the year-end No. 1 five times. By virtue of his long and prolific career, Connors still holds three prominent Open Era men&#x27;s singles records: 109 titles, 1,557 matches played, and 1,274 match wins. His titles include eight singles majors (an Open Era joint-record five US Opens, two Wimbledons, one Australian Open) and three year-end championships. In 1974, he became the second man in the Open Era to win three major titles in a calendar year, and was not permitted to participate in the fourth, the French Open. He retired in 1996 at the age of 43.

==Career==
===Early years===
Connors grew up in East St. Louis, Illinois, just across the Mississippi River from St. Louis, Missouri, and was raised Catholic. During his childhood he was coached and trained by his mother and grandmother. He played in his first U.S. Championship, the U.S. boys&#x27; 11-and-under of 1961, when he was nine years old. Connors&#x27;s mother, Gloria, took him to Southern California to be coached by Pancho Segura, starting at age 16, in 1968. But she remained part of the team as his coach and manager. He and his brother, John &quot;Johnny&quot; Connors, attended St. Phillip&#x27;s grade school. Connors won the Junior Orange Bowl in both the 12- and the 14-year categories, and is one of nine tennis players to win the Junior Orange Bowl championship twice in its 70-year history.

===Early career (1970–1973)===
In August 1970, Connors recorded his first match win in the first round of the Haverford tournament, beating Jean-Baptiste Chanfreau. In his first US Open, Connors lost in round one to Mark Cox. At Pacific Southwest Open in Los Angeles, he defeated Roy Emerson before losing to Clark Graebner in the last 16, where he was described by the Los Angeles Times as the &quot;Cinderfella of tennis&quot; and &quot;the kid with a magic wand for a backhand&quot;. In 1971, Connors won the NCAA singles title as a Freshman while attending UCLA and attained All-American status. He reached his first ATP Tour finals at Columbus (losing to Tom Gorman) and Los Angeles (beating newly-crowned US Open champion Stan Smith before losing to 43 year old Pancho Gonzales).

Connors turned professional in 1972 and won his first tournament, the Jacksonville Open, quickly followed by his second at Roanoke, third at Queen&#x27;s Club, fourth at Columbus, fifth at Cincinnati and sixth at Albany. Connors was acquiring a reputation as a maverick in 1972 when he refused to join the newly formed Association of Tennis Professionals (ATP), the union that was embraced by most male professional players, in order to play in and dominate a series of smaller tournaments organized by Bill Riordan, his manager. However, Connors played in other tournaments and won the 1973 U.S. Pro Singles, defeating Arthur Ashe in a five-set final, one of 11 tournaments Connors won that year.

===Peak years (1974–1983)===
In 1974, Connors was the dominant player. He had a 93–4 record that year and won 15 tournaments of the 21 he entered, including three of the four Grand Slam singles titles. Connors won the Australian Open, which began in late December 1973 and concluded on January 1, 1974, defeating Phil Dent in four sets. He beat Ken Rosewall in straight sets in the final of Wimbledon losing six games.
He allowed Rosewall just two games in the US Open final in the most one-sided men&#x27;s singles final in the tournament&#x27;s history. &quot;From the moment I took the court and hit the first ball, I felt I was gliding. I was on a cloud. It was a terrific feeling” said Connors afterwards. Connors did not participate in the French Open during his peak years (1974–78), as he was banned from playing by the event in 1974 due to his association with World Team Tennis (WTT). and in the other four years chose not to participate. His exclusion from the French Open denied him the opportunity to become the second male player of the Open era, after Rod Laver, to win all four major singles titles in a calendar year. Connors is one of thirteen men to win three or more major singles titles in a calendar year. He chose not to participate in the season-ending Masters Cup between the top eight players of the world and was not eligible for the World Championship Tennis (WCT) finals because he did not compete in the WCT&#x27;s regular tournaments. Connors finished 1974 at the top of ATP Point Rankings. He also was the recipient of the &quot;Martini and Rossi&quot; Award, voted for by a panel of journalists and was ranked world No. 1 by Rex Bellamy, &quot;Tennis Magazine&quot; (U.S.), Rino Tommasi, &quot;World Tennis&quot;, Bud Collins, Judith Elian and Lance Tingay.

In 1975, Connors reached the finals of Wimbledon (losing to Arthur Ashe), the US Open (losing to Manuel Orantes) and Australia (losing to John Newcombe), but he did not win any of them, although his loss to Newcombe was close as Connors lost 9–7 in a fourth set tiebreak. He never played in the Australian Open again. He won nine of the tournaments he entered achieving an 82–8 record. While he earned enough points to retain the ATP No. 1 ranking the entire year and was ranked number one by Rino Tommasi, all other tennis authorities, including the ATP, named Arthur Ashe, who solidly defeated Connors at Wimbledon, as the Player of the Year. He once again did not participate in the Masters Cup or the WCT Finals.

In 1976 Connors lost in the quarterfinals at Wimbledon to Roscoe Tanner. 
At the US Open, Connors captured the title once again (defeating Björn Borg). After the match, Borg said “it was a very good match. It was the best Jimmy has ever played against me. He hit everything on the lines, everything in the corners. I couldn&#x27;t do anything. Usually, you play like that for one and a half sets and start missing. But he was very consistent.&quot; He won 12 events, including the U.S. Pro Indoor in Philadelphia, Palm Springs and Las Vegas, he achieved a record of 90–8 and defeated Borg all four times they played. He was ranked No. 1 by the ATP for the entire year and was ranked number one by &quot;World Tennis, Tennis Magazine&quot; (U.S.), Bud Collins, Lance Tingay, John Barrett, and Tommasi. The ATP named Björn Borg as its Player of the Year.

In 1977, an injured Connors lost in the Wimbledon finals to Borg 6–4 in the fifth set and in the US Open finals to Guillermo Vilas, but Connors captured both the Masters, beating Borg, and the WCT Finals. While holding onto the ATP No. 1 ranking, &quot;World Tennis&quot; Magazine and most tennis authorities ranked Borg or Vilas No. 1 with Connors rated as No. 3 behind Borg. He won eight tournaments this year.

In 1978, Borg defeated Connors in the Wimbledon final. Connors defeated Borg in the US Open final (played on hardcourt for the inaugural time). &quot;The Los Angeles Times&quot; described the match by saying &quot;Connors played smashingly, as he has all tournament, pressuring Borg from the start. Yet Borg looked nothing like the broad-shouldered, power-hitting Swede who dominated Connors in straight sets at Wimbledon.&quot; Borg was suffering from an infected callous on his thumb but said &quot;it was little bit tender earlier today, but it did not bother me during the match. Jimmy was just too good today.&quot; Connors reached the final of the US Open in five straight years from 1974 through 1978, winning three times with each win being on a different surface (1974 on grass, 1976 on clay and 1978 on hard). Connors won ten tournaments in 1978, including the U.S. Pro Indoor. While he retained the ATP No. 1 ranking at the end of the year, the ATP and most tennis authorities rated Borg, who also won the French Open, as the player of the year.

Connors reached the ATP world No. 1 ranking on July 29, 1974, and held it for 160 consecutive weeks, a record until it was surpassed by Roger Federer on February 26, 2007. He was the year-end No. 1 player from 1974 through 1978 and held the No. 1 ranking for a total of 268 weeks during his career. Connors relinquished his initial grip (160 weeks) on the No. 1 ranking for only one week, from August 23 to 30, 1977, before resuming as No. 1 for another 84 weeks.

From 1979 to 1981, Connors lost in the semifinals of the three top Grand Slam events every time except the 1981 French Open, where he lost in the quarterfinals. He reached the semifinals at the Masters in 1979 and 1980, but he did win the WCT Finals in 1980. He was generally ranked third in the world those years. He won eight tournaments in 1979, six in 1980 and four in 1981.

In 1982, Connors experienced a resurgence as he defeated John McEnroe in five close sets &quot;that varied from boringly slow to fiercely brilliant&quot; to win the Wimbledon final. Connors beat Ivan Lendl in the US Open final when Lendl was unable to cope &quot;with Connors&#x27; penetrating, sharply-angled groundstrokes into the corners, or his net-charging attacks&quot;. After the US Open, Connors reclaimed the ATP No. 1 ranking. He also reached the semifinal of the Masters Cup and won five other tournaments for a total of seven. After trading the number-one ranking back and forth with McEnroe, he finished the year ranked No. 2 in points earned, but he was named Player of the Year by the ATP and was ITF World Champion due to his victories at Wimbledon and the US Open.

In 1983, Connors, McEnroe and Lendl traded the No. 1 ranking several times. Connors won the US Open for a record fifth time beating Lendl in the final in four sets, where he &quot;blunted Lendl&#x27;s power with defensive strength and spectacular volleys&quot;. It was his 100th tournament victory and fourth of the year. He finished the year as the No. 3 ranked player.

===Later years (1984–1996)===
In 1984 Connors had made both the finals of Wimbledon and the WCT finals with semifinal appearances at the French Open, the US Open, and the Masters Cup. He won five tournaments and finished the year as the No. 2 ranked player after McEnroe. In 1985, he made the semifinals of the three majors he entered and finished No. 4 for the year, a ranking he would again obtain in 1987, at the age of 35.

In the fourth round of the 1987 Wimbledon Championships, Connors defeated Mikael Pernfors, ten years his junior, in five sets from two sets down and having trailed 1–4 in the third set and 0–3 in the fourth set. In July 1988, Connors ended a four-year title drought by winning the Sovran Bank Tennis Classic in Washington, D.C. It was the 106th title of his career. Connors had played in 56 tournaments and lost 11 finals since his previous victory in the Tokyo Indoors against Lendl in October 1984. He also won the title at Toulouse.

In 1989, Connors won the final tournaments of his career at Toulouse (beating his old rival McEnroe, who was then ranked No. 4 in the world) and Tel Aviv. He still holds the Open era record with 109 men&#x27;s singles titles. At the 1989 US Open, Connors defeated the third seed (and future two-time champion) Stefan Edberg, in straight sets in the fourth round, in a match in which Connors accumulated fines of $2,250 for three code violations, was penalized a game in the second set and was one more code violation from being defaulted. Afterwards Connors said &quot;I went out and played a match everybody dreams will happen and he played one of those matches you hope you have only one time in your career.” Connors pushed sixth-seeded Andre Agassi to five sets in the quarterfinals before losing. He ended 1989 ranked 14 in the world.

Connors&#x27; career seemed to be at an end in 1990, when he played only three tournament matches and lost all three, dropping to No. 936 in the world rankings. However, after surgery on his deteriorating left wrist, he came back to play 14 tournaments in 1991. An ailing back forced him to retire from a five-sets match in the third round of the French Open against Michael Chang, the 1989 champion. Connors walked off the court, after hitting a service-return winner against Chang on the first point of the fifth set, having just levelled the match by winning the fourth.

Connors recuperated and made an improbable run to the 1991 US Open semifinals which he later said were &quot;the best 11 days of my tennis career&quot;. In the first round, Connors was two sets and 3-0 down against Patrick McEnroe before winning in five sets. He then had straight sets wins over Michiel Schapers and 10th seed Karel Novacek. In the fourth round, on his 39th birthday, he defeated 24-year-old Aaron Krickstein in five sets, in 4 hours and 41 minutes, coming back from a 2–5 deficit in the final set. Connors then defeated Paul Haarhuis in the quarterfinals in four sets after Haarhuis had served for a two sets to love lead. He lost to Jim Courier in the semifinals, in straight sets. 22 years later, ESPN aired a documentary commemorating Connors&#x27;s run.

In 1992, Connors beat world No. 3, Michael Stich, at Memphis. Afterwards Stich accused Connors of being &quot;very unfair on the court,” saying &quot;he talks to the crowd between your first and second serves and he talks to the crowd as you are preparing for your serve. If that’s his idea of winning... I think it’s ridiculous what he’s doing.&quot; Connors lost in the semifinals to Mal Washington. He beat 20 year old world No. 12, Wayne Ferreira, to reach the quarterfinals at Indianapolis, before losing to Boris Becker. Connors participated in his last major tournament, in the 1992 US Open, where he beat 22 year old Jaime Oncins in straight sets in the first round on his 40th birthday, before losing to Lendl (then ranked No. 7) in four sets, in the second round.

In September 1992, Connors played Martina Navratilova in the third Battle of the Sexes tennis match at Caesars Palace in Las Vegas, Nevada. Connors was allowed only one serve per point and Navratilova was allowed to hit into half the doubles court. Connors won, 7–5, 6–2 and won an estimated $1 million.

In February 1993, Connors reached the semifinals of the San Francisco tournament, beating Richard Matuszewski, Bryan Shelton (in an ill-tempered match in which Shelton afterwards accused Connors of disrupting his concentration by stalling, yelling obscenities and playing to the crowd) and 21 year old Chuck Adams, before retiring against Brad Gilbert due to bone spurs in his right foot.

However, this would not be the end of his playing career. As late as June 1995, three months shy of his 43rd birthday, Connors beat 22 year old Sébastien Lareau, in straight sets, and 27 year old Martin Sinner, in straight sets, to progress to the quarterfinals of the Halle event in Germany. Connors lost this quarterfinal in straight sets to Marc Rosset. His last match on the ATP Tour came in April 1996, when he lost in three sets to Richey Reneberg in Atlanta.

Connors endorsed Converse but wore Nike Air Tech Challenge IV low&#x27;s at one time.

===Rivalries===
Prominent contemporary players with Connors included Phil Dent, Brian Gottfried, Raul Ramírez, Harold Solomon, Dick Stockton, Roscoe Tanner, and Guillermo Vilas. His prominent older opponents included Pancho Gonzales, Ken Rosewall, Rod Laver, Arthur Ashe, John Newcombe, Ilie Năstase, Stan Smith and Manuel Orantes. His prominent younger opponents included Vitas Gerulaitis, Björn Borg, John McEnroe, Ivan Lendl, Stefan Edberg, Boris Becker and Andre Agassi.

====Björn Borg====

During his best years of 1974 through 1978, Connors was challenged the most by Borg, with twelve matches on tour during that time frame. Borg won only four of those meetings, but two of those wins were in the Wimbledon finals of 1977 and 1978. Connors lost his stranglehold on the top ranking to Borg in early 1979 and wound up with an official tour record of 8 wins and 15 losses against Borg as Borg was four years younger and won the last ten times they met. Head to head in major championship finals, they split their four meetings, Borg winning two Wimbledons (1977 and 1978) and Connors winning two US Opens (1976 and 1978). Connors described his rivalry with Borg in a 1987 newspaper article by saying &quot;Borg and I were fire and ice. We were just entirely different people on and off the court.&quot;

====Ilie Năstase====
Nastase was another rival in Connors&#x27;s prime. Though six years older than Connors, Nastase won eleven of their first twelve meetings. However, Connors then won eleven of their final fifteen meetings to trail Nastase 12-15. The two would team up to win the doubles championships at the 1973 Wimbledon and the 1975 US Open.

====Manuel Orantes and Guillermo Vilas====
Orantes upset Connors in the final of the 1975 US Open, but Connors was 12 wins and 3 losses overall against Orantes in tour events. On the other hand, Vilas wore down Connors in the final of the 1977 US Open and was much more competitive in all of their meetings. Connors was able to manage only a 5–4 record against Vilas in tour events.

====Rod Laver and John Newcombe====
In 1975, Connors won two highly touted &quot;Challenge Matches&quot;, both arranged by the Riordan company and televised nationally by CBS Sports from Caesars Palace in Las Vegas, Nevada. The first match, in February and billed as $100,000 ($ today) winner-takes-all, was against 36 year old Laver. Connors won that match in four sets. In April, Connors met Newcombe in a match billed as a $250,000 winner-takes-all. Connors won the match in four sets. Connors ended his business relationship with Riordan later in 1975.

Connors played Newcombe six matches listed on the ATP website, with Newcombe winning the first two meetings on grass (1973 US Open quarterfinal and 1975 Australian Open final) and Connors winning the last four on indoor carpet (WCT Aetna World Cup 1976 and 1978) and hard courts (1978 Sydney Indoor quarterfinal and 1979 Hong Kong round of 16). Connors won all three meetings with Rod Laver in tour events, all when Laver was at least 37 years old.

====John McEnroe====

In the 1980 WCT Finals, Connors defeated the defending champion, John McEnroe. In 1982, at age 29, Connors was back in the Wimbledon singles final, where he faced McEnroe, who by then was established firmly as the world&#x27;s top player. Connors recovered from being three points away from defeat in a fourth-set tie-break (at 3–4) to win the match, 3–6, 6–3, 6–7, 7–6, 6–4, and claimed his second Wimbledon title, eight years after his first.

Although Connors&#x27;s tour record against McEnroe was 14–20 McEnroe is 6½ years younger than Connors and had a losing record against Connors until he won 12 out of their last 14 meetings. Head to head in major championship finals, they split their two meetings, Connors winning the 1982 Wimbledon in five sets, and McEnroe winning the 1984 Wimbledon in straight sets. McEnroe won six of their nine meetings in Grand Slam events. Connors described his rivalry with McEnroe in a newspaper article in 1987 by saying &quot;We went at it on and off the court. That was because we were fire and fire, we were so similar. Still are.&quot;

====Ivan Lendl====

Connors defeated another of the next generation of tennis stars, Ivan Lendl, in the 1982 US Open final and soon regained the No. 1 ranking. Connors had a tour record of 13–22 against Lendl, but Lendl is eight years younger than Connors and had a losing record against Connors until he won their last 17 matches from 1984 through 1992, after Connors&#x27;s prime. Head to head in major championship finals, Connors defeated Lendl in both meetings, winning the 1982 and 1983 US Open. Connors described his rivalry with Lendl in a newspaper article in 1987 by saying &quot;Lendl and I didn’t get along, and I won a lot early. He’s won a lot later.&quot;

===Maverick===
In 1974, Connors and Riordan began filing lawsuits against the ATP and its president, Arthur Ashe, for allegedly restricting his freedom in the game. The lawsuits stemmed from the French Open banning Connors in 1974 after he had signed a contract to play World Team Tennis (WTT) for the Baltimore Banners. Connors was seeking to enter the French Open, but the ATP and French officials opposed WTT because of scheduling conflicts. Just before the start of Wimbledon 1975 the British press reported that Riordan had filed lawsuits claiming damages against Arthur Ashe and ATP secretary Bob Briner. Ashe had criticised Connors in a letter as “seemingly unpatriotic” for playing lucrative ‘challenge’ matches, rather than joining the U.S. Davis Cup team and Briner had called Riordan, a “nihilist”. Connors dropped Riordan (and the lawsuits) in November 1975.

At Wimbledon in 1977, he declined to participate in a parade of former champions to celebrate the tournament&#x27;s centenary, choosing instead to practice in the grounds with Ilie Nastase while the parade took place. In 2000, he also declined to join a gathering of 58 former champions held to mark the millennium. In his 2013 autobiography, Connors blamed his missing the 1977 parade on the All England Club for not letting his doctor onto the grounds so that Connors could try on a customized splint for a thumb injury. Connors explained that this necessitated his rushing to meet the doctor at the entrance to the grounds, and then convincing Nastase to help him try out the splint on a practice court. By Connors&#x27; account, he then rushed to Centre Court for the parade, but was too late.

Connors also irritated sponsors and tennis officials by shunning the end-of-year Masters championship from 1974 through 1976. However, he entered this round-robin competition in 1977 when it moved to New York City. Although Connors lost a celebrated late-night match to Vilas, he took the title by defeating Borg in the final.

In a semi final of a tournament at Boca Raton in February 1986 against Ivan Lendl, Connors protested what he said was a bad line call in the sixth game of the fifth set that gave Lendl a 3-2, 40-0 lead. Umpire Jeremy Shales, after imposing a 15-second warning, gave Connors a code-of-conduct warning for delay of game. Connors then was penalized a point giving Lendl the game and making the fifth-set score 4-2 for Lendl. Connors continued to protest and refused to play. He then was given a game penalty, making it 5-2 for Lendl. After supervisor Ken Farrar had failed to persuade Connors to continue play, he was defaulted. Connors insisted that he did not quit the match. Connors told reporters the next week at Palm Springs. &quot;I didn&#x27;t quit, I was defaulted. I take full credit, good or bad, for what I&#x27;ve done. If I&#x27;m suspended, I&#x27;ll just go home and ride my horses. I was standing up for the rights of players. I&#x27;ll tell you, if a lot of guys could afford it, they would do it. I did it because I thought it was right.&quot; A month after the incident, the Men’s International Professional Tennis Council decided that Connors would be banned for 10 weeks and fined $20,000 (in addition to $5,000 imposed on the day of the match).

===Distinctions and honors===
Connors is often considered among the greatest tennis players in the history of the sport. Connors won a male open era record 109 singles titles. He also won 16 doubles titles (including the men&#x27;s doubles titles at Wimbledon in 1973 and the US Open in 1975). Connors has won more matches (1,274) than any other male professional tennis player in the open era. His career win–loss record was 1,274–283 for a winning percentage of 82.4. He played 398 tournaments, a record until Fabrice Santoro overtook it in 2008.

In Grand Slam Singles events, Connors reached the semifinals or better a total of 31 times and the quarterfinals or better a total of 41 times, despite entering the Australian Open Men&#x27;s Singles only twice and not entering the French Open Men&#x27;s Singles for five of his peak career years. The 31 semifinals stood as a record until surpassed by Roger Federer at Wimbledon 2012. The 41 quarterfinals remained a record until Roger Federer surpassed it at Wimbledon 2014. Connors was the only player to win the US Open on three different surfaces: grass, clay, and hard. He was also the first male tennis player to win Grand Slam singles titles on three different surfaces: grass (1974), clay (1976), and hard (1978).

Connors was inducted into the International Tennis Hall of Fame in 1998 and Intercollegiate Tennis Association (ITA) Hall of Fame in 1986. He also has a star on the St. Louis Walk of Fame. In his 1979 autobiography, tennis promoter and Grand Slam winning player Jack Kramer ranked Connors as one of the 21 best players of all time. Because of his fiery competitiveness and acrimonious relationships with a number of peers, he has been likened to baseball player Pete Rose. In 1983, Fred Perry ranked the greatest male players of all time and put them in to two categories, before World War II and after. Perry&#x27;s modern best behind Laver: &quot;Borg, McEnroe, Connors, Hoad, Jack Kramer, John Newcombe, Ken Rosewall, Manuel Santana&quot;.

==Playing style==

In the modern era of power tennis, Connors&#x27; style of play has often been cited as highly influential, especially in the development of the flat backhand. Larry Schwartz on ESPN.com said about Connors, &quot;His biggest weapons were an indomitable spirit, a two-handed backhand and the best service return in the game. It is difficult to say which was more instrumental in Connors becoming a champion. ... Though smaller than most of his competitors, Connors didn&#x27;t let it bother him, making up for a lack of size with determination.&quot; Of his own competitive nature Connors has said, &quot;[T]here&#x27;s always somebody out there who&#x27;s willing to push it that extra inch, or mile, and that was me. (Laughter) I didn&#x27;t care if it took me 30 minutes or five hours. If you beat me, you had to be the best, or the best you had that day. But that was my passion for the game. If I won, I won, and if I lost, well, I didn&#x27;t take it so well.&quot;

His on-court antics, designed to get the crowd involved, both helped and hurt his play. Schwartz said, &quot;While tennis fans enjoyed Connors&#x27;s gritty style and his never-say-die attitude, they often were shocked by his antics. His sometimes vulgar on-court behavior—like giving the finger to a linesman after disagreeing with a call or strutting about the court with the tennis racket handle between his legs; sometimes he would yank on the handle in a grotesque manner and his fans would go wild or groan in disapproval—did not help his approval rating. During the early part of his career, Connors frequently argued with umpires, linesmen, the players union, Davis Cup officials and other players. He was even booed at Wimbledon—a rare show of disapproval there—for snubbing the Parade of Champions on the first day of the Centenary in 1977.&quot; His brash behavior both on and off the court earned him a reputation as the brat of the tennis world. Tennis commentator Bud Collins nicknamed Connors the &quot;Brash Basher of Belleville&quot; after the St Louis suburb where he grew up. Connors himself thrived on the energy of the crowd, positive or negative, and manipulated and exploited it to his advantage in many of the greatest matches of his career.

Connors was taught to hit the ball on the rise by his teaching-pro mother, Gloria Connors, a technique he used to defeat the opposition in the early years of his career. Gloria sent her son to Southern California to work with Pancho Segura at the age of 16. Segura advanced Connors&#x27; game of hitting the ball on the rise which enabled Connors to reflect the power and velocity of his opponents back at them. In the 1975 Wimbledon final, Arthur Ashe countered this strategy by taking the pace off the ball, giving Connors only soft junk shots (dinks, drop shots, and lobs) to hit.

In an era when the serve and volley was the norm, Björn Borg excepted, Connors was one of the few players to hit the ball flat, low, and predominantly from the baseline. Connors hit his forehand with a semi-Western grip and with little net clearance. Contemporaries such as Arthur Ashe and commentators such as Joel Drucker characterized his forehand as his greatest weakness, especially on extreme pressure points, as it lacked the safety margin of hard forehands hit with topspin. His serve, while accurate and capable, was never a great weapon for him as it did not reach the velocity and power of his opponents.

His lack of a dominating serve and net game, combined with his individualist style and maverick tendencies, meant that he was not as successful in doubles as he was in singles, although he did win Grand Slam titles with Ilie Năstase, reached a final with Chris Evert, and accumulated 16 doubles titles during his career.

===Racket evolution===
At a time when most other tennis pros played with wooden rackets, Connors used the &quot;Wilson T2000&quot; steel racket, which utilized a method for stringing that had been devised and patented by Lacoste in 1953. He played with this chrome tubular steel racket until 1984, when most other pros had shifted to new racket technologies, materials, and designs.

At the Tokyo Indoor in October 1983, Connors switched to a new mid-size graphite racket, the Wilson ProStaff, that had been designed especially for him and he used it on the 1984 tour. But 1985 again found Connors playing with the T2000. In 1987, he finally switched to a graphite racket when he signed a contract with Slazenger to play their Panther Pro Ceramic. In 1990, Connors signed with Estusa.

Connors used lead tape which he would wind around the racket head to provide the proper &quot;feel&quot; for his style of game.

==Commentating==
Connors did commentary with NBC-TV in 1990 and 1991, during its coverage of the French Open and Wimbledon tournaments. During the Wimbledon tournaments of 2005, 2006, and 2007, Connors commentated for the BBC alongside John McEnroe (among others), providing moments of heated discussion between two former archrivals. Connors returned to BBC commentary at Wimbledon in 2014. Connors has also served as a commentator and analyst for the Tennis Channel since the US Open tournament of 2009.

==Coaching==
On July 24, 2006, at the start of the Countrywide Classic tournament in Los Angeles, American tennis player Andy Roddick announced his partnership with Connors as his coach. In September, 2006 Roddick reached the final of the U.S. Open, where he lost to Roger Federer. On March 6, 2008, Roddick announced the end of that 19-month relationship.

In July 2013 former women&#x27;s world No. 1 Maria Sharapova announced on her website that Connors was her new coach. On August 15, 2013, Sharapova confirmed that she had ended the partnership with Connors after just one match together.

==Author==
In 2013, Connors published his autobiography &quot;The Outsider&quot;. It won the British Sports Book Awards in the &quot;Best Autobiography/Biography&quot; category.

==Personal life==
Connors was engaged to fellow tennis pro Chris Evert from 1974 to 1975, and they each triumphed in the singles events at the 1974 Wimbledon Championships, a feat labelled &quot;The Lovebird Double&quot; by the media. Their engagement was broken off shortly before the 1975 Wimbledon championship. Connors and Evert briefly reconciled in 1976 and 1978, before parting for good. In May 2013, Connors wrote his autobiography in which he alleged that Evert was pregnant with their child and that she unilaterally made the decision to have an abortion.

Former Miss World Marjorie Wallace was engaged to Connors from 1976 to 1977, but in 1979 Connors married &quot;Playboy&quot; model Patti McGuire. They have two children, son Brett and daughter Aubree, and live in the Santa Barbara, California, area.

In the fall of 1988, Connors auditioned to host the NBC daytime version of &quot;Wheel of Fortune&quot;, a show of which he and his wife &quot;never missed an episode&quot;. However, the job went to Rolf Benirschke. According to show creator Merv Griffin, many news outlets tried to get their hands on Connors&#x27; audition tape, but Griffin refused to release it because he said &quot;it wouldn&#x27;t have been fair to Jimmy.&quot;

In the 1990s, he joined his brother John as an investor in the Argosy Gaming Company, which owned riverboat casinos on the Mississippi River. The two owned 19 percent of the company which was headquartered in East Alton, Illinois, in the St. Louis metropolitan area. Argosy narrowly averted bankruptcy in the late 1990s and Connors&#x27; brother John personally sought Chapter 7 bankruptcy. In the liquidation, Connors, through his company, Smooth Swing, acquired the Alystra Casino in Henderson, Nevada, for $1.9 million from Union Planters Bank, which had foreclosed on John. In 1995, John Connors had opened the casino with announced plans to include a Jimmy Connors theme area. It was shuttered in 1998 and became a magnet for the homeless and thieves who stripped its copper piping. The casino never reopened under Connors&#x27; ownership and it was destroyed in a May 2008 fire.

In October 2005, Connors had successful hip-replacement surgery at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center in Los Angeles.

On January 8, 2007, Connors&#x27; mother Gloria died at age 82.

On November 21, 2008, Connors was arrested outside an NCAA basketball game between the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill and the University of California at Santa Barbara after refusing to comply with an order to leave an area near the entrance to the stadium. The charges were dismissed by a judge on February 10, 2009.

On July 24, 2018, LiveWire Ergogenics, Inc. announced that Connors joined the firm as a spokesman and advisor. The company focuses on special purpose real estate acquisitions and the licensing and management of fully compliant turnkey production facilities for cannabis-based products and services.

In December 2019, Connors appeared as himself on season 18 episode 9 of &quot;Family Guy&quot; titled &quot;Christmas Is Coming&quot;.

==Career statistics==
===Singles performance timeline===

* Australian Open was held twice in 1977, in January and December. Connors did not play these tournaments.

===Records===
*These records were attained in Open Era of tennis.
*Combined tours included Association of Tennis Professionals, Grand Prix Circuit, World Championship Tennis.
*Records in bold indicate peer-less achievements.



==Professional awards==
*ITF World Champion: 1982
*ATP Player of the Year: 1974, 1982
*ATP Comeback Player of the Year: 1991

==See also==

*ATP World Tour records
*Connors–McEnroe rivalry
*List of open era tennis records
*List of Grand Slam related tennis records
*Tennis male players statistics
*Tennis records of All Time – Men&#x27;s singles
*Tennis records of the Open Era – Men&#x27;s singles
*World number one male tennis player rankings

==Notes==
==References==
==Further reading==
*
*Seebohm, Caroline, (2009), Little Pancho

===Video===
*&quot;Charlie Rose with Jimmy Connors (August 7, 1995)&quot; Studio: Charlie Rose, DVD Release Date: October 5, 2006, ASIN: B000JCF3S8
*&quot;Biography: Jimmy Connors DVD&quot; A&amp;E 2002.
*&quot;Jimmy Connors Presents Tennis Fundamentals: Comprehensive&quot;, Starring: Jimmy Connors; Chris Evert, Foundation Sports, DVD Release Date: May 1, 2006, Run Time: 172 minutes, ASIN: B000FVQWCY.
*&quot;Wimbledon 1975 Final: Ashe vs. Connors&quot; Standing Room Only, DVD Release Date: October 30, 2007, Run Time: 120 minutes, ASIN: B000V02CTQ.

==External links==
* 
* 
* Official Wimbledon website profile
* BBC profile</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q53393" start="0" end="19" title="Jimmy Connors" label="James Scott Connors"/>
<link wikidata="Q847" start="80" end="86" title="tennis" label="tennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q583537" start="116" end="127" title="List of ATP number 1 ranked singles players" label="world No. 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q744089" start="157" end="192" title="Association of Tennis Professionals" label="Association of Tennis Professionals"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="214" end="236" title="List of ATP number 1 ranked singles players#Weeks at No. 1" label="fifth-most of all time"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="259" end="273" title="List of ATP number 1 ranked singles players#Year-end No. 1 players" label="year-end No. 1"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="365" end="400" title="Open Era tennis records – men&amp;#x27;s singles#All tournaments" label="Open Era men&amp;#x27;s singles records"/>
<link wikidata="Q102113" start="491" end="496" title="Grand Slam (tennis)" label="major"/>
<link wikidata="Q2295996" start="502" end="510" title="Open Era" label="Open Era"/>
<link wikidata="Q123577" start="529" end="536" title="US Open (tennis)" label="US Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q41520" start="543" end="552" title="The Championships, Wimbledon" label="Wimbledon"/>
<link wikidata="Q60874" start="559" end="574" title="Australian Open" label="Australian Open"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="586" end="608" title="Open Era tennis records – men&amp;#x27;s singles#Year-end championships" label="year-end championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q43605" start="762" end="773" title="French Open" label="French Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q577891" start="861" end="885" title="East St. Louis, Illinois" label="East St. Louis, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497" start="903" end="920" title="Mississippi River" label="Mississippi River"/>
<link wikidata="Q38022" start="926" end="945" title="St. Louis" label="St. Louis, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="962" end="970" title="Catholicism" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q54581" start="1243" end="1256" title="Pancho Segura" label="Pancho Segura"/>
<link wikidata="Q6313400" start="1458" end="1476" title="Junior Orange Bowl" label="Junior Orange Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1565058" start="1845" end="1853" title="Mark Cox (tennis)" label="Mark Cox"/>
<link wikidata="Q299531" start="1858" end="1880" title="Countrywide Classic" label="Pacific Southwest Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q312545" start="1909" end="1920" title="Roy Emerson" label="Roy Emerson"/>
<link wikidata="Q271805" start="2141" end="2145" title="National Collegiate Athletic Association" label="NCAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q174710" start="2190" end="2194" title="University of California, Los Angeles" label="UCLA"/>
<link wikidata="Q3805746" start="2486" end="2503" title="Jacksonville Open (tennis)" label="Jacksonville Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q744089" start="2735" end="2770" title="Association of Tennis Professionals" label="Association of Tennis Professionals"/>
<link wikidata="Q4001665" start="3003" end="3016" title="1973 U.S. Pro Tennis Championships" label="1973 U.S. Pro"/>
<link wikidata="Q53325" start="3036" end="3047" title="Arthur Ashe" label="Arthur Ashe"/>
<link wikidata="Q781682" start="3333" end="3348" title="1974 Australian Open" label="Australian Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q730865" start="3412" end="3416" title="1974 Australian Open – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="1974"/>
<link wikidata="Q976190" start="3428" end="3437" title="Phil Dent" label="Phil Dent"/>
<link wikidata="Q312728" start="3460" end="3472" title="Ken Rosewall" label="Ken Rosewall"/>
<link wikidata="Q745901" start="3506" end="3515" title="1974 Wimbledon Championships" label="Wimbledon"/>
<link wikidata="Q162276" start="3576" end="3583" title="1974 US Open (tennis)" label="US Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q43605" start="3861" end="3872" title="French Open" label="French Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044168" start="3985" end="4002" title="World Team Tennis" label="World Team Tennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q105550" start="4182" end="4191" title="Rod Laver" label="Rod Laver"/>
<link wikidata="Q942050" start="5706" end="5713" title="1976 US Open – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="US Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q507643" start="7666" end="7670" title="1974 US Open – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="1974"/>
<link wikidata="Q942050" start="7681" end="7685" title="1976 US Open – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="1976"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302687" start="7698" end="7702" title="1978 US Open – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="1978"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426" start="8087" end="8100" title="Roger Federer" label="Roger Federer"/>
<link wikidata="Q951533" start="10406" end="10434" title="1987 Wimbledon Championships" label="1987 Wimbledon Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q635487" start="10453" end="10468" title="Mikael Pernfors" label="Mikael Pernfors"/>
<link wikidata="Q189542" start="11226" end="11239" title="Stefan Edberg" label="Stefan Edberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q7407" start="11656" end="11668" title="Andre Agassi" label="Andre Agassi"/>
<link wikidata="Q53370" start="12124" end="12137" title="Michael Chang" label="Michael Chang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414503" start="12386" end="12409" title="1991 US Open – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="1991 US Open semifinals"/>
<link wikidata="Q302217" start="12741" end="12757" title="Aaron Krickstein" label="Aaron Krickstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q29441" start="12870" end="12883" title="Paul Haarhuis" label="Paul Haarhuis"/>
<link wikidata="Q53396" start="12984" end="12995" title="Jim Courier" label="Jim Courier"/>
<link wikidata="Q217776" start="13049" end="13053" title="ESPN" label="ESPN"/>
<link wikidata="Q258713" start="13734" end="13746" title="Jaime Oncins" label="Jaime Oncins"/>
<link wikidata="Q54545" start="13918" end="13937" title="Martina Navratilova" label="Martina Navratilova"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187909" start="13951" end="13970" title="The Battle of the Sexes (tennis)" label="Battle of the Sexes"/>
<link wikidata="Q569978" start="13987" end="14001" title="Caesars Palace" label="Caesars Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q23768" start="14005" end="14022" title="Las Vegas, Nevada" label="Las Vegas, Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="14245" end="14258" title="San Francisco" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q560187" start="14723" end="14739" title="Sébastien Lareau" label="Sébastien Lareau"/>
<link wikidata="Q72091" start="14775" end="14788" title="Martin Sinner" label="Martin Sinner"/>
<link wikidata="Q123298" start="14923" end="14934" title="Marc Rosset" label="Marc Rosset"/>
<link wikidata="Q730444" start="15017" end="15032" title="Richey Reneberg" label="Richey Reneberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q319515" start="15063" end="15071" title="Converse (brand)" label="Converse"/>
<link wikidata="Q483915" start="15081" end="15085" title="Nike, Inc." label="Nike"/>
<link wikidata="Q976190" start="15202" end="15211" title="Phil Dent" label="Phil Dent"/>
<link wikidata="Q912255" start="15213" end="15228" title="Brian Gottfried" label="Brian Gottfried"/>
<link wikidata="Q972727" start="15230" end="15242" title="Raul Ramírez" label="Raul Ramírez"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585949" start="15244" end="15258" title="Harold Solomon" label="Harold Solomon"/>
<link wikidata="Q967423" start="15260" end="15273" title="Dick Stockton (tennis)" label="Dick Stockton"/>
<link wikidata="Q54681" start="15275" end="15288" title="Roscoe Tanner" label="Roscoe Tanner"/>
<link wikidata="Q201515" start="15294" end="15309" title="Guillermo Vilas" label="Guillermo Vilas"/>
<link wikidata="Q53554" start="15350" end="15365" title="Pancho Gonzales" label="Pancho Gonzales"/>
<link wikidata="Q312728" start="15367" end="15379" title="Ken Rosewall" label="Ken Rosewall"/>
<link wikidata="Q105550" start="15381" end="15390" title="Rod Laver" label="Rod Laver"/>
<link wikidata="Q53325" start="15392" end="15403" title="Arthur Ashe" label="Arthur Ashe"/>
<link wikidata="Q312464" start="15405" end="15418" title="John Newcombe" label="John Newcombe"/>
<link wikidata="Q106113" start="15420" end="15432" title="Ilie Năstase" label="Ilie Năstase"/>
<link wikidata="Q54657" start="15434" end="15444" title="Stan Smith" label="Stan Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q318569" start="15449" end="15463" title="Manuel Orantes" label="Manuel Orantes"/>
<link wikidata="Q53547" start="15506" end="15522" title="Vitas Gerulaitis" label="Vitas Gerulaitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q104506" start="15524" end="15534" title="Björn Borg" label="Björn Borg"/>
<link wikidata="Q16474" start="15536" end="15548" title="John McEnroe" label="John McEnroe"/>
<link wikidata="Q182736" start="15550" end="15560" title="Ivan Lendl" label="Ivan Lendl"/>
<link wikidata="Q189542" start="15562" end="15575" title="Stefan Edberg" label="Stefan Edberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q76334" start="15577" end="15589" title="Boris Becker" label="Boris Becker"/>
<link wikidata="Q7407" start="15594" end="15606" title="Andre Agassi" label="Andre Agassi"/>
<link wikidata="Q941222" start="15858" end="15862" title="1977 Wimbledon Championships – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="1977"/>
<link wikidata="Q941235" start="15867" end="15871" title="1978 Wimbledon Championships – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="1978"/>
<link wikidata="Q941222" start="16195" end="16199" title="1977 Wimbledon Championships – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="1977"/>
<link wikidata="Q941235" start="16204" end="16208" title="1978 Wimbledon Championships – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="1978"/>
<link wikidata="Q942050" start="16244" end="16248" title="1976 US Open – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="1976"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302687" start="16253" end="16257" title="1978 US Open – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="1978"/>
<link wikidata="Q279457" start="16876" end="16888" title="1975 US Open – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="1975 US Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q2620537" start="17030" end="17042" title="1977 US Open – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="1977 US Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q2931052" start="17346" end="17356" title="CBS Sports" label="CBS Sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q569978" start="17362" end="17376" title="Caesars Palace" label="Caesars Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q23768" start="17380" end="17397" title="Las Vegas, Nevada" label="Las Vegas, Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q4016866" start="18212" end="18227" title="1980 World Championship Tennis Finals" label="1980 WCT Finals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1082781" start="18935" end="18939" title="1982 Wimbledon Championships – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="1982"/>
<link wikidata="Q942069" start="18988" end="18992" title="1984 Wimbledon Championships – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="1984"/>
<link wikidata="Q2551198" start="19765" end="19769" title="1982 US Open – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="1982"/>
<link wikidata="Q892568" start="19774" end="19778" title="1983 US Open – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="1983"/>
<link wikidata="Q53325" start="20059" end="20070" title="Arthur Ashe" label="Arthur Ashe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044168" start="20228" end="20245" title="World Team Tennis" label="World Team Tennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q17985725" start="20260" end="20277" title="Baltimore Banners" label="Baltimore Banners"/>
<link wikidata="Q815369" start="21223" end="21239" title="All England Lawn Tennis and Croquet Club" label="All England Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q270907" start="21710" end="21717" title="Tennis Masters Cup" label="Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q312726" start="23735" end="23750" title="Fabrice Santoro" label="Fabrice Santoro"/>
<link wikidata="Q123577" start="24289" end="24296" title="US Open (tennis)" label="US Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151291" start="24326" end="24331" title="grass court" label="grass"/>
<link wikidata="Q198718" start="24333" end="24337" title="clay court" label="clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330871" start="24343" end="24347" title="hard court" label="hard"/>
<link wikidata="Q102113" start="24397" end="24407" title="Grand Slam (tennis)" label="Grand Slam"/>
<link wikidata="Q52454" start="24527" end="24560" title="International Tennis Hall of Fame" label="International Tennis Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24573" end="24626" title="Intercollegiate Tennis Association#Hall of Fame" label="Intercollegiate Tennis Association (ITA) Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q7589721" start="24662" end="24684" title="St. Louis Walk of Fame" label="St. Louis Walk of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q54529" start="24759" end="24770" title="Jack Kramer (tennis player)" label="Jack Kramer"/>
<link wikidata="Q739866" start="24959" end="24968" title="Pete Rose" label="Pete Rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q312639" start="24979" end="24989" title="Fred Perry" label="Fred Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="25077" end="25089" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q132377" start="26899" end="26908" title="Davis Cup" label="Davis Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q41520" start="26959" end="26968" title="Wimbledon (tennis)" label="Wimbledon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000491" start="27209" end="27220" title="Bud Collins" label="Bud Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q38022" start="27292" end="27300" title="St. Louis, Missouri" label="St Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q54581" start="27724" end="27737" title="Pancho Segura" label="Pancho Segura"/>
<link wikidata="Q536733" start="27917" end="27931" title="1975 Wimbledon" label="1975 Wimbledon"/>
<link wikidata="Q53325" start="27939" end="27950" title="Arthur Ashe" label="Arthur Ashe"/>
<link wikidata="Q915012" start="28102" end="28118" title="serve and volley" label="serve and volley"/>
<link wikidata="Q104506" start="28133" end="28143" title="Björn Borg" label="Björn Borg"/>
<link wikidata="Q102113" start="28897" end="28907" title="Grand Slam (tennis)" label="Grand Slam"/>
<link wikidata="Q106113" start="28920" end="28932" title="Ilie Năstase" label="Ilie Năstase"/>
<link wikidata="Q14286" start="28955" end="28966" title="Chris Evert" label="Chris Evert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329777" start="29134" end="29140" title="Wilson Sporting Goods" label="Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q309031" start="29243" end="29250" title="Lacoste" label="Lacoste"/>
<link wikidata="Q3992333" start="29413" end="29425" title="1983 Tokyo Indoor" label="Tokyo Indoor"/>
<link wikidata="Q8023175" start="29499" end="29514" title="Wilson ProStaff Original 6.0" label="Wilson ProStaff"/>
<link wikidata="Q2855977" start="29725" end="29734" title="Slazenger" label="Slazenger"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="29982" end="29988" title="NBC-TV" label="NBC-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q43605" start="30034" end="30045" title="French Open" label="French Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q41520" start="30050" end="30059" title="The Championships, Wimbledon" label="Wimbledon"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="30159" end="30162" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q16474" start="30173" end="30185" title="John McEnroe" label="John McEnroe"/>
<link wikidata="Q41520" start="30310" end="30319" title="The Championships, Wimbledon" label="Wimbledon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2747964" start="30390" end="30404" title="Tennis Channel" label="Tennis Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q123577" start="30415" end="30422" title="US Open (tennis)" label="US Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q299531" start="30495" end="30514" title="Countrywide Classic" label="Countrywide Classic"/>
<link wikidata="Q54584" start="30565" end="30577" title="Andy Roddick" label="Andy Roddick"/>
<link wikidata="Q912506" start="30645" end="30649" title="2006 US Open – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="2006"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426" start="30711" end="30724" title="Roger Federer" label="Roger Federer"/>
<link wikidata="Q11666" start="30847" end="30862" title="Maria Sharapova" label="Maria Sharapova"/>
<link wikidata="Q4971090" start="31133" end="31159" title="British Sports Book Awards" label="British Sports Book Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q14286" start="31278" end="31289" title="Chris Evert" label="Chris Evert"/>
<link wikidata="Q4184" start="31645" end="31658" title="autobiography" label="autobiography"/>
<link wikidata="Q11995" start="31694" end="31702" title="pregnant" label="pregnant"/>
<link wikidata="Q8452" start="31775" end="31783" title="abortion" label="abortion"/>
<link wikidata="Q173402" start="31793" end="31803" title="Miss World" label="Miss World"/>
<link wikidata="Q2547969" start="31804" end="31820" title="Marjorie Wallace" label="Marjorie Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q150820" start="31897" end="31904" title="Playboy" label="Playboy"/>
<link wikidata="Q159288" start="32003" end="32028" title="Santa Barbara, California" label="Santa Barbara, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q3567653" start="32118" end="32134" title="Wheel of Fortune (U.S. game show)" label="Wheel of Fortune"/>
<link wikidata="Q7360696" start="32236" end="32251" title="Rolf Benirschke" label="Rolf Benirschke"/>
<link wikidata="Q598344" start="32279" end="32291" title="Merv Griffin" label="Merv Griffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4789714" start="32536" end="32557" title="Argosy Gaming Company" label="Argosy Gaming Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q7338100" start="32571" end="32587" title="riverboat casino" label="riverboat casino"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497" start="32596" end="32613" title="Mississippi River" label="Mississippi River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277727" start="32682" end="32702" title="East Alton, Illinois" label="East Alton, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q38022" start="32711" end="32720" title="St. Louis, Missouri" label="St. Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q944269" start="32721" end="32738" title="St. Louis metropolitan area" label="metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q49267" start="32959" end="32976" title="Henderson, Nevada" label="Henderson, Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q7885961" start="33000" end="33019" title="Union Planters" label="Union Planters Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q131327" start="33208" end="33216" title="homeless" label="homeless"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052562" start="33426" end="33453" title="Cedars-Sinai Medical Center" label="Cedars-Sinai Medical Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q192334" start="33623" end="33666" title="University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill" label="University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q263064" start="33675" end="33716" title="University of California at Santa Barbara" label="University of California at Santa Barbara"/>
<link wikidata="Q5930" start="34246" end="34256" title="Family Guy" label="Family Guy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2295996" start="34516" end="34524" title="Open Era" label="Open Era"/>
<link wikidata="Q744089" start="34561" end="34596" title="Association of Tennis Professionals" label="Association of Tennis Professionals"/>
<link wikidata="Q3775082" start="34598" end="34616" title="Grand Prix tennis circuit" label="Grand Prix Circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1991741" start="34618" end="34643" title="World Championship Tennis" label="World Championship Tennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q693708" start="34723" end="34741" title="Tennis world champions named by the International Tennis Federation" label="ITF World Champion"/>
<link wikidata="Q434468" start="34749" end="34771" title="ATP Awards" label="ATP Player of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q434468" start="34785" end="34816" title="ATP Awards" label="ATP Comeback Player of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206583" start="34839" end="34861" title="ATP World Tour records" label="ATP World Tour records"/>
<link wikidata="Q3884019" start="34863" end="34886" title="Connors–McEnroe rivalry" label="Connors–McEnroe rivalry"/>
<link wikidata="Q14612467" start="34888" end="34919" title="List of open era tennis records" label="List of open era tennis records"/>
<link wikidata="Q6572360" start="34921" end="34962" title="List of Grand Slam related tennis records" label="List of Grand Slam related tennis records"/>
<link wikidata="Q3422468" start="34964" end="34994" title="Tennis male players statistics" label="Tennis male players statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q17016846" start="34996" end="35043" title="Tennis records of All Time – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="Tennis records of All Time – Men&amp;#x27;s singles"/>
<link wikidata="Q5232431" start="35045" end="35096" title="Tennis records of the Open Era – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="Tennis records of the Open Era – Men&amp;#x27;s singles"/>
<link wikidata="Q686735" start="35098" end="35142" title="World number one male tennis player rankings" label="World number one male tennis player rankings"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="191315" wikidata="Q8608" url="?curid=191315" title="Altenkirchen (district)">
<text>Altenkirchen () is a district in Rhineland-Palatinate, Germany. It is bounded by (from the north and clockwise) the North Rhine-Westphalian districts Rhein-Sieg, Oberbergischer Kreis, Olpe and Siegen-Wittgenstein, and the districts of Westerwaldkreis and Neuwied.

== History ==

The history of the district is linked with the Westerwald region.

The district was established in 1816 by the Prussian administration. It combined the county of Wildenburg and the two counties of Sayn. The former had been part of Berg, the latter ones had belonged to the duchy of Nassau.

The county used to be divided into nine mayoralties, including the Bürgermeisterei Weyerbusch.

== Geography ==

Altenkirchen is the northernmost district of Rhineland-Palatinate. It is occupied by the northern portions of the Westerwald mountains. The valley of the river Sieg borders the Westerwald on the north. The lands north of the Sieg are called Wildenburgisches Land, after the tiny county of Wildenburg, that once existed here.

== Coat of arms ==
The coat of arms displays:
* Top left: The golden lion of the county of Sayn, which occupied the territory in the 12th century
* Top right: The symbol of the tiny county of Wildenburg, which existed until 1806 in the very north of the district
* Bottom: The black and red cross is a combination of the bishops&#x27; emblems of Cologne and Trier

== Towns and municipalities ==


==References==
== External links ==
* (German)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q8608" start="0" end="12" title="Altenkirchen (district)" label="Altenkirchen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200" start="33" end="53" title="Rhineland-Palatinate" label="Rhineland-Palatinate"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="55" end="62" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198" start="116" end="138" title="North Rhine-Westphalia" label="North Rhine-Westphalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6287" start="150" end="160" title="Rhein-Sieg" label="Rhein-Sieg"/>
<link wikidata="Q6298" start="162" end="182" title="Oberbergischer Kreis" label="Oberbergischer Kreis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5953" start="184" end="188" title="Olpe (district)" label="Olpe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5982" start="193" end="212" title="Siegen-Wittgenstein" label="Siegen-Wittgenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q8602" start="235" end="250" title="Westerwaldkreis" label="Westerwaldkreis"/>
<link wikidata="Q8606" start="255" end="262" title="Neuwied (district)" label="Neuwied"/>
<link wikidata="Q640966" start="327" end="337" title="Westerwald" label="Westerwald"/>
<link wikidata="Q38872" start="391" end="398" title="Prussia" label="Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1014593" start="442" end="452" title="Wildenburg Castle (Hunsrück)" label="Wildenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q553182" start="477" end="481" title="Sayn" label="Sayn"/>
<link wikidata="Q151095" start="511" end="515" title="Berg (state)" label="Berg"/>
<link wikidata="Q836680" start="562" end="568" title="Nassau (duchy)" label="Nassau"/>
<link wikidata="Q30185" start="611" end="622" title="mayoralties" label="mayoralties"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021334" start="638" end="664" title="Bürgermeisterei Weyerbusch" label="Bürgermeisterei Weyerbusch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200" start="729" end="749" title="Rhineland-Palatinate" label="Rhineland-Palatinate"/>
<link wikidata="Q640966" start="798" end="808" title="Westerwald" label="Westerwald"/>
<link wikidata="Q152484" start="844" end="848" title="Sieg (river)" label="Sieg"/>
<link wikidata="Q553182" start="1101" end="1105" title="Sayn" label="Sayn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7904317" start="1356" end="1363" title="Electorate of Cologne" label="Cologne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1794352" start="1368" end="1373" title="Electorate of Trier" label="Trier"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="191320" wikidata="Q320065" url="?curid=191320" title="Artie Shaw">
<text>Artie Shaw (born Arthur Jacob Arshawsky; May 23, 1910 – December 30, 2004) was an American clarinetist, composer, bandleader, actor and author of both fiction and non-fiction.

Widely regarded as &quot;one of jazz&#x27;s finest clarinetists&quot;, Shaw led one of the United States&#x27; most popular big bands in the late 1930s through the early 1940s. Though he had numerous hit records, he was perhaps best known for his 1938 recording of Cole Porter&#x27;s &quot;Begin the Beguine&quot;. Before the release of &quot;Beguine&quot;, Shaw and his fledgling band had languished in relative obscurity for over two years and, after its release, he became a major pop artist within short order. The record eventually became one of the era&#x27;s defining recordings. Musically restless, Shaw was also an early proponent of what became known much later as Third Stream music, which blended elements of classical and jazz forms and traditions. His music influenced other musicians, such as Monty Norman in England, whose &quot;James Bond Theme&quot; features a vamp possibly influenced by Shaw&#x27;s 1938 recording of &quot;Nightmare&quot;.

Shaw also recorded with small jazz groups drawn from within the ranks of the big bands he led. He served in the U.S. Navy from 1942 to 1944, during which time he led a morale-building band that toured the South Pacific. Following his discharge in 1944, he returned to lead a band through 1945. Following the breakup of that band, he began to focus on other interests and gradually withdrew from the world of being a professional musician and major celebrity, although he remained a force in popular music and jazz before retiring from music completely in 1954.

==Early life==
Arthur Jacob Arshawsky was born on May 23, 1910, in New York City to Sarah (née Strauss) and Harold &quot;Harry&quot; Arshawsky, a dressmaker and photographer. The family was Jewish; his father was from Russia, his mother from Austria. 

Shaw grew up in New Haven, Connecticut, where his natural introversion was deepened by local antisemitism. He bought a saxophone by working in a grocery store and began learning the saxophone at 13. At 16, he switched to the clarinet and left home to tour with a band.

==Career==
Returning to New York, he became a session musician through the early 1930s. From 1925 to 1936, Shaw performed with many bands and orchestras; from 1926 to 1929, he worked in Cleveland and established a lasting reputation as music director and arranger for an orchestra led by the violinist Austin Wylie. In 1929 and 1930, he played with Irving Aaronson&#x27;s Commanders, where he was exposed to symphonic music, which he would later incorporate in his arrangements. In 1932, Shaw joined the Roger Wolfe Kahn Orchestra and made several recordings with the outfit including &quot;It Don&#x27;t Mean a Thing (If It Ain&#x27;t Got That Swing)&quot; and &quot;Fit as a Fiddle&quot;.

===Leader of bands===
In 1935, he first gained attention with his &quot;Interlude in B-flat&quot; at a swing concert at the Imperial Theater in New York. During the swing era, his big bands were popular with hits like &quot;Begin the Beguine&quot; (1938), &quot;Stardust&quot; (with a trumpet solo by Billy Butterfield), &quot;Back Bay Shuffle&quot;, &quot;Moonglow&quot;, &quot;Rosalie&quot;, and &quot;Frenesi&quot;. The show was well received, but was forced to dissolve in 1937 because his band&#x27;s sound was not commercial. Shaw valued experimental and innovative music over dancing and love songs.

He was an innovator in the big band idiom, using unusual instrumentation; &quot;Interlude in B-flat&quot;, where he was backed with only a rhythm section and a string quartet, was one of the earliest examples of what would be later dubbed Third Stream. His incorporation of stringed instruments could be attributed to the influence of the classical composer Igor Stravinsky.

In addition to hiring Buddy Rich, he signed Billie Holiday as his band&#x27;s vocalist in 1938, becoming the first white band leader to hire a full-time black female singer to tour the segregated Southern U.S. However, after recording &quot;Any Old Time&quot;, Holiday left the band due to hostility from audiences in the South, as well as from music company executives who wanted a more &quot;mainstream&quot; singer.

Like his main rival, Benny Goodman, and other leaders of big bands, Shaw fashioned a smaller &quot;band within the band&quot; in 1940. He named it Artie Shaw and the Gramercy Five after his home telephone exchange. Band pianist Johnny Guarnieri played harpsichord on the quintet recordings, and Al Hendrickson played electric guitar. Trumpeter Roy Eldridge became part of the group, succeeding Billy Butterfield. In 1940, the original Gramercy Five cut eight sides, then Shaw dissolved the band in early 1941. The Gramercy Five&#x27;s biggest hit was &quot;Summit Ridge Drive&quot;, one of Shaw&#x27;s million-selling records. His last prewar band, organized in September 1941, included Oran &quot;Hot Lips&quot; Page, Max Kaminsky, Georgie Auld, Dave Tough, Jack Jenney, Ray Conniff and Guarnieri.

The long series of musical groups Shaw subsequently formed included Lena Horne, Helen Forrest, Mel Tormé, Buddy Rich, Dave Tough, Barney Kessel, Jimmy Raney, Tal Farlow, Dodo Marmarosa, and Ray Conniff. He used the morose &quot;Nightmare&quot;, with its Hasidic nuances, as his theme rather than choosing a more accessible song. In a televised interview in the 1970s, Shaw derided the &quot;asinine&quot; songs of Tin Pan Alley that were the lifeblood of popular music and which bands, especially the most popular (such as his own) were compelled to play night after night. In 1994, he told Frank Prial of &quot;The New York Times&quot;: &quot;I thought that because I was Artie Shaw I could do what I wanted, but all they wanted was &#x27;Begin the Beguine&#x27;&quot;.

Throughout his career, Shaw had a habit of forming bands, developing them according to his immediate aspirations, making a quick series of records, and then disbanding. He generally did not stick around long enough to reap his bands&#x27; successes through live performances of their recorded hits. Following the breakup of what was already his second band in 1939, he rarely toured at all and, if he did, his personal appearances were usually limited to long-term engagements in a single venue or bookings that did not require much traveling, unlike many bands of the era that traveled great distances doing seemingly endless strings of one-night engagements.

===Radio days===

Shaw did many big band remote broadcasts. Throughout the autumn and winter of 1938, he was often heard from the Blue Room of the Hotel Lincoln in New York City. After touring in 1939, he led the house band at the Café Rouge of the Hotel Pennsylvania in New York. He was the headliner of a radio series with comedian Robert Benchley as emcee. Shaw broadcast on CBS from November 20, 1938, until November 14, 1939.

Shaw became increasingly disillusioned with not having time to develop new arrangements, and having to play the same pop tunes over and over. In an interview, he explained, &quot;&#x27;Begin the Beguine&#x27; is a pretty nice tune. But not when you have to play it 500 nights in a row.&quot; Finally, in frustration, he walked off the Café Rouge bandstand while on the air, and quit the band two days later. He departed for Mexico, and the band continued without him into January but eventually broke up.

After Shaw returned from Mexico in 1940, and still under contract to RCA Victor, he experimented with a group of session musicians in Hollywood, trying to combine strings and woodwinds with a jazz band. The result was the hit &quot;Frenesi&quot;.

He was hired as bandleader for the &quot;Burns and Allen Show&quot; broadcast from Hollywood. He organized a band that was modeled after his swing band concept of the late-1930s with the addition of six violins, two violas, and one cello. The addition of a string section to a big band was not novel, as it had been done by Paul Whiteman and others since the 1920s. Shaw updated the idea with the music trends of the 1940s. Strings gave him a wider tonal palette and allowed him to concentrate on ballads rather than the fast dance songs of the swing era. Shaw was at or near the top of the list of virtuoso jazz bandleaders. The band was showcased on the Burns and Allen program every week.

In 1940, at the height of his popularity, the 30-year-old Shaw earned up to $60,000 per week. In contrast, George Burns and Gracie Allen were each making $5,000 per week during the year that Shaw and his orchestra provided the music for their radio show. He acted on the show as a love interest for Gracie Allen. Shaw&#x27;s contract was renewed for another 13 weeks when the program was moved to New York.

Shaw disliked having to be a part of the celebrity culture of the period, with its professional obligations. He told &quot;Metronome&quot; magazine: &quot;I don&#x27;t like the &quot;business&quot; of music. I&#x27;m unhappy in the music &#x27;business.&#x27; Maybe I don&#x27;t even belong in it. I like the music part, but for me the business part just plain stinks.&quot; Shaw also resented the constant pressure imposed on him by networks, agencies, publishers, and promoters. He summed up his feelings in a self-penned 1939 &quot;Saturday Evening Post&quot; article: &quot;My job is to play music, not politics, and my only obligation is to the people who pay to listen to me. I don&#x27;t attempt to ram hackneyed, insipid tunes down the public&#x27;s throat just because they&#x27;ve been artificially hypoed to the so-called &#x27;hit&#x27; class. This policy of trying to maintain some vestige of musical integrity has, naturally, earned me enemies, people who think I&#x27;m a longhair, impressed with my own ability. Nothing could be farther from the truth. My faith in dance music — I refuse to call it swing — borders on the fanatic. I have the utmost respect for the many real musicians who are creating a new music as important as the classics, but I have no respect for musical clowns who lead an orchestra with a baton and a quip. However, more power to them if they can make it pay.&quot;

When Shaw told his agents that he was walking away from the big band, they warned him that he couldn&#x27;t do that; he had a million dollars in contracts that had to be honored. Shaw didn&#x27;t care, and responded, &quot;Tell &#x27;em I&#x27;m insane. A nice, young American boy walking away from a million dollars, wouldn&#x27;t you call that insane?&quot;

Shaw broke up the Hollywood band, keeping a nucleus of seven musicians in addition to himself, and filled out the ensemble with New York musicians until March 1941. While taking a few months&#x27; vacation in the spring of 1941 to reassess what to do next, Shaw recorded in another small-group format with three horns and a four-man rhythm section with the addition of a dozen strings. By September, he formed a big band with seven brass, five saxes, four rhythm, and fifteen strings. On December 7, three months into the tour, the 31-piece band was in the midst of a matinee performance in Providence, Rhode Island, when he was given a note about the Japanese bombing of Pearl Harbor. The note instructed him to tell military personnel to return to their bases. Shaw was shaken by the news, as he told interviewer Freddie Johnson in 1994: &quot;Everything seemed to pale into insignificance, and I had to go back out on stage and announce &quot;Star Dust&quot; or something, and it sounded so fatuous. Here we were in the middle of a conflagration. On impulse, I went to the front row of the band where Les Robinson, first alto man, was sitting, and I said, &#x27;Pass the word. This is two weeks&#x27; notice.&#x27; It went through the band and we played the rest of that show with a pall over it. Anyway, I joined the Navy.&quot;

===War and after===

During World War II, Shaw enlisted in the United States Navy and shortly after formed a band, which served in the Pacific theater. After 18 months playing for Navy personnel, (sometimes as many as four concerts a day in battle zones, including Guadalcanal), Shaw returned to the U.S. in a state of physical exhaustion and received a medical discharge. After the war, the popularity of big bands declined, as Crooners and Bebop began to dominate the charts.

Shaw credited his time in the Navy from 1942 to 1944 as a period of renewed introspection. After his discharge, he entered psychoanalysis and began to withdraw from music in favor of a writing career. His autobiography, &quot;The Trouble With Cinderella: An Outline of Identity&quot;, was published in 1952 (with later reprint editions in 1992 and 2001). Revealing downbeat elements of the music business, Shaw explained that &quot;the trouble with Cinderella&quot; is &quot;nobody ever lives happily ever after.&quot; He turned to semi-autobiographical fiction with the three short novels in &quot;I Love You, I Hate You, Drop Dead!&quot; (1965, reprinted in 1997), which prompted Terry Southern&#x27;s comment: &quot;Here is a deeply probing examination of the American marital scene. I flipped over it!&quot; Shaw&#x27;s short stories, including &quot;Snow White in Harlem&quot;, were collected in &quot;The Best of Intentions and Other Stories&quot; (1989). He worked for years on his 1,000-page autobiographical novel, &quot;The Education of Albie Snow&quot;, but the three-volume work remained unpublished.

After his discharge in 1944, he formed another band, this time what could be considered a modern big band in that it contained what is now considered the standard eight brass and five saxes. It did not include any strings and was based in Hollywood, California, where Shaw was living. He continued to record for RCA Victor, as he had before the war, and limited the band&#x27;s personal appearances to military bases in California. In August 1945, his contract with RCA ended and he signed with an independent label, Musicraft. He made a few records for Musicraft before the band broke up, and all of the recordings for Musicraft from 1946 were staffed by top-notch session musicians. The big band was back in the studio, this time including strings. On these Musicraft recordings in 1946 Shaw featured the young singer Mel Tormé. On some of the sides, Tormé was also featured with his vocal group the Meltones.

In the late 1940s Shaw commissioned Norman Dello Joio to compose a solo work; Shaw premiered the resultant Concertante for Clarinet and Orchestra with the Chautauqua (NY) Symphony on 23 July 1949, Franco Autori conducting. Two Ohio performances later that year were with the Dayton Philharmonic (3 November) and Cleveland Orchestra (18 December). Shaw again performed the work in The Town Hall on 20 February 1950 with Thomas Scherman and the Little Orchestra Society; on the preceding day (19 February) Shaw had performed the Mozart concerto in Newark (NJ) with Scherman and the L.O.S.

In July 1954, Shaw undertook a brief Australian tour for promoter Lee Gordon on which he shared the bill with drummer Buddy Rich and vocalist Ella Fitzgerald. After completing that tour Shaw stopped playing the clarinet, citing his own perfectionism, which, he later said, would have killed him. He explained to a reporter: &quot;In the world we live in, compulsive perfectionists finish last. You have to be Lawrence Welk or, on another level, Irving Berlin, and write the same kind of music over and over again. I&#x27;m not able to do that, and I have taken the clarinet as far as anyone can possibly go. To continue playing would be a disservice.&quot; He spent the rest of the 1950s living in Europe.

In 1983, after years of prodding by Williard Alexander, the 73-year-old Shaw organized a band and selected clarinetist Dick Johnson as bandleader and soloist. The 58-year-old Johnson, an accomplished woodwind and saxophonist and native of Brockton, Massachusetts, was no stranger to jazz having recorded numerous albums of his own and had idolized Shaw&#x27;s playing throughout his life. Shaw&#x27;s music library, which was the product of his almost 20 years of activity in the music business, contained numerous arrangements of monumental status of popular music in addition to many original big band jazz compositions of the era. It was a collection of music arranged by some of the foremost composer/arrangers of the period, much of which was sketched out by Shaw himself and filled in and completed by his orchestrator/arranger collaborators, among them Jerry Gray, William Grant Still, Lennie Hayton, Ray Conniff, Eddie Sauter, and Jimmy Mundy, among others. Shaw rehearsed his new band, (based out of Boston, Massachusetts), and the band made its official debut on New Year&#x27;s Eve 1984 at the Glen Island Casino in New Rochelle, New York, the same launching pad for many bands of the swing era decades earlier, when Shaw and his bands were in their prime. Shaw appeared with the band throughout its first few years, limiting his role to being its conductor and front man, while leaving the clarinet playing duties to Johnson. In 1985, another week-long series of strenuous rehearsals followed during which Shaw added more repertoire, including many arrangements and compositions that were from the later years of his career Shaw had never recorded. By 1987 though, Shaw was no longer touring with the band, quietly content that Johnson and the band kept true to Shaw&#x27;s band spirit and vision. He would, however, show up on occasion &quot;just to hear how things sounded&quot;.

===Films and television===

Shaw made several musical shorts in 1939 for Vitaphone and Paramount Pictures. He portrayed himself in the Fred Astaire film, &quot;Second Chorus&quot; (1940), which featured Shaw and his orchestra playing &quot;Concerto for Clarinet&quot;, and his 1940–41 Hollywood period &quot;Star Dust&quot; band can be heard throughout the soundtrack. The film garnered him two Oscar nominations for Best Score and Best Song (&quot;Love of My Life&quot;). He collaborated on the love song &quot;If It&#x27;s You&quot;, sung by Tony Martin in the Marx Brothers&#x27; film &quot;The Big Store&quot; (1941). On March 2, 1950, he was the mystery guest on the fifth episode of &quot;What&#x27;s My Line?&quot; and on August 31, 1952, was part of the panel. During the 1970s he made appearances on &quot;The Mike Douglas Show&quot; and &quot;The Tonight Show&quot; with Johnny Carson.

Many of his recordings have been used in motion pictures. His 1940 recording of &quot;Stardust&quot; was used in its entirety in the closing credits of the film &quot;The Man Who Fell to Earth&quot;. Martin Scorsese also used the Shaw theme song, &quot;Nightmare&quot;, in his Academy Award-winning Howard Hughes biopic, &quot;The Aviator.&quot;

Canadian filmmaker Brigitte Berman interviewed Hoagy Carmichael, Doc Cheatham, and others including Shaw for her documentary film, &quot;Bix: Ain&#x27;t None of Them Play Like Him Yet&quot; (1981) about Bix Beiderbecke, and afterward she went on to create an Academy Award-winning documentary, &quot;Artie Shaw: Time Is All You&#x27;ve Got&quot; (1985), featuring extensive interviews with Shaw, Buddy Rich, Mel Tormé, Helen Forrest, and other musicians, in addition to Shaw&#x27;s eighth wife, actress Evelyn Keyes. The documentary ends with Shaw rehearsing his new band with co-leader Johnson present and rolls to credits perhaps quite fittingly with the band taking a final segue to Shaw&#x27;s theme song &quot;Nightmare.&quot; In 2000, filmmaker Ken Burns interviewed Shaw at his home for his PBS documentary/miniseries &quot;Jazz&quot; where Shaw appears in multiple segments. His last major interview was in 2003, when he was interviewed by Russell Davies for the BBC Television documentary, &quot;Artie Shaw – Quest for Perfection&quot;. The documentary includes interviews with surviving members of his original bands, Johnson, and other music industry professionals.

==Personal life==
A self-proclaimed &quot;very difficult man,&quot; Shaw was married eight times. Two marriages were annulled; the others ended in divorce: Jane Cairns (1932–33; annulled); Margaret Allen (1934–37); actress Lana Turner (1940); Betty Kern, the daughter of songwriter Jerome Kern (1942–43); actress Ava Gardner (1945–46); &quot;Forever Amber&quot; author Kathleen Winsor (1946–48; annulled); actress Doris Dowling (1952–56), and actress Evelyn Keyes (1957–85). He had two sons, Steven Kern (with Betty Kern) and Jonathan Shaw (with Doris Dowling). Both Lana Turner and Ava Gardner later described Shaw as being extremely emotionally abusive. His controlling nature and incessant verbal abuse drove Turner to have a nervous breakdown, soon after which she divorced him. In 1940, before eloping with Lana Turner, Shaw briefly dated actresses Betty Grable and Judy Garland and, according to Tom Nolan&#x27;s biography, had an affair with Lena Horne.

Apart from his interest in music, Shaw had a tremendous intellect and almost insatiable thirst for intellectual knowledge and literature. During his self-imposed &quot;sabbaticals&quot; from the music business, his interests included studying advanced mathematics, as cited in Karl Sabbagh&#x27;s &quot;The Riemann Hypothesis&quot;.

In 1946, Shaw was present at a meeting of the Independent Citizens&#x27; Committee of the Arts, Sciences and Professions. Olivia de Havilland and Ronald Reagan, part of a core group of actors and artists who were trying to sway the organization away from Communism, presented an anti-Communist declaration which, if signed, was set to run in newspapers. There was bedlam as many rose to champion the communist cause, and Shaw began praising the democratic standards of the Soviet constitution. 
Shaw was also a precision marksman, ranking fourth in the United States in 1962, and an expert fly fisherman. In his later years, Shaw lived and wrote in the Newbury Park section of Thousand Oaks, California. 

==Death and estate==
Shaw died on December 30, 2004, aged 94. According to his publicist, he had been &quot;in ill health for some time, but I don&#x27;t know the specific cause of death.&quot; Shaw had been diabetic since the 1980s. 

In 2005, Shaw&#x27;s eighth wife, actress Evelyn Keyes, filed suit, seeking one-half of Shaw&#x27;s estate, pursuant to a contract to make a will between them. In July 2006, a Ventura, California, jury unanimously held that Keyes was entitled to almost one-half of Shaw&#x27;s estate, or $1,420,000.

==Awards and honors==
In 1980, Shaw donated his papers, most of which amounted to his music library of over 700 scores and parts and approximately 1,000 pieces of sheet music, to Boston University. In 1991, the collection was transferred to the School of Music of the University of Arizona in Tucson. In 2004, he received a Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award.

In 1938, &quot;DownBeat&quot; magazine readers voted Artie Shaw&#x27;s the best swing band.

In response to Benny Goodman&#x27;s nickname, the &quot;King of Swing&quot;, Shaw&#x27;s fans dubbed him the &quot;King of the Clarinet&quot;. He felt the titles should be reversed. &quot;Benny Goodman played clarinet. I played music,&quot; he said.

Longtime Duke Ellington clarinetist Barney Bigard cited Shaw as his favorite clarinet player.

== Selected discography ==
== References ==
==Bibliography==
* Tom Nolan, &quot;Artie Shaw, King of the Clarinet: His Life and Times&quot; (W. W. Norton, New York, 2011).
* John White, &quot;Artie Shaw: His Life and Music&quot; (Bloomsbury Academic, London, 2004).
* Vladimir Simosko, &quot;Artie Shaw: A Musical Biography and Discography&quot; (Scarecrow Press, Lanham, MD, 2000).

==External links==

* Artie Shaw Interview at NAMM Oral History Collection (1994)
* Biography at swingmusic.net 
* Rare film blog: Artie Shaw 1985
* &quot;Swing Bandleader, Clarinetist Artie Shaw Dies&quot;, &quot;The Washington Post,&quot; December 31, 2004
* University of Arizona: Artie Shaw Collection
* Artie Shaw recordings at the Discography of American Historical Recordings
*Classic Artie Shaw Bluebird And Victor Sessions (Mosaic Records)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q320065" start="0" end="10" title="Artie Shaw" label="Artie Shaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q320065" start="17" end="39" title="Artie Shaw" label="Arthur Jacob Arshawsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q207378" start="301" end="310" title="big bands" label="big bands"/>
<link wikidata="Q215120" start="442" end="453" title="Cole Porter" label="Cole Porter"/>
<link wikidata="Q814327" start="467" end="484" title="Begin the Beguine" label="Begin the Beguine"/>
<link wikidata="Q539089" start="852" end="864" title="Third Stream" label="Third Stream"/>
<link wikidata="Q954120" start="985" end="997" title="Monty Norman" label="Monty Norman"/>
<link wikidata="Q746181" start="1022" end="1038" title="James Bond Theme" label="James Bond Theme"/>
<link wikidata="Q207378" start="1215" end="1223" title="big band" label="big band"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="1250" end="1259" title="United States Navy" label="U.S. Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="1767" end="1780" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q2507958" start="1791" end="1794" title="née" label="née"/>
<link wikidata="Q49145" start="1969" end="1991" title="New Haven, Connecticut" label="New Haven, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q22649" start="2046" end="2058" title="antisemitism" label="antisemitism"/>
<link wikidata="Q37320" start="2409" end="2418" title="Cleveland" label="Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q504092" start="2572" end="2587" title="Irving Aaronson" label="Irving Aaronson"/>
<link wikidata="Q961834" start="2727" end="2743" title="Roger Wolfe Kahn" label="Roger Wolfe Kahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q730605" start="2814" end="2874" title="It Don&amp;#x27;t Mean a Thing (If It Ain&amp;#x27;t Got That Swing)" label="It Don&amp;#x27;t Mean a Thing (If It Ain&amp;#x27;t Got That Swing)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5455393" start="2885" end="2912" title="Fit as a Fiddle (song)" label="&amp;quot;Fit as a Fiddle&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q6006906" start="3039" end="3055" title="Imperial Theatre (Broadway)" label="Imperial Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q7658626" start="3080" end="3089" title="swing era" label="swing era"/>
<link wikidata="Q814327" start="3139" end="3156" title="Begin the Beguine" label="Begin the Beguine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543022" start="3177" end="3185" title="Stardust (1927 song)" label="Stardust"/>
<link wikidata="Q368430" start="3216" end="3233" title="Billy Butterfield" label="Billy Butterfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q6907798" start="3272" end="3280" title="Moonglow (song)" label="Moonglow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455491" start="3319" end="3326" title="Frenesi" label="Frenesi"/>
<link wikidata="Q207378" start="3550" end="3558" title="big band" label="big band"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456785" start="3662" end="3676" title="rhythm section" label="rhythm section"/>
<link wikidata="Q207338" start="3683" end="3697" title="string quartet" label="string quartet"/>
<link wikidata="Q539089" start="3762" end="3774" title="Third stream" label="Third Stream"/>
<link wikidata="Q9730" start="3862" end="3871" title="classical music" label="classical"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314" start="3881" end="3896" title="Igor Stravinsky" label="Igor Stravinsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q318339" start="3921" end="3931" title="Buddy Rich" label="Buddy Rich"/>
<link wikidata="Q104358" start="3943" end="3957" title="Billie Holiday" label="Billie Holiday"/>
<link wikidata="Q2652357" start="4084" end="4094" title="Racial segregation in the United States" label="segregated"/>
<link wikidata="Q49042" start="4221" end="4226" title="American South" label="South"/>
<link wikidata="Q46755" start="4340" end="4353" title="Benny Goodman" label="Benny Goodman"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4514" end="4532" title="Telephone exchange names#In popular culture" label="telephone exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q658194" start="4547" end="4563" title="Johnny Guarnieri" label="Johnny Guarnieri"/>
<link wikidata="Q3607505" start="4614" end="4628" title="Al Hendrickson" label="Al Hendrickson"/>
<link wikidata="Q376146" start="4663" end="4675" title="Roy Eldridge" label="Roy Eldridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q368430" start="4713" end="4730" title="Billy Butterfield" label="Billy Butterfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344717" start="5006" end="5036" title="Hot Lips Page" label="Oran &amp;quot;Hot Lips&amp;quot; Page"/>
<link wikidata="Q1912807" start="5038" end="5050" title="Max Kaminsky (musician)" label="Max Kaminsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q491400" start="5052" end="5064" title="Georgie Auld" label="Georgie Auld"/>
<link wikidata="Q348746" start="5066" end="5076" title="Dave Tough" label="Dave Tough"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473196" start="5078" end="5089" title="Jack Jenney" label="Jack Jenney"/>
<link wikidata="Q206304" start="5091" end="5102" title="Ray Conniff" label="Ray Conniff"/>
<link wikidata="Q112307" start="5187" end="5197" title="Lena Horne" label="Lena Horne"/>
<link wikidata="Q444180" start="5199" end="5212" title="Helen Forrest" label="Helen Forrest"/>
<link wikidata="Q470848" start="5214" end="5223" title="Mel Tormé" label="Mel Tormé"/>
<link wikidata="Q318339" start="5225" end="5235" title="Buddy Rich" label="Buddy Rich"/>
<link wikidata="Q348746" start="5237" end="5247" title="Dave Tough" label="Dave Tough"/>
<link wikidata="Q498745" start="5249" end="5262" title="Barney Kessel" label="Barney Kessel"/>
<link wikidata="Q724132" start="5264" end="5275" title="Jimmy Raney" label="Jimmy Raney"/>
<link wikidata="Q489424" start="5277" end="5287" title="Tal Farlow" label="Tal Farlow"/>
<link wikidata="Q720674" start="5289" end="5303" title="Dodo Marmarosa" label="Dodo Marmarosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q206304" start="5309" end="5320" title="Ray Conniff" label="Ray Conniff"/>
<link wikidata="Q171201" start="5373" end="5380" title="Hasidic Judaism" label="Hasidic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121111" start="5533" end="5546" title="Tin Pan Alley" label="Tin Pan Alley"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="5731" end="5749" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q4906708" start="6585" end="6600" title="big band remote" label="big band remote"/>
<link wikidata="Q6851749" start="6700" end="6713" title="Hotel Lincoln (New York City)" label="Hotel Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q5017109" start="6784" end="6794" title="Cafe Rouge (Hotel Pennsylvania)" label="Café Rouge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631006" start="6802" end="6820" title="Hotel Pennsylvania" label="Hotel Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790472" start="6887" end="6902" title="Robert Benchley" label="Robert Benchley"/>
<link wikidata="Q202585" start="7560" end="7570" title="RCA Victor" label="RCA Victor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5000099" start="7780" end="7795" title="Burns and Allen" label="Burns and Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q470182" start="8063" end="8076" title="Paul Whiteman" label="Paul Whiteman"/>
<link wikidata="Q344793" start="8539" end="8551" title="George Burns" label="George Burns"/>
<link wikidata="Q255786" start="8556" end="8568" title="Gracie Allen" label="Gracie Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q52418" start="11270" end="11293" title="bombing of Pearl Harbor" label="bombing of Pearl Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543022" start="11555" end="11564" title="Stardust (1927 song)" label="Star Dust"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="12006" end="12024" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920892" start="12078" end="12093" title="Pacific Ocean theater of World War II" label="Pacific theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q192767" start="12208" end="12219" title="Guadalcanal" label="Guadalcanal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141016" start="12372" end="12379" title="Crooner" label="Crooner"/>
<link wikidata="Q105513" start="12385" end="12390" title="Bebop" label="Bebop"/>
<link wikidata="Q591270" start="13104" end="13118" title="Terry Southern" label="Terry Southern"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572589" start="14053" end="14062" title="Musicraft" label="Musicraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q470848" start="14356" end="14365" title="Mel Tormé" label="Mel Tormé"/>
<link wikidata="Q724145" start="14485" end="14502" title="Norman Dello Joio" label="Norman Dello Joio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1634948" start="14829" end="14842" title="The Town Hall (New York City)" label="The Town Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q6513705" start="15103" end="15113" title="Lee Gordon (promoter)" label="Lee Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q318339" start="15155" end="15165" title="Buddy Rich" label="Buddy Rich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1768" start="15179" end="15194" title="Ella Fitzgerald" label="Ella Fitzgerald"/>
<link wikidata="Q676226" start="15446" end="15459" title="Lawrence Welk" label="Lawrence Welk"/>
<link wikidata="Q128746" start="15482" end="15495" title="Irving Berlin" label="Irving Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q357924" start="15863" end="15875" title="Dick Johnson (clarinetist)" label="Dick Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q49193" start="15983" end="16006" title="Brockton, Massachusetts" label="Brockton, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q13358595" start="16604" end="16614" title="Jerry Gray" label="Jerry Gray"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397729" start="16616" end="16635" title="William Grant Still" label="William Grant Still"/>
<link wikidata="Q487355" start="16637" end="16650" title="Lennie Hayton" label="Lennie Hayton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282967" start="16665" end="16677" title="Eddie Sauter" label="Eddie Sauter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1689400" start="16683" end="16694" title="Jimmy Mundy" label="Jimmy Mundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5567832" start="16849" end="16867" title="Glen Island Casino" label="Glen Island Casino"/>
<link wikidata="Q744948" start="16871" end="16883" title="New Rochelle" label="New Rochelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1809118" start="17712" end="17721" title="Vitaphone" label="Vitaphone"/>
<link wikidata="Q159846" start="17726" end="17744" title="Paramount Pictures" label="Paramount Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q100937" start="17774" end="17786" title="Fred Astaire" label="Fred Astaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q948153" start="17799" end="17812" title="Second Chorus" label="Second Chorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5158566" start="17879" end="17900" title="Concerto for Clarinet (Shaw)" label="Concerto for Clarinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q725874" start="18183" end="18194" title="Tony Martin (entertainer)" label="Tony Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q64450" start="18202" end="18215" title="Marx Brothers" label="Marx Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q371413" start="18233" end="18246" title="The Big Store" label="The Big Store"/>
<link wikidata="Q660263" start="18334" end="18354" title="What&amp;#x27;s My Line?" label="What&amp;#x27;s My Line?"/>
<link wikidata="Q3235414" start="18454" end="18475" title="The Mike Douglas Show" label="The Mike Douglas Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338655" start="18492" end="18508" title="The Tonight Show" label="The Tonight Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q310819" start="18520" end="18533" title="Johnny Carson" label="Johnny Carson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543022" start="18622" end="18630" title="Stardust (1927 song)" label="Stardust"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195431" start="18703" end="18728" title="The Man Who Fell to Earth (film)" label="The Man Who Fell to Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q41148" start="18736" end="18751" title="Martin Scorsese" label="Martin Scorsese"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="18813" end="18826" title="Academy Award" label="Academy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q189081" start="18835" end="18848" title="Howard Hughes" label="Howard Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q201924" start="18863" end="18874" title="The Aviator (2004 film)" label="The Aviator"/>
<link wikidata="Q22107810" start="18902" end="18917" title="Brigitte Berman" label="Brigitte Berman"/>
<link wikidata="Q460662" start="18930" end="18946" title="Hoagy Carmichael" label="Hoagy Carmichael"/>
<link wikidata="Q562871" start="18948" end="18960" title="Doc Cheatham" label="Doc Cheatham"/>
<link wikidata="Q225131" start="19086" end="19101" title="Bix Beiderbecke" label="Bix Beiderbecke"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="19142" end="19155" title="Academy Award" label="Academy Award"/>
<link wikidata="" start="19183" end="19222" title="Artie Shaw: Time Is All You&amp;#x27;ve Got" label="Artie Shaw: Time Is All You&amp;#x27;ve Got"/>
<link wikidata="Q253328" start="19386" end="19398" title="Evelyn Keyes" label="Evelyn Keyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q616886" start="19634" end="19643" title="Ken Burns" label="Ken Burns"/>
<link wikidata="Q6168169" start="19714" end="19718" title="Jazz (TV series)" label="Jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7381456" start="19831" end="19845" title="Russell Davies" label="Russell Davies"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="19854" end="19857" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q201034" start="20284" end="20295" title="Lana Turner" label="Lana Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q313270" start="20343" end="20354" title="Jerome Kern" label="Jerome Kern"/>
<link wikidata="Q164487" start="20374" end="20385" title="Ava Gardner" label="Ava Gardner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1646002" start="20403" end="20416" title="Forever Amber (novel)" label="Forever Amber"/>
<link wikidata="Q2342652" start="20430" end="20445" title="Kathleen Winsor" label="Kathleen Winsor"/>
<link wikidata="Q450738" start="20475" end="20488" title="Doris Dowling" label="Doris Dowling"/>
<link wikidata="Q253328" start="20512" end="20524" title="Evelyn Keyes" label="Evelyn Keyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q65029210" start="20587" end="20600" title="Jonathan Shaw (tattoo artist)" label="Jonathan Shaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q201034" start="20873" end="20884" title="Lana Turner" label="Lana Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q233852" start="20915" end="20927" title="Betty Grable" label="Betty Grable"/>
<link wikidata="Q11637" start="20932" end="20944" title="Judy Garland" label="Judy Garland"/>
<link wikidata="Q112307" start="21010" end="21020" title="Lena Horne" label="Lena Horne"/>
<link wikidata="Q6372218" start="21300" end="21312" title="Karl Sabbagh" label="Karl Sabbagh"/>
<link wikidata="Q205966" start="21330" end="21348" title="Riemann Hypothesis" label="Riemann Hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q95068" start="21479" end="21498" title="Olivia de Havilland" label="Olivia de Havilland"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="21503" end="21516" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="21612" end="21621" title="Communism" label="Communism"/>
<link wikidata="Q182121" start="21636" end="21650" title="anti-Communist" label="anti-Communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3529376" start="21878" end="21886" title="marksman" label="marksman"/>
<link wikidata="Q898886" start="21947" end="21960" title="fly fisherman" label="fly fisherman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7017236" start="22010" end="22022" title="Newbury Park, California" label="Newbury Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q208447" start="22034" end="22059" title="Thousand Oaks, California" label="Thousand Oaks, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q253328" start="22341" end="22353" title="Evelyn Keyes" label="Evelyn Keyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2186896" start="22399" end="22405" title="estate (law)" label="estate"/>
<link wikidata="Q490434" start="22475" end="22494" title="Ventura, California" label="Ventura, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q49110" start="22779" end="22796" title="Boston University" label="Boston University"/>
<link wikidata="Q503419" start="22868" end="22889" title="University of Arizona" label="University of Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q935843" start="22924" end="22957" title="Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award" label="Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253128" start="22975" end="22983" title="DownBeat" label="DownBeat"/>
<link wikidata="Q4030" start="23313" end="23327" title="Duke Ellington" label="Duke Ellington"/>
<link wikidata="Q497403" start="23340" end="23353" title="Barney Bigard" label="Barney Bigard"/>
<link wikidata="Q17091115" start="23828" end="23856" title="NAMM Oral History Program" label="NAMM Oral History Collection"/>
<link wikidata="Q166032" start="23996" end="24015" title="The Washington Post" label="The Washington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q42800691" start="24119" end="24164" title="Discography of American Historical Recordings" label="Discography of American Historical Recordings"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="191321" wikidata="Q1350219" url="?curid=191321" title="Ulithi">
<text>Ulithi (, , or ; pronounced roughly as YOU-li-thee) is an atoll in the Caroline Islands of the western Pacific Ocean, about east of Yap, within Yap State.

== Overview ==
Ulithi consists of 40 islets totaling , surrounding a lagoon about long and up to wide—at one of the largest in the world. It is administered by the state of Yap in the Federated States of Micronesia. Ulithi&#x27;s population was 773 in 2000. There are four inhabited islands on Ulithi Atoll. They are Falalop (), Asor &quot;(Yasor)&quot;, Mogmog &quot;(Mwagmwog)&quot;, and Fedarai &quot;(Fedraey)&quot;. Falalop is the most accessible with Ulithi Airport, a small resort hotel, store and one of three public high schools in Yap state. Mogmog is the seat of the high chief of Ulithi Atoll though each island has its own chief. Other important islands are Losiap (), Sorlen &quot;(Sohl&#x27;oay)&quot;, and Potangeras &quot;(Potoangroas)&quot;.

The atoll is in the westernmost of the Caroline Islands, southwest of Guam, east of the Philippines and south of Tokyo. It is a typical volcanic atoll, with a coral reef, white sand beaches and palm trees. Ulithi&#x27;s forty small islands barely rise above the sea, with the largest being only in area. However the reef runs roughly north and south, by across, enclosing a vast anchorage with an average depth of .

==History==
The Portuguese navigator Diogo da Rocha is credited as the first European to find Ulithi in 1525. The Spanish navigator Álvaro de Saavedra arrived on the ship &quot;Florida&quot; on 1 January 1528, claiming the islands for KingPhilipII under the name Islands of the Kings (; ) after his patron and the Three Wise Men honored in the approaching Catholic feast of Epiphany. It was later charted by other Spaniards as the Chickpea Islands (). It was also visited by the Spanish expedition of Ruy López de Villalobos on 26 January 1543.

It remained isolated until visited and explored in detail by Captain Don Bernardo de Egoy in 1712, and later visited by Spanish Jesuit missionaries led by Juan Antonio Cantova together with a group of 12 Spanish soldiers in 1731.

In 1885, Jesuit missionaries encouraged Germany to extend &quot;protection&quot; over the Carolina Islands to protect their profitable trade. However, the Spanish made similar claims and later that year Pope Leo XIII decreed Spain as the ruling power over the islands, granting Germany and the United Kingdom trading rights.

In 1889, a significant earthquake hit Yap (and Ulithi), leading the residents to believe that their engagement with outsiders had angered their traditional spirits.

Germany purchased the islands from Spain in 1899 for $4,500,000, conscripting residents as laborers and soldiers. By the early 1900s, Germany had established a police force, post offices, and hospitals on Yap.

During this time, German Capuchin friars began to replace the Jesuits. The friars struggled to convert the citizens to Catholicism. According to a history of the Catholic Church in Micronesia:

Yap had been known as &quot;the child of sorrow&quot; of the Caroline mission right from the start. The people were very slow to accept the new faith and slower still to practice it, the missionaries remarked again and again. There were none of the mass conversions there that had occurred in Pohnpei and other parts of the mission. Converts were made laboriously one by one, with baptisms rarely exceeding 20 or 30 a year throughout the German period. Even those who did receive baptism were all too susceptible to the pagan influences of the social environment, the missionaries thought. The number receiving the sacraments was quite small, even for the modest-sized congregations that the priests had. A pastor would report for a typical year perhaps a single Christian marriage, one or two Christian burials and a few anointing.

=== Good Friday Typhoon ===
The &quot;Good Friday Typhoon&quot; hit the atoll in 1907, which killed 473 throughout the Caroline Islands. SMS &quot;Planet&quot; was dispatched by the Germans to Ulithi for emergency food and relief, and eventually evacuated 114 residents to Yap. German authorities were caught unaware of how to respond to the disaster, and received much criticism for handling of the evacuation.

=== Japanese administration ===
The atoll was peacefully occupied in 1914 by Japan at the outset of the First World War. Japan was given a mandate to oversee the territory in 1920 by the League of Nations. Under the Japanese occupation, businessmen and soldiers eroded the traditional political system in Ulithi, with the authority of local chiefs ignored. This began a steady decline in the customs and individual culture of the people of Ulithi. The presence of the Catholic church was reinforced by the Japanese, who allowed the continued efforts of conversion to go on, further eroding the indigenous culture. By 1941, two-thousand (out of 3,000) residents had been converted to Christianity.

=== World War II ===

Early in the Second World War, the Japanese had established a radio and weather station on Ulithi and had occasionally used the lagoon as an anchorage, but had abandoned it by 1944. As the operations of the United States Navy (USN) moved west across the Pacific, the USN required a more forward base for its operations.

Ulithi was ideally positioned to act as a staging area for the USN&#x27;s western Pacific operations. The anchorage was large and well situated for a base, but there were no port facilities to repair ships or resupply the fleet. The US Navy built the very large Naval Base Ulithi that operated in 1944 and 1945.

On 23 September 1944, a regiment of the United States Army&#x27;s 81st Division landed unopposed, followed a few days later by a battalion of Seabees. The survey ship examined the lagoon and reported it capable of holding 700 vessels—a capacity greater than either Majuro or Pearl Harbor.

On 1 October 1944, the minesweeper USS &quot;YMS-385&quot; was sunk by a mine while clearing Zowariau [Zowatabu] Channel.

The USN transferred the local islanders to the island of Fedarai for the duration of the hostilities. On 4 October 1944 the vessels of Service Squadron 10 began leaving Eniwetok for Ulithi; Service Squadron 10 was termed by Admiral Nimitz as his &quot;secret weapon&quot;. Its commanding officer, Commodore Worrall R. Carter, devised the mobile service force that made it possible for the Navy to convert Ulithi to the secret distant Pacific base used during the major naval operations undertaken late in the war, including Leyte Gulf and the invasion of Okinawa. Service Squadron 10 converted the lagoon into a serviceable naval station, creating repair facilities and re-supply facilities thousands of miles away from an actual naval port. Pontoon piers of a new design were built at Ulithi, each consisting of the 4-by-12-pontoon sections, filled with sand and gravel, and then sunk. The pontoons were anchored in place by guy ropes to deadmen on shore, and by iron rods driven into the coral. Connecting tie pieces ran across the tops of the pontoons to hold them together into a pier. Despite extremely heavy weather on several occasions these pontoon piers stood up remarkably well. They gave extensive service, with little requirement for repairs. Piers of this type were also installed by the 51st Battalion to be used as aviation-gasoline mooring piers near the main airfield on Falalop.

Within a month of the occupation of Ulithi, a complete floating base was in operation. Six thousand ship fitters, artificers, welders, carpenters and electricians arrived aboard repair ships, destroyer tenders, and floating dry docks. had an air-conditioned optical shop and a metal fabrication shop with a supply of base metals from which she could make any alloy to form any part needed. , which looked like a big tanker, distilled fresh water and baked bread and pies. The ice cream barge made a shift. The dry docks towed to Ulithi were large enough to lift dry a 45,000-ton battleship.

Fleet oilers sortied from Ulithi to meet the task forces at sea, refueling the warships a short distance from their combat operational areas. The result was something never seen before: a vast floating service station enabling the entire Pacific fleet to operate indefinitely at unprecedented distances from its mainland bases. Ulithi was as far away from the US naval base at San Francisco as San Francisco was from London, England. The Japanese had considered that the vastness of the Pacific Ocean would make it very difficult for the US to sustain operations in the western Pacific. With the Ulithi naval base to refit, repair and resupply, many ships were able to deploy and operate in the western Pacific for a year or more without returning to the naval base at Pearl Harbor.

The Japanese had built an airstrip on Falalop. It was expanded and resurfaced, the runway running the full width of the island. The east end of the strip was extended approximately past the natural shoreline. During the operations, 4,500 sacks of mail, of air freight and 1,200 passengers would utilize this airstrip. A number of small strips for light aircraft were built on several of the smaller islands. The Seabees completed a fleet recreation center at Mog Mog island that could accommodate 8,000 men and 1,000 officers daily. A 1,200-seat theater, including an stage with a Quonset hut roof, was completed in 20 days. At the same time, a 500-seat chapel was built. A number of the larger islands were used both as bases to support naval vessels and facilities within the lagoon.

The Japanese still held Yap. Early after the US occupation they mounted a number of attacks but caused no damage to the Seabees working on the islands.

On 20 November 1944 the Ulithi harbor was attacked by Japanese &quot;kaiten&quot; manned torpedoes launched from two nearby submarines. The destroyer rammed one in the early morning hours. At 5:47 the fleet oiler , at anchor in the harbor, was struck and sunk. Destroyers began dropping depth charges throughout the anchorage. After the war Japanese naval officers said that two tender submarines, each carrying four manned torpedoes, had been sent to attack the fleet at Ulithi. Three of the &quot;kaiten&quot; were unable to launch due to mechanical problems and another ran aground on the reef. Two did make it into the lagoon, one of which sank USS &quot;Mississinewa&quot;. A second &quot;kaiten&quot; attack in January 1945 was foiled when &quot;I-48&quot; was sunk by the destroyer escort . None of the 122 men aboard the Japanese submarine survived.

On 11 March 1945, in a mission known as Operation Tan No. 2, several long range aircraft flying from southern Japan attempted a nighttime &quot;kamikaze&quot; attack on the naval base. One struck the , which had left a cargo light on despite the blackout. The plane struck over the stern starboard quarter, damaging the flight deck and killing a number of crewmen. Another crashed on Sorlen Island, having perhaps mistaken a signal tower there for the superstructure of an aircraft carrier.

By 13 March there were 647 ships at anchor at Ulithi, and with the arrival of amphibious forces staging for the invasion of Okinawa the number of ships at anchor peaked at 722.

In late June 1945, the Japanese aircraft-launching super submarines &quot;I-400&quot; and &quot;I-401&quot; were diverted from their planned attack on the Panama Canal to attack Ulithi Atoll. However, their mission was interrupted by the destruction of Nagasaki and Hiroshima, followed by the Japanese surrender.

After the Leyte Gulf was secured, the Pacific Fleet moved its forward staging area to Leyte, and Ulithi was all but abandoned. In the end, few US civilians ever heard of Ulithi. By the time naval security cleared release of the name, there were no longer reasons to print stories about it. The war had moved on, but for seven months in late 1944 and early 1945, the large lagoon of the Ulithi atoll was the largest and most active anchorage in the world.

=== Postwar ===
The LORAN (long-range navigation) station established on Potangeras during the naval occupation on the island continued to be operated by the United States Coast Guard post-war. The station was moved from Potangeras to Falalop Island in 1952. According to an August 1950 &quot;HQ Party Inspection&quot; memo, the move was predicated on the distance between Falalop and Potangeras, requiring a &quot;four hour DUKW [amphibious transport] ride...&quot;. The memo goes on to state &quot;...the use of DUKW is dangerous and will eventually lead to disaster. In addition considerable maintenance is required to keep the DUKW in an operating condition&quot;.

A 1956 USCG survey indicated that the station consisted of a BOQ and office, galley and meeting area, laundry building, barracks, signal-power building, recreation building and a &quot;jumbo Quonset&quot;. All of the buildings, with the exception of the signal-power, were Quonset structures. The report discusses the daily life and routine at the station as follows:

General life on the station is relaxed and fairly routine. Life here can be boring, or very interesting, depending upon how much the individual desires to do. There are practically unlimited recreational facilities, but it is easy to neglect these and fall into a rather lethargic rut. The working hours ... are 7 a.m. to 1 p.m., six days a week. Afternoons and evenings are free ... Loran watch standers average about four hours on watch, ten off ... their off watch time is their own, and no daywork is expected from them. The uniform to be worn is chosen for coolness and health with shorts and sandals permissible and the rule rather than the exception. Dress blues are not needed here at all.

The Station is completely isolated, and there is no opportunity for liberty or leave. Of course, there is no use for cars here, and dependents are not allowed. All supplies and mail come from Guam ... flights averaging one every week or ten days. Every three months heavy supplies and fuel are delivered ... and once a year, makes a stop here.

The cost of living for personnel here is very cheap, with little opportunity to spend money. Necessary items such as soap, cigarettes, toothpaste are stocked and beer and soda are on sale during non-working hours. Native handicraft is limited to canoe models, small statutes and grass skirts, which seldom run more than five or six dollars. Once a month a shopping list is sent to Guam...men can order anything that can be purchased on Guam...there is always Sears and Roebuck or Montgomery Ward. Officers are charged for three meals a day, regardless whether they eat them or not...about $50.00 a month.

As mentioned before, the recreational facilities are numerous and varied, and include: Swimming...spear fishing...fishing...shelling...photography...leather craft...Ham radio...volleyball...tennis...pool...horse shoes...movies...baseball &amp; softball...boat trips...shooting.

In conclusion...this station has many advantages and few disadvantages, as compared with other Loran Stations. The weather and climate are close to ideal, the station and equipment are in excellent repair, recreational facilities are many and varied, supplies and mail are better than average, and the natives are interesting, sincere honest people. The only disadvantage...is the isolation. All in all, this is a pretty wonderful place.

The station remained in operation until 1965, when it was again relocated to Yap.

A detailed census in 1949 reported that there were 421 inhabitants, mostly elderly. A follow-up census in 1960 showed a rise to 514, with the ratio of men to women having shifted to a small preponderance of males.

==== Typhoon Ophelia ====
Typhoon Ophelia struck the atoll on November 30, 1960, and caused significant damage both physically and socially.

The Coast Guard on the island of Falalop was first notified of a possible tropical disturbance two days prior to the actual typhoon. No action was taken at that time by the personnel other than to observe on a chart of the area the progress of the storm. The next day the station was notified from Guam that it was to take certain safeguarding precautions. While the personnel was engaged in this activity, the winds picked up so noticeably that the local commanding officer notified the Coast Guard section on Guam it was going to move...equipment, personal gear, and emergency rations to a concrete bunker.

==== Contemporary Ulithi ====
As a major staging area for the United States Navy in the final year of the Second World War, several sunken warships rest at the bottom of the Ulithi lagoon, including , a fleet oiler which sank fully loaded. In April 2001, sport divers located the wreckage, and four months later oil was observed leaking from the tanks. Several surveys were completed in 2001 and 2002 to determine the status of the wreckage and the leaks. Between January and February 2003, the Navy and subcontractors successfully emptied the fuel and oil, with 99% that remained in the wreckage removed.

Occasional diving and adventure tours visit Ulithi from Yap. Given permission from the local community, the atoll offers good diving.

Census records can be misleading because population can fluctuate during the year because it is common for Ulithians to leave for work or school abroad and to return. This is particularly true during festive times like the Outer Island High School graduation ceremony, when the population can increase considerably. Additionally, during events like weddings and funerals, community populations may double.

In 2009, with funding from the European Union (EU) and the Secretariat of the Pacific Community (SPC) partnership installed 215 solar photovoltaic (PV) system in Ulithi, with a 28 kWp (kilowatt peak) solar plant. Inverters with a capacity of 20 kW supply 240V / 60 Hz AC into an underground, ostensibly typhoon-proof grid.

===== Typhoon Maysak =====
Reef damage from Typhoon Maysak in 2015 is still visible in places, but the reefs have largely recovered. Maysak also caused significant damage to the PV electrical grid system on the atoll.

== Climate ==
Ulithi has a tropical rainforest climate (Af) with heavy rainfall year-round.

== Conservation ==
Since 2018, the Island Conservation group has led an effort with the local community to help stop invasive species from overtaking native green sea turtles and seabirds. One of the non-native species they are attempting to eradicate is the monitor lizard, first introduced during the Japanese occupation to rid the islands of rats.

In 2019, the US Navy submarine tender visited the atoll, as part of the research for US plans for establishing a logistics network across the Pacific, with a Naval press release noting Ulithi &quot;could again represent a logistical hub capable of supporting the fleet&quot;.

== Transportation ==
Located on Falalop Island, the Ulithi Civil Airfield (IATA code ULI, FAA Identifier TT02) serves as the main air link with the rest of Federated States of Micronesia. With no regularly scheduled flights, service is provided by Pacific Missionary Aviation.

Transport between the smaller closely located islands Ulithi is typically undertaken by motorboat. The ship Halipmohol operates as a Field Trip Ship, transiting on a semi-regular basis throughout the Yap outer islands. According to the Pacific Worlds website, it is customary to request permission from the Chief of Ulithi to visit the atoll.

== Culture ==
Traditionally, Ulithi culture was based on matriarchal lineages. Each lineage had a male chief by seniority. Each village had a village council to help with everyday issues, as well as questions concerning the entire atoll. Land was owned by the lineages and parceled out for different uses. Women typically handle the agricultural duties, while men fished. Religion was pagan-based, spirits and ancestral ghosts. Magic was also incorporated into the everyday life, prevalent in disease/medicine, navigation, weather and fishing. Sociological studies showed that by 1960, after decades of influence by outsiders, the traditional religion had all but vanished, to be replaced by Christianity.

==Language==
In an annual report released in early 2010, the Habele charity announced plans to develop and distribute native-language materials for educators and students in the outer islands of Yap State, Micronesia. The first project was a Ulithian-to-English dictionary. This was the first rigorous documentation of the Ulithian language, and copies were provided to educators and students throughout Ulithi and Fais. The authors&#x27; stated aim was to create a consistent and intuitive Latin alphabet useful for both native Ulithian and native English speakers.

==Education==
Public schools:
* Yap Outer Islands High School

== References ==
== External links ==

* &quot;Its existence kept secret throughout the war, the US naval base at Ulithi was for a time the world&#x27;s largest naval facility&quot;, George Spangler, March 1998
* Ulithi in World War II
* &quot;OPERATION TAN NO. 2: The Japanese Attack on Task Force 58&#x27;s Anchorage at Ulithi&quot; by Bob Hackett and Sander Kingsepp (Revision 2) at the Imperial Japanese Navy Page
* Habele Outer Island Education Fund, an educational charity serving Ulithi
* An extensive history () of the Catholic Church in Yap and Ulithi</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1350219" start="0" end="6" title="Ulithi" label="Ulithi"/>
<link wikidata="Q42523" start="58" end="63" title="atoll" label="atoll"/>
<link wikidata="Q118350" start="71" end="87" title="Caroline Islands" label="Caroline Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="103" end="116" title="Pacific Ocean" label="Pacific Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q209638" start="132" end="135" title="Yap" label="Yap"/>
<link wikidata="Q11342951" start="144" end="153" title="Yap State" label="Yap State"/>
<link wikidata="Q207524" start="193" end="198" title="islet" label="islet"/>
<link wikidata="Q187223" start="225" end="231" title="lagoon" label="lagoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q11342951" start="320" end="332" title="Yap State" label="state of Yap"/>
<link wikidata="Q702" start="340" end="370" title="Federated States of Micronesia" label="Federated States of Micronesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q520485" start="473" end="480" title="Falalop" label="Falalop"/>
<link wikidata="Q11824803" start="613" end="627" title="Ulithi Airport" label="Ulithi Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q16635" start="987" end="991" title="Guam" label="Guam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1490" start="1030" end="1035" title="Tokyo" label="Tokyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q200464" start="1350" end="1360" title="Portuguese Empire" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q16209588" start="1371" end="1385" title="Diogo da Rocha" label="Diogo da Rocha"/>
<link wikidata="Q80702" start="1448" end="1455" title="Spanish Empire" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q448541" start="1466" end="1484" title="Álvaro de Saavedra Cerón" label="Álvaro de Saavedra"/>
<link wikidata="Q34417" start="1569" end="1581" title="Philip II of Spain" label="KingPhilipII"/>
<link wikidata="Q51671" start="1648" end="1662" title="Three Wise Men" label="Three Wise Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="1690" end="1698" title="Roman Catholicism" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q688564" start="1699" end="1704" title="feast day" label="feast"/>
<link wikidata="Q132001" start="1708" end="1716" title="Epiphany (Christian)" label="Epiphany"/>
<link wikidata="Q449551" start="1835" end="1858" title="Ruy López de Villalobos" label="Ruy López de Villalobos"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="2008" end="2027" title="Jesuit missionaries" label="Jesuit missionaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q43922" start="2314" end="2327" title="Pope Leo XIII" label="Pope Leo XIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="2405" end="2419" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="2603" end="2610" title="German Empire" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q124862" start="2839" end="2847" title="Order of Friars Minor Capuchin" label="Capuchin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3906" end="3927" title="1902–1919 Pacific typhoon seasons#1907" label="hit the atoll in 1907"/>
<link wikidata="Q16029414" start="3979" end="4001" title="SMS Planet (1905)" label="SMS &amp;quot;Planet&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q188712" start="4332" end="4337" title="Empire of Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="4359" end="4374" title="World War I" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q38130" start="4442" end="4459" title="League of Nations" label="League of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="4988" end="5004" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q190107" start="5037" end="5062" title="weather station" label="radio and weather station"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="5182" end="5200" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q115821261" start="5446" end="5450" title="US Naval Base Carolines" label="base"/>
<link wikidata="Q115827593" start="5558" end="5575" title="Naval Base Ulithi" label="Naval Base Ulithi"/>
<link wikidata="Q52371" start="5633" end="5641" title="regiment" label="regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="5649" end="5667" title="United States Army" label="United States Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q271437" start="5675" end="5688" title="81st Infantry Division (United States)" label="81st Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q6382533" start="5738" end="5747" title="battalion" label="battalion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757145" start="5751" end="5758" title="Seabee (US Navy)" label="Seabees"/>
<link wikidata="Q1303735" start="5764" end="5775" title="survey ship" label="survey ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q12919" start="5874" end="5880" title="Majuro" label="Majuro"/>
<link wikidata="Q127091" start="5884" end="5896" title="Pearl Harbor" label="Pearl Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6157" end="6176" title="Service Squadron#Creation of Service Squadrons" label="Service Squadron 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q217645" start="6254" end="6260" title="Chester Nimitz" label="Nimitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q308999" start="6546" end="6556" title="Battle of Leyte Gulf" label="Leyte Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q192660" start="6577" end="6584" title="Battle of Okinawa" label="Okinawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4364290" start="7598" end="7609" title="repair ship" label="repair ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q3050282" start="7612" end="7628" title="destroyer tender" label="destroyer tender"/>
<link wikidata="Q811177" start="7644" end="7652" title="dry dock" label="dry dock"/>
<link wikidata="Q56063450" start="7896" end="7911" title="ice cream barge" label="ice cream barge"/>
<link wikidata="Q182531" start="7999" end="8009" title="battleship" label="battleship"/>
<link wikidata="Q162986" start="8012" end="8023" title="Fleet oiler" label="Fleet oiler"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="8389" end="8402" title="San Francisco" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="8429" end="8435" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q11824803" start="8822" end="8841" title="Falalop Airfield" label="airstrip on Falalop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1627026" start="9377" end="9388" title="Quonset hut" label="Quonset hut"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9805" end="9811" title="kaiten#Missions" label="kaiten"/>
<link wikidata="Q165363" start="9825" end="9832" title="torpedo" label="torpedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2811" start="9860" end="9869" title="submarine" label="submarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q174736" start="9876" end="9885" title="destroyer" label="destroyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q653260" start="10023" end="10035" title="depth charge" label="depth charge"/>
<link wikidata="Q14920473" start="10309" end="10320" title="Ship grounding" label="ran aground"/>
<link wikidata="Q2466147" start="10482" end="10498" title="Type C submarine" label="&amp;quot;I-48&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1499623" start="10515" end="10531" title="destroyer escort" label="destroyer escort"/>
<link wikidata="Q2026439" start="10635" end="10654" title="Operation Tan No. 2" label="Operation Tan No. 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q133194" start="10739" end="10747" title="kamikaze" label="kamikaze"/>
<link wikidata="Q622031" start="10915" end="10926" title="flight deck" label="flight deck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370583" start="11047" end="11061" title="superstructure" label="superstructure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146715" start="11316" end="11372" title="I-400-class submarine" label="super submarines &amp;quot;I-400&amp;quot; and &amp;quot;I-401&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7350" start="11420" end="11432" title="Panama Canal" label="Panama Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q488" start="11503" end="11540" title="Atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki" label="destruction of Nagasaki and Hiroshima"/>
<link wikidata="Q6540361" start="11558" end="11576" title="Surrender of Japan" label="Japanese surrender"/>
<link wikidata="Q308999" start="11589" end="11611" title="Battle of Leyte Gulf" label="Leyte Gulf was secured"/>
<link wikidata="Q596529" start="12055" end="12060" title="LORAN" label="LORAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q11224" start="12193" end="12218" title="United States Coast Guard" label="United States Coast Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q715165" start="12460" end="12464" title="DUKW" label="DUKW"/>
<link wikidata="Q6499202" start="14577" end="14594" title="Sears and Roebuck" label="Sears and Roebuck"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246929" start="14598" end="14613" title="Montgomery Ward" label="Montgomery Ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q18394896" start="15766" end="15781" title="Typhoon Ophelia" label="Typhoon Ophelia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="16554" end="16572" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="16598" end="16614" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q162986" start="16695" end="16706" title="fleet oiler" label="fleet oiler"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="17234" end="17240" title="Census" label="Census"/>
<link wikidata="Q49836" start="17583" end="17590" title="wedding" label="wedding"/>
<link wikidata="Q201676" start="17596" end="17603" title="funeral" label="funeral"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="17672" end="17686" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q871511" start="17700" end="17736" title="Secretariat of the Pacific Community" label="Secretariat of the Pacific Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q192127" start="17775" end="17787" title="Photovoltaics" label="photovoltaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929025" start="17821" end="17824" title="Nominal power (photovoltaic)" label="kWp"/>
<link wikidata="Q25236" start="17886" end="17888" title="kW" label="kW"/>
<link wikidata="Q7846049" start="18009" end="18023" title="Typhoon Maysak" label="Typhoon Maysak"/>
<link wikidata="Q209531" start="18211" end="18238" title="tropical rainforest climate" label="tropical rainforest climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q199458" start="18434" end="18450" title="green sea turtle" label="green sea turtle"/>
<link wikidata="Q11824803" start="18958" end="18979" title="Ulithi Airport" label="Ulithi Civil Airfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q192824" start="18981" end="18985" title="IATA airport code" label="IATA"/>
<link wikidata="Q15807314" start="19154" end="19181" title="Pacific Missionary Aviation" label="Pacific Missionary Aviation"/>
<link wikidata="Q29536" start="19913" end="19918" title="Paganism" label="pagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="20220" end="20232" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q5636693" start="20296" end="20302" title="Habele" label="Habele"/>
<link wikidata="Q36842" start="20558" end="20575" title="Ulithian language" label="Ulithian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393489" start="20650" end="20654" title="Fais Island" label="Fais"/>
<link wikidata="Q8229" start="20726" end="20740" title="Latin script" label="Latin alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q55313281" start="20835" end="20864" title="Yap Outer Islands High School" label="Yap Outer Islands High School"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="191323" wikidata="Q256812" url="?curid=191323" title="CORONA (satellite)">
<text>The CORONA program was a series of American strategic reconnaissance satellites produced and operated by the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) Directorate of Science &amp; Technology with substantial assistance from the U.S. Air Force. The CORONA satellites were used for photographic surveillance of the Soviet Union (USSR), China, and other areas beginning in June 1959 and ending in May 1972.

== History ==
In 1957, the Soviet Union launched Sputnik 1, the first artificial Earth satellite. Officially, Sputnik was launched to correspond with the International Geophysical Year, a solar period that the International Council of Scientific Unions declared would be ideal for the launching of artificial satellites to study Earth and the solar system. However, the launch led to public concern about the perceived technological gap between the West and the Soviet Union. The unanticipated success of the mission precipitated the Sputnik Crisis, and prompted President Dwight D. Eisenhower to authorize the Corona program, a top priority reconnaissance program managed jointly by the Air Force and the CIA. Satellites were developed to photograph denied areas from space, provide information about Soviet missile capability and replace risky U-2 reconnaissance flights over Soviet territory.

== Overview ==

CORONA started under the name &quot;Discoverer&quot; as part of the WS-117L satellite reconnaissance and protection program of the U.S. Air Force in 1956. The WS-117L was based on recommendations and designs from the RAND Corporation. The primary goal of the program was to develop a film-return photographic satellite to replace the U-2 spyplane in surveilling the Sino-Soviet Bloc, determining the disposition and speed of production of Soviet missiles and long-range bombers assets. The CORONA program was also used to produce maps and charts for the Department of Defense and other U.S. government mapping programs.

The CORONA project was pushed forward rapidly following the shooting down of a U-2 spy plane over the Soviet Union on 1 May 1960.

CORONA ultimately encompassed eight separate but overlapping series of satellites (dubbed &quot;Keyhole&quot; or KH), launched from 1959 to 1972. CORONA was complemented and ultimately succeeded by the higher resolution KH-7 Gambit and KH-8 Gambit 3 series of satellites.

An alternative concurrent program to the CORONA program was &quot;SAMOS&quot;. That program included several types of satellite which used a different photographic method. This involved capturing an image on photographic film, developing the film aboard the satellite and then scanning the image electronically. The image was then transmitted via telemetry to ground stations. The Samos E-1 and Samos E-2 satellite programs used this system, but they were not able to take very many pictures and then relay them to the ground stations each day. Two later versions of the Samos program, such as the E-5 and the E-6, used the bucket-return approach pioneered with CORONA, but neither of the latter Samos series were successful.

== Spacecraft ==
The CORONA satellites were designated KH-1, KH-2, KH-3, KH-4, KH-4A and KH-4B. KH stood for &quot;Key Hole&quot; or &quot;Keyhole&quot; (Code number 1010), with the name being an analogy to the act of spying into a person&#x27;s room by peering through their door&#x27;s keyhole. The incrementing number indicated changes in the surveillance instrumentation, such as the change from single-panoramic to double-panoramic cameras. The &quot;KH&quot; naming system was first used in 1962 with KH-4, the earlier numbers being applied retroactively.

Below is a list of CORONA launches, as compiled by the United States Geological Survey. This table lists government&#x27;s designation of each type of satellite (C, C-prime, J-1, etc.), the resolution of the camera, and a description of the camera system.


== Program history ==
=== Discoverer ===

As American space launches were not classified until late 1961, the first CORONA satellites were cloaked with disinformation as being part of a space technology development program called &quot;Discoverer&quot;. To the public, Discoverer missions were scientific and engineering missions, the film-return capsules being used to return biological specimens. To facilitate this deception, several CORONA capsules were built to house a monkey passenger. Many test monkeys were lost during ground tests of the capsule&#x27;s life support system. The Discoverer cover proved to be cumbersome, inviting scrutiny from the scientific community. Discoverer 37, launched 13 January 1962, was the last CORONA mission to bear the Discoverer name. Subsequent CORONA missions were simply classified as &quot;Department of Defense satellite launches&quot;.

=== KH-1 ===
The first series of CORONA satellites were the Keyhole 1 (KH-1) satellites based on the Agena-A upper stage, which offered housing and an engine that provided attitude control in orbit. The KH-1 payload included the C (for CORONA) single panoramic camera built by Fairchild Camera and Instrument with a f/5.0 aperture and focal length. It had a ground resolution of . Film was returned from orbit by a single General Electric Satellite Return Vehicle (SRV). The SRV was equipped with a small onboard solid-fuel retro motor to deorbit the payload at the end of the mission. Recovery of the capsule was done in mid-air by a specially equipped aircraft.

There were three camera-less test launches in the first half of 1959, none of them entirely successful. Discoverer 1 was a test vehicle carrying no SRV nor camera. Launched on 28 February 1959, it was the first man-made object put into a polar orbit, but only sporadically returned telemetry. Discoverer 2 (14 April 1959) carried a recovery capsule for the first time but no camera. The main bus performed well, but the capsule recovery failed, the SRV coming down over Spitzbergen rather than Hawaii. The capsule was never found. Discoverer 3 (3 June 1959), the first Discoverer to carry a biological package (four black mice in this case) failed to achieve orbit when its Agena crashed into the Pacific Ocean.

The pressure to orbit a photographic surveillance satellite to succeed the Lockheed U-2 was so great that operational, camera-equipped KH-1 launches began 25 June 1959 with the (unsuccessful) launching of Discoverer 4, despite there not having been a successful test of the life-support unit for biological passengers. This proved to be a moot point by this time as the link between the Discoverer series and living payloads had been established by the attempted flight of Discoverer 3.

The three subsequent Discoverers were successfully orbited, but all of their cameras failed when the film snapped during loading. Ground tests determined that the acetate-based film became brittle in the vacuum of space, something that had not been discovered even in high altitude, low pressure testing. The Eastman Kodak Company was tasked with creating a more resilient replacement. Kodak developed a technique of coating a high-resolution emulsion on a type of polyester from DuPont. Not only was the resulting polyester-based film resistant to vacuum brittling, it weighed half as much as the prior acetate-based film.

There were four more partially successful and unsuccessful missions in the KH-1 series before Discoverer 13 (10 August 1960), which managed a fully successful capsule recovery for the first time. This was the first recovery of a man-made object from space, beating the Soviet Korabl Sputnik 2 by nine days. Discoverer 13 is now on display in the &quot;Milestones of Flight&quot; hall in the National Air and Space Museum in Washington, D.C.

Two days after the 18 August 1960 launch of Discoverer 14, its film bucket was successfully retrieved in the Pacific Ocean by a Fairchild C-119 Flying Boxcar transport plane. This was the first successful return of a payload from orbit, occurring just one day before the launch of Korabl-Sputnik 2, a biosatellite that took into orbit the two Soviet space dogs, Belka and Strelka, and safely returned them to Earth.

The impact of CORONA on American intelligence gathering was tremendous. With the success of Discoverer 14, which returned of film and provided more coverage of the Soviet Union than all preceding U2 flights, for the first time the United States had a clear picture of the USSR&#x27;s strategic nuclear capabilities. Before CORONA, the National Intelligence Estimates (NIE) of CIA were highly uncertain and strongly debated. Six months before Discoverer 14, an NIE predicted that the Soviets would have 140–200 ICBMs deployed by 1961. A month after the flight of Discoverer 14, that estimate was refined to just 10–25.

Additionally, CORONA increased the pace at which intelligence could be received, with satellites providing monthly coverage from the start. Photographs were more easily assessed by analysts and political leaders than covert agent reports, improving not just the amount of intelligence but its accessibility.

The KH-1 series ended with Discoverer 15 (13 September 1960), whose capsule successfully deorbited but sank into the Pacific Ocean and was not recovered.

=== Later KH Series ===
In 1963, the KH-4 system was introduced with dual cameras and the program made completely secret by then president, John Kennedy. The Discoverer label was dropped and all launches became classified. Because of the increased satellite mass, the basic Thor-Agena vehicle’s capabilities were augmented by the addition of three Castor solid-fueled strap-on motors. On 28 February 1963, the first Thrust Augmented Thor lifted from Vandenberg Air Force Base at Launch Complex 75 carrying the first KH-4 satellite. The launch of the new and unproven booster went awry as one SRB failed to ignite. Eventually the dead weight of the strap-on motor dragged the Thor off its flight path, leading to a Range Safety destruct. It was suspected that a technician had not attached an umbilical on the SRB properly. Although some failures continued to occur during the next few years, the reliability rate of the program significantly improved with KH-4. Maneuvering rockets were also added to the satellite beginning in 1963. These were different from the attitude stabilizing thrusters which had been incorporated from the beginning of the program. CORONA orbited in very low orbits to enhance resolution of its camera system. But at perigee (the lowest point in the orbit), CORONA endured drag from the atmosphere of Earth. In time, this could cause its orbit to decay and force the satellite to re-enter the atmosphere prematurely. The new maneuvering rockets were designed to boost CORONA into a higher orbit, and lengthen the mission time even if low perigees were used. For use during unexpected crises, the National Reconnaissance Office (NRO) kept a CORONA in &quot;R-7&quot; status, meaning ready for launch in seven days. By the summer of 1965, NRO was able to maintain CORONA for launch within one day.

Nine of the KH-4A and KH-4B missions included ELINT subsatellites, which were launched into a higher orbit.

Some P-11 reconnaissance satellites were launched from KH-4A.

At least two launches of Discoverer were used to test satellites for the Missile Defense Alarm System (MIDAS), an early missile-launch-detection program that used infrared cameras to detect the heat signature of launch vehicles launching to orbit.

The last launch under the Discoverer cover name was Discoverer 38 on 26 February 1962. Its bucket was successfully recovered in midair during the 65th orbit (the 13th recovery of a bucket; the ninth one in midair). Following this last use of the Discoverer name, the remaining launches of CORONA satellites were entirely TOP SECRET. The last CORONA launch was on 25 May 1972. The project ended when CORONA was replaced by the KH-9 Hexagon program.

== Technology ==
=== Cameras ===
The CORONA satellites used special 70 mm film with a focal length camera. Manufactured by Eastman Kodak, the film was initially thick, with a resolution of 170 lines per mm (0.04 inch) of film. The contrast was 2-to-1. (By comparison, the best aerial photography film produced in World War II could produce just 50 lines per mm (1250 per inch) of film). The acetate-based film was later replaced with a polyester-based film stock that was more durable in Earth orbit. The amount of film carried by the satellites varied over time. Initially, each satellite carried of film for each camera, for a total of of film. But a reduction in the thickness of the film stock allowed more film to be carried. In the fifth generation, the amount of film carried was doubled to of film for each camera for a total of of film. This was accomplished by a reduction in film thickness and with additional film capsules. Most of the film shot was black and white. Infrared film was used on mission 1104, and color film on missions 1105 and 1008. Color film proved to have lower resolution, and so was never used again.

The cameras were manufactured by the Itek Corporation. A , f/5 triplet lens was designed for the cameras. Each lens was in diameter. They were quite similar to the Tessar lenses developed in Germany by Carl Zeiss AG. The cameras themselves were initially long, but later extended to in length. Beginning with the KH-4 satellites, these lenses were replaced with Petzval f/3.5 lens. The lenses were panoramic, and moved through a 70° arc perpendicular to the direction of the orbit. A panoramic lens was chosen because it could obtain a wider image. Although the best resolution was only obtained in the center of the image, this could be overcome by having the camera sweep automatically (&quot;reciprocate&quot;) back and forth across 70° of arc. The lens on the camera was constantly rotating, to counteract the blurring effect of the satellite moving over the planet.

The first CORONA satellites had a single camera, but a two-camera system was quickly implemented. The front camera was tilted 15° aft, and the rear camera tilted 15° forward, so that a stereoscopic image could be obtained. Later in the program, the satellite employed three cameras. The third camera was employed to take &quot;index&quot; photographs of the objects being stereographically filmed. The J-3 camera system, first deployed in 1967, placed the camera in a drum. This &quot;rotator camera&quot; (or drum) moved back and forth, eliminating the need to move the camera itself on a reciprocating mechanism. The drum permitted the use of up to two filters and as many as four different exposure slits, greatly improving the variability of images that CORONA could take. The first cameras could resolve images on the ground down to in diameter. Improvements in the imaging system were rapid, and the KH-3 missions could see objects in diameter. Later missions would be able to resolve objects just in diameter. resolution was found to be the optimum resolution for quality of image and field of view.

The initial CORONA missions suffered from mysterious border fogging and bright streaks which appeared irregularly on the returned film. Eventually, a team of scientists and engineers from the project and from academia (among them Luis Alvarez, Sidney Beldner, Malvin Ruderman, Arthur Glines, and Sidney Drell) determined that electrostatic discharges (called corona discharges) caused by some of the components of the cameras were exposing the film. Corrective measures included better grounding of the components, improved film rollers that did not generate static electricity, improved temperature controls, and a cleaner internal environment. Although improvements were made to reduce the corona, the final solution was to load the film canisters with a full load of film and then feed the unexposed film through the camera onto the take-up reel with no exposure. This unexposed film was then processed and inspected for corona. If none was found or the corona observed was within acceptable levels, the canisters were certified for use and loaded with fresh film for a launch mission.

=== Calibration ===
CORONA satellites were allegedly calibrated using the calibration targets located outside of Casa Grande, Arizona. The targets consisted of concrete arrows located in and to the south of the city, and may have helped to calibrate the cameras of the satellites. These claims about the purpose of the targets, perpetuated by online forums and featured in National Geographic and NPR articles, have since been disputed, with aerial photogrammetry proposed as a more likely purpose for them.

=== Recovery ===

Film was retrieved from orbit via a reentry capsule (nicknamed &quot;film bucket&quot;), designed by General Electric, which separated from the satellite and fell to Earth. After the fierce heat of reentry was over, the heat shield surrounding the vehicle was jettisoned at and parachutes deployed. The capsule was intended to be caught in mid-air by a passing airplane towing an airborne claw which would then winch it aboard, or it could land at sea. A salt plug in the base would dissolve after two days, allowing the capsule to sink if it was not picked up by the United States Navy. After Reuters reported on a reentry vehicle&#x27;s accidental landing and discovery by Venezuelan farmers in mid-1964, capsules were no longer labeled &quot;SECRET&quot; but offered a reward in eight languages for aerial footage return to the United States. Beginning with flight number 69, a two-capsule system was employed. This also allowed the satellite to go into passive (or &quot;zombie&quot;) mode, shutting down for as many as 21 days before taking images again. Beginning in 1963, another improvement was &quot;Lifeboat&quot;, a battery-powered system that allowed for ejection and recovery of the capsule in case power failed. The film was processed at Eastman Kodak&#x27;s Hawkeye facility in Rochester, New York.

The &quot;CORONA film bucket&quot; was later adapted for the KH-7 GAMBIT satellites, which took higher resolution photos.

=== Launch ===
CORONA were launched by a Thor-Agena rocket, which used a Thor first stage and an Agena as the second stage of the rocket lifting the CORONA into orbit.

The first satellites in the program orbited at altitudes above the surface of the Earth, although later missions orbited even lower at . Originally, CORONA satellites were designed to spin along their main axis so that the satellite would remain stable. Cameras would take photographs only when pointed at the Earth. The Itek camera company, however, proposed to stabilize the satellite along all three axes—keeping the cameras permanently pointed at the earth. Beginning with the KH-3 version of the satellite, a horizon camera took images of several key stars. A sensor used the satellite&#x27;s side thruster rockets to align the rocket with these &quot;index stars&quot;, so that it was correctly aligned with the Earth and the cameras pointed in the right direction. Beginning in 1967, two horizon cameras were used. This system was known as the Dual Improved Stellar Index Camera (DISIC).

== Operations ==
The United States Air Force credits the Sunnyvale Air Force Station (now Onizuka Air Force Station) as being the &quot;birthplace of the CORONA program&quot;. In May 1958, the Department of Defense directed the transfer of the WS-117L program to Advanced Research Projects Agency (ARPA). In FY1958, WS-117L was funded by the USAF at a level of US$108.2 million (inflation adjusted US$ billion in ). For DISCOVERER, the Air Force and ARPA spent a combined sum of US$132.3 million in FY1959 (inflation adjusted US$ billion in ) and US$101.2 million in FY1960 (inflation adjusted US$ billion in ). According to John N. McMahon, the total cost of the CORONA program amounted to $US850 million.

The procurement and maintenance of the CORONA satellites were managed by the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), which used cover arrangements lasting from April 1958 to 1969 to get access to the Palo Alto plant of the Hiller Helicopter Corporation for the production. At this facility, the rocket&#x27;s second stage Agena, the cameras, film cassettes, and re-entry capsule were assembled and tested before shipment to Vandenberg Air Force Base. In 1969, assembly duties were relocated to the Lockheed facilities in Sunnyvale, California. (The NRO was worried that, as CORONA was phased out, skilled technicians worried about their jobs would quit the program—leaving CORONA without staff. The move to Sunnyvale ensured that enough skilled staff would be available.)

The decisions regarding what to photograph were made by the CORONA Target Program. CORONA satellites were placed into near-polar orbits. This software, run by an on-board computer, was programmed to operate the cameras based on the intelligence targets to be imaged, the weather, the satellite&#x27;s operational status, and what images the cameras had already captured. Ground control for CORONA satellites was initially conducted from Stanford Industrial Park, an industrial park on Page Mill Road in Palo Alto, California. It was later moved to Sunnyvale Air Force Base near Sunnyvale, California.

== Design staff ==
, , , James W. Plummer, and were responsible for the design, development, and operation of CORONA. For their role in creating the first space-based Earth photographic observation systems, they were awarded the Charles Stark Draper Prize in 2005. Walter Gize, of Palo Alto, was the program design senior electrical engineer for &#x27;power&#x27; requirements.

== Declassification ==
The CORONA program was officially classified top secret until 1992. On 22 February 1995, the photos taken by the CORONA satellites, and also by two contemporary programs (ARGON and KH-6 LANYARD) were declassified under an Executive Order signed by President Bill Clinton. The further review by photo experts of the &quot;obsolete broad-area film-return systems other than &quot;CORONA&quot;&quot; mandated by President Clinton&#x27;s order led to the declassification in 2002 of the photos from the KH-7 and the KH-9 low-resolution cameras.

The declassified imagery has since been used by a team of scientists from the Australian National University to locate and explore ancient habitation sites, pottery factories, megalithic tombs, and Palaeolithic archaeological remains in northern Syria. Similarly, scientists at Harvard have used the imagery to identify prehistoric traveling routes in Mesopotamia.

The U.S. Geological Survey hosts more than 860,000 images of the Earth’s surface from between 1960 and 1972 from CORONA, ARGON, and LANYARD programs.

== Launches ==
== Image gallery ==
== In popular culture ==
The 1963 thriller novel &quot;Ice Station Zebra&quot; and its 1968 film adaptation were inspired, in part, by news accounts from 17 April 1959, about a missing experimental CORONA satellite capsule (Discoverer 2) that inadvertently landed near Spitzbergen on 13 April 1959. While Soviet agents may have recovered the vehicle, it is more likely that the capsule landed in water and sank.

== See also ==

* Cold War
* Deep Black (1986 book)
* KH-5 ARGON, KH-6 LANYARD, KH-7 GAMBIT, KH-8 GAMBIT 3
* KH-9 Hexagon &quot;Big Bird&quot;
* KH-10 DORIAN or Manned Orbital Laboratory (MOL program)
* KH-11, KH-12, KH-13.
* Richard M. Bissell Jr.
* SAMOS
* Satellite imagery
* Zenit

== References ==
=== Sources ===
* Burrows, William E., &quot;This New Ocean: The Story of the First Space Age&quot;, New York, Random House, 1998 
* Chun, Clayton K.S., &quot;Thunder Over the Horizon: From V-2 rockets to Ballistic Missiles&quot;, Westport, Praeger Security International, 2006 
* Collins, Martin, &quot;After Sputnik: 50 Years of the Space Age&quot;, New York, Smithsonian Books/HarperCollins, 2007 
* &quot;Corona&quot;, Mission and Spacecraft Library, Jet Propulsion Laboratory, National Aeronautics and Space Administration, No date Accessed 2012-60-06
* Day, Dwayen A.; Logsdon, John M.; and Latell, Brian, eds. &quot;Eye in the Sky: The Story of the Corona Spy Satellites&quot;, Washington, D.C., Smithsonian Institution Press, 1998 
* Drell, Sidney D., &quot;Physics and U.S. National Security&quot;, &quot;Reviews of Modern Physics&quot;, 71:2 (1999), pp. S460–S470
* Drell, Sidney D., &quot;Reminiscences of Work on National Reconnaissance&quot;, in &quot;Nuclear Weapons, Scientists, and the Post-Cold War Challenge: Selected Papers on Arms Control&quot;, Sidney D. Drell, ed. Hackensack, New Jersey, World Scientific, 2007
* Jensen, John R., &quot;Remote Sensing of the Environment: An Earth Resource Perspective&quot;, Upper Saddle River, New Jersey, Pearson Prentice Hall, 2007 
* Kramer, Herbert J., &quot;Observation of the Earth and Its Environment: Survey of Missions and Sensors&quot;, Berlin, Springer, 2002 
* Lewis, Jonathan E., &quot;Spy Capitalism: Itek and the CIA&quot;, New Haven, Connecticut, Yale University Press, 2002, 
* Monmonier, Mark S., &quot;Spying With Maps: Surveillance Technologies and the Future of Privacy&quot;, Chicago, Illinois, University of Chicago Press, 2004 
* National Aeronautics and Space Administration, &quot;Societal Impact of Spaceflight&quot;, Washington, D.C., NASA, 2009
* Olsen, Richard C., &quot;Remote Sensing From Air and Space.&quot; Bellingham, Washington, SPIE Press, 2007
* Peebles, Curtis, &quot;The Corona Project: America&#x27;s First Spy Satellites&quot;, Annapolis, Maryland, Naval Institute Press, 1997 
* Ruffner, Kevin C., ed. &quot;Corona: America&#x27;s First Satellite Program&quot;, New York, Morgan James, 1995 
* Smith, F. Dow, &quot;The Design and Engineering of Corona&#x27;s Optics&quot;, in &quot;CORONA: Between the Sun and the Earth: The First NRO Reconnaissance Eye in Space&quot;, Robert McDonald, ed. Bethesda, Maryland: ASPRS, 1997
* Taubman, Phil, &quot;Secret Empire: Eisenhower, the CIA, and the Hidden Story of America&#x27;s Space Espionage&quot;, New York, Simon &amp; Schuster, 2003. 
* Yenne, Bill, &quot;Secret Gadgets and Strange Gizmos: High-Tech (and Low-Tech) Innovations of the U.S. Military&quot;, Grand Rapids, Michigan, Publishers Group Worldwide, 2006 

== External links ==

* US Geological Survey Satellite Images: Photographic imagery from the CORONA, ARGON and LANYARD satellites (1959 to 1972).
* GlobalSecurity.org: Imagery Intelligence
* Swords into Ploughshares: Archaeological Applications of CORONA Satellite Imagery in the Near East</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q256812" start="4" end="10" title="CORONA (satellite)" label="CORONA"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="35" end="43" title="United States" label="American"/>
<link wikidata="Q466421" start="54" end="78" title="reconnaissance satellite" label="reconnaissance satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="109" end="136" title="Central Intelligence Agency" label="Central Intelligence Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q3029496" start="143" end="182" title="Directorate of Science &amp;amp; Technology" label="Directorate of Science &amp;amp; Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q11223" start="220" end="234" title="United States Air Force" label="U.S. Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="305" end="317" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="326" end="331" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q80811" start="446" end="455" title="Sputnik 1" label="Sputnik 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q333352" start="931" end="945" title="Sputnik crisis" label="Sputnik Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q9916" start="960" end="990" title="Dwight D. Eisenhower" label="President Dwight D. Eisenhower"/>
<link wikidata="Q189064" start="1243" end="1246" title="Lockheed U-2" label="U-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q861141" start="1527" end="1543" title="RAND Corporation" label="RAND Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q189064" start="1644" end="1656" title="Lockheed U-2" label="U-2 spyplane"/>
<link wikidata="Q11209" start="1864" end="1885" title="United States Department of Defense" label="Department of Defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q748379" start="1991" end="2045" title="U-2 incident" label="shooting down of a U-2 spy plane over the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q2741214" start="2282" end="2293" title="KH-7 Gambit" label="KH-7 Gambit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2352628" start="2298" end="2311" title="KH-8 Gambit 3" label="KH-8 Gambit 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255431" start="2401" end="2406" title="Samos (satellite)" label="SAMOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q190157" start="2666" end="2677" title="transmitter" label="transmitted"/>
<link wikidata="Q209867" start="2682" end="2691" title="telemetry" label="telemetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349167" start="2695" end="2709" title="ground station" label="ground station"/>
<link wikidata="Q3195852" start="3177" end="3185" title="Key Hole" label="Key Hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q41363" start="3469" end="3478" title="Panoramic format" label="panoramic"/>
<link wikidata="Q15328" start="3499" end="3505" title="camera" label="camera"/>
<link wikidata="Q189656" start="4035" end="4049" title="disinformation" label="disinformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q211485" start="4069" end="4085" title="space technology" label="space technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q5281823" start="4562" end="4575" title="Discoverer 37" label="Discoverer 37"/>
<link wikidata="Q16862" start="4869" end="4888" title="RM-81 Agena" label="Agena-A upper stage"/>
<link wikidata="Q83001" start="4940" end="4956" title="Spacecraft attitude control" label="attitude control"/>
<link wikidata="Q4038586" start="5045" end="5076" title="Fairchild Camera and Instrument" label="Fairchild Camera and Instrument"/>
<link wikidata="Q54173" start="5190" end="5206" title="General Electric" label="General Electric"/>
<link wikidata="Q2398310" start="5537" end="5549" title="Discoverer 1" label="Discoverer 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q209867" start="5715" end="5724" title="telemetry" label="telemetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q906157" start="5726" end="5738" title="Discoverer 2" label="Discoverer 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q25231" start="5903" end="5914" title="Svalbard" label="Spitzbergen"/>
<link wikidata="Q782" start="5927" end="5933" title="Hawaii" label="Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q906159" start="5964" end="5976" title="Discoverer 3" label="Discoverer 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q16862" start="6107" end="6112" title="RM-81 Agena" label="Agena"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="6130" end="6143" title="Pacific Ocean" label="Pacific Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q189064" start="6221" end="6233" title="Lockheed U-2" label="Lockheed U-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q906162" start="6351" end="6363" title="Discoverer 4" label="Discoverer 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q212527" start="6797" end="6804" title="acetate" label="acetate"/>
<link wikidata="Q486269" start="6943" end="6964" title="Kodak" label="Eastman Kodak Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q221062" start="7114" end="7120" title="DuPont (1802–2017)" label="DuPont"/>
<link wikidata="Q906148" start="7353" end="7366" title="Discoverer 13" label="Discoverer 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q823456" start="7535" end="7551" title="Korabl Sputnik 2" label="Korabl Sputnik 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q752669" start="7650" end="7679" title="National Air and Space Museum" label="National Air and Space Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="7683" end="7699" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q583107" start="7829" end="7858" title="Fairchild C-119 Flying Boxcar" label="Fairchild C-119 Flying Boxcar"/>
<link wikidata="Q19799" start="7859" end="7874" title="cargo aircraft" label="transport plane"/>
<link wikidata="Q823456" start="7982" end="7998" title="Korabl-Sputnik 2" label="Korabl-Sputnik 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q864704" start="8002" end="8014" title="biosatellite" label="biosatellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q327132" start="8063" end="8080" title="Soviet space dogs" label="Belka and Strelka"/>
<link wikidata="Q2" start="8110" end="8115" title="Earth" label="Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q377332" start="8210" end="8223" title="Discoverer 14" label="Discoverer 14"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967393" start="8453" end="8483" title="National Intelligence Estimate" label="National Intelligence Estimate"/>
<link wikidata="Q177471" start="8628" end="8633" title="Intercontinental ballistic missile" label="ICBMs"/>
<link wikidata="Q906153" start="9073" end="9086" title="Discoverer 15" label="Discoverer 15"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093603" start="9475" end="9485" title="Thor-Agena" label="Thor-Agena"/>
<link wikidata="Q48970" start="9549" end="9555" title="Castor (rocket stage)" label="Castor"/>
<link wikidata="Q461492" start="9651" end="9676" title="Vandenberg Space Force Base" label="Vandenberg Air Force Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q83481" start="10444" end="10451" title="Apsis" label="perigee"/>
<link wikidata="Q3230" start="10514" end="10533" title="atmosphere of Earth" label="atmosphere of Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q427818" start="10823" end="10853" title="National Reconnaissance Office" label="National Reconnaissance Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q836610" start="11070" end="11075" title="Signals intelligence" label="ELINT"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160983" start="11269" end="11297" title="Missile Defense Alarm System" label="Missile Defense Alarm System"/>
<link wikidata="Q256812" start="11497" end="11510" title="Discoverer 38" label="Discoverer 38"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11766" end="11776" title="Classified information in the United States#Top Secret" label="TOP SECRET"/>
<link wikidata="Q794697" start="11871" end="11883" title="KH-9 Hexagon" label="KH-9 Hexagon"/>
<link wikidata="Q11424" start="11968" end="11972" title="film" label="film"/>
<link wikidata="Q193540" start="11980" end="11992" title="focal length" label="focal length"/>
<link wikidata="Q486269" start="12017" end="12030" title="Kodak" label="Eastman Kodak"/>
<link wikidata="Q690182" start="12125" end="12133" title="Contrast (vision)" label="contrast"/>
<link wikidata="Q212527" start="12285" end="12292" title="acetate" label="acetate"/>
<link wikidata="Q188245" start="12330" end="12339" title="polyester" label="polyester"/>
<link wikidata="Q852632" start="12873" end="12886" title="Infrared photography" label="Infrared film"/>
<link wikidata="Q6094336" start="13066" end="13082" title="Itek" label="Itek Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q862169" start="13088" end="13091" title="F-number" label="f/5"/>
<link wikidata="Q24876220" start="13092" end="13104" title="triplet lens" label="triplet lens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568507" start="13193" end="13199" title="Tessar" label="Tessar"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="13220" end="13227" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q282186" start="13231" end="13244" title="Carl Zeiss AG" label="Carl Zeiss AG"/>
<link wikidata="Q251700" start="13391" end="13398" title="Petzval lens" label="Petzval"/>
<link wikidata="Q632867" start="13513" end="13527" title="Wide-angle lens" label="panoramic lens"/>
<link wikidata="Q35158" start="14086" end="14098" title="Stereoscopy" label="stereoscopic"/>
<link wikidata="Q37221" start="14742" end="14750" title="diameter" label="diameter"/>
<link wikidata="Q178344" start="15239" end="15251" title="Luis Walter Alvarez" label="Luis Alvarez"/>
<link wikidata="Q1887951" start="15269" end="15284" title="Malvin Ruderman" label="Malvin Ruderman"/>
<link wikidata="Q779433" start="15305" end="15317" title="Sidney Drell" label="Sidney Drell"/>
<link wikidata="Q165294" start="15368" end="15384" title="corona discharge" label="corona discharge"/>
<link wikidata="Q15328" start="15427" end="15433" title="camera" label="camera"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501125" start="15495" end="15504" title="ground (electricity)" label="grounding"/>
<link wikidata="Q25024940" start="16173" end="16192" title="Corona Satellite Calibration Targets" label="calibration targets"/>
<link wikidata="Q79889" start="16212" end="16232" title="Casa Grande, Arizona" label="Casa Grande, Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q5973845" start="16472" end="16491" title="National Geographic" label="National Geographic"/>
<link wikidata="Q671510" start="16496" end="16499" title="NPR" label="NPR"/>
<link wikidata="Q190149" start="16541" end="16562" title="Photogrammetry" label="aerial photogrammetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q54173" start="16727" end="16743" title="General Electric" label="General Electric"/>
<link wikidata="Q2" start="16792" end="16797" title="Earth" label="Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q6840854" start="16966" end="16995" title="Mid-air retrieval" label="mid-air by a passing airplane"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="17194" end="17212" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q130879" start="17220" end="17227" title="Reuters" label="Reuters"/>
<link wikidata="Q717" start="17301" end="17310" title="Venezuela" label="Venezuela"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="17457" end="17470" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q49218" start="17919" end="17938" title="Rochester, New York" label="Rochester, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q2741214" start="18002" end="18013" title="KH-7 GAMBIT" label="KH-7 GAMBIT"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093603" start="18105" end="18115" title="Thor-Agena" label="Thor-Agena"/>
<link wikidata="Q249534" start="18137" end="18141" title="Thor (rocket family)" label="Thor"/>
<link wikidata="Q16862" start="18161" end="18166" title="RM-81 Agena" label="Agena"/>
<link wikidata="Q11223" start="19150" end="19173" title="United States Air Force" label="United States Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q7093965" start="19219" end="19244" title="Onizuka Air Force Station" label="Onizuka Air Force Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q207361" start="19392" end="19425" title="Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency" label="Advanced Research Projects Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q6250098" start="19754" end="19769" title="John N. McMahon" label="John N. McMahon"/>
<link wikidata="Q47265" start="20032" end="20041" title="Palo Alto" label="Palo Alto"/>
<link wikidata="Q613362" start="20055" end="20084" title="Hiller Aircraft" label="Hiller Helicopter Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q461492" start="20256" end="20281" title="Vandenberg Air Force Base" label="Vandenberg Air Force Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q208459" start="20353" end="20374" title="Sunnyvale, California" label="Sunnyvale, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q3968168" start="21042" end="21066" title="Stanford Research Park" label="Stanford Industrial Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q47265" start="21108" end="21129" title="Palo Alto, California" label="Palo Alto, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q7093965" start="21153" end="21177" title="Onizuka Air Force Station" label="Sunnyvale Air Force Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q208459" start="21183" end="21204" title="Sunnyvale, California" label="Sunnyvale, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q6144879" start="21232" end="21248" title="James W. Plummer" label="James W. Plummer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063447" start="21436" end="21462" title="Charles Stark Draper Prize" label="Charles Stark Draper Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q2351078" start="21780" end="21785" title="Argon (satellite)" label="ARGON"/>
<link wikidata="Q2351103" start="21790" end="21802" title="KH-6" label="KH-6 LANYARD"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124" start="21867" end="21879" title="Bill Clinton" label="Bill Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2741214" start="22108" end="22112" title="KH-7" label="KH-7"/>
<link wikidata="Q794697" start="22121" end="22125" title="KH-9" label="KH-9"/>
<link wikidata="Q127990" start="22229" end="22259" title="Australian National University" label="Australian National University"/>
<link wikidata="Q40203" start="22349" end="22361" title="Palaeolithic" label="Palaeolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q23498" start="22362" end="22376" title="archaeological" label="archaeological"/>
<link wikidata="Q858" start="22397" end="22402" title="Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="22429" end="22436" title="Harvard" label="Harvard"/>
<link wikidata="Q11767" start="22503" end="22514" title="Mesopotamia" label="Mesopotamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5042539" start="22758" end="22775" title="Ice Station Zebra (novel)" label="Ice Station Zebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320705" start="22790" end="22810" title="Ice Station Zebra (film)" label="1968 film adaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q906157" start="22927" end="22939" title="Discoverer 2" label="Discoverer 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q25231" start="22972" end="22983" title="Spitzbergen" label="Spitzbergen"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="23134" end="23142" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q98139669" start="23145" end="23167" title="Deep Black (1986 book)" label="Deep Black (1986 book)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2351078" start="23170" end="23180" title="KH-5 ARGON" label="KH-5 ARGON"/>
<link wikidata="Q2351103" start="23182" end="23194" title="KH-6 Lanyard" label="KH-6 LANYARD"/>
<link wikidata="Q2741214" start="23196" end="23207" title="KH-7 Gambit" label="KH-7 GAMBIT"/>
<link wikidata="Q2352628" start="23209" end="23222" title="KH-8 Gambit 3" label="KH-8 GAMBIT 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q794697" start="23225" end="23237" title="KH-9 Hexagon" label="KH-9 Hexagon"/>
<link wikidata="Q794697" start="23244" end="23252" title="Big Bird (satellite)" label="Big Bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q948200" start="23261" end="23266" title="Manned Orbiting Laboratory" label="KH-10"/>
<link wikidata="Q948200" start="23277" end="23302" title="Manned Orbital Laboratory" label="Manned Orbital Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1039527" start="23319" end="23324" title="KH-11" label="KH-11"/>
<link wikidata="Q1039527" start="23326" end="23331" title="KH-12" label="KH-12"/>
<link wikidata="Q849195" start="23333" end="23338" title="Enhanced Imaging System" label="KH-13"/>
<link wikidata="Q7327531" start="23342" end="23364" title="Richard M. Bissell Jr." label="Richard M. Bissell Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q1255431" start="23367" end="23372" title="Samos (satellite)" label="SAMOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q725252" start="23375" end="23392" title="Satellite imagery" label="Satellite imagery"/>
<link wikidata="Q189576" start="23395" end="23400" title="Zenit (satellite)" label="Zenit"/>
<link wikidata="Q127094" start="23978" end="23992" title="Dwayne A. Day" label="Day, Dwayen A."/>
<link wikidata="Q5195854" start="25361" end="25376" title="Curtis Peebles" label="Peebles, Curtis"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="191325" wikidata="Q122965" url="?curid=191325" title="Erich von Däniken">
<text>Erich Anton Paul von Däniken (; ; born 14 April 1935) is a Swiss author of several pseudoscientific books which make claims about extraterrestrial influences on early human culture, including the best-selling &quot;Chariots of the Gods?&quot;, published in 1968. Von Däniken is one of the main figures responsible for popularizing the &quot;paleo-contact&quot; and ancient astronauts hypotheses.

The ideas put forth in his books are rejected by virtually all scientists and academics, who categorize his work as pseudohistory, pseudoarchaeology, and pseudoscience. Early in his career, he was convicted and served time for several counts of fraud or embezzlement, and wrote one of his books in prison.

Von Däniken was the co-founder of the Archaeology, Astronautics and SETI Research Association (AAS RA). He designed Mystery Park (now known as Jungfrau Park), a theme park located in Interlaken, Switzerland, that opened in May 2003.

==Early life==
Von Däniken was born in Zofingen, Aargau. Brought up as a Roman Catholic, he attended the Saint-Michel International Catholic School in Fribourg, Switzerland. During his time at the school he rejected the church&#x27;s interpretations of the Bible and developed an interest in astronomy and flying saucers. At the age of 19, he was given a four-month suspended sentence for theft. He left the school and was apprenticed to a Swiss hotelier for a time, before moving to Egypt. In December 1964, von Däniken wrote (&quot;Were Our Ancestors Visited from Space?&quot;) for the German-Canadian periodical . While in Egypt, he was involved in a jewelry deal which resulted in a nine-month conviction for fraud and embezzlement upon his return to Switzerland.

Following his release, von Däniken became a manager of the Hotel Rosenhügel in Davos, Switzerland, during which time he wrote &quot;Chariots of the Gods?&quot; (, literally &quot;Memories of the Future&quot;), working on the manuscript late at night after the hotel&#x27;s guests had retired. The draft of the book was turned down by several publishers. Econ Verlag (now part of Ullstein Verlag) was willing to publish the book after a complete reworking by a professional author, Utz Utermann, who used the pseudonym of Wilhelm Roggersdorf. Utermann was a former editor of the Nazi Party&#x27;s newspaper and had been a Nazi bestselling author. The re-write of &quot;Chariots of the Gods?&quot; was accepted for publication early in 1967, but not printed until March 1968. Against all expectations, the book gained widespread interest and became a bestseller. Von Däniken was paid 7 percent of the book&#x27;s turnover, while 3 percent went to Utermann. In 1970, referred to the hype over Däniken as &quot;Dänikitis&quot;.&lt;ref name=&quot;Spiegel 40/70&quot;&gt;, 44418148, no. 40, 28 September 1970, p. 214&lt;/ref&gt;

In November 1968, von Däniken was arrested for fraud, after falsifying hotel records and credit references in order to take out loans for $130,000 over a period of twelve years. He used the money for foreign travel to research his book. Two years later, von Däniken was convicted for &quot;repeated and sustained&quot; embezzlement, fraud, and forgery, with the court ruling that the writer had been living a &quot;playboy&quot; lifestyle. He unsuccessfully entered a plea of nullity, on the grounds that his intentions were not malicious and that the credit institutions were at fault for failing adequately to research his references, and on 13 February 1970 he was sentenced to three and a half years imprisonment and was also fined 3,000 francs. He served one year of this sentence before being released.

His first book, &quot;Chariots of the Gods?&quot;, had been published by the time of his trial, and its sales allowed him to repay his debts and leave the hotel business. Von Däniken wrote his second book, &quot;Gods from Outer Space&quot;, while in prison.

==Claims of alien influence on Earth==
The general claim of von Däniken over several published books, starting with &quot;Chariots of the Gods?&quot; in 1968, is that extraterrestrials or &quot;ancient astronauts&quot; visited Earth and influenced early human culture. Von Däniken writes about his belief that structures such as the Egyptian pyramids, Stonehenge, and the Moai of Easter Island, and certain artifacts from that period, are products of higher technological knowledge than is presumed to have existed at the times they were manufactured. He also describes ancient artwork throughout the world as containing depictions of astronauts, air and space vehicles, extraterrestrials, and complex technology. Von Däniken explains the origins of religions as reactions to contact with an alien race, and offers interpretations of sections of the Old Testament of the Bible.

===Criticism===
In 1966, when von Däniken was writing his first book, scientists Carl Sagan and I. S. Shklovskii had written about the possibility of paleocontact and extraterrestrial visitation claims in one chapter of their book &quot;Intelligent Life in the Universe&quot;, leading author Ronald Story to speculate in his book &quot;The Space-gods Revealed&quot; that this may have been the genesis of von Däniken&#x27;s ideas. Many ideas from this book appeared in different form in Däniken&#x27;s books.

Prior to von Däniken&#x27;s work, other authors had presented ideas of extraterrestrial contacts. He has failed to credit these authors properly or at all, even when making the same claims using similar or identical evidence. The first edition of von Däniken&#x27;s &quot;Erinnerungen an die Zukunft&quot; failed to cite Robert Charroux&#x27;s &quot;One Hundred Thousand Years of Man&#x27;s Unknown History&quot; despite making very similar claims, and publisher Econ-Verlag was forced to add Charroux in the bibliography in later editions, to avoid a possible lawsuit for plagiarism.

====Logical and factual errors====


=====Iron pillar of Delhi=====
In &quot;Chariots of the Gods?&quot;, von Däniken cited the Iron pillar of Delhi in India, erected approximately 402 AD, as a prime example of extraterrestrial influence because of its &quot;unknown origins&quot; and a complete absence of rust despite its estimated 1,500 years of continuous exposure to the elements. When informed by an interviewer, in 1974, that the pillar was not rust-free, and that its origin, method of construction, and relative resistance to corrosion were all well understood, von Däniken responded that he no longer believed extraterrestrials had been involved in its creation.

=====Cueva de los Tayos=====
In &quot;The Gold of the Gods&quot;, von Däniken describes an expedition that he undertook through man-made tunnels within Cueva de los Tayos, a natural cave system in Ecuador, guided by a local man named Juan Moricz. He reported seeing mounds of gold, strange statues, and a library containing metal tablets, all of which he considered to be evidence of ancient extraterrestrial visitation.

Moricz told &quot;Der Spiegel&quot; that there had been no expedition; von Däniken&#x27;s descriptions came from &quot;a long conversation&quot;, and the photos in the book had been &quot;fiddled&quot;. During the 1974 interview, von Däniken asserted that he had indeed seen the library and the artifacts in the tunnels, but he had embellished some aspects of the story to make it more interesting: 

Four years later, he admitted that he had never been inside Cueva de los Tayos, and had fabricated the entire cave adventure. A geologist found no evidence of artificial tunnels in the area. Father Crespi&#x27;s gold artifacts, according to an archeologist consulted by &quot;Der Spiegel&quot;, were mostly brass imitations sold locally as tourist souvenirs.

=====&quot;Book of Dzyan&quot; and &quot;Tulli Papyrus&quot;=====
Samuel Rosenberg said that the &quot;Book of Dzyan&quot;, referred to by von Däniken, was &quot;a fabrication superimposed on a gigantic hoax concocted by Madame Blavatsky.&quot; He also says that the &quot;Tulli Papyrus&quot;, cited by von Däniken in one of his books, is probably cribbed from the Book of Ezekiel, and quoted Nolli (through Walter Ramberg, Scientific Attache at the U.S. Embassy in Rome), then current Director of the Egyptian Section of the Vatican Museum, as &quot;suspect[ing] that Tulli was taken in and that the papyrus is a fake.&quot; According to Richard R. Lingeman of &quot;The New York Times&quot;, it is likely that von Däniken obtained these references from UFO books that mentioned them as real documents.

=====Nazca Lines=====

Von Däniken brought the Nazca Lines to public prominence in &quot;Chariots of the Gods?&quot; with his proposal that the lines were built on instructions from extraterrestrial beings as airfields for their spaceships. In his 1998 book &quot;Arrival of The Gods&quot;, he added that some of the pictures depicted extraterrestrials. The idea did not originate with von Däniken; it began after people who first saw the lines from the air made joking comparisons to Martian &quot;canals&quot;, and had already been published by others.

Descriptions of some Nazca line photos in &quot;Chariots of the Gods?&quot; contain significant inaccuracies. One, for example, purporting to demonstrate markings of a modern airport, was actually the knee joint of one of the bird figures, and was quite small. Von Däniken said that this was an &quot;error&quot; in the first edition, but it has not been corrected in later editions.

Consensus among archeologists is that the Nazca lines were created by pre-Columbian civilizations for cultural purposes. Efforts by archeologists to refute fringe theories such as Däniken&#x27;s have been minimal, however. Silverman and Proulx have said that this silence from archaeologists has harmed the profession, as well as the Peruvian nation. Von Däniken&#x27;s books attracted so many tourists to the Nazca region that researcher Maria Reiche had to spend much of her own time and money preserving the lines.

=====Piri Reis map=====

Von Däniken wrote in &quot;Chariots of the Gods?&quot; that a version of the Piri Reis map depicted some Antarctic mountains that were and still are buried in ice, and could only be mapped with modern equipment. His theory relies on the book of &quot;Maps of the Ancient Sea Kings&quot; by Charles Hapgood. A.D. Crown, in &quot;Some Trust in Chariots&quot;, explains how this is simply wrong. The map in von Däniken&#x27;s book only extends five degrees south of the equator, ending in Cape São Roque, which means that it does not extend to Antarctica. Von Däniken also said that the map showed some distortions that would only happen if it was an aerial view taken from a spaceship flying above El Cairo, but in fact it does not extend far enough to the south to cause visible distortions in an aerial view. Von Däniken also asserts the existence of a legend saying that a god gave the map to a priest, the god being an extraterrestrial being. But Piri Reis said that he had drawn that map himself using older maps, and the map is consistent with the cartographic knowledge of that time. Also, the map is not &quot;absolutely accurate&quot; as claimed by von Däniken, since it contains many errors and omissions; a fact that von Däniken did not correct when he covered the map again in his 1998 book &quot;Odyssey of the Gods&quot;. Other authors had already published this same idea, a fact that von Däniken did not recognize until 1974 in an interview with &quot;Playboy&quot; magazine.

=====Pyramid of Cheops=====

Erich von Däniken puts forward many beliefs about the Great Pyramid of Giza in his 1968 book &quot;Chariots of the Gods?&quot;, saying that the ancient Egyptians could not have built it, not having sufficiently advanced tools, leaving no evidence of workers, and incorporating too much &#x27;intimate&#x27; knowledge about the Earth and its geography into the design. To date, the technique of construction is not well understood and the tools the Egyptians used are not entirely known; however, marks left in the quarries by those tools are still visible, and many examples of possible tools are preserved in museums.

Von Däniken claims that it would have taken the Egyptians too long to cut all the blocks necessary and drag them to the construction site in time to build the Great Pyramid in only 20 years; and a &quot;Nova&quot; documentary failed to demonstrate the proposed construction method, and came to no conclusions about how long the theoretical technique would require to construct the monument. The documentary does not actually demonstrate the cutting or transportation of a true 2.5 ton block but instead has actors portray the theory by pushing what is a prop rock on a prop sled based on an ancient sled that was discovered in Egypt.

Von Däniken also said that there were too many problems with their tools, and, according to him, the Egyptians had no prehistory so they could not have possibly built these large pyramids, even though there are pyramids in Egypt that were built before the Great Pyramid. Because he believed that there was no prehistory, von Däniken put forward that there is nothing known about how, when, or why these pyramids were built.

Von Däniken also claims that Egyptians built perfect pyramids from the beginning, but numerous pyramid precursors survive, showing the errors made and corrected by Egyptian architects while they were perfecting the technique. These include simple mastabas, the Step Pyramid of Djoser, and the so-called Bent Pyramid.

In his book, he says that there is no evidence of Egyptian workers at the pyramid site; however, archaeologists have found evidence of buildings where workers would have lived, with bakeries and sewer systems. There are also tombs of workers, with some of the skeletons showing evidence of having received medical care. This may indicate the workers were well taken care of, which suggests they were Egyptian.

Von Däniken states that the Great Pyramid is located on the Median line dividing the continents, and that the Egyptians could not have aligned the edges so perfectly to true north without advanced technology that only aliens could give them. Egyptian builders, however, knew of simple methods to find north via star observation. Egyptologists have found artifacts and drawings of an object called a merkhet, which enabled the ancient Egyptians to find true north using the North Star and other stars aligned with the merkhet. The ancient Egyptian astronomers and, possibly, farmers spent much time studying the stars in order to accurately track the agricultural seasons.

=====Sarcophagus of Palenque=====

Von Däniken claimed that the Sarcophagus of Palenque depicted a spaceman sitting on a rocket-powered spaceship, wearing a spacesuit. However, archaeologists see nothing special about the figure, a dead Maya monarch (K&#x27;inich Janaab&#x27; Pakal) wearing traditional Maya hairstyle and jewellery, surrounded by Maya symbols that can be observed in other Maya drawings. The right hand is not handling any rocket controls, but simply making a traditional Maya gesture that other figures in the sides of the lid also make, and is not holding anything. The rocket shape is actually two serpents joining their heads at the bottom, with the rocket &quot;flames&quot; being the beards of the serpents. The rocket motor under the figure is the face of a monster, symbol of the underworld. (In &quot;Chariots of the Gods?&quot; Von Däniken also incorrectly states the sculpture to be from Copán, rather than Palenque.)

=====Peruvian stones=====
Von Däniken put forward photographs of the Ica stones, ancient stones in Peru, with carvings of men using telescopes, detailed world maps, and advanced medical operations, all beyond the knowledge of ancient Peruvians. But the PBS television series &quot;Nova&quot; determined that the stones were modern, and located the potter who made them. This potter makes stones daily and sells them to tourists. Von Däniken had visited the potter and examined the stones himself, but he didn&#x27;t mention this in his book. He says that he didn&#x27;t believe the potter when he said that he had made the stones. Von Däniken says that he asked Doctor Cabrera, a local surgeon who owns the museum, and Cabrera had told him that the potter&#x27;s claims were a lie and that the stones were ancient. But the potter had proof that Cabrera had thanked him for providing the stones for the museum. Von Däniken claimed that the stones at the museum were very different from those made by the potter, but the &quot;Nova&quot; reporters oversaw the manufacturing of one stone and confirmed that it was very similar to those in the museum.

====Accusations of European ethnocentrism====
Kenneth Feder accused von Däniken of European ethnocentrism, while John Flenley and Paul Bahn suggested that views such as his interpretation of the Easter Island statues &quot;ignore the real achievements of our ancestors and constitute the ultimate in racism: they belittle the abilities and ingenuity of the human species as a whole.&quot;

====Other criticisms====
Ronald Story published &quot;The Space Gods Revealed: A Close Look At The Theories of Erich Von Däniken&quot; in 1976, written in response to the evidence presented in von Däniken&#x27;s &quot;Chariots of the Gods?&quot;. It was reviewed as &quot;a coherent and much-needed refutation of von Däniken&#x27;s theories&quot;. Archeologist Clifford Wilson wrote two books similarly debunking von Däniken: &quot;Crash Go the Chariots&quot; in 1972 and &quot;The Chariots Still Crash&quot; in 1975.

A 2004 article in &quot;Skeptic Magazine&quot; states that von Däniken took many of the book&#x27;s concepts from &quot;The Morning of the Magicians&quot; (1960), that this book in turn was heavily influenced by the Cthulhu Mythos, and that the core of the ancient astronaut theory originates in H. P. Lovecraft&#x27;s stories &quot;The Call of Cthulhu&quot; written in 1926, and &quot;At the Mountains of Madness&quot; written in 1931.

Jason Colavito (who has made or echoed some of the criticisms above) has criticized von Däniken&#x27;s book &quot;Signs of the Gods&quot; from 1979 for what he describes as making very racist claims while speculating that ancient aliens created varying human races.

==Popularity==
According to von Däniken, books in his series have altogether been translated into 32 languages and have sold more than 63 million copies.

Based on von Däniken&#x27;s books a comic book &quot;Die Götter aus dem All&quot; has been created by Bogusław Polch written by Arnold Mostowicz and Alfred Górny. In 1978–1982 eight comic books were translated into 12 languages and have sold over 5 million copies.

Jungfrau Park located near Interlaken, Switzerland, was opened as the Mystery Park in 2003. Designed by von Däniken, it explored several great &quot;mysteries&quot; of the world.

Ridley Scott said that his film &quot;Prometheus&quot; is related to some of von Däniken&#x27;s ideas regarding early human civilization. Reviewing the two-disc DVD release of Roland Emmerich&#x27;s film &quot;Stargate&quot;, Dean Devlin referred to the &quot;Is There a Stargate?&quot; feature where &quot;author Erich von Däniken discusses evidence he has found of alien visitations to Earth.&quot;

Von Däniken is an occasional presenter on the History Channel and H2 show &quot;Ancient Aliens&quot;, where he talks about aspects of his theories as they pertain to each episode.

=== &quot;Dänikenitis&quot; ===
Erich Von Däniken acknowledges his popularity by referring to the phrase &quot;Dänikenitis&quot;, which he mentions in his book &quot;Chariots of the Gods&quot;. 

&quot;Dänikenitis&quot; slowed down in the 1970s when he began to be heavily criticized by archeologists and astronomers, which led to his books not being translated into the English language anymore. He was able to bounce back into popularity when he produced a twenty-five-part German television series in 1993, and this led to his books being translated into English once again. Germany and other European countries have large support for Erich&#x27;s work and he was able to continue to fill auditoriums all throughout the 1990s.

==Books==
* &quot;Chariots of the Gods?&quot; (Souvenir Press Ltd, 1969)
* &quot;Return to the Stars&quot; (Souvenir Press Ltd, 1970) 
* &quot;Gods from Outer Space&quot; (Bantam,1972; reprint of &quot;Return to the Stars&quot;)
* &quot;Miracles of the Gods: A Hard Look at the Supernatural&quot; (Souvenir Press Ltd, 1975) 
* &quot;In Search of Ancient Gods: My Pictorial Evidence for the Impossible&quot; (Corgi books, 1976) 
* &quot;According to the Evidence&quot; (Souvenir Press, 1977) 
* &quot;Signs of the Gods&quot; (Corgi books, 1980) 
* &quot;The Stones of Kiribati: Pathways to the Gods&quot; (Corgi books, 1982) 
* &quot;The Gods and their Grand Design: The Eighth Wonder of the World&quot; (Souvenir Press, 1984) 
* &quot;The Eyes of the Sphinx: The Newest Evidence of Extraterrestrial Contact&quot; (Berkley Publishing Corporation, 1996) 
* &quot;The Return of the Gods: Evidence of Extraterrestrial Visitations&quot; (Element, 1998) 
* &quot;Arrival of the Gods: Revealing the Alien Landing Sites of Nazca&quot; (Element, 1998) 
* &quot;The Gods Were Astronauts: Evidence of the True Identities of the Old &quot;Gods&quot;&quot; (Vega books, 2001) 
* &quot;Odyssey of the Gods: An Alien History of Ancient Greece&quot; (Vega books, 2002) 
* &quot;History Is Wrong&quot; (New Page books, 2009) 
* &quot;Evidence of the Gods&quot; (New Page books, 2010) 
* &quot;Twilight of the Gods: The Mayan Calendar and the Return of the Extraterrestrials&quot; (New Page books, 2010) 
* &quot;Tomy and the Planet of Lies&quot; (Tantor eBooks, 2012) 
* &quot;Remnants of the Gods: A Visual Tour of Alien Influence in Egypt, Spain, France, Turkey, and Italy&quot; (New Page Books, 2013) 
* &quot;The Gods Never Left Us&quot; (New Page Books, 2018) 
* &quot;Eyewitness to the Gods&quot; (New Page Books, 2019) 
* &quot;War of the Gods&quot; (New Page Books, 2020) 
* &quot;Confessions of an Egyptologist: Lost Libraries, Vanished Labyrinths &amp; the Astonishing Truth Under the Saqqara Pyramids&quot; (New Page Books, 2021) 

===German language===
* &quot;Erinnerungen an die Zukunft&quot; (1968)
* &quot;Zurück zu den Sternen: Argumente für das Unmögliche&quot; (1969) 
* &quot;Strategie der Götter: Das Achte Weltwunder&quot; (1982) 
* &quot;Der Tag an dem die Götter kamen&quot; (1984) 
* &quot;Habe ich mich geirrt?&quot; (1985) 
* &quot;Wir alle sind Kinder der Götter&quot; (1987) C. Bertelsmann, 
* &quot;Die Augen der Sphinx&quot; (1989) C. Bertelsmann, 
* &quot;Die Spuren der Ausserirdischen&quot; (1990) (Bildband) 
* &quot;Die Steinzeit war ganz anders&quot; (1991) 
* &quot;Ausserirdische in Ägypten&quot; (1991)
* &quot;Erinnerungen an die Zukunft&quot; (1992) (Reissue with new foreword)
* &quot;Der Götter-Schock&quot; (1992) 
* &quot;Raumfahrt im Altertum&quot; (1993) 
* &quot;Auf den Spuren der Allmächtigen&quot; (1993) C. Bertelsmann, 
* &quot;Botschaften und Zeichen aus dem Universum&quot; (1994) C. Bertelsmann, 
* &quot;Im Name von Zeus&quot; (2001) C. Bertelsmann, 
* &quot;Götterdämmerung&quot; (2009) KOPP Verlag 
* &quot;Grüße aus der Steinzeit: Wer nicht glauben will, soll sehen!&quot; (2010)
* &quot;Was ist falsch im Maya-Land?: Versteckte Technologien in Tempeln und Skulpturen&quot; (2011)
* &quot;Was ich jahrzehntelang verschwiegen habe&quot; (2015) 
* &quot;Botschaften aus dem Jahr 2118: Neue Erinnerungen an die Zukunft&quot; (2020) 

==Films==
* Harald Reinl : &quot;Chariots of the Gods&quot; (1970) Documentary.
* Ferry Radax: &quot;Mit Erich von Däniken in Peru&quot; (With Erich von Däniken in Peru, 1982). A documentary.
* Daniken: a video song directed by Samik Roy Choudhury, sung by Rupam Islam of West Bengal, India

== Comic books ==
* &quot;Landung in den Anden&quot; (1978), 
* &quot;Atlantis – Experimente mit Menschen und Monstern&quot; (1978), 
* &quot;Krieg der Feuerwagen – Report einer Invasion&quot; (1978), 
* &quot;Revolte der Titanen&quot; (1978), 
* &quot;Der Untergang von Atlantis – Die Rache der Götter&quot; (1978), 
* &quot;Als Sodom und Gomorrha starben&quot; (1978), 
* &quot;Das Geheimnis der Pyramide&quot; (1982), 
* &quot;Als die Sonne still stand&quot; (1982), 

==See also==
* David Icke
* &quot;Frauds, Myths, and Mysteries: Science and Pseudoscience in Archaeology&quot; (book)
* Graham Hancock
* Mauro Biglino
* Oolon Colluphid
* Zecharia Sitchin

==Further reading==
* Peter Krassa, &quot;Disciple of the Gods: A biography of Erich von Däniken&quot; (W. H. Allen &amp; Unwin, 1976). 

==References==
===Sources===
* 

==External links==

* Erich von Däniken&#x27;s official homepage</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q122965" start="0" end="28" title="Erich von Däniken" label="Erich Anton Paul von Däniken"/>
<link wikidata="Q483677" start="83" end="99" title="pseudoscientific" label="pseudoscientific"/>
<link wikidata="Q181508" start="130" end="146" title="extraterrestrial life" label="extraterrestrial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354710" start="215" end="236" title="Chariots of the Gods?" label="Chariots of the Gods?"/>
<link wikidata="Q646988" start="341" end="354" title="Paleocontact" label="paleo-contact"/>
<link wikidata="Q646988" start="365" end="383" title="ancient astronauts" label="ancient astronauts"/>
<link wikidata="Q11146759" start="513" end="526" title="pseudohistory" label="pseudohistory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345825" start="528" end="545" title="pseudoarchaeology" label="pseudoarchaeology"/>
<link wikidata="Q483677" start="551" end="564" title="pseudoscience" label="pseudoscience"/>
<link wikidata="Q28813" start="642" end="647" title="fraud" label="fraud"/>
<link wikidata="Q157833" start="651" end="663" title="embezzlement" label="embezzlement"/>
<link wikidata="Q181016" start="847" end="860" title="Jungfrau Park" label="Jungfrau Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q68103" start="887" end="897" title="Interlaken" label="Interlaken"/>
<link wikidata="Q63986" start="977" end="985" title="Zofingen" label="Zofingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q11972" start="987" end="993" title="Aargau" label="Aargau"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="1011" end="1025" title="Roman Catholic" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q681917" start="1043" end="1085" title="Collège Saint-Michel" label="Saint-Michel International Catholic School"/>
<link wikidata="Q36378" start="1089" end="1097" title="Fribourg" label="Fribourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q5401971" start="1244" end="1257" title="flying saucer" label="flying saucer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631120" start="1751" end="1758" title="Hotel manager" label="manager"/>
<link wikidata="Q68097" start="1786" end="1791" title="Davos" label="Davos"/>
<link wikidata="Q451462" start="2086" end="2101" title="Ullstein Verlag" label="Ullstein Verlag"/>
<link wikidata="Q1710106" start="2188" end="2200" title="Wilhelm Utermann" label="Utz Utermann"/>
<link wikidata="Q7320" start="2285" end="2295" title="Nazi Party" label="Nazi Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2099032" start="3246" end="3253" title="playboy (lifestyle)" label="playboy"/>
<link wikidata="Q696606" start="3307" end="3314" title="void (law)" label="nullity"/>
<link wikidata="Q175582" start="4233" end="4250" title="Egyptian pyramids" label="Egyptian pyramids"/>
<link wikidata="Q39671" start="4252" end="4262" title="Stonehenge" label="Stonehenge"/>
<link wikidata="Q20350" start="4272" end="4276" title="Moai" label="Moai"/>
<link wikidata="Q14452" start="4280" end="4293" title="Easter Island" label="Easter Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q220659" start="4307" end="4315" title="artifact (archaeology)" label="artifact"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069160" start="4351" end="4381" title="out-of-place artifact" label="higher technological knowledge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845" start="4771" end="4776" title="Bible" label="Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q410" start="4860" end="4870" title="Carl Sagan" label="Carl Sagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q93909" start="4875" end="4891" title="Iosif Samuilovich Shklovskii" label="I. S. Shklovskii"/>
<link wikidata="Q349061" start="5610" end="5625" title="Robert Charroux" label="Robert Charroux"/>
<link wikidata="Q164666" start="5862" end="5872" title="plagiarism" label="plagiarism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354710" start="5952" end="5973" title="Chariots of the Gods?" label="Chariots of the Gods?"/>
<link wikidata="Q543419" start="6003" end="6023" title="Iron pillar of Delhi" label="Iron pillar of Delhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5192642" start="6701" end="6719" title="Cueva de los Tayos" label="Cueva de los Tayos"/>
<link wikidata="Q736" start="6746" end="6753" title="Ecuador" label="Ecuador"/>
<link wikidata="Q131478" start="6989" end="7000" title="Der Spiegel" label="Der Spiegel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7412511" start="7798" end="7814" title="Samuel Rosenberg (writer)" label="Samuel Rosenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q997817" start="7835" end="7848" title="Book of Dzyan" label="Book of Dzyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q189454" start="7953" end="7969" title="Helena Blavatsky" label="Madame Blavatsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q7852166" start="8005" end="8018" title="Tulli Papyrus" label="Tulli Papyrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q178390" start="8097" end="8112" title="Book of Ezekiel" label="Book of Ezekiel"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="8400" end="8418" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q2620036" start="8584" end="8595" title="Nazca Lines" label="Nazca Lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354710" start="8626" end="8647" title="Chariots of the Gods?" label="Chariots of the Gods?"/>
<link wikidata="Q202390" start="9548" end="9561" title="pre-Columbian" label="pre-Columbian"/>
<link wikidata="Q419" start="9812" end="9816" title="Peru" label="Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q213577" start="9917" end="9929" title="Maria Reiche" label="Maria Reiche"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128599" start="10099" end="10112" title="Piri Reis map" label="Piri Reis map"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064750" start="10312" end="10327" title="Charles Hapgood" label="Charles Hapgood"/>
<link wikidata="Q22664" start="10468" end="10475" title="Geographic coordinate system" label="degrees"/>
<link wikidata="Q2535130" start="10508" end="10522" title="Cape São Roque" label="Cape São Roque"/>
<link wikidata="Q217915" start="10971" end="10980" title="Piri Reis" label="Piri Reis"/>
<link wikidata="Q37200" start="11596" end="11617" title="Great Pyramid of Giza" label="Great Pyramid of Giza"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071768" start="12365" end="12369" title="Nova (American TV series)" label="Nova"/>
<link wikidata="Q180927" start="13469" end="13476" title="mastaba" label="mastaba"/>
<link wikidata="Q192418" start="13483" end="13505" title="Step Pyramid of Djoser" label="Step Pyramid of Djoser"/>
<link wikidata="Q459608" start="13525" end="13537" title="Bent Pyramid" label="Bent Pyramid"/>
<link wikidata="Q339264" start="14120" end="14130" title="true north" label="true north"/>
<link wikidata="Q1648270" start="14350" end="14357" title="merkhet" label="merkhet"/>
<link wikidata="Q12980" start="14424" end="14434" title="North Star" label="North Star"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14688" end="14711" title="Temple of the Inscriptions#Sarcophagus" label="Sarcophagus of Palenque"/>
<link wikidata="Q28567" start="14861" end="14865" title="Maya civilization" label="Maya"/>
<link wikidata="Q371384" start="14875" end="14906" title="K&amp;#x27;inich Janaab&amp;#x27; Pakal" label="K&amp;#x27;inich Janaab&amp;#x27; Pakal"/>
<link wikidata="Q214827" start="15541" end="15546" title="Copán" label="Copán"/>
<link wikidata="Q181427" start="15560" end="15568" title="Palenque" label="Palenque"/>
<link wikidata="Q910365" start="15641" end="15651" title="Ica stones" label="Ica stones"/>
<link wikidata="Q215616" start="15825" end="15828" title="Public Broadcasting Service" label="PBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071768" start="15853" end="15857" title="Nova (American TV series)" label="Nova"/>
<link wikidata="Q6390092" start="16767" end="16780" title="Kenneth Feder" label="Kenneth Feder"/>
<link wikidata="Q189049" start="16813" end="16826" title="ethnocentrism" label="ethnocentrism"/>
<link wikidata="Q14452" start="16916" end="16929" title="Easter Island" label="Easter Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q20350" start="16930" end="16937" title="Moai" label="statues"/>
<link wikidata="" start="17165" end="17239" title="The Space Gods Revealed: A Close Look At The Theories of Erich Von Däniken" label="The Space Gods Revealed: A Close Look At The Theories of Erich Von Däniken"/>
<link wikidata="Q7534655" start="17654" end="17670" title="Skeptic (U.S. magazine)" label="Skeptic Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2708466" start="17750" end="17778" title="The Morning of the Magicians" label="The Morning of the Magicians"/>
<link wikidata="Q621596" start="17846" end="17860" title="Cthulhu Mythos" label="Cthulhu Mythos"/>
<link wikidata="Q169566" start="17926" end="17941" title="H. P. Lovecraft" label="H. P. Lovecraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141815" start="17963" end="17982" title="The Call of Cthulhu" label="The Call of Cthulhu"/>
<link wikidata="Q786586" start="18016" end="18043" title="At the Mountains of Madness" label="At the Mountains of Madness"/>
<link wikidata="Q13377685" start="18068" end="18082" title="Jason Colavito" label="Jason Colavito"/>
<link wikidata="Q8461" start="18253" end="18259" title="racist" label="racist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1213240" start="18543" end="18565" title="Die Götter aus dem All" label="Die Götter aus dem All"/>
<link wikidata="Q9175888" start="18592" end="18606" title="Bogusław Polch" label="Bogusław Polch"/>
<link wikidata="Q181016" start="18756" end="18769" title="Jungfrau Park" label="Jungfrau Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q68103" start="18783" end="18793" title="Interlaken" label="Interlaken"/>
<link wikidata="Q56005" start="18936" end="18948" title="Ridley Scott" label="Ridley Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q192686" start="18974" end="18984" title="Prometheus (2012 film)" label="Prometheus"/>
<link wikidata="Q60100" start="19112" end="19127" title="Roland Emmerich" label="Roland Emmerich"/>
<link wikidata="Q105801" start="19146" end="19154" title="Stargate (film)" label="Stargate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1621107" start="19384" end="19399" title="History Channel" label="History Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2501910" start="19418" end="19432" title="Ancient Aliens" label="Ancient Aliens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354710" start="20268" end="20289" title="Chariots of the Gods?" label="Chariots of the Gods?"/>
<link wikidata="Q1315995" start="23279" end="23290" title="KOPP Verlag" label="KOPP Verlag"/>
<link wikidata="Q78920" start="23637" end="23649" title="Harald Reinl" label="Harald Reinl"/>
<link wikidata="Q439153" start="23658" end="23678" title="Chariots of the Gods (film)" label="Chariots of the Gods"/>
<link wikidata="Q86337" start="23707" end="23718" title="Ferry Radax" label="Ferry Radax"/>
<link wikidata="Q2879782" start="23882" end="23893" title="Rupam Islam" label="Rupam Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q333118" start="24404" end="24414" title="David Icke" label="David Icke"/>
<link wikidata="" start="24423" end="24493" title="Frauds, Myths, and Mysteries: Science and Pseudoscience in Archaeology" label="Frauds, Myths, and Mysteries: Science and Pseudoscience in Archaeology"/>
<link wikidata="Q370235" start="24509" end="24523" title="Graham Hancock" label="Graham Hancock"/>
<link wikidata="Q16735538" start="24526" end="24539" title="Mauro Biglino" label="Mauro Biglino"/>
<link wikidata="Q1039078" start="24542" end="24557" title="Oolon Colluphid" label="Oolon Colluphid"/>
<link wikidata="Q169613" start="24560" end="24576" title="Zecharia Sitchin" label="Zecharia Sitchin"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="191327" wikidata="Q510093" url="?curid=191327" title="Paul Harrington (musician)">
<text>Paul Harrington (born 13 May 1960) is an Irish musician, who, with Charlie McGettigan, won the Eurovision Song Contest for Ireland in 1994; the third of a record three consecutive wins by Ireland. 

==Career==
===Music===
Harrington was born in Dublin, Republic of Ireland. He attended O&#x27;Connells secondary School, North Circular Road Dublin.
He first came to public attention with his debut album, &quot;What I&#x27;d Say&quot;, reaching the Top 10 in 1991. However, that attention reached new heights in 1994 when he represented Ireland and won the Eurovision Song Contest along with Charlie McGettigan.

In the late 1990s, Harrington was the performer of choice for many of the A-list celebrities that would frequent the VIP Room in Dublin&#x27;s most prestigious nightspot at the time, Lillie&#x27;s bordello, here he would regularly entertain and be joined by, stars from the world of music, film, and television. He has performed for, amongst others, the Rolling Stones, Prince, and U2. It was at this location that Michael Flatley and Harrington reconnected after 10 years. Flatley was so impressed with Harrington that he created a role for him as a principal singer in his dance extravaganza &quot;Celtic Tiger Live&quot;. This saw Harrington performing in arenas across Europe and North America, including Wembley and Madison Square Gardens.

Harrington release &quot;A Collection&quot; in 2008, and after a stunning performance on &quot;The Late Late Show&quot;, the album entered Ireland&#x27;s Top 20 reaching number 4.

In 2009, he joined with his brothers as &quot;The Harrington Brothers&quot; to record &quot;Molly Malone&quot; with The Official Leinster Supporters Group. The song became the official anthem for the Leinster Rugby Team. The song entered the Irish Charts in 2009 and was number one in the download charts. The Harrington Brothers performed &quot;Molly Malone&quot; live at The RDS Dublin just before Leinster played Edinburgh in the Heineken Cup.

In 2010, Harrington released a live studio album, &quot;Songs&quot;, featuring his unique interpretations of some of the world&#x27;s best-loved songs, and produced by Grammy nominees Chris O’Brien and Graham Murphy. The album also featured Bill Shanley, Sean Devitt, and Tony Molloy.

Harrington released a new live album in 2018 entitled &quot;Lights of Home&quot;. The album was recorded by Tim Martin at the Sugar Club Dublin, and features nine new songs. Although this will be Harrington&#x27;s first solo album in eight years, he has collaborated on other albums in that time, including a Christmas album featuring the Whitefriar Street Choir (&quot;O Holy Night&quot;) and a North American – Irish collaboration called &quot;Cape Spear&quot;.

===Television and radio===
For the last five years, Harrington has had a regular slot on &quot;The Pat Kenny Show&quot; on Newstalk; The features include &quot;The Popular Irish Ballad – a brief history&quot;, also every Tuesday morning &quot;The Lyric&#x27;s The Thing&quot;.
Paul Harrington&#x27;s radio career also includes five years with Dublin&#x27;s Q102 and two years with Sunshine 106.8, where his duties included presentation, scriptwriting, and voiceover work.

Throughout his career, Harrington has made many television appearances on TV shows and variety shows, including &quot;The Lyrics Board&quot;. In 2017 and 2018, Harrington wrote and presented the documentary &quot;Ireland’s Eurovision Winners&quot;, which was released on DVD and is also due to air on television.

In 2018, Harrington was a guest on the popular TV show &quot;The Restaurant&quot;. He took on the role as an executive chef, where he attained the highest accolade of 5 Star Chef awarded by three-star Michelin chef Marco Pierre White and celebrity chef Rachel Allen.

==Other work==

Throughout his career, Harrington has contributed to charity. His work has included going to the Sahara Desert to raise funds for Dublin Simon Community and producing and performing charity concerts for organisations including the Irish Cancer Society, Haven for Haiti, Console, and annually for the Rape Crisis Centre.

Harrington has a great interest in developing the arts with young and old people alike. He has worked with Samantha Mumba stage school and has been involved in many local and national projects. Harrington was a patron of the Arts in the Donahies Community School where he produced shows, developed young talent, and introduced many young people to the world of performance.

==References==
==External links==
*Official Website of Paul Harrington</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q510093" start="0" end="15" title="Paul Harrington (musician)" label="Paul Harrington"/>
<link wikidata="Q514544" start="67" end="85" title="Charlie McGettigan" label="Charlie McGettigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q276" start="95" end="118" title="Eurovision Song Contest" label="Eurovision Song Contest"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="144" end="184" title="List of Eurovision Song Contest winners#Winners by country" label="third of a record three consecutive wins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761" start="245" end="251" title="Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q27" start="253" end="272" title="Republic of Ireland" label="Republic of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q316685" start="1027" end="1042" title="Michael Flatley" label="Michael Flatley"/>
<link wikidata="Q442665" start="1212" end="1229" title="Celtic Tiger Live" label="Celtic Tiger Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q128468" start="1321" end="1328" title="Wembley Stadium" label="Wembley"/>
<link wikidata="Q186125" start="1333" end="1355" title="Madison Square Gardens" label="Madison Square Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q2612445" start="1453" end="1471" title="The Late Late Show (Irish talk show)" label="The Late Late Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345276" start="1631" end="1643" title="Molly Malone" label="Molly Malone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473374" start="1739" end="1758" title="Leinster Rugby" label="Leinster Rugby Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q1766418" start="1912" end="1926" title="The RDS Dublin" label="The RDS Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q15120374" start="1972" end="1984" title="Heineken Cup" label="Heineken Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q4151017" start="2189" end="2202" title="Graham Murphy" label="Graham Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q13653071" start="2861" end="2869" title="Newstalk" label="Newstalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q5310793" start="3081" end="3099" title="Dublin&amp;#x27;s Q102" label="Dublin&amp;#x27;s Q102"/>
<link wikidata="Q7641433" start="3119" end="3133" title="Sunshine 106.8" label="Sunshine 106.8"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785648" start="3329" end="3345" title="The Lyrics Board" label="The Lyrics Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q7760320" start="3586" end="3600" title="The Restaurant (Irish TV series)" label="The Restaurant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2917016" start="3740" end="3758" title="Marco Pierre White" label="Marco Pierre White"/>
<link wikidata="Q7279130" start="3778" end="3790" title="Rachel Allen" label="Rachel Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6070572" start="4040" end="4060" title="Irish Cancer Society" label="Irish Cancer Society"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="191328" wikidata="Q1013978" url="?curid=191328" title="List of communities in Yukon">
<text>This is a list of communities in Yukon, Canada.

== Municipalities ==


== Unincorporated communities ==

These areas lie within the Unorganized Yukon, which covers 99.8% of the territory&#x27;s land mass.

=== Hamlets ===
Statistics Canada recognizes two census subdivisions in Yukon that are classified as hamlets.
*Ibex Valley
*Mount Lorne

=== Localities ===
The &quot;Gazetteer of Yukon&quot; recognized 96 localities as of February 2012. Two of these localities, Tagish and Upper Liard, are designated as census subdivisions by Statistics Canada, though are classified as settlements.

*Aishihik
*Ballarat Creek
*Barlow
*Bear Creek
*Black Hills
*Boundary
*Braeburn
*Brewer Creek
*Britannia Creek
*Brooks Brook
*Calumet
*Canyon
*Canyon City
*Carcross Cutoff
*Caribou
*Champagne
*Clear Creek
*Clinton Creek
*Coffee Creek
*Conrad
*Dalton Post
*De Wette
*Dezadeash
*Donjek
*Dominion
*Dry Creek
*Dundalk
*Eagle Plains
*Flat Creek
*Fort Reliance
*Fort Selkirk
*Forty Mile
*Frances Lake
*Glacier Creek
*Glenboyle
*Gold Bottom
*Gold Run
*Gordon Landing
*Grand Forks
*Granville, Yukon
*Gravel Lake
*Herschel
*Hootalinqua
*Hundred Mile Landing
*Hutshi
*Isaac Creek
*Jakes Corner
*Jensen Creek
*Kirkman Creek
*Kloo Lake
*Klondike
*Klukshu
*Koidern
*Kynocks
*Lansdowne
*Lansing
*Lapierre House
*Little Gold
*Little River
*Little Salmon
*Little Teslin Lake
*Livingstone, Yukon
*Livingstone Creek
*Lorne, Yukon
*Mason Landing
*McCabe Creek
*McClintok
*McQuesten
*Mendenhall Landing
*Minto, Yukon
*Minto Bridge
*Montague, Yukon
*Moosehide
*Morley River
*Nesketahin
*Ogilvie
*Paris
*Pelly Lakes
*Quill Creek
*Rampart House
*Rancheria
*Readford
*Robinson
*Rock Creek
*Scroggie Creek
*Selwyn
*Silver City
*Sixtymile
*Snag
*Snag Junction
*Stevens Roadhouse
*Stewart River
*Stony Creek Camp
*Sulphur
*Summit Roadhouse
*Tagish (also designated a census subdivision)
*Takhini
*Takhini Hot Springs
*Ten Mile
*Teslin Crossing
*Teslin Lake
*Teslin River
*Thistle Creek
*Tuchitua
*Upper Laberge
*Upper Liard (also designated a census subdivision)
*Watson
*Wernecke
*West Dawson
*Whitefish Station
*Whitestone Village
*Yukon Crossing
==== Dalton Post ====

Dalton Post or Shäwshe is a former trading post and First Nations community on the Tatshenshini River. It was on the Dalton Trail near the Haines Highway. Today, it is a prime Pacific salmon fishing spot and serves as a base for whitewater rafting expeditions on the Tatshenshini and Alsek Rivers in the Tatshenshini-Alsek Provincial Park.

==== Jakes Corner ====

Jakes Corner is a spot on the road, at historical mile 866 of the Alaska Highway, at the junction with connections to the Tagish Road and the Atlin Road. There are a small number of area residents, the junction being best known for a gas station and café. The gas station has numerous examples of old machinery.

==== Klukshu ====

Klukshu&#x27;s more recent history is as a seasonal aboriginal fishing community, benefitting from a large Chinook salmon run. Located near the Haines Highway, it has no permanent population. Interpretive information is provided by the Champagne and Aishihik First Nations.

==== Little Salmon ====

Little Salmon is located on the Robert Campbell Highway between Faro and Carmacks, and stretches along the lake of the same name and the Yukon River. The only non-residential establishment is the Yukon government highway maintenance camp at Drury Creek. It was formerly an important settlement of the Little Salmon/Carmacks First Nation.

==== Silver City ====

Silver City, a historic mining town, is today only the residence of a small number of people, one household being a bed and breakfast establishment. It is located at historical mile 1053 of the Alaska Highway. It contains an airport, Silver City Airport.

==== Sulphur ====

Sulphur or Sulphur Creek was a mining camp south-east of Dawson on a creek of the same name that flows into the Indian River. A post office was opened there on 28 October 1903 by G. W. Coffin. It was closed in July 1922. The place is mentioned in Jack London&#x27;s story, &quot;To Build a Fire&quot;.

=== Settlements ===
The &quot;Gazetteer of Yukon&quot; recognized 29 settlements as of February 2012. Eleven of these settlements are designated as census subdivisions by Statistics Canada.

*Arlington
*Armstrong
*Bear Creek
*Beaver Creek – also designated a census subdivision
*Big Salmon
*Burwash Landing – also designated a census subdivision
*Carcross – also designated a census subdivision
*Destruction Bay – also designated a census subdivision
*Dry Creek
*Dundalk
*Herschel
*Hundred Mile Landing
*Johnsons Crossing – also designated a census subdivision
*Keno Hill – also designated a census subdivision
*Lewis
*Livingstone
*Lower Laberge
*Marsh Lake
*Mendenhall Landing
*Old Crow – also designated a census subdivision
*Pelly Crossing – also designated a census subdivision
*Rampart House
*Ross River – also designated a census subdivision
*Selwyn
*Snag
*Stewart Crossing – also designated a census subdivision
*Stewart River
*Swift River – also designated a census subdivision
*Teslin Lake
==== Herschel ====
Herschel was a settlement on Herschel Island, serving as a whaling station, North-West Mounted Police post and Hudson&#x27;s Bay Company store. It has been long abandoned, and shoreline erosion is threatening to wipe out the remaining buildings.

==== Stewart River ====
Stewart River is a former settlement at the juncture of the Yukon and Stewart rivers. A few buildings and cabins remain, as well as private museum, which are threatened by erosion. It was founded as a trading post in the 1880s before the Klondike Gold Rush to serve placer miners working along the Stewart River. The Burian family was still living there in the late 1980s.

== First Nations communities ==

Statistics Canada recognizes five census subdivisions in Yukon that are classified as Indian settlements, and four census subdivisions as self-governments.

=== Indian settlements ===
*Champagne – also recognized as a locality
*Kloo Lake
*Klukshu – also recognized as a locality
*Two Mile Village
*Two and One-Half Mile Village

=== Self-governments ===
*Carcross 4
*Lake Laberge 1
*Moosehide Creek 2
*Teslin Post 13

== Ghost towns ==
*Elsa
*Clinton Creek
*Fort Frances
*Forty Mile
*Miner&#x27;s Prayer

=== Miner&#x27;s Prayer ===
Miner&#x27;s Prayer was settled near the Blackstone River Mining Concern, providing a retreat where the miners could indulge in billiards, alcohol and other entertainment otherwise forbidden on the mining settlement. Today it is home to fewer than thirty permanent residents. It can be accessed by gravel road veering west from mile 57 on the Dempster Highway.

== See also ==
*List of cities in Canada
*List of towns in Canada

==Notes==
== References ==

*Robert G. Woodall, The Postal History of Yukon Territory Canada, Lawrence, MA, Quarterman, Revised edition, 1976, 

== External links ==
*Yukon-Municipal Information
*Association of Yukon Communities
*Yukon Municipal Government Websites
*Yukon community profiles web site</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2009" start="33" end="38" title="Yukon" label="Yukon"/>
<link wikidata="Q16902364" start="133" end="150" title="Unorganized Yukon" label="Unorganized Yukon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155740" start="223" end="240" title="Statistics Canada" label="Statistics Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053463" start="256" end="275" title="census subdivisions" label="census subdivisions"/>
<link wikidata="Q5084" start="308" end="315" title="Hamlet (place)" label="hamlets"/>
<link wikidata="Q1295814" start="318" end="329" title="Ibex Valley, Yukon" label="Ibex Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1313619" start="331" end="342" title="Mount Lorne" label="Mount Lorne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1743233" start="469" end="475" title="Tagish, Yukon" label="Tagish"/>
<link wikidata="Q2499757" start="480" end="491" title="Upper Liard" label="Upper Liard"/>
<link wikidata="Q4699166" start="593" end="601" title="Aishihik" label="Aishihik"/>
<link wikidata="Q2936914" start="734" end="745" title="Canyon City, Yukon" label="Canyon City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061056" start="773" end="782" title="Champagne Landing" label="Champagne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2979349" start="797" end="810" title="Clinton Creek" label="Clinton Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126626" start="826" end="832" title="Conrad, Yukon" label="Conrad"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="834" end="845" title="#Dalton Post" label="Dalton Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q1013978" start="847" end="855" title="De Wette, Yukon" label="De Wette"/>
<link wikidata="Q3214841" start="857" end="866" title="Dezadeash Lake" label="Dezadeash"/>
<link wikidata="Q116311701" start="906" end="918" title="Eagle Plains" label="Eagle Plains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438689" start="932" end="945" title="Fort Reliance" label="Fort Reliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q782621" start="947" end="959" title="Fort Selkirk" label="Fort Selkirk"/>
<link wikidata="Q913017" start="961" end="971" title="Forty Mile, Yukon" label="Forty Mile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1013978" start="1026" end="1034" title="Gold Run, Yukon" label="Gold Run"/>
<link wikidata="Q17332337" start="1052" end="1063" title="Grand Forks, Yukon" label="Grand Forks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1013978" start="1065" end="1081" title="Granville, Yukon" label="Granville, Yukon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1162" end="1174" title="#Jakes Corner" label="Jakes Corner"/>
<link wikidata="Q602965" start="1216" end="1224" title="Klondike, Yukon" label="Klondike"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1226" end="1233" title="#Klukshu" label="Klukshu"/>
<link wikidata="Q6487365" start="1253" end="1262" title="Lansdowne, Yukon" label="Lansdowne"/>
<link wikidata="Q28237" start="1264" end="1271" title="Lansing" label="Lansing"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1273" end="1287" title="Lapierre House" label="Lapierre House"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1289" end="1300" title="Little Gold" label="Little Gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q1013978" start="1302" end="1314" title="Little River, Yukon" label="Little River"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1316" end="1329" title="#Little Salmon" label="Little Salmon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1331" end="1349" title="Little Teslin Lake" label="Little Teslin Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1013978" start="1351" end="1369" title="Livingstone, Yukon" label="Livingstone, Yukon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1371" end="1388" title="Livingstone Creek" label="Livingstone Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1013978" start="1390" end="1402" title="Lorne, Yukon" label="Lorne, Yukon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1404" end="1417" title="Mason Landing" label="Mason Landing"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1433" end="1442" title="McClintok" label="McClintok"/>
<link wikidata="Q1915352" start="1444" end="1453" title="McQuesten" label="McQuesten"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1455" end="1473" title="Mendenhall Landing" label="Mendenhall Landing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1013978" start="1475" end="1487" title="Minto, Yukon" label="Minto, Yukon"/>
<link wikidata="Q113570344" start="1489" end="1501" title="Minto Bridge" label="Minto Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1013978" start="1503" end="1518" title="Montague, Yukon" label="Montague, Yukon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1946973" start="1520" end="1529" title="Moosehide" label="Moosehide"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1531" end="1543" title="Morley River" label="Morley River"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1545" end="1555" title="Nesketahin" label="Nesketahin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2903559" start="1557" end="1564" title="Ogilvie Aerodrome" label="Ogilvie"/>
<link wikidata="Q974043" start="1566" end="1571" title="Paris, Yukon" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1681" end="1692" title="#Silver City" label="Silver City"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1778" end="1785" title="#Sulphur" label="Sulphur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1743233" start="1805" end="1811" title="Tagish, Yukon" label="Tagish"/>
<link wikidata="Q7678195" start="1861" end="1880" title="Takhini Hot Springs" label="Takhini Hot Springs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7705528" start="1892" end="1907" title="Teslin Crossing" label="Teslin Crossing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7705533" start="1922" end="1934" title="Teslin River, Yukon" label="Teslin River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2499757" start="1976" end="1987" title="Upper Liard" label="Upper Liard"/>
<link wikidata="Q39463" start="2171" end="2183" title="trading post" label="trading post"/>
<link wikidata="Q392316" start="2188" end="2201" title="First Nations in Canada" label="First Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q23016" start="2219" end="2237" title="Tatshenshini River" label="Tatshenshini River"/>
<link wikidata="Q3012566" start="2253" end="2265" title="Dalton Trail" label="Dalton Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q616140" start="2275" end="2289" title="Haines Highway" label="Haines Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q133325" start="2312" end="2326" title="Oncorhynchus" label="Pacific salmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q207238" start="2365" end="2383" title="Rafting" label="whitewater rafting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781851" start="2420" end="2431" title="Alsek River" label="Alsek River"/>
<link wikidata="Q935426" start="2440" end="2474" title="Tatshenshini-Alsek Provincial Park" label="Tatshenshini-Alsek Provincial Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q628076" start="2567" end="2581" title="Alaska Highway" label="Alaska Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3513841" start="2623" end="2634" title="Tagish Road" label="Tagish Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q757394" start="2643" end="2653" title="Atlin Road" label="Atlin Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q833503" start="2940" end="2954" title="Chinook salmon" label="Chinook salmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061084" start="3069" end="3105" title="Champagne and Aishihik First Nations" label="Champagne and Aishihik First Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q661298" start="3165" end="3188" title="Robert Campbell Highway" label="Robert Campbell Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001646" start="3197" end="3201" title="Faro, Yukon" label="Faro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043492" start="3206" end="3214" title="Carmacks, Yukon" label="Carmacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q104437" start="3270" end="3281" title="Yukon River" label="Yukon River"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3374" end="3385" title="Drury Creek" label="Drury Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q778269" start="3434" end="3469" title="Little Salmon/Carmacks First Nation" label="Little Salmon/Carmacks First Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q367914" start="3611" end="3628" title="bed and breakfast" label="bed and breakfast"/>
<link wikidata="Q3915282" start="3729" end="3748" title="Silver City Airport" label="Silver City Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q6021454" start="3882" end="3894" title="Indian River (Yukon)" label="Indian River"/>
<link wikidata="Q45765" start="4017" end="4028" title="Jack London" label="Jack London"/>
<link wikidata="Q515819" start="4049" end="4064" title="To Build a Fire" label="To Build a Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q745512" start="4299" end="4311" title="Beaver Creek, Yukon" label="Beaver Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001811" start="4364" end="4379" title="Burwash Landing" label="Burwash Landing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035637" start="4420" end="4428" title="Carcross" label="Carcross"/>
<link wikidata="Q284300" start="4469" end="4484" title="Destruction Bay" label="Destruction Bay"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4545" end="4553" title="#Herschel" label="Herschel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1623630" start="4577" end="4594" title="Johnsons Crossing" label="Johnsons Crossing"/>
<link wikidata="Q991764" start="4635" end="4644" title="Keno City" label="Keno Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q3295010" start="4720" end="4730" title="Marsh Lake, Yukon" label="Marsh Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q672763" start="4752" end="4760" title="Old Crow, Yukon" label="Old Crow"/>
<link wikidata="Q998348" start="4801" end="4815" title="Pelly Crossing" label="Pelly Crossing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2167628" start="4871" end="4881" title="Ross River, Yukon" label="Ross River"/>
<link wikidata="Q3487102" start="4930" end="4934" title="Snag, Yukon" label="Snag"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246045" start="4936" end="4952" title="Stewart Crossing" label="Stewart Crossing"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4993" end="5006" title="#Stewart River" label="Stewart River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2372735" start="5008" end="5019" title="Swift River, Yukon" label="Swift River"/>
<link wikidata="Q7705530" start="5060" end="5071" title="Teslin Lake, Yukon" label="Teslin Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547493" start="5120" end="5135" title="Herschel Island" label="Herschel Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q2506428" start="5167" end="5192" title="North-West Mounted Police" label="North-West Mounted Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q76039" start="5202" end="5227" title="Hudson&amp;#x27;s Bay Company" label="Hudson&amp;#x27;s Bay Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q104437" start="5422" end="5427" title="Yukon River" label="Yukon"/>
<link wikidata="Q167118" start="5432" end="5439" title="Stewart River (Yukon)" label="Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q80026" start="5534" end="5541" title="erosion" label="erosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q631489" start="5600" end="5618" title="Klondike Gold Rush" label="Klondike Gold Rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q12148490" start="5628" end="5641" title="Placer mining" label="placer miners"/>
<link wikidata="Q16211218" start="5855" end="5872" title="Indian settlement" label="Indian settlement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061056" start="5954" end="5963" title="Champagne Landing" label="Champagne"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6008" end="6015" title="#Klukshu" label="Klukshu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7859102" start="6049" end="6065" title="Two Mile Village" label="Two Mile Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q2462444" start="6067" end="6096" title="Two and One-Half Mile Village" label="Two and One-Half Mile Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035637" start="6124" end="6134" title="Carcross" label="Carcross 4"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6136" end="6150" title="Lake Laberge, Yukon" label="Lake Laberge 1"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6152" end="6169" title="Moosehide Creek, Yukon" label="Moosehide Creek 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q2406227" start="6171" end="6185" title="Teslin, Yukon" label="Teslin Post 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q742847" start="6206" end="6210" title="Elsa, Yukon" label="Elsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2979349" start="6212" end="6225" title="Clinton Creek" label="Clinton Creek"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6227" end="6239" title="Fort Frances, Yukon" label="Fort Frances"/>
<link wikidata="Q913017" start="6241" end="6251" title="Forty Mile, Yukon" label="Forty Mile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1013978" start="6253" end="6272" title="Miner&amp;#x27;s Prayer, Yukon" label="Miner&amp;#x27;s Prayer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6343" end="6359" title="Blackstone River (Yukon)" label="Blackstone River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186634" start="6645" end="6661" title="Dempster Highway" label="Dempster Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q378794" start="6680" end="6704" title="List of cities in Canada" label="List of cities in Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q6643730" start="6706" end="6729" title="List of towns in Canada" label="List of towns in Canada"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="191335" wikidata="Q8022880" url="?curid=191335" title="Wilsden">
<text>Wilsden is a village and civil parish in west Bradford, in West Yorkshire, England. Wilsden is west of Bradford and is close to the Aire Valley and the nearby villages of Denholme, Cullingworth, Harden, Cottingley and Allerton. Wilsden re-acquired civil parish status in 2004. The 2001 census revealed a population of 3,697, increasing to 4,807 at the 2011 Census.

==History==
During the Roman era, the area was part of the Ancient British (Celtic) kingdom of Elmet. A connection to the original British tribes of the area may have been included in the name of the village; Wilsden is an Old English name and was originally recorded as &quot;Wealhas-den&quot;, which has been interpreted as &quot;place of the Welsh&quot;. Since all speakers of Brittonic languages were known as &quot;Welsh&quot; in Old English, the name may have implied that Wilsden was a place that Britons retreated to, after Anglo-Saxon settlers arrived in the Aire Valley.

The village is mentioned in the Domesday Book as belonging to Gamalbarn and was part of the manor known as Allerton-cum-Wilsden.

A map of 1818, shows Wilsden Hill, Wilsden and Lingbob as being three separate and distinct hamlets. Industrialisation led to the building of mills in the village, the first of which, Albion Mill, was built in 1810 with a further seven following in the same century. Albion Mill was demolished after it suffered a serious fire in 1990.

The church of St Matthew was built in Wilsden in 1826 and was identical to the Church of St Paul in Shipley. The church was demolished in 1962 and ten years later, a modern St Matthew&#x27;s church was built in a different location in the village.

In 1886, a railway station was opened on the Queensbury to Keighley line that ran to the west of the village. The station was actually in the hamlet of Harecroft, away, and was closed down in May 1955 to passengers and November 1963 to goods. The 616 and 619 bus services connect the village with Harden, Bingley and Eldwick to the north and with Allerton and Bradford to the south. The main road that runs north–south through the village is an unclassified road but connects at the southern end with the B6144 road towards Cullingworth and Bradford, and at the northern end goes through Harden to connect with the B6429 towards Bingley.

Wilsden has many businesses such as Wilsden Autos, Suite Centre, a Co-op and a post office.

The village occupies the high ground to the west of the Aire Valley and is surrounded by upland pastures, enclosed areas, wooded valleys and gritstone moorland.

The Ling Bob public house was built to the south of the village in 1836 and was originally known as the Brown Cow Inn. It was situated in the hamlet of Ling Bob, which was separate from the village of Wilsden at that time, however, the locals all knew the pub as the Ling Bob, so the name stuck.

==Wilsden Village Hall==

Wilsden village hall holds many groups such as scouting groups, walking group, a weekly auction, a pre-school and others.

Administratively, it is part of the Bingley Rural ward of the City of Bradford and part of the Shipley constituency.

==Notable people==
*Alfred Fowler, Astronomer was born in the village

==See also==
*Listed buildings in Wilsden

== References ==
===Sources===

== External links ==

* Wilsden
* Webcam located in Wilsden.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q8022880" start="0" end="7" title="Wilsden" label="Wilsden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115575" start="25" end="37" title="Civil parishes in England" label="civil parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q22905" start="46" end="54" title="Bradford" label="Bradford"/>
<link wikidata="Q23083" start="59" end="73" title="West Yorkshire" label="West Yorkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q408636" start="132" end="143" title="River Aire" label="Aire Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2342182" start="171" end="179" title="Denholme" label="Denholme"/>
<link wikidata="Q3362593" start="181" end="193" title="Cullingworth" label="Cullingworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q9286424" start="195" end="201" title="Harden, West Yorkshire" label="Harden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2472862" start="203" end="213" title="Cottingley, Bradford" label="Cottingley"/>
<link wikidata="Q4732139" start="218" end="226" title="Allerton, West Yorkshire" label="Allerton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115575" start="248" end="260" title="Civil parishes in England" label="civil parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q849967" start="433" end="440" title="Ancient Britons" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333032" start="461" end="466" title="Elmet" label="Elmet"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="589" end="600" title="Old English" label="Old English"/>
<link wikidata="Q156877" start="746" end="765" title="Brittonic languages" label="Brittonic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q19867" start="980" end="993" title="Domesday Book" label="Domesday Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421532" start="1515" end="1522" title="Shipley, West Yorkshire" label="Shipley"/>
<link wikidata="Q8022879" start="1675" end="1690" title="Wilsden railway station" label="railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q7759032" start="1709" end="1731" title="Queensbury lines" label="Queensbury to Keighley"/>
<link wikidata="Q4914277" start="3040" end="3053" title="Bingley Rural" label="Bingley Rural"/>
<link wikidata="Q2834810" start="3066" end="3082" title="City of Bradford" label="City of Bradford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031659" start="3099" end="3106" title="Shipley (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Shipley"/>
<link wikidata="Q520882" start="3142" end="3155" title="Alfred Fowler" label="Alfred Fowler"/>
<link wikidata="Q104767515" start="3207" end="3234" title="Listed buildings in Wilsden" label="Listed buildings in Wilsden"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="191336" wikidata="Q2379139" url="?curid=191336" title="Virtual economy">
<text>A virtual economy (or sometimes synthetic economy) is an emergent economy existing in a virtual world, usually exchanging virtual goods in the context of an online game, particularly in massively multiplayer online games (MMOs). People enter these virtual economies for recreation and entertainment rather than necessity, which means that virtual economies lack the aspects of a real economy that are not considered to be &quot;fun&quot; (for instance, avatars in a virtual economy often do not need to buy food in order to survive, and usually do not have any biological needs at all). However, some people do interact with virtual economies for &quot;real&quot; economic benefit.

Despite primarily dealing with in-game currencies, this term also encompasses the selling of virtual currency for real money, in what is sometimes called &quot;open centralised marketplaces&quot;.

== Overview ==
Virtual economies are observed in MUDs and massively multiplayer online role-playing games (MMORPGs). The largest virtual economies are found in MMORPGs. Virtual economies also exist in life simulation games which may have taken the most radical steps toward linking a virtual economy with the real world. This can be seen, for example, in Second Life&#x27;s recognition of intellectual property rights for assets created &quot;in-world&quot; by subscribers, and its &quot;laissez-faire&quot; policy on the buying and selling of Linden Dollars (the world&#x27;s official currency) for real money on third party websites. Virtual economies can also exist in browser-based Internet games where &quot;real&quot; money can be spent and user-created shops opened, or as a kind of emergent gameplay.

Virtual property is a label that can refer to any resource that is controlled by the powers-that-be, including virtual objects, avatars, or user accounts. The following characteristics may be found in virtual resources in mimicry of tangible property. Note however that it is possible for virtual resources to lack one or more of these characteristics, and they should be interpreted with reasonable flexibility.
# Rivalry: Possession of a resource is limited to one person or a small number of persons within the virtual world&#x27;s game mechanics.
# Persistence: Virtual resources persist across user sessions. In some cases, the resource exists for public view even when its owner is not logged into the virtual world.
# Interconnectivity: Resources may affect or be affected by other people and other objects. The value of a resource varies according to a person&#x27;s ability to use it for creating or experiencing some effect.
# Secondary markets: Virtual resources may be created, traded, bought, and sold. Real-world assets (typically money) may be at stake.
# Value added by users: Users may enhance the value of virtual resources by customizing and improving upon the resource.

The existence of these conditions create an economic system with properties similar to those seen in contemporary economies. Therefore, economic theory can often be used to study these virtual worlds.

Within the virtual worlds they inhabit, synthetic economies allow in-game items to be priced according to supply and demand rather than by the developer&#x27;s estimate of the item&#x27;s utility. These emergent economies are considered by most players to be an asset of the game, giving an extra dimension of reality to play. In classical synthetic economies, these goods were charged only for in-game currencies. These currencies are often sold for real world profit.

=== Marketplace ===
The release of Blizzard Entertainment&#x27;s World of Warcraft in 2004 and its subsequent huge success across the globe has forced both MMORPGs and their secondary markets into mainstream consciousness, and many new market places have opened up during this time. A search for WoW Gold on Google will show a multitude of sites (more than 90 sponsored results ) from which Gold can be purchased. Real money commerce in a virtual market has grown to become a multibillion-dollar industry. In 2001, EverQuest players Brock Pierce and Alan Debonneville founded &quot;Internet Gaming Entertainment Ltd (IGE)&quot;, a company that offered not only the virtual commodities in exchange for real money but also provided professional customer service. &quot;IGE&quot; had a trained staff that would handle financial issues, customer inquiries and technical support to ensure that gamers are satisfied with each real money purchase. It also took advantage of the global reach of synthetic worlds by setting up a shop in Hong Kong where a small army of technically savvy but low wage workers could field orders, load up avatars, retrieve store goods and deliver them wherever necessary. This lucrative market has opened a whole new type of economy where the border between the real and the virtual is obscure.

Hundreds of companies are enormously successful in this newfound market, with some virtual items being sold for several million dollars, like Beeple&#x27;s &quot;&quot;. Some of these companies sell multiple virtual goods for multiple games, and others sell services for single games. Virtual real estate is earning real world money, with people like 43-year-old &quot;Wonder Bread&quot; deliveryman, John Dugger, purchasing a virtual real estate for $750, setting him back more than a weeks wages. This virtual property includes nine rooms, three stories, rooftop patio, wall of solid stonework in a prime location, nestled at the foot of a quiet coastal hillside. Dugger represents a group of gamers that are not in the market for a real house but instead to own a small piece of the vast computer database that was Ultima Online, the mythical world in which the venerable MMO Ultima Online unfolds. Such trading of real money for virtual goods simply represents the development of virtual economies where people come together where the real and the synthetic worlds are meeting within an economic sphere.

Although virtual markets may represent a growth area, it is unclear to what extent they can scale to supporting large numbers of businesses, due to the inherent substitutability of goods on these markets plus the lack of factors such as location to dispense demand. In spite of numerous famed examples of the economic growth of Second Life, an amateur analyst in 2008 estimated the income inequity in Second Life&#x27;s economy as worse than has ever been recorded in any real economy: a Gini coefficient of 90.2, a Hoover index of 77.8, and a Theil index of 91%. However, the application of these economic measures to a virtual world may be inappropriate where poverty is merely virtual and there is a direct relationship between in-game wealth and time spent playing.

The global secondary market - defined as real money trading between players - turnover was estimated at 880 million dollars in 2005 by the president of the, at the time, market leading company IGE. Before that, in 2004, the American economist Edward Castronova had estimated the turnover at over 100 million dollars based solely on sales figures from the two auction sites eBay and the Korean itemBay. A speculative extrapolation based on these quotes and other industry figures produced a global turnover figure of 2 billion dollars as of 2007.

However, the secondary market is unlikely to have followed the growth of the primary market since 2007 seeing as game companies have become better at monetizing on their games with microtransactions and many popular games such as World of Warcraft are sporting increased measures against player to player real money trading. Also hampering the turnover growth are the extreme price drops that has followed the increased competition from businesses in mainland China targeting the global secondary market. Furthermore, the global decline in consumption that followed the financial crisis of 2007–2008 would have affected the secondary market negatively as well. Post 2007 secondary market growth is likely localized to emerging markets such as Russia, eastern Europe, South America, and South East Asia - all of which are relatively inaccessible to international merchants due to payment systems, advertisement channels and language barrier. For example, South Korea is estimated to have the biggest share of the global real money trading market and it has there become an officially acknowledged and taxable part of the economy. In western countries the secondary market remains a black market with little to no social acceptance or official acknowledgement.

As for an actual economic model, secondary market turnover in popular player vs player oriented MMORPGs without trade restrictions such as Runescape, EVE Online and Ultima Online has been estimated at around 1.1 dollar per concurrent player and day. No model for more regulated MMORPGs such as World of Warcraft has been suggested. However, being a largely unregulated market and tax free market, any turnover figure or economic model remain speculative.

== Types of virtual currencies ==
=== Standard currency ===
Many games, both online and off, use a common or standard type of currency that can only be earned in-game and used to spend on in-game items that cannot be traded with other players or converted to real-world funds by means provided by the developer; for example, by completing quests in &quot;World of Warcraft&quot;, players earn gold pieces that are used to purchase new gear.

=== Premium currency ===
Many online games, particularly those that use the freemium model, offer at least one additional form of currency beyond its standard one, called premium currency. Premium currency cannot typically be earned in-game like common currency but instead by purchasing the premium currency using real-world funds. Premium currency typically is limited to purchase time-limited virtual goods, access to new characters or levels, large quantities of standard in-game currency, temporary boosts to the player-character&#x27;s experience growth, or other goods that cannot be acquired with the common in-game currency. Once premium currency is purchased, it is rare for players to be able to revert the premium currency, or the goods purchased with it, back into real-world funds without selling it to other players through 3rd-party websites, making it a &quot;one-way currency&quot;. Most commonly, premium currency must be purchased through microtransactions in bundles of fixed sizes with discounts for larger purchases, and do not allow players to purchase exactly the amount of premium currency they need for a virtual good. This practice tends to encourage the player to buy additional bundles as to minimize their leftover premium currency, a favorable practice for the publisher.

=== In-game membership items ===
Some membership-based MMORPGs take advantage of the population of players who wish to buy in-game items with real money through in-game items that can only be generated by buying them from the developer, which can then be redeemed for membership status or traded with other players for items such as in-game currency. This also allows for games to maintain larger audiences of high-level players as they have the resources to buy membership with in-game gold from people who purchase and trade these items for gold. This also allows for an official conversion rate of in-game currency to real world currency to be established, though many 3rd-party item sellers will work to obtain the in-game currency needed to buy the membership items and sell them on 3rd-party markets at a lower real-world price than the official conversion rate. Many games who implement this monetization model often strictly prohibit 3rd-party real world trading and ban players who do so. Some examples of this form of monetization include Runescape&#x27;s bonds and World of Warcraft&#x27;s WoW Tokens.

=== Cosmetic items ===
Many online multiplayer games have player-run economies of cosmetic items, sometimes involving and encouraging the use of real-world money. &quot;Team Fortress 2&quot;, a team-based online FPS released by Valve in 2007, is a hero shooter, where players selected from one of several created characters to control. In 2009, Valve introduced hats, virtual goods that could be used to customize the character models. Hats could be earned by players by accumulating in-game material drops and then used to synthesize the hat, or later could be purchased directly using real-world currency through the game&#x27;s storefront. Valve also expanded this customization beyond hats to include weapons, weapon &quot;skins&quot; which change the appearance of the weapon, and similar means to customize the selected character avatar. In addition, through Valve&#x27;s digital storefront Steam, players could trade these items, sell them in exchange for monetary credits which could only be used on Steam (from which Valve would take a cut of the sale), or receive them in promotions with other publishers of products they owned. This created a virtual economy around the game, as certain customization items carried status and recognition, giving them a perceived social value status. This created a virtual economy around items in the game, as some rare items, known as &quot;unusuals&quot; by the game community due to various special effects applied, and are seen as having high social value, had traded for as high as , and because of the active trading that incorporated real-world money, Valve hired economist Yanis Varoufakis to help manage this.

Valve followed the same pattern with its next major game, &quot;Counter-Strike: Global Offensive&quot;, where players could earn crates in-game that could be unlocked with keys purchased through real-world funds to obtain weapon skins that were doled out based on a rarity scale, a practice they had started in &quot;Team Fortress 2&quot;. As with &quot;Team Fortress 2&quot; skins, these &quot;Counter-Strike&quot; skins gained value as status symbols among players coupled with the rarity of certain skins, and became highly valued, and was considered to help boost the popularity of the game. However, as &quot;Counter-Strike&quot; gained favor as an esport, these skins became part of a larger skin gambling scheme, where grey market websites, integrated with Steam&#x27;s features, could allow players to use skins to gamble on the results of &quot;Counter-Strike&quot; esport events, and later just using skins to play games of chance, sometimes skirting many gambling restrictions that virtual and real world casinos are subject to. While some of these websites were taken off line for various reasons, Valve was pressured to prevent abuse of the skin trading systems on Steam.

Many games on Valve&#x27;s video game marketplace Steam would implement this form of trading in their games, monetizing it by taking a cut of sales revenue from these items, with Valve also doing the same.

=== Player-driven economy ===
Some games may have currency systems that are partially or fully controlled by players of the game. Such games offer the means for players to acquire in-game resources which players may then sell or trade with other players, craft into gear which can be sell or traded, and otherwise create a virtual marketplace within the game above and beyond in-game stores established by the developer. This economy may also mix with real-world currency, with players trading in-game items through external websites to the game. &quot;EVE Online&quot; is a prime example of an online game with a vast player-driven economy that, in 2014, was estimated to have a total virtual value of based on the trading of the in-game currency. Player-driven economies have led to immaterial labor activities, such as gold farming in &quot;World of Warcraft&quot;, where some players are paid in real-world funds to spend the time to acquire in-game wealth for other players. Websites such as Playerauctions and G2A operate as digital marketplaces for players to exchange items of value.

== Recent developments ==

=== More controlled markets ===

==== Price comparison ====
Information brokerages and other tools that aid in the valuation of virtual items on secondary markets have increased in number. This has occurred as a response to alleviate the labor involved in leveling that requires hours, days or weeks to achieve. Being able to exchange real money for virtual currency provides the player purchasing power for virtual commodities. As such, players are guaranteed opportunities, increased skills and a fine reputation, which is a definite advantage over others.

==== Taxation ====
Most scholars agree that the sale of virtual property for real currency or assets is taxable. However, there are significant legal and practical challenges to the taxation of income from the sale of virtual property. For example, uncertainty regarding the nature and conceptual location of virtual property makes it difficult to collect and apportion tax revenue when a sale occurs across multiple jurisdictions.

In addition to taxing income from transactions involving real currency or assets, there has been considerable discussion involving the taxation of transactions that take place entirely within a virtual economy. Theoretically, virtual world transactions could be treated as a form of barter, thus generating taxable income. However, for policy reasons, many commentators support some form of a &quot;cash out&quot; rule that would prevent in-game transactions from generating tax liabilities. Nevertheless, as one commentator notes, &quot;the easier it is to buy real goods with virtual currency (e.g. order a real life pizza) the more likely the IRS will see exclusively in-world profits as taxable.&quot; The IRS had included in-game currency as taxable property in forms for calendar year 2019 reporting, but subsequently removed mention of them after complaints were filed about their inclusion.

==== Gambling regulation ====
As with the above skin gambling concerns, conversion between in-game and real-world currency has led to direct comparisons with other online &quot;games of chance&quot; as &#x27;virtual winnings&#x27;. This is why gamers and companies engaged in this conversion, where it is permitted by a game, may fall under gambling legislation.

During an interview with Virtual World News, Alex Chapman of the British law firm Campbell Hooper stated: &quot;Now we&#x27;ve spoken with the gambling commission, and they&#x27;ve said that MMOGs aren&#x27;t the reason for the , but they won&#x27;t say outright, and we&#x27;ve asked directly, that they won&#x27;t be covered. You can see how these would be ignored at first, but very soon they could be in trouble. It&#x27;s a risk, but a very easy risk to avoid.&quot; He suggested that compliance might require MMOGs and related traders to obtain a gambling license, which is not excessively difficult in the EU.

When queried about games where real-world transactions for in-game assets are &quot;not&quot; permitted, but there is an &#x27;unofficial secondary market&#x27;, Chapman responded: &quot;Ultimately the point is whether the thing that you win has value in money or money&#x27;s worth. If it does have value, it could be gambling.&quot; So to avoid regulation by these laws, the &quot;operator would need to take reasonable steps to ensure that the rewards they give do not have a monetary value[,]&quot; possibly by demonstrating enforcement of their terms of service prohibiting secondary markets.

=== Virtual crime ===
Monetary issues can give a virtual world problems similar to those in the real world. In South Korea, where the number of video game players is massive, some have reported the emergence of gangs and mafia, where powerful players would threaten beginners to give money for their &quot;protection&quot;, and actually steal and rob.

Other similar problems arise in other virtual economies. In the game &quot;The Sims Online,&quot; a 17-year-old boy going by the in-game name &quot;Evangeline&quot; was discovered to have built a cyber-brothel, where customers would pay sim-money for minutes of cybersex. Maxis canceled each of his accounts, but had he deposited his fortune in the Gaming Open Market he would have been able to keep a part of it.

A 2007 virtual heist has led to calls from some community members in &quot;Second Life&quot; to bring in external regulation of these markets: &quot;In late July, a perpetrator with privileged information cracked a stock exchange&#x27;s computers, made false deposits, then ran off with what appears to be the equivalent of US$10,000, disappearing into thin air. This heist left investors feeling outraged and vulnerable.&quot;

In &quot;EVE Online&quot; however, theft and scamming other players is perfectly allowed within the game&#x27;s framework as long as no real world trading is committed. Players are allowed to loot all items from fallen victims in battle, but there is a disincentive in the form of NPC police intervention in higher-security space. Virtual possessions valued in the tens of thousands of USD have been destroyed or plundered through corporate espionage and piracy. This has resulted in widespread retributive warfare and crime between various player corporations.

==== Black market ====
Many MMORPGs such as &quot;RuneScape&quot;, &quot;World of Warcraft&quot;, &quot;Guild Wars&quot;, &quot;Warhammer Online&quot;, &quot;Lord of the Rings Online&quot; and &quot;Final Fantasy XI&quot; strictly prohibit buying gold, items, or any other product linked with the game, with real world cash. &quot;RuneScape&quot; went as far as making this practice impossible after being threatened by credit card companies when their customers who bought gold had their credit cards stolen to be used for bot accounts to farm even more gold by criminal traders. They did this by removing unbalanced trades and their traditional player vs. player fighting system to prevent players from trading items by killing each other in combat for each other&#x27;s items (this was scrapped on February 1, 2011, after having been in place for 3 years), resulting in over 60,000 cancelled subscriptions in protest. &quot;Final Fantasy XI&quot; and &quot;Warhammer Online&quot; both have entire task forces dedicated to the removal of real money trading from the game. To control real money trading, &quot;EVE Online&quot; created an official and sanctioned method to convert real world cash to in-game currency; players can use real world money to buy a specific in-game item which can be redeemed for account subscription time or traded on the in-game market for in-game currency.

=== Stability ===
For a persistent world to maintain a stable economy, a balance must be struck between currency sources and sinks. Generally, games possess numerous sources of new currency for players to earn. However, some possess no effective &quot;sinks&quot;, or methods of removing currency from circulation. If other factors remain constant, greater currency supply weakens the buying power of a given amount; a process known as inflation. In practice, this results in constantly rising prices for traded commodities. With the proper balance of growth in player base, currency sources, and sinks, a virtual economy could remain stable indefinitely.

As in the real world, actions by players can destabilize the economy. Gold farming creates resources within the game more rapidly than usual, exacerbating inflation. In extreme cases, a cracker may be able to exploit the system and create a large amount of money. This could result in hyperinflation.

In the real world entire institutions are devoted to maintaining desired level of inflation. This difficult task is a serious issue for serious MMORPGs, that often have to cope with mudflation. Episodes of hyperinflation have also been observed.

==== Non-fungible token ====
A non-fungible token (NFT) is a unit of data on a digital ledger called a blockchain, where each NFT can represent a unique digital item, and thus they are not interchangeable. NFTs can represent digital files such as art, audio, videos, items in video games and other forms of creative work. While the digital files themselves are infinitely reproducible, the NFTs representing them are tracked on their underlying blockchains and provide buyers with proof of ownership. Blockchains such as Ethereum, WAXP, Bitcoin Cash and Flow each have their own token standards to define their use of NFTs.

NFTs can also be used to represent in-game assets which are controlled by the user instead of the game developer. NFTs allow assets to be traded on third-party marketplaces where players of games such as Axie Infinity or MyCryptoHero can trade their tokenised &quot;Axies&quot; or &quot;Heroes&quot;.

== Capital ==
In these virtual economies, the value of in-game resources is frequently tied to the in-game power they confer upon the owner. This power allows the user, usually, to acquire more rare and valuable items. In this regard, in-game resources are not just tradable objects but can play the role of &quot;capital&quot;.

Players also acquire human capital as they become more powerful. Powerful guilds often recruit powerful players so that certain players can acquire better items which can only be acquired by the cooperation among many players.

== Other virtual economies ==
Virtual economies have also been said to exist in the &quot;metagame&quot; worlds of live action role-playing games and collectible card games. Other &quot;metagame&quot; currencies have cropped up in games such as &quot;Everquest&quot; and &quot;World of Warcraft&quot;. Dragon kill points or DKP are a semi-formal score-keeping system used by guilds in massively multiplayer online games. Players in these games are faced with large scale challenges, or raids, which may only be surmounted through the concerted effort of dozens of players at a time. Dragon kill points are not official currencies, but are created and managed by endgame guilds to manage distributions of rewards in those raids.

Virtual economies represented not only in MMORPG genre but also in online business simulation games (&quot;Virtonomics&quot;, &quot;Miniconomy&quot;). Simplified economy represented in almost all real-time strategies (&quot;StarCraft II: Heart of the Swarm&quot;, &quot;Command &amp; Conquer: Red Alert 2&quot;) in a form of gathering and spending resources. &quot;Diablo III&quot; has its virtual economy as well which is represented by online game auction.

===Moderation on social news and networking sites===
On a number of discussion and networking sites, such as Slashdot, Reddit, care2 and Yahoo! Answers, points are gained through the garnering of trust evidenced in upward moderations of posted content; however, as stated by Slashdot co-founder CmdrTaco, his implementation of user moderation was not intended as a currency, even though it has evolved on other discussion-oriented sites into such a system. On some such sites, the accumulation of &quot;karma points&quot; can be redeemed in various ways for virtual services or objects, while most other sites do not contain a redemption system.

On some sites, points are gained for inviting new users to the site.

== Controversy ==
A game&#x27;s synthetic economy often results in interaction with a &quot;real&quot; economy; characters, currency, and items may be sold and bought on online auction websites or purchased from standalone webshops. Since January 2007 users are no longer allowed to sell virtual goods of online games on eBay due to the ambiguous legal status of real world trading.

While many game developers, such as Blizzard (creator of &quot;World of Warcraft&quot;), prohibit the practice, it is common that goods and services within virtual economies will be sold on online auction sites and traded for real currencies.

According to standard conceptions of economic value (see the subjective theory of value), the goods and services of virtual economies do have a demonstrable value. Since players of these games are willing to substitute real economic resources of time and money (monthly fees) in exchange for these resources, by definition they have demonstrated utility to the user. Some virtual currencies have even accrued higher value and stability than some real world currencies. One example is Runescape&#x27;s gold coins, which is more valuable and stable alternative to the Venezuelan Bolívar, with many Venezuelan&#x27;s turning to selling Runescape gold to make a living.

In January 2010, Blizzard stepped up its offensive on account security scams with the launch of a new website. The new Battle.Net account security website hopes to highlight the importance of keeping it safe when it comes to subscribers&#x27; accounts.
 These pages are part of a larger effort to provide you with the knowledge and tools necessary to identify and report threats to your account&#x27;s safety, to spotlight ways in which we work to fulfill our security commitment, and to act as a helpful resource in case someone manages to steal account information from you.
Ongoing campaign by WoW fan sites to boycott gold ads on their sites is just one of several community efforts to raise awareness against crackers.
 Gold sellers and leveling services are responsible for the vast majority of all account thefts, and they are the number-one source of World of Warcraft-related phishing attempts, spyware, and even credit card theft. Players who buy gold actively support spam, hacks, and keyloggers, and by doing so diminish the gameplay experience for everyone else.
On August 1, 2011, Blizzard Entertainment announced that their forthcoming MMORPG, Diablo III, will include a currency-based auction house, wherein players will be able to buy and sell in-game items for real money. Robert Bridenbecker, Vice President of Online Technologies at Blizzard, explained that the intent behind the effort is largely to reduce account thefts resulting from player interaction with third-party sites. An undisclosed fee structure including listing fees, sale fees, and cash-out fees will accompany the Auction House at launch, and all transactions will exist within the protected context of Blizzard&#x27;s MMORPG. The &quot;Real Money Auction House&quot; (RMAH), as it is called by the &quot;Diablo III&quot; fanbase, will exist in the presence of a parallel auction house wherein items are exchanged for gold, the in-game currency. Accordingly, gold can be posted on the RMAH such that the two currencies may be exchanged for one another at the market rate less applicable fees.

Other virtual world developers officially sell virtual items and currency for real-world money. For example, the MMOG &quot;There&quot; has therebucks that sell for US dollars. If the currency in &quot;Second Life&quot;, the Linden Dollars, can be easily acquired with real money, the reverse is done through a market place owned by Linden Lab, but is not guaranteed, as the TOS of linden Lab explicitly says that Linden dollars are not redeemable. Rates would fluctuate based on supply and demand, but over the last few years they have remained fairly stable at around 265 Linden Dollars (L$) to the US Dollar, due to &quot;money creation&quot; by Linden Lab. The currency in &quot;Entropia Universe&quot;, Project Entropia Dollars (PED), could be bought and redeemed for real-world money at a rate of 10 PED for U.S$. 1. On December 14, 2004, an island in &quot;Project Entropia&quot; sold for U.S. $26,500 (£13,700). One gamer also purchased a virtual space station for U.S. $100,000 (£56,200) and plans to use it as a virtual nightclub. Another example was recently cited on CNBC that one seller was selling a Pokémon Go account for $999,999.

Many Korean virtual worlds (such as Flyff) and other worlds outside that country (such as Archlord and Achaea, Dreams of Divine Lands) operate entirely by selling items to players for real money. Such items generally cannot be transferred and are often used only as a means to represent a Premium subscription via a method which is easily integrated into the game engine.

These intersections with real economies remain controversial. Markets that capitalize in gaming are not widely accepted by the gaming industry. Reasons for this controversy are varied. Firstly, the developers of the games often consider themselves as trying to present a fantasy experience, so the involvement of real world transactions takes away from it. Further, in most games, it would be unacceptable to offer another player real currency in order to have them play a certain way (e.g., in a game of &quot;Monopoly&quot; between friends, offering another player a real dollar in exchange for a property on the board); and for this to be necessary or valuable may indicate a Kingmaker scenario within the game. However, such rules of etiquette need not apply, and in practice they often don&#x27;t, to massive game worlds with thousands of players who know one another only through the game system.

Further and more involved issues revolve around the issue of how (or if) real-money trading subjects the virtual economy to laws relating to the real economy. Some argue that to allow in-game items to have monetary values makes these games, essentially, gambling venues, which would be subject to legal regulation as such. Another issue is the impact of taxation that may apply if in-game items are seen as having real value. If (for example) a magic sword is considered to have real-world value, a player who kills a powerful monster to earn such a sword could find himself being charged tax on the value of the sword, as would be normal for a &quot;prize winning&quot;. This would make it impossible for any player of the game &quot;not&quot; to participate in real-money trading.

A third issue is the involvement of the world&#x27;s developer or maintenance staff in such transactions. Since a developer may change the virtual world any time, ban a player, delete items, or even simply take the world down never to return, the issue of their responsibility in the case where real money investments are lost through items being lost or becoming inaccessible is significant. Richard Bartle argued that this aspect negates the whole idea of ownership in virtual worlds, and thus in the absence of real ownership no real trade may occur. Some developers have acted deliberately to delete items that have been traded for money, as in Final Fantasy XI, where a task force was set up to delete characters involved in selling in-game currency for real-world money.

However, Second Life has shown a legal example which may indicate that the developer can be in part held responsible for such losses. Second Life at one stage, offered and advertised the ability to &quot;own virtual land&quot;, which was purchased for real money. In 2007, Marc Bragg, an attorney, was banned from Second Life; in response he sued the developers for thereby depriving him of his land, which he – based on the developers&#x27; own statements – &quot;owned&quot;. The lawsuit ended with a settlement in which Bragg was re-admitted to Second Life. The details of the final settlement were not released, but the word &quot;own&quot; was removed from all advertising as a result. (Bragg purchased his land directly from the developers, and thus they were not an uninvolved third party in his transactions.) 

== See also ==

* Cryptocurrency
* Digital currency
* Electronic money
* Simulated reality
* Social simulation
* Virtual reality
* Virtual world
* Virtual currency
== References ==
== External links ==
* Virtual Economy Research Network bibliography – a comprehensive bibliography of publications related to virtual economy
* Castronova, Edward. &quot;Virtual Worlds: A First-Hand Account of Market and Society on the Cyberian Frontier,&quot; &quot;CESifo Working Paper No. 618&quot;, December 2001.
* Castronova, Edward. &quot;On Virtual Economies,&quot; &quot;CESifo Working Paper Series No. 752&quot;, July 2002.
* Castronova, Edward. &quot;The Price of &#x27;Man&#x27; and &#x27;Woman&#x27;: A Hedonic Pricing Model of Avatar Attributes in a Synthethic World,&quot; &quot;CESifo Working Paper Series No. 957&quot;, June 2003.
* Dr. Richard A. Bartle, Pitfalls of Virtual Property – A philosophical case against the concept of &quot;virtual property&quot; ownership.
* Virtual Economies The Economist, Jan 2005, (subscription)
* Zonk (Slashdot). &quot;Virtual Island Sells For $26,500&quot;. 14 December 2004.
* Fairfield, Joshua, &quot;Virtual Property&quot;. Boston University Law Review, Vol. 85, 2005
* Internet Gambling Regulation Present and Future – Mark Methenitis&#x27; Essay for Texas Tech University School of Law detailing internet gambling and economies within MMORPG&#x27;s and the problems that will be faced in the future.
* Economic Theory and MMOGs – Powerpoint presentation by Sam Lewis, a designer working with SOE, on the interaction between economic theory and MMO design.
* Virtual Goods: the next big business model by Susan Wu
* Lastowka, Greg and Hunter, Dan. &quot;The Laws of the Virtual Worlds,&quot; California Law Review
* Yoon, Ung-Gi. &quot;Real Money Trading in MMORPG items from a Legal and Policy Perspective&quot;, South Korean Judge&#x27;s thought on RMT in virtual world
* A Virtual Weimar: Hyperinflation in a Video Game World</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2379139" start="2" end="17" title="Virtual economy" label="virtual economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2379139" start="32" end="49" title="Virtual economy" label="synthetic economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q215772" start="57" end="65" title="emergence" label="emergent"/>
<link wikidata="Q444835" start="88" end="101" title="virtual world" label="virtual world"/>
<link wikidata="Q10585208" start="122" end="135" title="virtual goods" label="virtual goods"/>
<link wikidata="Q116634" start="157" end="168" title="online game" label="online game"/>
<link wikidata="Q862490" start="186" end="219" title="massively multiplayer online game" label="massively multiplayer online game"/>
<link wikidata="Q751424" start="930" end="933" title="Multi-user dungeon" label="MUD"/>
<link wikidata="Q175173" start="939" end="986" title="massively multiplayer online role-playing games" label="massively multiplayer online role-playing games"/>
<link wikidata="Q106827" start="1236" end="1247" title="Second Life" label="Second Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q171990" start="1369" end="1382" title="laissez-faire" label="laissez-faire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5370763" start="1671" end="1688" title="emergent gameplay" label="emergent gameplay"/>
<link wikidata="Q152402" start="1819" end="1826" title="Avatar (computing)" label="avatars"/>
<link wikidata="Q159810" start="2996" end="3005" title="economy" label="economies"/>
<link wikidata="Q166656" start="3190" end="3207" title="supply and demand" label="supply and demand"/>
<link wikidata="Q178824" start="3590" end="3612" title="Blizzard Entertainment" label="Blizzard Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q131007" start="3620" end="3637" title="World of Warcraft" label="World of Warcraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134845" start="4070" end="4079" title="EverQuest" label="EverQuest"/>
<link wikidata="Q5970954" start="4172" end="4175" title="IGE" label="IGE"/>
<link wikidata="Q82953425" start="5015" end="5021" title="Mike Winkelmann" label="Beeple"/>
<link wikidata="Q8031737" start="5242" end="5254" title="Wonder Bread" label="Wonder Bread"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043550" start="5691" end="5704" title="Ultima Online" label="Ultima Online"/>
<link wikidata="Q862490" start="5748" end="5751" title="Massively multiplayer online game" label="MMO"/>
<link wikidata="Q106827" start="6310" end="6321" title="Second Life" label="Second Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q162455" start="6470" end="6486" title="Gini coefficient" label="Gini coefficient"/>
<link wikidata="Q280746" start="6498" end="6510" title="Hoover index" label="Hoover index"/>
<link wikidata="Q1655361" start="6526" end="6537" title="Theil index" label="Theil index"/>
<link wikidata="Q51379" start="6685" end="6704" title="direct relationship" label="direct relationship"/>
<link wikidata="Q896666" start="7870" end="7899" title="financial crisis of 2007–2008" label="financial crisis of 2007–2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q546395" start="8018" end="8034" title="emerging markets" label="emerging markets"/>
<link wikidata="Q187732" start="8699" end="8708" title="RuneScape" label="Runescape"/>
<link wikidata="Q336177" start="8710" end="8720" title="Eve Online" label="EVE Online"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043550" start="8725" end="8738" title="Ultima Online" label="Ultima Online"/>
<link wikidata="Q1444631" start="9534" end="9542" title="freemium" label="freemium"/>
<link wikidata="Q18344644" start="10417" end="10433" title="microtransaction" label="microtransaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q382108" start="12046" end="12061" title="Team Fortress 2" label="Team Fortress 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q193559" start="12105" end="12110" title="Valve Corporation" label="Valve"/>
<link wikidata="Q104830011" start="12125" end="12137" title="hero shooter" label="hero shooter"/>
<link wikidata="Q10585208" start="12245" end="12258" title="virtual goods" label="virtual goods"/>
<link wikidata="Q337535" start="12774" end="12779" title="Steam (service)" label="Steam"/>
<link wikidata="Q40688" start="13503" end="13519" title="Yanis Varoufakis" label="Yanis Varoufakis"/>
<link wikidata="" start="13606" end="13638" title="Counter-Strike: Global Offensive" label="Counter-Strike: Global Offensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q300920" start="14196" end="14202" title="esport" label="esport"/>
<link wikidata="Q26160630" start="14240" end="14253" title="skin gambling" label="skin gambling"/>
<link wikidata="Q3590573" start="14467" end="14482" title="game of chance" label="games of chance"/>
<link wikidata="Q337535" start="14778" end="14783" title="Steam (service)" label="Steam"/>
<link wikidata="Q336177" start="15488" end="15498" title="EVE Online" label="EVE Online"/>
<link wikidata="Q22909151" start="15720" end="15736" title="immaterial labor" label="immaterial labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1535646" start="15757" end="15769" title="gold farming" label="gold farming"/>
<link wikidata="Q131007" start="15779" end="15796" title="World of Warcraft" label="World of Warcraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q7203288" start="15932" end="15946" title="Playerauctions" label="Playerauctions"/>
<link wikidata="Q23890897" start="15951" end="15954" title="G2A" label="G2A"/>
<link wikidata="Q5520201" start="18289" end="18309" title="gambling legislation" label="gambling legislation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18337" end="18355" title="Virtual World News" label="Virtual World News"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18394" end="18409" title="Campbell Hooper" label="Campbell Hooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q7214489" start="19480" end="19496" title="terms of service" label="terms of service"/>
<link wikidata="Q884" start="19640" end="19651" title="South Korea" label="South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2279868" start="19957" end="19972" title="The Sims Online" label="The Sims Online"/>
<link wikidata="Q131295" start="20084" end="20091" title="brothel" label="brothel"/>
<link wikidata="Q626268" start="20144" end="20152" title="cybersex" label="cybersex"/>
<link wikidata="Q220317" start="20154" end="20159" title="Maxis" label="Maxis"/>
<link wikidata="Q106827" start="20372" end="20383" title="Second Life" label="Second Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q336177" start="20735" end="20745" title="EVE Online" label="EVE Online"/>
<link wikidata="Q466466" start="21007" end="21010" title="Non-player character" label="NPC"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917" start="21112" end="21115" title="United States dollar" label="USD"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160650" start="21157" end="21176" title="corporate espionage" label="corporate espionage"/>
<link wikidata="Q45393" start="21181" end="21187" title="piracy" label="piracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q187732" start="21339" end="21348" title="RuneScape" label="RuneScape"/>
<link wikidata="Q131007" start="21362" end="21379" title="World of Warcraft" label="World of Warcraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q219335" start="21393" end="21403" title="Guild Wars" label="Guild Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q715581" start="21417" end="21433" title="Warhammer Online" label="Warhammer Online"/>
<link wikidata="Q623479" start="21447" end="21471" title="Lord of the Rings Online" label="Lord of the Rings Online"/>
<link wikidata="Q678394" start="21488" end="21504" title="Final Fantasy XI" label="Final Fantasy XI"/>
<link wikidata="Q187732" start="21620" end="21629" title="RuneScape" label="RuneScape"/>
<link wikidata="Q678394" start="22216" end="22232" title="Final Fantasy XI" label="Final Fantasy XI"/>
<link wikidata="Q715581" start="22249" end="22265" title="Warhammer Online" label="Warhammer Online"/>
<link wikidata="Q336177" start="22400" end="22410" title="EVE Online" label="EVE Online"/>
<link wikidata="Q1535646" start="23405" end="23417" title="Gold farming" label="Gold farming"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138423" start="23521" end="23528" title="cracker (software)" label="cracker"/>
<link wikidata="Q185565" start="23620" end="23634" title="hyperinflation" label="hyperinflation"/>
<link wikidata="Q8023663" start="23819" end="23829" title="mudflation" label="mudflation"/>
<link wikidata="Q185565" start="23843" end="23857" title="hyperinflation" label="hyperinflation"/>
<link wikidata="Q55648452" start="23915" end="23933" title="non-fungible token" label="non-fungible token"/>
<link wikidata="Q2732056" start="23971" end="23977" title="ledger" label="ledger"/>
<link wikidata="Q20514253" start="23987" end="23997" title="blockchain" label="blockchain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474273" start="24073" end="24088" title="Fungibility" label="interchangeable"/>
<link wikidata="Q6498684" start="24374" end="24383" title="ownership" label="ownership"/>
<link wikidata="Q16783523" start="24405" end="24413" title="Ethereum" label="Ethereum"/>
<link wikidata="Q34328146" start="24421" end="24433" title="Bitcoin Cash" label="Bitcoin Cash"/>
<link wikidata="Q94653118" start="24713" end="24726" title="Axie Infinity" label="Axie Infinity"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24730" end="24742" title="MyCryptoHero" label="MyCryptoHero"/>
<link wikidata="Q8137" start="25125" end="25132" title="Capital (economics)" label="capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q165687" start="25162" end="25175" title="human capital" label="human capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q216749" start="25484" end="25514" title="live action role-playing games" label="live action role-playing games"/>
<link wikidata="Q734698" start="25519" end="25541" title="trading card game" label="collectible card games"/>
<link wikidata="Q905288" start="25671" end="25689" title="Dragon kill points" label="Dragon kill points"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25744" end="25750" title="Clan (computer gaming)#Clans in RPGs" label="guilds"/>
<link wikidata="Q862490" start="25754" end="25787" title="massively multiplayer online game" label="massively multiplayer online game"/>
<link wikidata="Q450824" start="25855" end="25860" title="Raid (gaming)" label="raids"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26031" end="26038" title="EverQuest#Social dynamics" label="endgame"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198141" start="26172" end="26196" title="business simulation game" label="business simulation game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569451" start="26205" end="26216" title="Virtonomics" label="Virtonomics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2290192" start="26230" end="26240" title="Miniconomy" label="Miniconomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q208189" start="26294" end="26314" title="real-time strategies" label="real-time strategies"/>
<link wikidata="" start="26322" end="26354" title="StarCraft II: Heart of the Swarm" label="StarCraft II: Heart of the Swarm"/>
<link wikidata="" start="26368" end="26402" title="Command &amp;amp; Conquer: Red Alert 2" label="Command &amp;amp; Conquer: Red Alert 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q244030" start="26463" end="26473" title="Diablo III" label="Diablo III"/>
<link wikidata="Q59083" start="26667" end="26675" title="Slashdot" label="Slashdot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136" start="26677" end="26683" title="Reddit" label="Reddit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5038828" start="26685" end="26690" title="care2" label="care2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061188" start="26695" end="26709" title="Yahoo! Answers" label="Yahoo! Answers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7848173" start="26741" end="26809" title="trust metric" label="garnering of trust evidenced in upward moderations of posted content"/>
<link wikidata="Q2156046" start="26853" end="26861" title="CmdrTaco" label="CmdrTaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q3318184" start="26885" end="26900" title="moderation system" label="user moderation"/>
<link wikidata="Q781384" start="27445" end="27459" title="online auction" label="online auction"/>
<link wikidata="Q58024" start="27596" end="27600" title="eBay" label="eBay"/>
<link wikidata="Q178824" start="27695" end="27703" title="Blizzard Entertainment" label="Blizzard"/>
<link wikidata="Q131007" start="27722" end="27739" title="World of Warcraft" label="World of Warcraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q781384" start="27849" end="27863" title="online auction" label="online auction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1966981" start="27964" end="27990" title="economic subjectivism" label="subjective theory of value"/>
<link wikidata="Q466707" start="28249" end="28256" title="utility" label="utility"/>
<link wikidata="Q244030" start="29729" end="29739" title="Diablo III" label="Diablo III"/>
<link wikidata="Q244030" start="30363" end="30373" title="Diablo III" label="Diablo III"/>
<link wikidata="Q862490" start="30765" end="30769" title="MMOG" label="MMOG"/>
<link wikidata="Q3178880" start="30776" end="30781" title="There (internet service)" label="There"/>
<link wikidata="Q3178880" start="30792" end="30802" title="therebucks" label="therebucks"/>
<link wikidata="Q106827" start="30854" end="30865" title="Second Life" label="Second Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q13576850" start="31277" end="31291" title="money creation" label="money creation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345246" start="31335" end="31352" title="Entropia Universe" label="Entropia Universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917" start="31466" end="31471" title="USD" label="U.S$."/>
<link wikidata="Q25956" start="31607" end="31620" title="space station" label="space station"/>
<link wikidata="Q622425" start="31682" end="31691" title="nightclub" label="nightclub"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138278" start="31836" end="31841" title="Flyff" label="Flyff"/>
<link wikidata="Q241377" start="31890" end="31898" title="Archlord" label="Archlord"/>
<link wikidata="Q4673352" start="31903" end="31933" title="Achaea, Dreams of Divine Lands" label="Achaea, Dreams of Divine Lands"/>
<link wikidata="Q17243" start="32684" end="32692" title="Monopoly (game)" label="Monopoly"/>
<link wikidata="Q6412798" start="32852" end="32870" title="Kingmaker scenario" label="Kingmaker scenario"/>
<link wikidata="Q678394" start="34510" end="34526" title="Final Fantasy XI" label="Final Fantasy XI"/>
<link wikidata="Q106827" start="34648" end="34659" title="Second Life" label="Second Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q106827" start="34953" end="34964" title="Second Life" label="Second Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q13479982" start="35477" end="35491" title="Cryptocurrency" label="Cryptocurrency"/>
<link wikidata="Q10836209" start="35494" end="35510" title="Digital currency" label="Digital currency"/>
<link wikidata="Q10836209" start="35513" end="35529" title="Electronic money" label="Electronic money"/>
<link wikidata="Q125547326" start="35532" end="35549" title="Simulated reality" label="Simulated reality"/>
<link wikidata="Q3500657" start="35552" end="35569" title="Social simulation" label="Social simulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q170519" start="35572" end="35587" title="Virtual reality" label="Virtual reality"/>
<link wikidata="Q444835" start="35590" end="35603" title="Virtual world" label="Virtual world"/>
<link wikidata="Q4112083" start="35606" end="35622" title="Virtual currency" label="Virtual currency"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048474" start="35785" end="35803" title="Edward Castronova" label="Castronova, Edward"/>
<link wikidata="Q2149039" start="36291" end="36312" title="Richard Bartle" label="Dr. Richard A. Bartle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7708154" start="36751" end="36786" title="Texas Tech University School of Law" label="Texas Tech University School of Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q959672" start="36993" end="36996" title="Sony Online Entertainment" label="SOE"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="191350" wikidata="Q1779535" url="?curid=191350" title="Kollóttadyngja">
<text>Kollóttadyngja () is a shield volcano in the Ódáðahraun lava-field in Iceland. Its height reaches 1,177 metres, and it has a diameter of 6–7 km. The summit crater is 800 metres in diameter, but only about 20–30 metres deep. In its centre, there is a bowl about 150 metres in diameter with a depth of about 60–70 metres.

The mountain is located in the Nordhurland Eystra (Northeastern Region) of Iceland and is one of the 236 named mountains at Vatnajökull National Park.

==See also==
* Fjords of Iceland
* Geography of Iceland
* Glaciers of Iceland
* Iceland plume
* List of lakes of Iceland
* List of islands off Iceland
* List of rivers of Iceland
* Waterfalls of Iceland
* Volcanism of Iceland
** List of volcanic eruptions in Iceland
** List of volcanoes in Iceland

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1779535" start="0" end="14" title="Kollóttadyngja" label="Kollóttadyngja"/>
<link wikidata="Q212057" start="23" end="37" title="shield volcano" label="shield volcano"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="45" end="55" title="Ódáðahraun" label="Ódáðahraun"/>
<link wikidata="Q189" start="70" end="77" title="Iceland" label="Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q241551" start="352" end="370" title="Northeastern Region (Iceland)" label="Nordhurland Eystra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353292" start="445" end="470" title="Vatnajökull National Park" label="Vatnajökull National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q592997" start="488" end="505" title="Fjords of Iceland" label="Fjords of Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q678377" start="508" end="528" title="Geography of Iceland" label="Geography of Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501687" start="531" end="550" title="Glaciers of Iceland" label="Glaciers of Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3393383" start="553" end="566" title="Iceland plume" label="Iceland plume"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413579" start="569" end="593" title="List of lakes of Iceland" label="List of lakes of Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1853767" start="596" end="623" title="List of islands off Iceland" label="List of islands off Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q733416" start="626" end="651" title="List of rivers of Iceland" label="List of rivers of Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296764" start="654" end="675" title="Waterfalls of Iceland" label="Waterfalls of Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q11282196" start="678" end="698" title="Volcanism of Iceland" label="Volcanism of Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q16423112" start="702" end="739" title="List of volcanic eruptions in Iceland" label="List of volcanic eruptions in Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q349932" start="743" end="771" title="List of volcanoes in Iceland" label="List of volcanoes in Iceland"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="191352" wikidata="Q465751" url="?curid=191352" title="Chipotle Mexican Grill">
<text>Chipotle Mexican Grill, Inc. (, ), often known simply as Chipotle, is an American multinational chain of fast casual restaurants specializing in bowls, tacos, and Mission burritos made to order in front of the customer. As of June 30, 2024, Chipotle has 3,500 restaurants. Its name derives from &quot;chipotle&quot;, the Nahuatl name (from &quot;chilpoctli&quot;) for a smoked and dried jalapeño chili pepper.

Chipotle was one of the first chains of fast casual restaurants. It was founded by Steve Ells on July 13, 1993. Ells was the founder, chairman, and CEO of Chipotle. He was inspired to open the restaurant after visiting taquerias and burrito shops in San Francisco&#x27;s Mission District while working as a chef. Ells wanted to show customers that fresh ingredients could be used to quickly serve food. Chipotle had 16 restaurants (all in Colorado) when McDonald&#x27;s Corporation became a major investor in 1998. By the time McDonald&#x27;s fully divested itself from Chipotle in 2006, the chain had grown to over 500 locations. With more than 2,000 locations, Chipotle had a net income of US$475.6&quot; &quot;million and a staff of more than 45,000 employees in 2015.

In May 2018, Chipotle announced the relocation of their corporate headquarters to Newport Beach, California, in Southern California, leaving Denver after 25 years.

== History ==
Steve Ells attended the Culinary Institute of America in Hyde Park, New York. Afterward, he became a line cook for Jeremiah Tower at Stars in San Francisco. There, Ells observed the popularity of the taquerías and San Francisco burritos in the Mission District. In 1993, Ells took what he learned in San Francisco and opened the first Chipotle Mexican Grill in Denver, Colorado, in a former Dolly Madison Ice Cream store at 1644 East Evans Avenue, near the University of Denver campus, using an $85,000 loan from his father. Ells and his father calculated that the store would need to sell 107 burritos per day to be profitable. After one month, the original restaurant was selling over 1,000 burritos a day. The second store opened in 1995 using Chipotle&#x27;s cash flow, and the third was opened using an SBA loan. To fund additional growth, Ells&#x27; father invested $1.5&quot; &quot;million. Afterwards, Ells created a board of directors and business plan, raising an additional $1.8&quot; &quot;million for the company. Ells had originally planned to use funds from the first Chipotle to open a fine-dining restaurant, but instead focused on Chipotle Mexican Grill when the restaurants saw success.

In 1998, the first restaurant outside of Colorado opened in Kansas City, Missouri.

In 1998, McDonald&#x27;s made an initial minority investment in the company. By 2001, McDonald&#x27;s had grown to be Chipotle&#x27;s largest investor. The investment from McDonald&#x27;s allowed the firm to quickly expand, from 16 restaurants in 1998 to over 500 by 2005. On January 26, 2006, Chipotle made its initial public offering (IPO) after increasing the share price twice due to high pre-IPO demand. In its first day as a public company, the stock rose exactly 100%, resulting in the best U.S.-based IPO in six years, and the second-best IPO for a restaurant after Boston Market. The money from the offering was then used to fund new store growth.

In March 2005, Monty Moran was appointed president and chief operating officer of Chipotle while Ells remained chairman and CEO.

In October 2006, McDonald&#x27;s fully divested from Chipotle. This was part of a larger initiative for McDonald&#x27;s to divest all of its non-core business restaurants—Chipotle, Donatos Pizza, and Boston Market—so that it could focus on the main McDonald&#x27;s chain. McDonald&#x27;s had invested approximately $360&quot; &quot;million into Chipotle, and took out $1.5&quot; &quot;billion. McDonald&#x27;s had attempted to get Chipotle to add drive-through windows and a breakfast menu, which Ells resisted. In 2008, Chipotle opened its first location outside of the United States in Toronto.

In January 2009, president and chief operating officer Monty Moran was promoted to co-CEO, a position that he would share with Ells, while Moran retained his president position.

In a list of fastest-growing restaurant chains in 2009, Chipotle was ranked eighth, based on increases in U.S. sales over the past year, and in 2010 Chipotle was ranked third. &quot;Consumer Reports&quot; ranked Chipotle as the best Mexican fast-food chain in 2011. The company serves approximately 750,000 customers per day.

In December 2010, Chipotle hired chef Nate Appleman to develop new cuisine. Appleman has won Rising Star Chef from the James Beard Foundation, was named &quot;Best New Chef&quot; by the Food &amp; Wine magazine, and competed on &quot;The Next Iron Chef&quot;.

In 2010, U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) audited Chipotle&#x27;s Minneapolis restaurants, and found that some employees had been hired using fraudulent documents. In December, Chipotle fired 450 employees from its Minneapolis restaurants as a result of the audit, resulting in protests by local groups. In February 2011, ICE expanded the audit to include 60 restaurants in Virginia and Washington, D.C. which resulted in 40 workers being fired. In April 2011, the criminal division of the attorney general&#x27;s office in Washington, D.C., joined the case, and ICE agents began interviewing employees at 20 to 25 restaurants in other locations, such as Los Angeles and Atlanta. In response to the government investigations, Chipotle hired former director of ICE Julie Myers Wood and high-profile attorneys Robert Luskin and Gregory B. Craig.

In April 2014, Chipotle announced an increase in menu prices for the first time in nearly three years, due to increasing costs for steak, avocados, and cheese. The price increase was expected to be rolled out from the end of second quarter of 2014 through the end of the third quarter. In late 2015, Chipotle expanded its mobile strategy through delivery partnerships with tech startups like Tapingo, a delivery service that targets college campuses.

In December 2016, Chipotle announced that co-CEO Monty Moran has stepped down from his role effective immediately with Ells becoming the sole CEO. Eleven months later, Ells announced in November 2017 that he would be stepping down as CEO.

In December 2017, Chipotle announced it signed a 15-year lease and in late 2018 will move around 450 corporate employees—currently housed in multiple buildings around downtown Denver—into the new 1144 Fifteenth Tower and occupy around 126,000 square feet or 5 floors of the 40-story tower.

In February 2018, Chipotle announced that Taco Bell CEO Brian Niccol would replace Ells as CEO starting on March 5 while Ells would retain his chairman position. Many industry analysts praised Niccol&#x27;s appointment saying that Chipotle &quot;needed new blood&quot;. Chipotle stock went up $30.27, or 12.04%, as a result of the announcement. However, other analysts criticized the announcement by saying that &quot;the move goes against everything the burrito chain stands for&quot;.

In May 2018, Chipotle announced that it would relocate headquarters from Denver to Newport Beach, California, in Southern California. Corporate functions handled in their Denver and New York offices would move to Newport Beach or to an existing office in Columbus, Ohio. This move would impact 400 workers, some being offered relocation and retention packages.

In May 2018, Chipotle announced the &quot;Chipotlane&quot; and began testing it in the U.S.. The Chipotlane acts as a drive-thru, but it is for mobile order pickup only; customers are unable to order food at the handout window but are welcome to pick up their mobile orders through the Chipotlane or inside the restaurant. As of 2023, there are over 500+ locations which include the Chipotlane in order to make the restaurant run more efficiently.

In June 2018, the company announced the closing of 65 under-performing restaurants.

Ells broke all ties with the company in March 2020 by resigning as its chairman and departing from its board of directors.

In January 2023, the company announced plans to hire 15,000 workers and expand to 7,000 locations, up from a previous goal of 6,000. This would double its footprint. At the time of the announcement, it had more than 100,000 employees. An article in &quot;The Wall Street Journal&quot; in July noted the chain would focus on opening 700-800 new locations in small towns and cities as part of its plan to expand by nearly 3,800 locations, in territory traditionally dominated by chains like McDonald&#x27;s and Applebee&#x27;s.

In September 2024, Chipotle announced it is developing a new automated avocado processing machine, Autocado. The company claims that this machine can peel and cut avocados in less than 30 seconds. If successful, Autocado could significantly reduce the time and labor required to prepare large quantities of guacamole. Chipotle states that the machine is designed to adapt to varying avocado sizes, automatically adjusting its settings based on the specific fruit being processed. The company estimates it will use approximately 130 million pounds of avocados in the current year.

===Expansion attempts into other types of cuisines===

In the 2010s, Ells tried to diversify the company by creating or acquiring several subsidiaries. These subsidiaries offered very different cuisines compared to their parent company. Examples include soul food (Soul Daddy), Asian cuisine (ShopHouse Southeast Asian Kitchen), pizza (Pizzeria Locale), and burgers (Tasty Made). In 2023, Chipotle had also tried incorporating California inspired bowls into the Farmesa Fresh Eatery concept. None were a financial success and all concepts were discontinued.

In 2011, Steve Ells was a judge for the TV show &quot;America&#x27;s Next Great Restaurant&quot; and investor of ANGR Holdings, the company that will be running the winning concept&#x27;s restaurants. Chipotle has agreed to purchase Ells&#x27; investment in ANGR at his cost, provide support for ANGR operations, and invest a total of $2.3&quot; &quot;million in cash contributions. The winning concept, Soul Daddy, was quickly closed after operating for 8 weeks.

In September 2011, Chipotle opened an Asian fast-casual concept restaurant named ShopHouse Southeast Asian Kitchen in Washington, D.C. The company has said the new restaurant &quot;would follow the Chipotle service format and its focus on &#x27;food with integrity&#x27; in ingredients&quot;. Chipotle&#x27;s plan was to start with only one store, and see how the restaurant works out before expanding the concept.

On July 29, 2016, the company announced the opening of its first Tasty Made burger restaurant in the fall.

The newer restaurant concepts did not perform as well as expected, so ShopHouse Southeast Asian Kitchen and Tasty Made were closed in March 2017 and February 2018 respectively, leaving only Pizzeria Locale operating besides the parent company.

In February 2023, Chipotle opened their first Farmesa Fresh Eatery in Santa Monica, California, serving bowls containing customers&#x27; choice of a protein, a green or grain, two sides, a topping, and a selection of up to five sauces. Some of the choices included steak, salmon, whipped potatoes, sweet potato chips, beets, and cauliflower.

In July 2023, Chipotle exited the highly competitive pizza restaurant industry by announcing that they were closing all of their remaining Pizzeria Locale locations and would &quot;dissolve the business&quot;. Chipotle also abandoned Farmesa in April 2024. 

== International ==

According to an article in The Motley Fool, Chipotle had 17 locations outside of the United States by October 2014 with the majority in Canada, and the UK was in the process of opening more locations. The rate of overseas expansion was slower than expected. Many of the press reviewers thought that the food was overpriced for their area.

As of 2018 there are 33 locations outside of the United States with 19 locations in Canada (Ottawa, Toronto, Markham, Vaughan, Mississauga, Oakville, Vancouver), 6 locations in the United Kingdom (London), 6 in France (with 1 in Lyon, and the rest in Paris), and 2 in Germany (Frankfurt).

In July 2023, the company announced it would partner with the Kuwait-based Alshaya Group in its first-ever franchise deal to expand into the Middle East. 

=== Canada ===

In August 2008, Chipotle opened its first location outside of the United States in Toronto, Canada. A second Toronto store opened in 2010. The first Canadian location outside Toronto opened in Vancouver in December 2012. Chipotle has six locations in the Vancouver-area, including Vancouver, West Vancouver, North Vancouver, Burnaby, Port Coquitlam, Langley and Surrey. In 2023, Chipotle announced that seventh store would open up in the Vancouver region. The first location in the country&#x27;s Capital opened in February 2017 at the Rideau Centre. Across Canada, there are 26 stores in Ontario, 16 in British Columbia, and 2 in Alberta. 

=== United Kingdom ===

Chipotle expanded to Europe with the first European restaurant opening in May 2010 in London. A second location opened in London in September 2011. The following year, three additional locations quickly opened in the London area. After this growth spurt, the rate of further expansion in London slowed greatly with the sixth location appearing in 2013 and the seventh in June 2015. Although Chipotle blames the slow growth in the United Kingdom on the British unfamiliarity with Mexican foods, several locally owned burrito chains had opened locations across the United Kingdom during the same interval. , there were 19 UK locations, of which 17 were in London.

=== France ===
The first location in France opened in Paris in May 2012. Expansion in France was much slower than that in the United Kingdom or Canada, with a second location in Paris opening in 2013 and a third location in 2014. At the time of its opening in 2014, the restaurant at La Défense was the largest Chipotle location in the world at , while a typical Chipotle restaurant is usually between and . A fourth Parisian location was opened in Levallois-Perret in 2015 followed by a fifth Parisian location in Saint-Germain-des-Prés in 2016. The company opened its seventh location in France and its first location outside the Paris region, inside Lyon&#x27;s La Part-Dieu shopping mall in 2021.

=== Germany ===
The first location in Germany opened up in Frankfurt&#x27;s Skyline Plaza shopping mall in August 2013. A second location opened in Frankfurt&#x27;s MyZeil shopping mall in April 2019.

== Corporate management ==
Chipotle&#x27;s team includes a residing corporate office of managers and its board of directors. Members of both teams are appointed to serve on committees: audit, compensation, and nominating and corporate governance.

By late 2016, the top management team consisted of the chief executive officer, Steve Ells; the chief financial officer, Jack R. Hartung; the chief marketing and development officer, Mark Crumpacker. At that time, the board of directors consists of: Ells, Patrick Flynn, Albert Baldocchi, Neil Flanzraich, Darlene Friedman, Stephen Gillet, Kimbal Musk and John Charlesworth. On March 14, 2018, it was reported that Mark Crumpacker, who had previously been charged in a 2016 cocaine ring indictment, would be leaving the company.

Ells served as chairman of the company, and served as chief executive officer until November 2017. He had a 1.25% stake in the company in 2010. The labor-market research firm Glassdoor reported that Ells earned $29&quot; &quot;million in 2014, versus a median of $19,000 for Chipotle&#x27;s workers, making the CEO-to-worker pay ratio 1522:1.

On February 13, 2018, Chipotle announced that Taco Bell CEO Brian Niccol would replace Ells as CEO starting on March 5 while Ells would retain his chairman position.

On March 6, 2020, Ells resigned as chairman and left the board of directors, breaking his final ties to the company. At the same time, Niccol was appointed chairman and the size of the board was reduced from 10 to 7 directors.

On August 13, 2024, Starbucks announced it was hiring Niccol as its next CEO. Chief Operating Officer Scott Boatwright was appointed by the board as interim CEO effective August 31, 2024. At the same board meeting, company director Scott Maw was named chairman of the board and retiring CFO Jack Hartung was named president. Four months later, Boatwright was named permanent CEO by the board in November 2024.

=== Operation and distribution ===
All of Chipotle&#x27;s restaurants are company-owned, rather than franchised. , 1430 restaurants have since opened throughout the United States and Canada, with locations in 43 states, Ontario, British Columbia, and the District of Columbia.

The field team are the employees who work closely with but not directly within specific restaurants. The field support system includes apprentice team leaders (step up from restaurateurs), team leaders or area managers, team directors and regional directors (not atypical for them to oversee more than fifty locations). Because Chipotle does not franchise, all restaurants are owned and operated directly by the corporation itself. Thus, whenever Chipotle is in the process of launching a new location, the field team hires a new general manager and trains them at a current location so that they will be ready for the new location when it opens for business. The corporate office takes care of finding and funding new locations as well.

In July 2023, the company announced it was testing a robot developed to cut the time to prepare avocados for guacamole in half amid an ongoing labor shortage. It was one of multiple chains incorporating automation into its operations at the time.

== Menu ==

Chipotle&#x27;s menu consists of five items: burritos, bowls, tacos, quesadillas, and salads. The price of each item is based on the choice of chicken, pork carnitas, barbacoa, steak, tofu-based &quot;sofritas&quot;, or vegetarian (with guacamole or queso, which would be at an extra charge otherwise). Additional optional toppings are offered free of charge, including: rice, beans, four types of salsa, fajita vegetables, sour cream, cheese, and lettuce. When asked in 2007 about expanding the menu, Steve Ells said, &quot;[I]t&#x27;s important to keep the menu focused, because if you just do a few things, you can ensure that you do them better than anybody else.&quot; Chipotle also offers a children&#x27;s menu. Most restaurants sell beer and margaritas in addition to soft drinks and fruit drinks.

The majority of food is prepared in each restaurant. Some exceptions are the beans and carnitas, which are prepared at a central kitchen in Chicago, Illinois. None of the restaurants have freezers, microwave ovens, or can openers.

The chain experimented with breakfast foods at two airports in the Washington (D.C.) metropolitan area but decided against expanding the menu in that direction. Starting in 2009, selected restaurants had offered a pozole soup, which has since been discontinued. Starting in 2009, Chipotle tested a vegan chicken product (made by Gardein) called &quot;Garden Blend&quot; in various cities but discontinued it in 2010.

In 2013, Chipotle began testing the tofu-based &quot;sofritas&quot; option (made by Hodo Soy) in Northern California restaurants; following its successful trial, it was rolled out nation-wide in 2014.

In June 2015, Chipotle began test marketing a pork and chicken chorizo-type sausage as a new protein option at selected locations in the Kansas City area. Some food writers have expressed their health related concerns over the protein&#x27;s relatively high sodium content since a 4-ounce serving contains 293 calories and 803 milligrams of sodium while the American Heart Association’s recommended daily amount is less than 1,500 milligrams of sodium. In contrast, the protein options with next highest sodium contents are Barbacoa with 530 milligrams and sofritas with 555 milligrams. An earlier version of the Mexican sausage was tested in Denver and New York City in 2011, but that test was terminated when that version of the sausage was perceived as looking too greasy. Chorizo was discontinued in September 2017 but was returned to the menu in the following year for a limited time.

In July 2020, Chipotle began test marketing a cauliflower rice option at 55 locations in Colorado and Wisconsin.

In August 2021, Chipotle began testing a company-made vegan chorizo made with pea protein. The vegan chorizo (now called plant-based chorizo) was subsequently released nation-wide as a limited-time only item on January 3, 2022, before being removed on March 4, 2022.

Chipotle accepts fax orders, and in 2005 the company added the ability to order online from their website. For both online and fax orders, customers proceed to the front of the line to pay for pre-ordered food. In 2009, Chipotle released an app for the iPhone that allows users to find nearby Chipotle locations, place an order, and prepay with a credit card. In 2013, Chipotle released an Android app that allows users to locate nearby Chipotle locations, place an order, prepay with a credit or gift card, and access favorites and recent orders.

In late 2021, the company added a non-food item to the menu—cilantro soap. According to published reports, the soap sold out the day after its release. The soap was produced after an August 2021 Instagram post of what was thought to be a mock photo of the product. It was an effort to engage fans and haters of the herb that, &quot;plays into a larger trend of turning digital moments into real life experiences,&quot; according to Chris Brandt, Chipotle&#x27;s Chief Marketing Officer.

=== Nutrition ===
In 2003, a Center for Science in the Public Interest report stated that Chipotle&#x27;s burritos contain over 1,000 calories, which is nearly equivalent to two meals&#x27; worth of food. MSNBC Health.com placed the burritos on their list of the &quot;20 Worst Foods in America&quot; because of their high caloric content and high sodium. When a burrito with carnitas, rice, vegetables, cheese, guacamole, and salsa was compared with a typical Big Mac, the burrito had more fat, cholesterol, carbohydrates, and sodium than the Big Mac, but it also had more protein and fiber. The restaurant has also received praise—Health.com included the restaurant in its list of the &quot;Healthiest Fast Food Restaurants&quot;.

Chipotle&#x27;s vegetarian options include rice, black beans, fajita vegetables (onions and bell peppers), salsa, guacamole, queso and cheese. All items other than the meats, cheese, sour cream, and honey vinaigrette dressing are vegan. As of late 2013, Chipotle developed a new cooking strategy for the pinto beans, eliminating the bacon and making them vegetarian and vegan-friendly. The cheese is processed with vegetable-based rennet in order to be suitable for vegetarians. In April 2010, Chipotle began testing a vegan &quot;Garden Blend&quot; option, which is a plant-based meat alternative marinated in chipotle adobo, at six locations in the U.S. The flour tortillas used for the burritos and soft tacos are the only items that contain gluten.

=== Portion size irregularities ===
Some customers took to the social media platform TikTok accusing Chipotle of reducing portion sizes. In June 2024, a Wells Fargo analyst and his team set investigated the matter and ordered 75 identically configured items from 8 different Chipotle locations in New York City. The team weighed each bowl and reported that portion sizes varied widely. The samples they ranged from 14oz to 27oz with a median weight of 21.5oz

=== Food sourcing ===
In 1999, while looking for ways to improve the taste of the carnitas, founder Steve Ells was prompted by an article written by Edward Behr to visit Concentrated Animal Feeding Operations (CAFOs). Ells found the CAFOs &quot;horrific&quot;, and began sourcing from open-range pork suppliers. This caused an increase in both the price and the sales of the carnitas burritos.

In 2001, Chipotle released a mission statement called &quot;Food With Integrity&quot;, which highlighted Chipotle&#x27;s efforts to increase their use of naturally raised meat, organic produce, and dairy without added hormones. Chipotle uses only the leg and thigh meat from its chickens; at least one location sells the breast meat to Panera Bread.

Ells testified before the United States Congress in support of the Preservation of Antibiotics for Medical Treatment Act, which was aimed to reduce the amount of antibiotics given to farm animals.

From 2006 to 2012, the Coalition of Immokalee Workers (CIW), a Floridian farmworker organization, protested Chipotle&#x27;s refusal to sign a Fair Food agreement, which would commit the restaurant chain to pay a penny-per-pound premium on its Florida tomatoes to boost tomato harvesters&#x27; wages, and to only buy Florida tomatoes from growers who comply with the Fair Food Code of Conduct. In 2009, the creators of the documentary film &quot;Food, Inc.&quot; (along with 31 other leaders in the sustainable food movement) signed an open letter of support for the CIW&#x27;s campaign, stating that, &quot;If Chipotle is sincere in its wishes to reform its supply chain, the time has come to work with the Coalition of Immokalee Workers as a true partner in the protection of farmworkers rights.&quot; In September 2009, Chipotle announced that it would sidestep partnership with the CIW and instead work directly with East Coast Growers and Packers to increase wages for its tomato pickers. Ells framed the dispute as a fundamental issue of control, stating that, &quot;the CIW wants us to sign a contract that would let them control Chipotle&#x27;s decisions regarding food in the future&quot;. In October 2012, Chipotle signed an agreement with the CIW and became the 11th company to join the organization&#x27;s Fair Food Program.

In January 2015, Chipotle pulled carnitas from its menu in a third of its restaurants; company officials cited animal welfare problems at one of the suppliers, found during a regular audit, as the reason. Subsequently, a false rumor spread online claiming it was done to appease Muslims who consider pork to be unclean, leading to some protests on social media. The company still uses antibiotic-free and hormone-free steak in its restaurants, despite being briefly forced to &quot;serve beef that is not naturally raised&quot; during the summer of 2013, posting an in-store notice each time that occurred. Roberto Ferdman of &quot;The Washington Post&quot; opined that Chipotle&#x27;s stated mission to sell &quot;food with integrity&quot; may be &quot;untenable&quot; if meat producers continue to breach Chipotle&#x27;s ethical standards.

Also in 2015, Chipotle stopped using genetically modified corn and soybeans in their foods, claiming to be the first nationwide restaurant to cook completely GMO free. However, in 2019, Chipotle paid $6.5&quot; &quot;million to settle a lawsuit where the plaintiffs claimed that the company&#x27;s food &quot;may have been sourced from livestock that consumed GMO animal feed&quot;.

==Food safety==
Since 2008, a former Kansas State University food safety professor has accused Chipotle of confusing the public by using such terms as &quot;naturally raised meats&quot;, &quot;organic ingredients&quot;, and &quot;locally sourced&quot; and trying to equate those terms with food safety. In rebuttal, a Chipotle spokesperson told &quot;The Daily Beast&quot; that &quot;all of our practices have always been very much within industry norms. It&#x27;s important to note that restaurant practices are regulated by health codes, and restaurants are routinely inspected by health officials. Everything we have done in our supply chain and in our restaurants has been within industry norms.&quot; Yet, FiveThirtyEight pointed out that the 2015 norovirus outbreak appears to be unusual and others are criticizing their food sourcing or handling practices. MarketWatch wrote that the result of all of these outbreaks will be to force Chipotle to obtain their produce from larger corporate farms that can afford the more extensive microbial food-safety testing programs and to process vegetables at centralized locations instead of at the individual stores, both of which are industry-standard practices that the company had previously criticized. &quot;The New York Times&quot; implied that the company&#x27;s insistence on maintaining its long standing rhetoric about &quot;food integrity&quot; seemed to be quite opposite with the realities of recent current events and made it appear that the management was just ignoring their current problems. It also has been pointed out that Chipotle&#x27;s current record-keeping system is actually hindering the health authorities&#x27; investigation in locating the sources of the various infections.

A writer for the magazine &quot;Popular Science&quot; pointed out that Chipotle had publicly acknowledged that they &quot;may be at a higher risk for food-borne illness outbreaks than some competitors due to our use of fresh produce and meats rather than frozen, and our reliance on employees cooking with traditional methods rather than automation&quot;. Other observers have argued that the variety of pathogens implicated in different incidents (Salmonella, &quot;E. coli&quot;, and norovirus) points towards a systemic problem, and that the use of manure to grow organic food can increase the risk of spreading bacteria like &quot;E. coli&quot;.

In December 2015, Seattle health officials closed a Seattle-area Chipotle for a day after it had repeatedly had small numbers of violations during recent consecutive inspections that previously would not have generated a closure order. On December 10, 2015, CEO Steve Ells released a press statement apologizing for 2015 outbreaks and promised changes to minimize the risks of future outbreaks.

=== 2008 outbreaks ===
==== March 2008 hepatitis outbreak ====

In March and April 2008, the Community Epidemiology Branch of the San Diego County Health and Human Services Agency traced a hepatitis A outbreak in San Diego County to a single Chipotle restaurant located in La Mesa, California, in which 22 customers were infected with the virus.

==== April 2008 norovirus outbreak ====

In 2008, Chipotle was implicated in a norovirus outbreak in Kent, Ohio, where over 400 people became ill after eating at a Chipotle restaurant. Officials at the Ohio Department of Health said that the outbreak was caused by &quot;Norovirus Genotype G2&quot;. Many of the victims were students at Kent State University. The initial source of the outbreak was never found.

=== 2015 outbreaks ===
==== July 2015 &quot;E. coli&quot; outbreak ====

In early November 2015, &quot;The Oregonian&quot; reported that there was a little-known &quot;E. coli&quot; outbreak that had occurred earlier in July in which five people were infected with the O157:H7 strain of &quot;E. coli&quot;. The outbreak was traced to a single Chipotle location in Seattle and that the incident was not publicized at that time. Seattle public health officials defended their actions at that time by saying that the outbreak was over by the time they made an association with Chipotle. Health officials were unable to trace the source of the July outbreak and said that the cause of the July outbreak is unrelated to the October/November outbreak.

==== August 2015 norovirus outbreak ====

Another norovirus outbreak was confirmed to have occurred in August 2015 at a Simi Valley, California, location in which 80 customers and 18 employees reported becoming ill. Ventura County health inspectors found various health violations during two inspections following the outbreak report. Despite those violations, the county health officials did not close the restaurant and allowed it to continue to operate. In a January 2016 article, &quot;The New York Times&quot; reported that the number of victims involved in the Simi Valley norovirus outbreak was actually 207, twice the number that was reported earlier.

In an unusual move, the U.S. Attorney&#x27;s Office for the Central District of California in conjunction with the Food and Drug Administration had gotten a federal grand jury to issue a subpoena in January 2016 as part of a criminal investigation seeking documents and information from Chipotle concerning the Simi Valley norovirus outbreak. , it is too early to tell which organization is the actual target of the investigation. In most cases involving norovirus outbreaks that involved a single location, state and/or local authorities are the usual jurisdiction responsible in the investigation and prosecution of those type of cases. However, Ventura County officials had been criticized for their handling of parts of their investigation, and for allowing the restaurant to continue to operate after finding health violations during consecutive inspections.

Less than two weeks later, a federal class action lawsuit was filed in the U.S. District Court for the Central District of California claiming that Chipotle knowingly allowed an ill kitchen manager to work for two days before sending that person home. Then, the restaurant actively deep-cleaned the restaurant to remove all traces of contamination prior to notifying the Ventura County Environmental Health Division of the existing outbreak, hindering their investigation. The lawsuit also claimed that the number of known victims was as high as 234 and estimates that the number of meals that the infected employee may have come in contact with could be as high 3,000.

==== August 2015 &quot;Salmonella&quot; outbreak ====

At almost the same time as the Simi Valley norovirus outbreak, Minnesota health officials confirmed a &quot;Salmonella&quot; outbreak that affected 17 Minneapolis-area Chipotle restaurants in mid-August 2015. The source of the outbreak was traced back to contaminated tomatoes that were grown in Mexico. The Minnesota Department of Health reported that samples from 45 victims were tested and found that their illness was caused by the &quot;Salmonella&quot; Newport bacterium as determined by DNA profiling. Later, the state officials reported that the total of persons who became infected was increased to 64 and the number Chipotle locations in which they had acquired the bacterium was increased to 22, all located within the state of Minnesota.

==== October 2015 &quot;E. coli&quot; outbreak ====

In October 2015, at least 22 people were reported to have gotten sick after eating at several different Chipotle locations in the states of Washington and Oregon. At that time, an epidemiologist for the Washington State Department of Health said the culprit appeared to be a Shiga toxin-producing &quot;Escherichia coli&quot; bacterium, but they were still waiting the outcome of several laboratory tests before they could give a definitive result. As a precaution, Chipotle had closed 43 stores in Washington and Oregon pending the results and recommendations of the involved health authorities. On November 5, the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) had reported that the number of persons reported ill had risen to 40 known cases and that the bacteria samples taken from 7 infected persons in Washington and 3 persons in Oregon states were confirmed to be infected by the same strain of &quot;E. coli&quot;, the Shiga toxin-producing STEC O26 strain, as determined by DNA profiling. At least 12 persons required hospitalization, but there were no fatalities. As of November 2015, Health authorities were still trying to trace the exact source of the bacterial contamination, but suspected fresh produce.

On November 12, the CDC increased the number of known cases to 50, the number of persons requiring hospitalization to 14, and the number of DNA fingerprint confirmations to 33. Through a match via Pulsenet, the DNA fingerprint also matched a recent case in Minnesota, but the ill person did not eat at Chipotle. The source of the bacteria infection still had not yet been determined at the time of the report released by the CDC and the CDC is trying to use the more definitive, but more time-consuming whole genome sequencing procedure to see if they are able to determine the relationships between all of the STEC O26 cases. In the meantime, Chipotle reopened the closed restaurants on November 11 after disposing all of the food within the closed facilities and deep cleaning those facilities.

On November 20, the CDC reported that the number of STEC O26 cases, as determined by DNA fingerprinting, had increased to 45 with 16 persons requiring hospitalization and the total number states being affected had increased to six. Besides Oregon and Washington, new cases were reported in the states of Minnesota, California, New York, and Ohio. 43 out of 45 of the affected individuals had reported that they had eaten at a Chipotle in the week before they had become sick.

On December 4, the CDC reported that the number of STEC O26 cases, as determined by DNA fingerprinting, had increased to 52 with 20 persons requiring hospitalization and the total number states being affected had increased to nine. New cases were reported in the states of California (1), Illinois (1), Maryland (1), Ohio (2), Pennsylvania (1), and Washington (1).

The price of shares for Chipotle stock dropped a further 12% immediately after the CDC had issued their update on November 20. Share prices had been dropping since the initial announcement of the &quot;E. coli&quot; outbreak in late October with investors unsure if the drop in share prices just a temporary aberration and that Chipotle management is handling the incident as well as they could. Chipotle has since hired a consultant to improve their food safety program and have their program reviewed by both the CDC and FDA.

On February 1, 2016, the CDC official closed their investigations on the larger &quot;E. coli&quot; that started in Pacific Northwest in October 2015 and also the smaller outbreak that started in Kansas and Oklahoma in November since no new cases were reported since December 1. In their final report, the CDC stated that 55 persons in 11 states were infected with the same strain of STEC O26 during the major outbreak with 21 of those persons requiring hospitalization. The five persons infected in the later outbreak were made ill by a genetically different strain of STEC O26. The CDC also reported that federal and local health and food safety authorities were unable to detect traces of the microorganisms in any of the food samples taken from the suspected restaurants or from their supply chain. The CDC, FDA, and the USDA Food Safety and Inspection Service were unable to determine a point source that was in common in the meals that were consumed by all the victims since some of the restaurants were located far apart and had obtained some of their ingredients from different suppliers while other consumers of the suspected suppliers were not affected.

==== November 2015 &quot;E. coli&quot; cases ====

The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention reported on December 21 that five more people became ill after eating at two Chipotle restaurants located in Kansas and Oklahoma in late November. Preliminary DNA fingerprinting results appear to indicated that the newer cases were caused by a different strain of Shiga toxin-producing &quot;E. coli&quot; O26. Scientists are waiting for the results of the more definitive whole genome sequencing analyses to determine if the organisms responsible for this outbreak are genetically related to the &quot;E. coli&quot; that are responsible for causing the outbreak that had started in Oregon and Washington in late October and thus an extension of that outbreak. The agency has not yet determined which food is responsible for the outbreak. The Food and Drug Administration reported that they are trying to determine how the bacteria in these cases, along with the earlier Oregon, Washington, and other multi-state cases, might have been propagated through the food supply chain.

====December 2015 norovirus outbreak====
In December 2015, 80 students at Boston College, including members of the men&#x27;s basketball team, were sickened after eating at a single Chipotle restaurant. Affected students had been tested for both &quot;E. coli&quot; and norovirus in order to determine the cause of the illnesses. Although it would take as long as two days before the results of more definitive tests became known, public health investigators reported that preliminary tests pointed to the presence of norovirus. The health inspectors for the City of Boston had since closed this particular location on December 7 for a number of health violations that included maintaining meats at a too low of a temperature on the serving line and for allowing a sick employee to work at the time of the inspection.

On December 10, officials from the Boston Public Health Commission reported that tests had identified a single strain of norovirus that was responsible for this particular outbreak. Boston Globe reported on December 10 that 141 persons were reported to have gotten ill and that some of the newer victims had not visited Chipotle before contracting the virus and most likely became infected by being in close proximity to someone who had gotten ill at Chipotle, such as a roommate or dorm-mate. Boston authorities traced the cause of the outbreak to a sick employee who was allowed to work on the day of the outbreak. Chipotle has since fired the employee and also the manager who knowingly allowed the ill worker to complete his shift instead of following health codes.

====Consequences====
On February 8, 2016, Chipotle closed all of its eateries nationwide for a few hours during the morning for an all-staff meeting on food safety. The company hired a new head of food safety, who instituted changes including having all employees wash hands every half hour, having two employees verify that produce like onions, jalapeños and avocados have been immersed in hot water for five seconds to kill germs on their exteriors, and using Pascalization to pre-treat food ingredients.

Since the series of food-poisoning outbreaks in 2015 lowered trust in the product, Chipotle has tried to lure back its customers with free food and heavier advertising. Same-store sales increased 17.8% percent in the first quarter of 2017.

===2017 and 2018 outbreaks===
====July 2017 norovirus outbreak====
Despite corrective actions, the company faced another setback in implementing their safe food policies in July 2017. A norovirus outbreak is being investigated in Virginia. More than 130 people reported having norovirus-like symptoms and two individuals had tested positive for the virus after eating at a Chipotle restaurant in Sterling, Virginia. The Loudoun County Health Department confirmed the illnesses from July 13–16, 2017. Shares of Chipotle stock dropped more than 10% on this news. On July 25, several news agencies reported that Chipotle officials confirmed that the &quot;recent norovirus outbreak in Virginia was the result of lax sick policy enforcement by store managers&quot; and that the company believed that an employee was the cause of the outbreak.

==== July 2018 &quot;Clostridium perfringens&quot; outbreak ====
In late July 2018, Ohio public health officials launched an investigation after receiving 350 complaints from customers after they had eaten at a Powell, Ohio, location. By mid-August, the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention identified the bacteria that cause the outbreak which had affected over 700 people as &quot;Clostridium perfringens&quot;. This food borne outbreak has been called the worst incident to date that can be traced to a single restaurant location.

==Data breach==
===2017===
In April 2017, Chipotle first announced that their point of sale payment system was compromised during a three-week period from late March to mid-April but gave very little information about the incident. The following month, the company later revealed that 2,250 restaurants in 47 states were involved which could potentially affect hundreds of thousands of customers who may had their credit or debit card account information with security codes stolen. A few restaurants in Canada were also affected. Some security experts criticized the way Chipotle had downplayed the incident. During the same month, a credit union in New Hampshire filed a class action lawsuit on the behalf of banks and credit unions against Chipotle for failure to provide elementary credit card data security in the most recent data breach after a similar data breach that had occurred in 2004. In July 2017, Gainesville, Florida, police reported that an unidentified person took more than $17,000 from an ATM at a local credit union by stealing from 40 different accounts that can be traced directly to the data breach.

===2019===
A number of Chipotle mobile ordering app customers claimed that their mobile ordering app accounts had been hacked and reported fraudulent orders charged to their credit cards. Chipotle claimed that the customers were using unsecured passwords, and that any fraudulent orders were a result of this. The customers then argued that the passwords they were using were secure, and that their complaints involved an issue with the server.

==Lawsuits==
In November 2016, three men filed a class-action lawsuit against Chipotle alleging that a burrito was listed as containing only 300 calories, when in fact it contained more. They are seeking &quot;unspecified damages and for an injunction against the company to prevent it from posting what it calls misleading information on its food&quot;.

In January 2020 the company received a $1.3&quot; &quot;million fine from the state of Massachusetts for 13,000 child labor violations.

== Labor issues and unionization ==

In May 2019, Chipotle was in the news for having dismissed a manager in St. Paul, Minnesota, who had been falsely accused of racism. 

In December 2019, the office of the general counsel of the National Labor Relations Board (NLRB), Peter Robb, filed a complaint against Chipotle, accusing the company of firing a worker in New York City in retaliation for trying to organize a union, as well as alleging that a manager in Manhattan threatened to fire workers if they engaged in protected union activities, implying they could even face physical violence as a result.

In July 2022, Chipotle closed a store in Augusta, Maine, whose staff was trying to unionize, ostensibly due to staffing difficulties. In November 2022, the NLRB issued a complaint against Chipotle, accusing the company of illegally closing the Augusta store and blackballing the employees at the store in violation of the National Labor Relations Act.

In August 2022, a restaurant in Lansing, Michigan, became the chain&#x27;s first location to vote to unionize with the International Brotherhood of Teamsters.

At multiple points in 2022, various outlets highlighted Chipotle as an example of a restaurant chain investing in robotics and automation via Chippy, an autonomous kitchen assistant made by Miso Robotics.

== Advertising and publicity ==
In the past, Chipotle mainly relied on billboards, radio advertisements, and word of mouth to advertise. In 2010, the company initiated an ad campaign that mocks advice given to Chipotle by advertising agencies. In 2012, Chipotle aired its first nationally televised commercial during the 54th Annual Grammy Awards ceremony. Chipotle has run many promotions giving out free food to potential customers, especially when opening a new store. Stores also give out free burritos on certain holidays; for instance, on Halloween, some locations have had promotions in which free burritos are given to people who come dressed as a burrito.

Chipotle gave away free burritos to reporters during the 1997 trial of Timothy McVeigh, which took place in Chipotle&#x27;s hometown of Denver. In addition, stores offered free burritos to those displaced by Hurricane Katrina. Chipotle received attention when Ozzy Osbourne&#x27;s reality show &quot;The Osbournes&quot; featured the company&#x27;s burritos heavily.

For Halloween 2010, Chipotle announced that customers dressed as a processed food product would receive a burrito for $2. The event was part of a $1&quot; &quot;million fundraiser for &quot;Jamie Oliver&#x27;s Food Revolution&quot; called &quot;Boorito 2010: The Horrors of Processed Food&quot;. For &quot;Boorito 2011&quot;, customers dressed in costumes &quot;inspired by family farms&quot; will receive a menu item for $2, with proceeds from the promotion going to The Chipotle Cultivate Foundation and Farm Aid. The promotion is aimed to increase awareness of family farms. Also in support of family farms, Chipotle released music videos of Karen O of the Yeah Yeah Yeahs and Willie Nelson.

On September 12, 2013, Chipotle released an animated short called &quot;The Scarecrow&quot;, with a companion mobile video game; both feature a narrative heavily critical of industrial farming, but little in the way of direct marketing for the chain. The short features a cover of &quot;Pure Imagination&quot; from &quot;Willy Wonka &amp; the Chocolate Factory&quot;, sung by Fiona Apple. It was named one of the worst advertisements of 2013 by The Wall Street Journal.

In 2011, Chipotle created the &quot;Farm Team&quot;, which is a rewards program available only by invitation from restaurant managers. The Farm Team members have access to a special Chipotle website, where members can earn rewards, i.e. free food and T-shirts. The site offers members to, &quot;learn where Chipotle’s food comes from, take quizzes and polls, play games and watch videos about the company&quot;. In April 2014, the Farm Team program was shut down.

Chipotle sponsors Team Garmin-Barracuda (formerly Team Garmin-Chipotle, Team Garmin-Slipstream, Team Garmin-Transitions and Team Garmin-Cervélo) of the International Cycling Union, and is an official team partner of the Boston Celtics, and the Boston Bruins. In June 2009, Chipotle sponsored free screenings of &quot;Food, Inc.&quot;, a film that criticizes the corporate food industry. Founder Steve Ells stated that he hoped the film would make customers appreciate Chipotle&#x27;s &quot;Food With Integrity&quot; policy. From May until September 2009, Chipotle ran a contest on mychipotle.com, a microsite which had a competition for the best user-created audio and video presentations about different combinations of ingredients. In July 2010, Chipotle began a campaign to support healthier lunch alternatives for students, in which money will be donated to The Lunch Box program based on how many spam Emails consumers forward to a company Email address.

For Chipotle&#x27;s 18th anniversary, the company began wrapping its burritos in gold foil as part of a larger promotion to draw attention to its &quot;Food With Integrity&quot; mantra. Also as part of the gold foil campaign, Chipotle is offering prizes for customer-created pictures of items wrapped in gold foil. Chipotle hired comedian Amy Sedaris to create a comedic how-to video on wrapping with gold foil, and spread the video using Twitter. In March 2013, Chipotle pulled its sponsorship of a Boy Scouts of America event, citing that organization&#x27;s ban on LGBT members.

On March 14, 2016, a National Labor Relations Board (NLRB) administrative law judge concluded that Chipotle&#x27;s social media policy, and more specifically its application towards an employee who posted tweets regarding wages and working conditions, violated the National Labor Relations Act (NLRA). A former Chipotle employee in Havertown, Pennsylvania, wrote a series of tweets from his personal account about hourly workers being required to work on snow days. Chipotle instructed the employee to delete the tweets. The NLRB judge determined that Chipotle&#x27;s request to delete the tweets violated the NLRA even though the employee was not disciplined as a result of his tweets.

In July 2021, Chipotle rolled out limited edition gold foil at participating locations to celebrate American athletes competing in Tokyo at the 2020 Summer Olympics. On October 28, 2021, Chipotle announced $1&quot; &quot;million of burritos to be given away for free for the first 30,000 people to play the Chipotle experience on the video game &quot;Roblox&quot;. The site ended up experiencing a three-day outage, but the company clarified that it was not the fault of Chipotle.

On February 16, 2023, MoneyGram Haas F1 Team announced a sponsorship deal with Chipotle. The Chipotle logo will be featured on both the nose and side of the VF-23, race-suits of drivers Kevin Magnussen and Nico Hulkenberg and team apparel.

== Architecture ==
Architecturally, all Chipotle restaurants are built using most of the same material finishes (plywood, corrugated metal, stainless steel, exposed ductwork), although each store is unique. The interiors have been described as having an &quot;industrial, sheet metal look&quot;. Chipotle has built restaurants using white ceramic tile instead of stainless steel. It costs the company approximately $850,000 to open a new restaurant. When the first Chipotle opened, Steve Ells asked his friend, sculptor Bruce Gueswel, to design the chairs and a styled Mayan king whose face was loosely based on that of civil rights movement leader Martin Luther King Jr., a personal inspiration of Gueswel, for the restaurant. Both items were made from wood and metal. Gueswel has continued to design and build the art and chairs for all subsequent Chipotle restaurants.

Most Chipotle locations display a photograph of the original restaurant, which is near the University of Denver campus on Evans Avenue. Instead of a photograph of itself, the original location has a photograph of the Dolly Madison Ice Cream that previously occupied the location. In 2010, Chipotle began opening smaller concept locations that have lower costs of development and occupancy. Chipotle uses environmentally friendly packaging, with bowls made from recycled newsprint, unbleached tray liners, and napkins and cups made from postconsumer waste.

Chipotle&#x27;s architectural design team incorporates the principles of sustainable architecture in their projects. The &quot;green&quot; restaurant in Gurnee, Illinois, features an on-site six kilowatt wind turbine, which generates about 10% of the restaurant&#x27;s electrical needs. The Gurnee restaurant has received Platinum level LEED certification from U.S. Green Building Council. A restaurant in Tulsa, Oklahoma, uses recycled drywall, low-VOC paint, and energy-efficient appliances. A Chipotle restaurant in Austin, Texas, was the first to receive a four-star rating from the city&#x27;s Green Building Program. Additionally, Chipotle has made arrangements to add solar panels to 75 of its restaurants. Chipotle has contracted to clean its stores in the New York metropolitan area, with &quot;plant-based, environmentally preferable cleaning supplies and technologies&quot;. The cleansers are readily biodegradable and non-toxic to humans or aquatic life.

Chipotle was the defendant in a lawsuit for failure to comply with the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA). Maurizio Antoninetti, a customer who used a wheelchair, claimed he was denied the &quot;Chipotle Experience&quot;, because he was unable to see the food preparation. The case against the company was upheld in the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit, and the Supreme Court of the United States declined to hear Chipotle&#x27;s appeal, leaving the Ninth Circuit&#x27;s ruling intact. Chipotle has &quot;an official disability policy of bringing ingredients to the tables of diners with disabilities and doing tableside preparation.&quot; Chipotle is retrofitting restaurants affected by the ruling, replacing the walls in front of the food preparation area with lower ones or transparent panels. They are incorporating the new design elements into new restaurants. The case was one of over twenty ADA-related lawsuits filed by Antoninetti, who died in 2011.

==Other restaurant units==
;Defunct units
*Farmesa was a restaurant concept launch by Chipotle in March 2023 that specialized in custom-made bowls. The first location opened in Santa Monica. After a year of operations, Chipotle abandoned the concept in April 2024.

*Pizzeria Locale (2013–2023) was a fast casual pizza restaurant chain formed as a partnership with the original Pizzeria Locale, a single full-service pizza restaurant in Boulder, Colorado. The original Pizzeria Locale owners, Bobby Stuckey and Lachlan Mackinnon-Patterson, would continue to own their original location in Boulder while Chipotle would increase its stake in the chain over time. The first jointly owned location (with Chipotle) opened in Denver in May 2013. A second Denver location was opened in October 2014. The first location outside of Colorado was opened in Kansas City in July 2015. The first location in Cincinnati, the fourth in the chain, was opened in March 2016. By February 2017, the chain had grown to seven locations. In June 2018, Chipotle closed five Pizzeria Locale locations in Kansas City and Cincinnati, leaving two locations in Denver and one in Boulder still operating. In March 2019, Pizzeria Locale announced plans to open two additional locations within the Denver metropolitan area, one in Hale and the other in Stapleton. The planned Pizzeria Locale for Stapleton opened in December 2019, to make it the third location in operation. It was announced in February 2020 that the new Pizzeria Locale at the 9th and Colorado mixed-use development in Hale was expected to open later that year. The Hale restaurant finally opened in August 2020. In July 2023, Chipotle announced that they were closing all of their remaining Pizzeria Locale locations in Denver and were &quot;dissolve the business&quot;. To distance themselves from the failed partnership, the owners of the original Pizzeria Locale restaurant in Boulder renamed their surviving restaurant Pizzeria Alberico around the same time.
*Soul Daddy (May–Jun 2011) was a soul food fast casual restaurant that was owned by ANGR Holdings, LLC, and was managed by Chipotle after purchasing Ells&#x27; stake in the company. The restaurant had three locations that had operated for less than 5 weeks in 2011 before closing.
*ShopHouse Southeast Asian Kitchen (2011–2017) was an Asian fast-casual concept restaurant that was opened by Chipotle in September 2011. The company said that the new restaurant &quot;would follow the Chipotle service format and its focus on &#x27;food with integrity&#x27; in ingredients&quot;. Chipotle&#x27;s plan was to start with only one store, and see how the restaurant works out before expanding the concept. By July 2016, the chain had 15 restaurants. All ShopHouse locations were closed on March 17, 2017.
*Tasty Made (2016–2018) was a burger restaurant concept that Chipotle first opened in Lancaster, Ohio, in October 2016. On July 29, 2016, the company announced the opening of its first Tasty Made burger restaurant in the fall. The first location was revealed to be in Lancaster, Ohio. Ohio was selected as culinary manager Nate Appleman and national training director David Chrisman are both from the state and helped design the concept. Tasty Made was announced to have a focused menu like early burger restaurants which were limited to burgers, fries and milkshakes. Chipotle had trademarked Better Burger earlier in the year. Tasty Made was closed on February 28, 2018.


==References==
==Further reading==

== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q465751" start="0" end="28" title="Chipotle Mexican Grill" label="Chipotle Mexican Grill, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q465751" start="57" end="65" title="Chipotle Mexican Grill" label="Chipotle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2898326" start="105" end="116" title="fast casual" label="fast casual"/>
<link wikidata="Q191655" start="152" end="156" title="taco" label="taco"/>
<link wikidata="Q7414148" start="163" end="179" title="Mission burrito" label="Mission burritos"/>
<link wikidata="Q860808" start="301" end="309" title="chipotle" label="chipotle"/>
<link wikidata="Q13300" start="321" end="328" title="Nahuatl" label="Nahuatl"/>
<link wikidata="Q504133" start="387" end="395" title="jalapeño" label="jalapeño"/>
<link wikidata="Q165199" start="396" end="408" title="chili pepper" label="chili pepper"/>
<link wikidata="Q2898326" start="451" end="473" title="fast casual restaurant" label="fast casual restaurant"/>
<link wikidata="Q7612483" start="494" end="504" title="Steve Ells" label="Steve Ells"/>
<link wikidata="Q7469" start="682" end="698" title="Mission District" label="Mission District"/>
<link wikidata="Q38076" start="865" end="892" title="McDonald&amp;#x27;s Corporation" label="McDonald&amp;#x27;s Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q268873" start="1266" end="1291" title="Newport Beach, California" label="Newport Beach, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q7612483" start="1363" end="1373" title="Steve Ells" label="Steve Ells"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143412" start="1383" end="1416" title="the Culinary Institute of America" label="the Culinary Institute of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q988554" start="1420" end="1439" title="Hyde Park, New York" label="Hyde Park, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q6180996" start="1478" end="1492" title="Jeremiah Tower" label="Jeremiah Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q7602305" start="1496" end="1501" title="Stars (restaurant)" label="Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="1505" end="1518" title="San Francisco" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q21010259" start="1563" end="1571" title="taquería" label="taquería"/>
<link wikidata="Q7414148" start="1577" end="1599" title="Mission burrito" label="San Francisco burritos"/>
<link wikidata="Q7469" start="1607" end="1623" title="Mission District, San Francisco" label="Mission District"/>
<link wikidata="Q16554" start="1724" end="1730" title="Denver" label="Denver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261" start="1732" end="1740" title="Colorado" label="Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q5289342" start="1754" end="1767" title="Dolly Madison" label="Dolly Madison"/>
<link wikidata="Q519427" start="1820" end="1840" title="University of Denver" label="University of Denver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047513" start="2126" end="2135" title="cash flow" label="cash flow"/>
<link wikidata="Q495354" start="2171" end="2174" title="Small Business Administration" label="SBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q188628" start="2288" end="2306" title="board of directors" label="board of directors"/>
<link wikidata="Q41819" start="2630" end="2651" title="Kansas City, Missouri" label="Kansas City, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q38076" start="2663" end="2678" title="McDonald&amp;#x27;s" label="McDonald&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q185142" start="2966" end="2989" title="initial public offering" label="initial public offering"/>
<link wikidata="Q603617" start="3228" end="3241" title="Boston Market" label="Boston Market"/>
<link wikidata="Q1240741" start="3623" end="3636" title="Donatos Pizza" label="Donatos Pizza"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="4030" end="4037" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q507619" start="4248" end="4265" title="restaurant chains" label="restaurant chains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1957782" start="4401" end="4417" title="Consumer Reports" label="Consumer Reports"/>
<link wikidata="Q6129536" start="4639" end="4655" title="James Beard Foundation Award" label="Rising Star Chef"/>
<link wikidata="Q967621" start="4665" end="4687" title="James Beard Foundation" label="James Beard Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465279" start="4732" end="4747" title="Food &amp;amp; Wine" label="Food &amp;amp; Wine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7753985" start="4780" end="4798" title="The Next Iron Chef" label="The Next Iron Chef"/>
<link wikidata="Q943091" start="4816" end="4856" title="U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement" label="U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="5195" end="5203" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="5208" end="5224" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="5476" end="5487" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q23556" start="5492" end="5499" title="Atlanta" label="Atlanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q16203678" start="5585" end="5601" title="Julie Myers" label="Julie Myers Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q7347051" start="5629" end="5642" title="Robert Luskin" label="Robert Luskin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5605452" start="5647" end="5663" title="Gregory B. Craig" label="Gregory B. Craig"/>
<link wikidata="Q22077799" start="6058" end="6065" title="Tapingo" label="Tapingo"/>
<link wikidata="Q117249140" start="6705" end="6717" title="Brian Niccol" label="Brian Niccol"/>
<link wikidata="Q268873" start="7220" end="7245" title="Newport Beach, California" label="Newport Beach, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q844837" start="7250" end="7269" title="Southern California" label="Southern California"/>
<link wikidata="Q16567" start="7392" end="7406" title="Columbus, Ohio" label="Columbus, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q164746" start="8412" end="8435" title="The Wall Street Journal" label="The Wall Street Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q38076" start="8646" end="8661" title="McDonald&amp;#x27;s" label="McDonald&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q621532" start="8666" end="8681" title="Applebee&amp;#x27;s" label="Applebee&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q7564200" start="9530" end="9540" title="Soul Daddy" label="Soul Daddy"/>
<link wikidata="Q19881721" start="9558" end="9591" title="ShopHouse Southeast Asian Kitchen" label="ShopHouse Southeast Asian Kitchen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026802" start="9692" end="9717" title="California cuisine" label="California inspired bowls"/>
<link wikidata="Q4742573" start="9878" end="9914" title="America&amp;#x27;s Next Great Restaurant" label="America&amp;#x27;s Next Great Restaurant"/>
<link wikidata="Q7564200" start="9937" end="9950" title="Soul Daddy" label="ANGR Holdings"/>
<link wikidata="Q7564200" start="10228" end="10238" title="Soul Daddy" label="Soul Daddy"/>
<link wikidata="Q728206" start="10327" end="10332" title="Asian cuisine" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q19881721" start="10370" end="10403" title="ShopHouse Southeast Asian Kitchen" label="ShopHouse Southeast Asian Kitchen"/>
<link wikidata="Q27655513" start="10770" end="10780" title="Tasty Made" label="Tasty Made"/>
<link wikidata="Q7752442" start="11708" end="11723" title="The Motley Fool" label="The Motley Fool"/>
<link wikidata="Q817" start="12373" end="12379" title="Kuwait" label="Kuwait"/>
<link wikidata="Q61071558" start="12386" end="12399" title="Alshaya Group" label="Alshaya Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="12452" end="12463" title="Middle East" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="12566" end="12573" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q2944877" start="13019" end="13032" title="Rideau Centre" label="Rideau Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="13235" end="13241" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q166640" start="14261" end="14277" title="Levallois-Perret" label="Levallois-Perret"/>
<link wikidata="Q604717" start="14327" end="14349" title="Saint-Germain-des-Prés" label="Saint-Germain-des-Prés"/>
<link wikidata="Q456" start="14465" end="14469" title="Lyon" label="Lyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q9478" start="14477" end="14489" title="La Part-Dieu (shopping mall)" label="La Part-Dieu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1794" start="14573" end="14582" title="Frankfurt" label="Frankfurt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2293361" start="14590" end="14603" title="Skyline Plaza (Frankfurt)" label="Skyline Plaza"/>
<link wikidata="Q1794" start="14662" end="14671" title="Frankfurt" label="Frankfurt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1383197" start="14679" end="14685" title="MyZeil" label="MyZeil"/>
<link wikidata="Q140686" start="15509" end="15517" title="chairman" label="chairman"/>
<link wikidata="Q484876" start="15548" end="15571" title="chief executive officer" label="chief executive officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q37158" start="16253" end="16262" title="Starbucks" label="Starbucks"/>
<link wikidata="Q171947" start="16745" end="16755" title="franchising" label="franchised"/>
<link wikidata="Q390823" start="17966" end="17973" title="burrito" label="burrito"/>
<link wikidata="Q191655" start="17983" end="17987" title="taco" label="taco"/>
<link wikidata="Q865325" start="17990" end="18000" title="quesadilla" label="quesadilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q9266" start="18007" end="18012" title="salad" label="salad"/>
<link wikidata="Q5044066" start="18078" end="18086" title="carnitas" label="carnitas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2838998" start="18088" end="18096" title="barbacoa" label="barbacoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q249114" start="18319" end="18324" title="salsa (sauce)" label="salsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q44" start="18662" end="18666" title="beer" label="beer"/>
<link wikidata="Q657621" start="18671" end="18680" title="margarita" label="margarita"/>
<link wikidata="Q147538" start="18697" end="18707" title="soft drink" label="soft drink"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="18868" end="18885" title="Chicago, Illinois" label="Chicago, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q37828" start="18916" end="18924" title="Refrigerator" label="freezers"/>
<link wikidata="Q127956" start="18926" end="18940" title="microwave oven" label="microwave oven"/>
<link wikidata="Q12714" start="18946" end="18956" title="can opener" label="can opener"/>
<link wikidata="Q2367175" start="19027" end="19062" title="Washington metropolitan area" label="Washington (D.C.) metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q515692" start="19174" end="19180" title="pozole" label="pozole"/>
<link wikidata="Q5522176" start="19289" end="19296" title="Gardein" label="Gardein"/>
<link wikidata="Q23374" start="19643" end="19650" title="chorizo" label="chorizo"/>
<link wikidata="Q464880" start="19938" end="19964" title="American Heart Association" label="American Heart Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q132744" start="20870" end="20873" title="fax" label="fax"/>
<link wikidata="Q368215" start="21094" end="21097" title="App Store (iOS)" label="app"/>
<link wikidata="Q2766" start="21106" end="21112" title="iPhone" label="iPhone"/>
<link wikidata="Q79576" start="21243" end="21250" title="Google Play" label="Android"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053605" start="21919" end="21960" title="Center for Science in the Public Interest" label="Center for Science in the Public Interest"/>
<link wikidata="Q13973" start="22095" end="22100" title="MSNBC" label="MSNBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q506796" start="22351" end="22358" title="Big Mac" label="Big Mac"/>
<link wikidata="Q181138" start="22854" end="22859" title="veganism" label="vegan"/>
<link wikidata="Q323635" start="22928" end="22938" title="pinto bean" label="pinto bean"/>
<link wikidata="Q326900" start="23055" end="23061" title="rennet" label="rennet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343997" start="23205" end="23221" title="meat analogue" label="meat alternative"/>
<link wikidata="Q360459" start="23244" end="23249" title="adobo" label="adobo"/>
<link wikidata="Q48938223" start="23463" end="23469" title="TikTok" label="TikTok"/>
<link wikidata="Q744149" start="23531" end="23542" title="Wells Fargo" label="Wells Fargo"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="23675" end="23688" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q5341842" start="23987" end="23998" title="Edward Behr (food writer)" label="Edward Behr"/>
<link wikidata="Q5158308" start="24008" end="24045" title="Concentrated Animal Feeding Operation" label="Concentrated Animal Feeding Operation"/>
<link wikidata="Q942830" start="24262" end="24279" title="mission statement" label="mission statement"/>
<link wikidata="Q380778" start="24410" end="24425" title="Organic food" label="organic produce"/>
<link wikidata="Q11364" start="24451" end="24458" title="hormone" label="hormone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7130852" start="24569" end="24581" title="Panera Bread" label="Panera Bread"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="24610" end="24632" title="United States Congress" label="United States Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1104299" start="24805" end="24835" title="Coalition of Immokalee Workers" label="Coalition of Immokalee Workers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1300148" start="25227" end="25237" title="Food, Inc." label="Food, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q76737185" start="25280" end="25296" title="sustainable food systems" label="sustainable food"/>
<link wikidata="Q166032" start="26751" end="26770" title="The Washington Post" label="The Washington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q182726" start="26999" end="27019" title="Genetically modified organism" label="genetically modified"/>
<link wikidata="Q31249" start="27383" end="27406" title="Kansas State University" label="Kansas State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1308139" start="27697" end="27712" title="The Daily Beast" label="The Daily Beast"/>
<link wikidata="Q600669" start="28057" end="28072" title="FiveThirtyEight" label="FiveThirtyEight"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142751" start="28099" end="28108" title="norovirus" label="norovirus"/>
<link wikidata="Q17068426" start="28210" end="28221" title="MarketWatch" label="MarketWatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="28606" end="28624" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q773087" start="29131" end="29146" title="Popular Science" label="Popular Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q25419" start="29734" end="29741" title="E. coli" label="E. coli"/>
<link wikidata="Q157661" start="30335" end="30346" title="hepatitis A" label="hepatitis A"/>
<link wikidata="Q108143" start="30359" end="30375" title="San Diego County, California" label="San Diego County"/>
<link wikidata="Q850929" start="30419" end="30438" title="La Mesa, California" label="La Mesa, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142751" start="30572" end="30581" title="norovirus" label="norovirus"/>
<link wikidata="Q989949" start="30594" end="30604" title="Kent, Ohio" label="Kent, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q20709478" start="30695" end="30720" title="Ohio Department of Health" label="Ohio Department of Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473615" start="30830" end="30851" title="Kent State University" label="Kent State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547338" start="31009" end="31022" title="The Oregonian" label="The Oregonian"/>
<link wikidata="" start="31175" end="31212" title="Escherichia coli O157:H7" label="O157:H7 strain of &amp;quot;E. coli&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q323414" start="31774" end="31797" title="Simi Valley, California" label="Simi Valley, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q108127" start="31870" end="31884" title="Ventura County, California" label="Ventura County"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094335" start="32339" end="32352" title="U.S. Attorney" label="U.S. Attorney"/>
<link wikidata="Q5595259" start="32472" end="32490" title="federal grand jury" label="federal grand jury"/>
<link wikidata="Q150839" start="34014" end="34024" title="Salmonella" label="Salmonella"/>
<link wikidata="Q476697" start="34400" end="34413" title="DNA profiling" label="DNA profiling"/>
<link wikidata="Q18394533" start="34913" end="34950" title="Washington State Department of Health" label="Washington State Department of Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q424753" start="34985" end="34996" title="Shiga toxin" label="Shiga toxin"/>
<link wikidata="Q25419" start="35013" end="35029" title="Escherichia coli" label="Escherichia coli"/>
<link wikidata="Q583725" start="35331" end="35373" title="Centers for Disease Control and Prevention" label="Centers for Disease Control and Prevention"/>
<link wikidata="Q7259698" start="36133" end="36141" title="Pulsenet" label="Pulsenet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2068526" start="36439" end="36462" title="whole genome sequencing" label="whole genome sequencing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7162" start="38644" end="38655" title="genetically" label="genetically"/>
<link wikidata="Q3536001" start="38831" end="38843" title="food sampling" label="food samples"/>
<link wikidata="Q49118" start="40422" end="40436" title="Boston College" label="Boston College"/>
<link wikidata="Q4947826" start="40463" end="40484" title="Boston College Eagles men&amp;#x27;s basketball" label="men&amp;#x27;s basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948038" start="41202" end="41233" title="Boston Public Health Commission" label="Boston Public Health Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072850" start="42400" end="42413" title="Pascalization" label="Pascalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q994379" start="43083" end="43101" title="Sterling, Virginia" label="Sterling, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2233834" start="43738" end="43750" title="Powell, Ohio" label="Powell, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q583725" start="43786" end="43828" title="Centers for Disease Control and Prevention" label="Centers for Disease Control and Prevention"/>
<link wikidata="Q309465" start="43921" end="43944" title="Clostridium perfringens" label="Clostridium perfringens"/>
<link wikidata="Q386147" start="44151" end="44164" title="point of sale" label="point of sale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172486" start="44904" end="44915" title="data breach" label="data breach"/>
<link wikidata="Q487999" start="44985" end="45005" title="Gainesville, Florida" label="Gainesville, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q81235" start="45082" end="45085" title="Automated teller machine" label="ATM"/>
<link wikidata="Q2783852" start="45693" end="45713" title="class-action lawsuit" label="class-action lawsuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q192571" start="46112" end="46123" title="child labour" label="child labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q28848" start="46246" end="46265" title="Saint Paul, Minnesota" label="St. Paul, Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q10265143" start="46280" end="46295" title="false accusation" label="falsely accused"/>
<link wikidata="Q8461" start="46299" end="46305" title="racism" label="racism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3024155" start="46368" end="46398" title="National Labor Relations Board" label="National Labor Relations Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q45364919" start="46407" end="46417" title="Peter B. Robb" label="Peter Robb"/>
<link wikidata="Q28206" start="46784" end="46798" title="Augusta, Maine" label="Augusta, Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4923114" start="47005" end="47017" title="Blacklist (employment)" label="blackballing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154442" start="47065" end="47093" title="National Labor Relations Act of 1935" label="National Labor Relations Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q28237" start="47128" end="47145" title="Lansing, Michigan" label="Lansing, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q655029" start="47215" end="47253" title="International Brotherhood of Teamsters" label="International Brotherhood of Teamsters"/>
<link wikidata="Q96283227" start="47446" end="47459" title="Miso Robotics" label="Miso Robotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q15737157" start="47571" end="47584" title="word of mouth" label="word of mouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337556" start="47783" end="47808" title="54th Annual Grammy Awards" label="54th Annual Grammy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q251868" start="48007" end="48016" title="Halloween" label="Halloween"/>
<link wikidata="Q220850" start="48199" end="48214" title="Timothy McVeigh" label="Timothy McVeigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q16422" start="48336" end="48353" title="Hurricane Katrina" label="Hurricane Katrina"/>
<link wikidata="Q133151" start="48388" end="48401" title="Ozzy Osbourne" label="Ozzy Osbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145002" start="48428" end="48441" title="The Osbournes" label="The Osbournes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6147315" start="48685" end="48720" title="Jamie Oliver&amp;#x27;s Food Revolution" label="Jamie Oliver&amp;#x27;s Food Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q494676" start="49140" end="49147" title="Karen O" label="Karen O"/>
<link wikidata="Q641858" start="49155" end="49170" title="Yeah Yeah Yeahs" label="Yeah Yeah Yeahs"/>
<link wikidata="Q206112" start="49175" end="49188" title="Willie Nelson" label="Willie Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q17010518" start="49263" end="49276" title="The Scarecrow (2013 film)" label="The Scarecrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148482" start="49365" end="49383" title="Intensive farming" label="industrial farming"/>
<link wikidata="Q7261099" start="49478" end="49494" title="Pure Imagination" label="Pure Imagination"/>
<link wikidata="Q936327" start="49512" end="49551" title="Willy Wonka &amp;amp; the Chocolate Factory" label="Willy Wonka &amp;amp; the Chocolate Factory"/>
<link wikidata="Q228968" start="49567" end="49578" title="Fiona Apple" label="Fiona Apple"/>
<link wikidata="Q164746" start="49636" end="49659" title="The Wall Street Journal" label="The Wall Street Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q48663" start="50279" end="50306" title="Union Cycliste Internationale" label="International Cycling Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q131371" start="50347" end="50361" title="Boston Celtics" label="Boston Celtics"/>
<link wikidata="Q194121" start="50371" end="50384" title="Boston Bruins" label="Boston Bruins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1300148" start="50444" end="50454" title="Food, Inc." label="Food, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q1931587" start="50726" end="50735" title="microsite" label="microsite"/>
<link wikidata="Q262170" start="51427" end="51438" title="Amy Sedaris" label="Amy Sedaris"/>
<link wikidata="Q918" start="51527" end="51534" title="Twitter" label="Twitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q608132" start="51588" end="51609" title="Boy Scouts of America" label="Boy Scouts of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q2996099" start="51649" end="51668" title="Boy Scouts of America membership controversies" label="ban on LGBT members"/>
<link wikidata="Q3024155" start="51692" end="51722" title="National Labor Relations Board" label="National Labor Relations Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q59654536" start="51786" end="51805" title="social media policy" label="social media policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154442" start="51936" end="51964" title="National Labor Relations Act" label="National Labor Relations Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q5683883" start="52003" end="52026" title="Havertown, Pennsylvania" label="Havertown, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q181278" start="52503" end="52523" title="2020 Summer Olympics" label="2020 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q692989" start="52710" end="52716" title="Roblox" label="Roblox"/>
<link wikidata="Q16300222" start="52863" end="52885" title="Haas F1 Team" label="MoneyGram Haas F1 Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q115683590" start="52998" end="53003" title="Haas VF-23" label="VF-23"/>
<link wikidata="Q1740212" start="53027" end="53042" title="Kevin Magnussen" label="Kevin Magnussen"/>
<link wikidata="Q76547" start="53047" end="53062" title="Nico Hülkenberg" label="Nico Hulkenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q48537" start="53702" end="53723" title="civil rights movement" label="civil rights movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q8027" start="53731" end="53753" title="Martin Luther King Jr." label="Martin Luther King Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q519427" start="54046" end="54066" title="University of Denver" label="University of Denver"/>
<link wikidata="Q185035" start="54585" end="54609" title="sustainable architecture" label="sustainable architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q277066" start="54665" end="54681" title="Gurnee, Illinois" label="Gurnee, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q1521623" start="54849" end="54853" title="Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design" label="LEED"/>
<link wikidata="Q783582" start="54873" end="54900" title="U.S. Green Building Council" label="U.S. Green Building Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q44989" start="54918" end="54923" title="Tulsa, Oklahoma" label="Tulsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q910267" start="54962" end="54965" title="Volatile organic compound" label="VOC"/>
<link wikidata="Q16559" start="55031" end="55044" title="Austin, Texas" label="Austin, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q774583" start="55187" end="55198" title="solar panel" label="solar panel"/>
<link wikidata="Q683705" start="55277" end="55303" title="New York metropolitan area" label="New York metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1111004" start="55551" end="55582" title="Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990" label="Americans with Disabilities Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q18205124" start="55590" end="55610" title="Maurizio Antoninetti" label="Maurizio Antoninetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q2358778" start="55803" end="55855" title="United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit" label="United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="55865" end="55899" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="Supreme Court of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q192517" start="56901" end="56918" title="Boulder, Colorado" label="Boulder, Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q5641339" start="57763" end="57767" title="Hale, Denver" label="Hale"/>
<link wikidata="Q17088919" start="57785" end="57794" title="Stapleton, Denver" label="Stapleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7564200" start="58465" end="58475" title="Soul Daddy" label="Soul Daddy"/>
<link wikidata="Q555997" start="58497" end="58506" title="soul food" label="soul food"/>
<link wikidata="Q19881721" start="58746" end="58779" title="ShopHouse Southeast Asian Kitchen" label="ShopHouse Southeast Asian Kitchen"/>
<link wikidata="Q728206" start="58799" end="58804" title="Asian cuisine" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q27655513" start="59264" end="59274" title="Tasty Made" label="Tasty Made"/>
<link wikidata="Q986005" start="59349" end="59364" title="Lancaster, Ohio" label="Lancaster, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q986005" start="59531" end="59546" title="Lancaster, Ohio" label="Lancaster, Ohio"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="191353" wikidata="Q1056509" url="?curid=191353" title="Azathoth">
<text>Azathoth is a deity in the Cthulhu Mythos and Dream Cycle stories of writer H. P. Lovecraft and other authors. He is the supreme deity of the Cthulhu Mythos and the ruler of the Outer Gods, and may also be seen as a symbol for primordial chaos, therefore being the most powerful entity in the entirety of the Cthulhu Mythos.

Azathoth is referred to as the &quot;daemon-sultan&quot; and &quot;Lord of All Things&quot;, whose throne is at the center of &quot;Ultimate Chaos&quot;. In his genealogy chart from 1933 of his mythos, Lovecraft places Azathoth as the single being at the very top from which everything else descends.

The name &quot;Azathoth&quot; was first mentioned in a note from 1919 by Lovecraft, and Azathoth was first formally introduced in the novella &quot;The Dream-Quest of Unknown Kadath&quot;, which was finished in 1927, but not published until 1943, though the name was the title of an unfinished novel in 1922 by Lovecraft, which was not published until 1938.

==H. P. Lovecraft==

===Inspiration===
The first recorded mention of the name Azathoth was in a note Lovecraft wrote to himself in 1919 that read simply, &quot;AZATHOTH—hideous name&quot;. Mythos editor Robert M. Price argues that Lovecraft could have combined the biblical names Anathoth (Jeremiah&#x27;s home town) and Azazel—mentioned by Lovecraft in &quot;The Dunwich Horror&quot;. Price also points to the alchemical term &quot;Azoth&quot;, which was used in the title of a book by Arthur Edward Waite, the model for the wizard Ephraim Waite in Lovecraft&#x27;s &quot;The Thing on the Doorstep&quot;.

Another note Lovecraft made to himself later in 1919 refers to an idea for a story: &quot;A terrible pilgrimage to seek the nighted throne of the far daemon-sultan Azathoth.&quot; In a letter to Frank Belknap Long, Lovecraft ties this plot germ to &quot;Vathek&quot;, a supernatural novel by William Beckford about a wicked caliph. Lovecraft&#x27;s attempts to work this idea into a novel floundered (a 500-word fragment survives, first published under the title &quot;Azathoth&quot; in the journal &quot;Leaves&quot; in 1938), although Lovecraftian scholar Will Murray suggests that Lovecraft recycled the idea into his Dream Cycle novella &quot;The Dream-Quest of Unknown Kadath&quot;, written in 1926.

Price sees another inspiration for Azathoth in Lord Dunsany&#x27;s Mana-Yood-Sushai, from &quot;The Gods of Pegana&quot;, a creator deity &quot;who made the gods and thereafter rested.&quot; In Dunsany&#x27;s conception, MANA-YOOD-SUSHAI sleeps eternally, lulled by the music of a lesser deity who must drum forever, &quot;for if he cease for an instant then MANA-YOOD-SUSHAI will start awake, and there will be worlds nor gods no more.&quot; This oblivious creator god accompanied by supernatural musicians is a clear prototype for Azathoth, Price argues.

===Fiction===
Other than the fragmentary draft described above, &quot;The Dream-Quest of Unknown Kadath&quot; was the first fiction by Lovecraft to mention Azathoth, and describes his realm as being beyond any and everything, and in which no dreams reach, placing it beyond the Dreamlands:

Verse 22 of Lovecraft&#x27;s 1929 poetry cycle &quot;Fungi from Yuggoth&quot; is entitled &quot;Azathoth&quot;, and consists of the following:

The realm in &quot;Fungi from Yuggoth&quot; is described as the chaos that is beyond dimensioned space, time, matter, form, and place. The &quot;daemon&quot; that claims to be Azathoth&#x27;s messenger is identified by later authors as Nyarlathotep, another of Lovecraft&#x27;s deities.

In a 1930 letter, Lovecraft describes Azathoth as &quot;the mindless Lord of Nighted Chaos who is the father of all other horrors &amp; is coeval with the Ultimate Abyss itself&quot;, in which the Ultimate Abyss is later stated to be where the archetypes reside, the true and unimaginable forms of the Outer Gods, and who are &quot;formless, ineffable, and guessed at only by rare dreamers on the low-dimensioned worlds&quot;, though as facets of the Supreme Archetype, and which further lies beyond the Ultimate Gate itself, as &quot;the Ultimate Gate leads fearsomely and perilously to the Last Void which is outside all earths, all universes, and all matter&quot;. Further noted is that &quot;the entities outside the Gates command all angles, and view the myriad parts of the cosmos in terms of fragmentary, change-involving perspective, or of the changeless totality beyond perspective, in accordance with their will&quot;. 

Lovecraft referred to Azathoth again in &quot;The Whisperer in Darkness&quot; (1931), where the narrator relates that he &quot;started with loathing when told of the monstrous nuclear beyond angled space which the &quot;Necronomicon&quot; had mercifully cloaked under the name of Azathoth&quot;. Here &quot;nuclear&quot; most likely refers to Azathoth&#x27;s central location at the nucleus of the cosmos and not to nuclear energy, which did not truly come of age until after Lovecraft&#x27;s death.

In &quot;The Dreams in the Witch House&quot; (1932), the protagonist Walter Gilman dreams that he is told by the witch Keziah Mason that &quot;He must meet the Black Man, and go with them all to the throne of Azathoth at the centre of ultimate Chaos... He must sign in his own blood the book of Azathoth and take a new secret name... What kept him from going with her...to the throne of Chaos where the thin flutes pipe mindlessly was the fact that he had seen the name &#x27;Azathoth&#x27; in the &quot;Necronomicon&quot;, and knew it stood for a primal horror too horrible for description.&quot; Gilman wakes from another dream remembering &quot;the thin, monotonous piping of an unseen flute&quot;, and decides that &quot;he had picked up that last conception from what he had read in the &quot;Necronomicon&quot; about the mindless entity Azathoth, which rules all time and space from a curiously environed black throne at the centre of Chaos&quot;. He later fears finding himself &quot;in the spiral black vortices of that ultimate void of Chaos wherein reigns the mindless daemon-sultan Azathoth&quot;. Gilman notes that the realm itself &quot;obeyed laws unknown to the physics and mathematics of any conceivable cosmos&quot;.

The poet Edward Pickman Derby, the protagonist of Lovecraft&#x27;s &quot;The Thing on the Doorstep&quot;, is a poet whose collection of &quot;nightmare lyrics&quot; is called &quot;Azathoth and Other Horrors&quot;.

The last major reference in Lovecraft&#x27;s fiction to Azathoth was in 1935&#x27;s &quot;The Haunter of the Dark&quot;, which tells of &quot;the ancient legends of Ultimate Chaos, at whose center sprawls the blind idiot god Azathoth, Lord of All Things, encircled by his flopping horde of mindless and amorphous dancers, and lulled by the thin monotonous piping of a demonic flute held in nameless paws&quot;. His title of &quot;blind idiot god&quot; is not to be taken as being of lesser intelligence or ignorance, but rather that Azathoth is detached from human affairs and is incomprehensible to the human mind.

In a letter to a James F. Morton in April of 1933, Lovecraft details a family tree containing his mythos, with Azathoth at the top of the tree, in which all beings below descend from it, with Lovecraft himself posited at the bottom of the tree. With Azathoth the ancestor, his creation goes through his children such as Nyarlathotep, &quot;The Nameless Mist,&quot; and &quot;Darkness,&quot; of Yog-Sothoth, Shub-Niggurath, Nug and Yeb, Cthulhu, Tsathoggua, and several deities and monsters that are unmentioned outside the letter, and some of Lovecraft&#x27;s and Clark Ashton Smith&#x27;s fancifully-posited human forebears.

==&quot;The Azathoth Cycle&quot;==
In 1995, Chaosium published &quot;The Azathoth Cycle&quot;, a Cthulhu Mythos anthology focusing on works referring to or inspired by the entity Azathoth. Edited by Lovecraft scholar Robert M. Price, the book includes an introduction by Price tracing the roots and development of the Blind Idiot God.

==References==
==Sources==
*

==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1056509" start="0" end="8" title="Azathoth" label="Azathoth"/>
<link wikidata="Q621596" start="27" end="41" title="Cthulhu Mythos" label="Cthulhu Mythos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2271327" start="46" end="57" title="Dream Cycle" label="Dream Cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q169566" start="76" end="91" title="H. P. Lovecraft" label="H. P. Lovecraft"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="178" end="188" title="Cthulhu Mythos deities#Outer Gods" label="Outer Gods"/>
<link wikidata="Q17508277" start="227" end="243" title="Chaos (cosmogony)" label="primordial chaos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2317161" start="776" end="809" title="The Dream-Quest of Unknown Kadath" label="The Dream-Quest of Unknown Kadath"/>
<link wikidata="Q4832293" start="911" end="927" title="Azathoth (short story)" label="unfinished novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370306" start="1190" end="1205" title="Robert M. Price" label="Robert M. Price"/>
<link wikidata="Q2662138" start="1267" end="1275" title="Anathoth" label="Anathoth"/>
<link wikidata="Q158825" start="1277" end="1285" title="Jeremiah" label="Jeremiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q721135" start="1308" end="1314" title="Azazel" label="Azazel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2468877" start="1347" end="1365" title="The Dunwich Horror" label="The Dunwich Horror"/>
<link wikidata="Q39689" start="1398" end="1408" title="alchemy" label="alchemical"/>
<link wikidata="Q659602" start="1420" end="1425" title="Azoth" label="Azoth"/>
<link wikidata="Q553124" start="1474" end="1493" title="Arthur Edward Waite" label="Arthur Edward Waite"/>
<link wikidata="Q465039" start="1560" end="1585" title="The Thing on the Doorstep" label="The Thing on the Doorstep"/>
<link wikidata="Q975994" start="1789" end="1807" title="Frank Belknap Long" label="Frank Belknap Long"/>
<link wikidata="Q54548" start="1848" end="1854" title="Vathek" label="Vathek"/>
<link wikidata="Q361026" start="1886" end="1902" title="William Thomas Beckford" label="William Beckford"/>
<link wikidata="Q131401" start="1918" end="1924" title="caliph" label="caliph"/>
<link wikidata="Q4832293" start="2063" end="2071" title="Azathoth (short story)" label="Azathoth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2271327" start="2215" end="2226" title="Dream Cycle" label="Dream Cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2317161" start="2241" end="2274" title="The Dream-Quest of Unknown Kadath" label="The Dream-Quest of Unknown Kadath"/>
<link wikidata="Q458658" start="2347" end="2359" title="Lord Dunsany" label="Lord Dunsany"/>
<link wikidata="Q7736948" start="2367" end="2383" title="Mana-Yood-Sushai" label="Mana-Yood-Sushai"/>
<link wikidata="Q7736948" start="2396" end="2414" title="The Gods of Pegana" label="The Gods of Pegana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2317161" start="2928" end="2961" title="The Dream-Quest of Unknown Kadath" label="The Dream-Quest of Unknown Kadath"/>
<link wikidata="Q2271327" start="3136" end="3146" title="Dream Cycle" label="Dreamlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q4148977" start="3202" end="3220" title="Fungi from Yuggoth" label="Fungi from Yuggoth"/>
<link wikidata="Q621416" start="3529" end="3541" title="Nyarlathotep" label="Nyarlathotep"/>
<link wikidata="Q7798461" start="3796" end="3808" title="Through the Gates of the Silver Key" label="later stated"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152214" start="4558" end="4583" title="The Whisperer in Darkness" label="The Whisperer in Darkness"/>
<link wikidata="Q2802" start="4732" end="4744" title="Necronomicon" label="Necronomicon"/>
<link wikidata="Q81197" start="4928" end="4942" title="Nuclear physics" label="nuclear energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1728079" start="5022" end="5051" title="The Dreams in the Witch House" label="The Dreams in the Witch House"/>
<link wikidata="Q621416" start="5173" end="5182" title="Nyarlathotep" label="Black Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q465039" start="6321" end="6346" title="The Thing on the Doorstep" label="The Thing on the Doorstep"/>
<link wikidata="Q3818169" start="6554" end="6577" title="The Haunter of the Dark" label="The Haunter of the Dark"/>
<link wikidata="Q15996481" start="7098" end="7113" title="James Ferdinand Morton Jr." label="James F. Morton"/>
<link wikidata="Q621431" start="7475" end="7486" title="Yog-Sothoth" label="Yog-Sothoth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2334196" start="7488" end="7502" title="Shub-Niggurath" label="Shub-Niggurath"/>
<link wikidata="Q16212730" start="7504" end="7515" title="Nug and Yeb" label="Nug and Yeb"/>
<link wikidata="Q12038" start="7517" end="7524" title="Cthulhu" label="Cthulhu"/>
<link wikidata="Q763980" start="7526" end="7536" title="Tsathoggua" label="Tsathoggua"/>
<link wikidata="Q555298" start="7645" end="7663" title="Clark Ashton Smith" label="Clark Ashton Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062574" start="7752" end="7760" title="Chaosium" label="Chaosium"/>
<link wikidata="Q16148485" start="7805" end="7829" title="Cthulhu Mythos anthology" label="Cthulhu Mythos anthology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370306" start="7925" end="7940" title="Robert M. Price" label="Robert M. Price"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="191354" wikidata="Q217475" url="?curid=191354" title="Tokyo Stock Exchange">
<text>The , abbreviated as Tosho () or TSE/TYO, is a stock exchange located in Tokyo, Japan.

The exchange is owned by Japan Exchange Group (JPX), a holding company that it also lists (), and operated by Tokyo Stock Exchange, Inc., a wholly owned subsidiary of JPX. JPX was formed from merger of Tokyo Stock Exchange Group, Inc. with Osaka Securities Exchange Co., Ltd. (now Osaka Exchange, Inc.); the merger process began in July 2012, when said merger was approved by the Japan Fair Trade Commission. JPX itself was launched on January 1, 2013.

==Overview==
The TSE is incorporated as a (joint-stock company) with nine directors, four auditors and eight executive officers. Its headquarters are located at 2-1 Nihonbashi-Kabutochō, Chūō, Tokyo which is the largest financial district in Japan.

The main indices tracking the stock market of TSE are the Nikkei 225 index of companies selected by the &quot;Nihon Keizai Shimbun&quot; (Japan&#x27;s largest business newspaper), the TOPIX index based on the share prices of Prime companies, and the J30 index of large industrial companies maintained by Japan&#x27;s major broadsheet newspapers. There are also active bond market and futures market.

Ninety-four domestic and 10 foreign securities companies participate in TSE trading. &quot;See: Members of the Tokyo Stock Exchange&quot;

=== Press club ===
The exchange&#x27;s press club, called the , meets on the third floor of the TSE building. Most Kabuto Club members are affiliated with the Nihon Keizai Shimbun, Kyodo News, Jiji Press, or business television broadcasters such as Bloomberg LP and CNBC. The Kabuto Club is generally busiest during April and May, when public companies release their annual accounts.

=== Hours ===
The exchange&#x27;s normal trading sessions are from 9:00 a.m. to 11:30 a.m. and from 12:30 p.m. to 3:00 p.m. on all days of the week except Saturdays, Sundays and holidays declared by the Exchange in advance. The exchange is closed for the following holidays: New Year&#x27;s Day, Coming of Age Day, National Foundation Day, Vernal Equinox Day, Shōwa Day, Constitution Memorial Day, Greenery Day, Children&#x27;s Day, Marine Day, Respect for the Aged Day, Autumnal Equinox, Health and Sports Day, Culture Day, Labour Thanksgiving Day, and The Emperor&#x27;s Birthday.

== Stock market ==

=== First, Second and other Sections until April 4, 2022 ===

Until April 4, 2022, corporate shares are listed and traded at Tokyo Stock Exchange in five market sections: the First Section which started when Tokyo Stock Exchange was re-established in 1949 and includes mainly large companies; the Second Section which started in 1961 and includes mainly mid-sized companies; JASDAQ (established in 1991, acquired by Osaka Stock Exchange in 2010, and absorbed into TSE in 2013) and Mothers (Market of the high-growth and emerging stocks, established at TSE in 1999) which are both for emerging companies; and TOKYO PRO Market which was established in 2009 jointly with London Stock Exchange as an Alternative Investment Market (Tokyo AIM) for small companies.

There were a total of 3,821 companies listed in Tokyo Stock Exchange, as of March 31, 2022.
=== Prime, Standard and Growth markets since April 4, 2022 ===

Beginning April 4, 2022, the market divisions were restructured into the Prime, Standard and Growth market divisions, differentiated by market liquidity, corporate governance, and other criteria. Companies voluntarily selected their new division between September and December 2021, and the results were published on January 11, 2022. From the First Section, 1841 companies were transitioned into the Prime market and 344 companies were transitioned into the Standard market. All 474 companies in the Second Section were also transitioned into the Standard market. From JASDAQ, all 658 companies in its Standard subsection were transitioned into the Standard market and all 36 companies in the Growth subsection were transitioned into the Growth market, along with all 424 companies in the Mothers section.

There were a total of 3,899 companies listed in Tokyo Stock Exchange, as of 21 August 2023.

==History==

===Prewar===
The Tokyo Stock Exchange was established on May 15, 1878, as the under the direction of then-Finance Minister Ōkuma Shigenobu and capitalist advocate Shibusawa Eiichi. Trading began on June 1, 1878.

In 1943, the exchange was combined with eleven other stock exchanges in major Japanese cities to form a single . The combined exchange was shut down on August 1, days before the bombing of Hiroshima.

===Postwar===
The Tokyo Stock Exchange reopened under its current Japanese name on May 16, 1949, pursuant to the new Securities Exchange Act.

The TSE runup from 1983 to 1990 was unprecedented, in 1990 it accounted for over 60% of the world&#x27;s stock market capitalization (by far the world&#x27;s largest) before falling precipitously in value and rank one of the 4th largest exchange in the world by market capitalization of listed shares.

The current TSE building was opened on May 23, 1988, replacing the original TSE building from 1931, and the trading floor of the TSE was closed on April 30, 1999, so that the exchange could switch to electronic trading for all transactions. A new facility, called , opened on May 9, 2000. In 2010, the TSE launched its Arrowhead trading facility.

In 2001, the TSE restructured itself as a (&quot;stock company&quot;): before this time, it was structured as an with its members as shareholders.

On 15 June 2007, the TSE paid $303 million to acquire a 4.99% stake in Singapore Exchange Ltd.

The London Stock Exchange (LSE) and the TSE are developing jointly traded products and share technology, marking the latest cross-border deal among bourses as international competition heats up.

In July 2008, the LSE and the TSE announced a new joint venture Tokyo-based market, which will be based on the LSE&#x27;s Alternative Investment Market (AIM).

===Technology problems===
The exchange was only able to operate for 90 minutes on November 1, 2005, due to bugs with a newly installed transactions system, developed by Fujitsu, which was supposed to help cope with higher trading volumes. The interruption in trading was the worst in the history of the exchange until October 1, 2020. Trading was suspended for four-and-a-half hours.

During the initial public offering of advertising giant Dentsu, in December 2001, a trader at UBS Warburg, the Swiss investment bank, sold 610,000 shares in this company at ¥6 each, while he intended to sell 16 shares at ¥600,000. The bank lost £71 million.

During yet another initial public offering, that of J-Com, on December 8, 2005, an employee at Mizuho Securities Co., Ltd. mistakenly typed an order to sell 600,000 shares at ¥1 each, instead of an order to sell 1 share at ¥600,000. Mizuho failed to catch the error; the Tokyo Stock Exchange initially blocked attempts to cancel the order, resulting in a net loss of US$347 million to be shared between the exchange and Mizuho. Both companies are now trying to deal with their troubles: lack of error checking, lack of safeguards, lack of reliability, lack of transparency, lack of testing, loss of confidence, and loss of profits. On 11 December, the TSE acknowledged that its system was at fault in the Mizuho trade. On 21 December, Takuo Tsurushima, chief executive of the TSE, and two other senior executives resigned over the Mizuho affair.

On January 17, 2006, the Nikkei 225 fell 2.8%, its fastest drop in nine months, as investors sold stocks across the board in the wake of a raid by prosecutors on internet company livedoor. The Tokyo Stock Exchange suspended trading 20 minutes before the close on January 18 due to the trade volume threatening to exceed the exchange&#x27;s computer system&#x27;s capacity of 4.5 million trades per day. This was called the &quot;livedoor shock&quot;. The exchange quickly increased its order capacity to five million trades a day.

On October 9, 2018, one of the four gateways used for order entry was taken down after Merrill Lynch Japan Securities erroneously tried to establish a second connection after it had already connected. Even though brokerages have access to alternative gateways, the outage caused &quot;delays in execution, correction and cancellation&quot; for many securities firms including Daiwa Securities and Nomura.

On October 1, 2020, for the first time in its history as an all electronic exchange, the Tokyo Stock Exchange had to suspend trading in all shares for a whole day due to a technical glitch, causing buying and selling to freeze. This was announced just minutes before 9 a.m., when it was scheduled to open. The problem was found to be in &quot;the system for relaying market information&quot;, hence making the glitch a network problem, but the &quot;Asahi Shimbun&quot; reported that the glitch was due to a mechanical failure. The issue stemmed back to the &quot;Arrowhead&quot; trading system and the inability to fail over to backup hardware. Other stock markets in Japan, including regional exchanges in Nagoya, Fukuoka and Sapporo, also suspended trading because they used the same technology platform as the TSE. Meanwhile, derivatives on the OSE continued trading, with Nikkei futures ending the day 0.56% higher. Japan Exchange Group Inc., which operates the Tokyo Stock Exchange, said that the suspension would be indefinite until the problem was resolved. Normal trading was resumed the following day.

==See also==

*List of East Asian stock exchanges
*List of stock exchanges

==References==
== External links ==

*Tokyo Stock Exchange Website
*Top Executive Interviews &quot;SOU&quot;
*&quot;Tokyo Exchange Struggles With Snarls in Electronics&quot;, &quot;The New York Times&quot;, 13 December 2005
*&quot;Fujitsu execs take pay cut after Tokyo exchange crash&quot;, The Register, 25 November 2005</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q217475" start="21" end="26" title="Tokyo Stock Exchange" label="Tosho"/>
<link wikidata="Q217475" start="33" end="40" title="Tokyo Stock Exchange" label="TSE/TYO"/>
<link wikidata="Q11691" start="47" end="61" title="stock exchange" label="stock exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q1490" start="73" end="78" title="Tokyo" label="Tokyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q11507487" start="113" end="133" title="Japan Exchange Group" label="Japan Exchange Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320224" start="369" end="389" title="Osaka Exchange" label="Osaka Exchange, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q842043" start="468" end="495" title="Japan Fair Trade Commission" label="Japan Fair Trade Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q134161" start="585" end="604" title="joint-stock company" label="joint-stock company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141952" start="707" end="717" title="Nihonbashi" label="Nihonbashi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1720870" start="718" end="727" title="Kabutocho" label="Kabutochō"/>
<link wikidata="Q212704" start="729" end="733" title="Chūō, Tokyo" label="Chūō"/>
<link wikidata="Q1490" start="735" end="740" title="Tokyo" label="Tokyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3244996" start="762" end="780" title="financial district" label="financial district"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="784" end="789" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="822" end="834" title="Tokyo Stock Exchange#Stock market" label="stock market"/>
<link wikidata="Q507338" start="850" end="860" title="Nikkei 225" label="Nikkei 225"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077694" start="902" end="922" title="Nihon Keizai Shimbun" label="Nihon Keizai Shimbun"/>
<link wikidata="Q238974" start="976" end="981" title="TOPIX" label="TOPIX"/>
<link wikidata="Q540626" start="1160" end="1171" title="bond market" label="bond market"/>
<link wikidata="Q2298435" start="1176" end="1190" title="futures market" label="futures market"/>
<link wikidata="Q6628261" start="1289" end="1324" title="Members of the Tokyo Stock Exchange" label="Members of the Tokyo Stock Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077694" start="1491" end="1511" title="Nihon Keizai Shimbun" label="Nihon Keizai Shimbun"/>
<link wikidata="Q779730" start="1513" end="1523" title="Kyodo News" label="Kyodo News"/>
<link wikidata="Q1688974" start="1525" end="1535" title="Jiji Press" label="Jiji Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q13977" start="1581" end="1593" title="Bloomberg LP" label="Bloomberg LP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023912" start="1598" end="1602" title="CNBC" label="CNBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q196627" start="1992" end="2011" title="New Year&amp;#x27;s Day" label="New Year&amp;#x27;s Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q483226" start="2013" end="2030" title="Coming of Age Day" label="Coming of Age Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059995" start="2032" end="2055" title="National Foundation Day (Japan)" label="National Foundation Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049141" start="2057" end="2075" title="Vernal Equinox Day" label="Vernal Equinox Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361434" start="2077" end="2086" title="Shōwa Day" label="Shōwa Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361489" start="2088" end="2113" title="Constitution Memorial Day" label="Constitution Memorial Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355051" start="2115" end="2127" title="Greenery Day" label="Greenery Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145630" start="2129" end="2148" title="Children&amp;#x27;s Day (Japan)" label="Children&amp;#x27;s Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355833" start="2150" end="2160" title="Marine Day" label="Marine Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186127" start="2162" end="2186" title="Respect for the Aged Day" label="Respect for the Aged Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q7530126" start="2188" end="2204" title="September equinox" label="Autumnal Equinox"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359602" start="2206" end="2227" title="Health and Sports Day" label="Health and Sports Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009535" start="2229" end="2240" title="Culture Day" label="Culture Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q82405" start="2242" end="2265" title="Labour Thanksgiving Day" label="Labour Thanksgiving Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q72318" start="2271" end="2298" title="The Emperor&amp;#x27;s Birthday" label="The Emperor&amp;#x27;s Birthday"/>
<link wikidata="Q1683760" start="2696" end="2702" title="JASDAQ Securities Exchange" label="JASDAQ"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320224" start="2737" end="2757" title="Osaka Stock Exchange" label="Osaka Stock Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q11340130" start="2802" end="2809" title="Mothers (Tokyo Stock Exchange)" label="Mothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q11249728" start="2929" end="2945" title="Tokyo Pro Market" label="TOKYO PRO Market"/>
<link wikidata="Q171240" start="2989" end="3010" title="London Stock Exchange" label="London Stock Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q438511" start="3017" end="3046" title="Alternative Investment Market" label="Alternative Investment Market"/>
<link wikidata="Q11832699" start="3373" end="3389" title="market liquidity" label="market liquidity"/>
<link wikidata="Q380767" start="3391" end="3411" title="corporate governance" label="corporate governance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1683760" start="3807" end="3813" title="JASDAQ" label="JASDAQ"/>
<link wikidata="Q11340130" start="4027" end="4034" title="Mothers (Tokyo Stock Exchange)" label="Mothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500849" start="4257" end="4273" title="Minister of Finance (Japan)" label="Finance Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q243141" start="4274" end="4289" title="Ōkuma Shigenobu" label="Ōkuma Shigenobu"/>
<link wikidata="Q704995" start="4314" end="4330" title="Shibusawa Eiichi" label="Shibusawa Eiichi"/>
<link wikidata="Q34664" start="4553" end="4562" title="Hiroshima, Hiroshima" label="Hiroshima"/>
<link wikidata="Q171240" start="5607" end="5628" title="London Stock Exchange" label="London Stock Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q11691" start="5751" end="5758" title="Stock exchange" label="bourses"/>
<link wikidata="Q438511" start="5921" end="5950" title="Alternative Investment Market" label="Alternative Investment Market"/>
<link wikidata="Q186394" start="6128" end="6135" title="Fujitsu" label="Fujitsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q185142" start="6355" end="6378" title="initial public offering" label="initial public offering"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189945" start="6400" end="6406" title="Dentsu" label="Dentsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q193199" start="6438" end="6449" title="UBS" label="UBS Warburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q6884799" start="6698" end="6725" title="Mizuho Securities Co., Ltd." label="Mizuho Securities Co., Ltd."/>
<link wikidata="Q119001253" start="7629" end="7637" title="livedoor" label="livedoor"/>
<link wikidata="Q720503" start="8838" end="8851" title="Asahi Shimbun" label="Asahi Shimbun"/>
<link wikidata="Q6569700" start="9516" end="9550" title="List of East Asian stock exchanges" label="List of East Asian stock exchanges"/>
<link wikidata="Q75024" start="9552" end="9575" title="List of stock exchanges" label="List of stock exchanges"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="9758" end="9776" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363733" start="9869" end="9881" title="The Register" label="The Register"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="191358" wikidata="Q1480510" url="?curid=191358" title="Skjaldbreiður">
<text>Skjaldbreiður (, &quot;broad shield&quot;) is an Icelandic lava shield formed in a huge and quite protracted eruption series from about roughly 9,500 years ago. The extensive lava fields which were produced by this eruption, flowed southwards, and formed the basin of Þingvallavatn, Iceland&#x27;s largest lake, and Þingvellir, the &quot;Parliament Plains&quot; where the Icelandic national assembly, the Alþing was founded in 930.

The volcano summit is at , and its crater measures roughly in diameter. The Skjaldbreiður lava shield covers with a volume of about . and is sometimes considered as a separate southern part of the Oddnýjarhnjúkur-Langjökull volcanic system which it is usually classified as being within. In this context its most recent eruption would be 3600 years ago, and the earliest eruption after the last ice age 10,200 years ago. There are at least three lava units deposited between 6000 and 9000 years BP, 

Straddling the Mid-Atlantic Ridge, the lava fields from Skjaldbreiður have been torn and twisted over the millennia, forming a multitude of fissures and rifts inside the Þingvellir National Park, the best known of which are Silfra, Almannagjá , Hrafnagjá and Flosagjá .

== Gallery ==
== References ==
=== Sources ===
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1480510" start="0" end="13" title="Skjaldbreiður" label="Skjaldbreiður"/>
<link wikidata="Q189" start="49" end="56" title="Iceland" label="Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q488416" start="175" end="185" title="lava field" label="lava field"/>
<link wikidata="Q335432" start="268" end="281" title="Þingvallavatn" label="Þingvallavatn"/>
<link wikidata="Q107370" start="316" end="326" title="Þingvellir" label="Þingvellir"/>
<link wikidata="Q131279" start="405" end="411" title="Althing" label="Alþing"/>
<link wikidata="Q109391" start="468" end="474" title="Volcanic crater" label="crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q125946476" start="630" end="672" title="Oddnýjarhnjúkur-Langjökull volcanic system" label="Oddnýjarhnjúkur-Langjökull volcanic system"/>
<link wikidata="Q503142" start="928" end="930" title="before present" label="BP"/>
<link wikidata="Q207313" start="949" end="967" title="Mid-Atlantic Ridge" label="Mid-Atlantic Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q107370" start="1104" end="1128" title="Þingvellir National Park" label="Þingvellir National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q2286006" start="1158" end="1164" title="Silfra" label="Silfra"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1166" end="1176" title="Almannagjá fissure" label="Almannagjá"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1179" end="1188" title="Hrafnagjá fissure" label="Hrafnagjá"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1193" end="1201" title="Flosagjá fissure" label="Flosagjá"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="191359" wikidata="Q465014" url="?curid=191359" title="Trampolining">
<text>Trampolining or trampoline gymnastics is a competitive Olympic sport in which athletes perform acrobatics while bouncing on a trampoline. In competition, these can include simple jumps in the straight, pike, tuck, or straddle position to more complex combinations of forward and/or backward somersaults and twists. Scoring is based on the difficulty and on the total seconds spent in the air. Points are deducted for bad form and horizontal displacement from the center of the bed.

Outside of the Olympics, competitions are referred to as gym sport, trampoline gymnastics, or gymnastics, which includes the events of trampoline, synchronised trampoline, double mini trampoline and tumbling.

==Origins==
In the early 1930s, George Nissen observed trapeze artistes performing tricks when bouncing off a safety net. He made the first modern trampoline in his garage to reproduce this on a smaller scale and used it to help with his diving and tumbling activities. He formed a company to build trampolines for sale and used a variant of the Spanish word &quot;trampolín&quot; (diving board) as a trademark. He used the trampoline to entertain audiences and also let them participate in his demonstrations as part of his marketing strategy. This was the beginning of a new sport.

In the United States, trampolining was quickly introduced into school physical education programs and was also used in private entertainment centers. Elsewhere in the world the sport was most strongly adopted in Europe and the former Soviet Union. Since trampolining became an Olympic sport in 2000, many more countries have started developing programs.

==Basic landing positions==

Competitive trampolining routines consist of combinations of 10 contacts with the trampoline bed combining varying rotations, twists and shapes with take-off and landing in one of four positions:

* Feet
* Seat
* Front
* Back
A routine must always start and finish on feet. In addition to the 10 contacts with the bed in a routine, competitors must start their routine within 60 seconds after presenting to the judges. They are also permitted up to one &quot;out bounce&quot;, a straight jump to control their height at the end of a routine, before sticking the landing. The trampolinist must stop completely—this means that the bed must stop moving as well—and they have to hold still for a count of 3 seconds before moving.

==Basic shapes==
In competitions, moves must usually be performed in one of the following 3 basic shapes:

A fourth &#x27;shape&#x27;, known as &#x27;puck&#x27; because it appears to be a hybrid of pike and tuck, is often used in multiple twisting somersaults—it is typically used in place of a &#x27;tuck&#x27; and in the competition would normally be judged as an open tuck shape.

A straddle or straddled pike is a variant of a pike with arms and legs spread wide and is only recognized as a move as a shaped jump and not in any somersault moves.

Rotation is performed about the body&#x27;s longitudinal and lateral axes, producing twists and somersaults respectively. Twists are done in multiples of a half and somersaults in multiples of a quarter. For example, a &quot;barani ball out&quot; move consists of a take-off from the back followed by a tucked 1¼  front somersault combined with a ½  twist, to land on feet. Rotation around the dorso-ventral axis is also possible (producing side-somersaults and &quot;turntables&quot;), but these are not generally considered to be valid moves within competitions and carry no &#x27;tariff&#x27; for difficulty.

Trampoline skills can be written in FIG (Federation Internationale de Gymnastique) shorthand. FIG shorthand consists of one digit signifying the number of quarter rotations, followed by digits representing the number of half twists in each somersault, and a symbol representing the position of the skill. &quot;/&quot; represents a straight position, &quot;&lt;&quot; represents a pike position, and &quot;ο&quot; represents a tuck position. For example, 42/ is a back somersault with a full twist in the straight position, 800ο is a double back somersault with no twists in the tuck position, and 821/ is a double somersault that has a full twist in the first full somersault and a half twist in the second full somersault while remaining in a straight position.

==Competition==

===Individual===

The first individual trampolining competitions were held in colleges and schools in the US and then in Europe. In the early years of competition there was no defined format with performers often completing lengthy routines and even remounting if falling off partway through. Gradually competitions became more codified such that by the 1950s the 10-bounce routine was the norm thereby paving the way for the first World Championships which were organised by Ted Blake of Nissen and held in London in 1964. The first World Champions were both American, Dan Millman and Judy Wills Cline. Kurt Baechler of Switzerland and Ted Blake of England were the European pioneers and the first ever televised National Championships were held in England in 1958.

Soon after the first World Championships, an inaugural meeting of prominent trampolinists was held in Frankfurt to explore the formation of an International Trampoline Federation. In 1965 in Twickenham, the Federation was formally recognised as the International Governing Body for the sport. In 1969, the first European Championship was held in Paris and Paul Luxon of London was the winner at the age of 18. The ladies winner was Ute Czech from Germany. From that time until 2010, European and World Championships have taken place in alternate years—the European in the odd and the World in the even. Now the World Championships are held annually.

In 1973, Ted Blake organised the first World Age Group Competition (WAG) in the newly opened Picketts Lock Sports Centre; these now run alongside the World Championships. Blake also used the first WAG as an opportunity to organise a World Trampoline Safety Conference which was held in the Bloomsbury Hotel, London, in order to codify safety concerns. There is also a World Cup circuit of international competitions which involves a number of competitions every year. There are also international matches between teams from several countries.

At first the Americans were successful at World Championship level, but soon European competitors began to dominate the sport and for a number of years, athletes from countries that made up the former Soviet Union have often dominated the sport. Germany and France have been the other strong nations in trampolining and the first four ranking places in World Trampolining used to go to USSR, France, Britain and Germany. In recent years, Canada has also produced Olympic medalists and World champions due in large part to contributions made to the sport by Dave Ross. Ross pioneered the sport in Canada almost 30 years ago and has consistently produced Olympic and World Cup athletes and champions. Since trampolining became an Olympic sport, China has also made a very successful effort to develop world-class trampoline gymnasts, their first major success was in the 2007 Men&#x27;s World Championship and later in both Men&#x27;s and Women&#x27;s gold medals and a bronze in the 2008 Olympic Games held in Beijing. Since then, they have won both World Championships and several Olympic medals.

===Synchronized===
In synchronized trampolining, two athletes perform exactly the same routine of ten skills at the same time on two adjacent trampolines. Each athlete is scored separately by a pair of judges for their form in the same manner as for individual competitions. Additional judges score the pair for synchronization. Fewer points are deducted for lack of synchronization if the pair are bouncing at the same height at the same time. The degree of difficulty of the routine is determined in the same way as for individual trampoline routines and the points added to the score to determine the winner.

=== Double mini===
A double mini trampoline is smaller than a regulation competition trampoline. It has a sloped end and a flat bed. The gymnasts run up and jump onto the sloping end and then jump onto the flat part before dismounting onto a mat. Skills are performed during the jumps or as they dismount.

A double mini-trampoline competition consists of two types of pass. In the one, which is known as a mounter pass, the athlete performs one skill in the jump from the sloping end to the flat bed and a second skill as they dismount from the flat bed to the landing mat. In the second, which is known as a spotter pass, the athlete does a straight jump from the sloping end to the flat bed to gain height, then after landing on the flat, performs the first skill, then after landing on the flat a second time, performs a second skill as they dismount. These skills are similar to those performed on a regular trampoline except that there is forward movement along the trampoline.

The form and difficulty are judged in a similar manner as for trampolining but there are additional deductions for failing to land cleanly (without stepping) or landing outside a designated area on the mat.

===Tumbling ===
Tumbling gymnastics is a further discipline of gymnastics competed at national and international events, usually alongside trampoline events. Instead of a sprung trampoline, competitors do a single, long complex tumbling and somersaulting combination along a straight, sprung runway, leading to a high final somersault onto a landing mat. The skills involved are very similar to those used in floor exercise or vault routines in artistic gymnastics, but with an extra emphasis on continuity and directional accuracy than in either of those events.

Tumbling is not an Olympic Games event but has been held as part of the European Games, as well as individual World and Continental Championships.

===Format===
The International Trampoline Federation became part of the Fédération Internationale de Gymnastique in 1999. FIG is now the international governing body for the sport which is paired with tumbling as the skill sets overlap. International competitions are run under the rules of FIG. Individual national gymnastics organizations can make local variations to the rules in matters such as the compulsory and optional routines and number of rounds for national and local competitions.

As part of the agreement to merge FIT with FIG, individual trampolining was accepted into the Summer Olympic Games for 2000 as an additional gymnastic sport.

The currently accepted basic format for individual trampoline competitions usually consists of two or three routines, one of which may involve a compulsory set of skills. The skills consist of various combinations of somersaults, shaped bounces, body landings and twists performed in various body positions such as the tuck, pike or straight position.

The routines are performed on a standard 14-foot-by-7-foot regulation-sized trampoline with a central marker. Each routine consists of the athlete performing ten different skills starting and finishing on the feet.

===Scoring===

The routine is marked out of 10 by five judges with deductions for incomplete moves or poor form. Usually, the highest and lowest scores are discarded. Additional points can be added depending on the difficulty of the skills being performed. The degree of difficulty (DD or tariff) is calculated by adding a factor for each half turn (or twist) or quarter somersault. Difficulty is important in a routine, however, there are differences in opinion between various coaches whether it is better to focus on increasing the difficulty of routines given that this usually results in a reduced form score or to focus on improving execution scores by displaying better form in an easier routine.

In senior level competitions, a &quot;Time of Flight&quot; (ToF) score was added to the overall score from 2010. This benefits athletes who can maintain greater height during their routines. &quot;Time of Flight&quot; is the time spent in the air from the moment the athlete leaves the mat until the time they make contact again and is measured with electronic timing equipment. The score given is the sum the time in seconds of all completed jumps. This is now mainly in all competitions, including Club, County and Regional, as it is a key factor in judging.

In 2017, the method of determining the horizontal displacement from the centre was changed, new markings were added to the bed and zones set up with deductions based on the distance from the centre of the trampoline bed. The score is determined by a deduction which is the sum of all the landing zone deductions subtracted from 10. The displacement is measured electronically where the equipment is available, or else by two judges observing the landing zones.

The total score is a combination of the degree of difficulty (DD) performed plus the total Time of Flight (ToF) minus standardized deductions for poor form and mistakes and the horizontal displacement.

===Score records===
The official world record DD for men at a FIG sanctioned event is 18.00, achieved by Jason Burnett of Canada on April 30, 2010, at the Pacific Rim Championships in Melbourne, Australia. He beat his own world record of 17.50 that he had achieved on April 2, 2007, at the Lake Placid, New York, Trampoline World Cup. Burnett beat the twenty-year-old record of 17.00 by Igor Gelimbatovsky (USSR, 1986) and Daniel Neale (GBR, 1999). The top competitors usually perform routines with a DD of 16.5 or greater. In 2009 Jason Burnett completed a training routine with a DD of 20.6 at Skyriders Trampoline Place in Canada.
The women&#x27;s world record DD is 16.20 by Samantha Smith (CAN). The top women competitors usually compete routines with a DD greater than 14.50.
The women&#x27;s synchronised trampoline pair of Karen Cockburn and Rosannagh Maclennan also of Canada completed a new world record DD of 14.20 at the same April 2, 2007, Lake Placid World Cup.

===Safety===
Although trampoline competitors are highly trained, they are also attempting to perform complex manoeuvres which could lead to accidents and falls. Trampolines used in competitions have their springs covered in pads to reduce the chance of injury when landing off the bed. They also have padded end decks, which are the locations that athletes are most likely to fall off the trampoline. The rules for international competitions (updated by FIG in 2006) also require 200mm thick mats on the floor for 2 metres around each trampoline and for there to be four spotters whose task it is to attempt to catch or reduce the impact of an athlete falling off the side of the trampoline bed. The floor matting rules are typically adopted by national bodies but not always in full; for example, in the UK the requirement for National &amp; Regional competition is still 2m but only of 20–25mm matting.

Teenage trampoline athletes are at higher risk of injury with higher training loads.

Among Olympic athletes at the 2008, 2012, and 2016 games, the injury rate for trampoline gymnasts was about half that for artistic gymnasts.

==References==

===Sources===
* Some original material extracted from &quot;Bounce 2000&quot; information booklet: David Allen, Brisbane, Queensland Australia.

==External links==
* Everything about trampolining and acrobatic sports
* Important Trampolining Safety Tips</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q465014" start="0" end="12" title="Trampolining" label="Trampolining"/>
<link wikidata="Q465014" start="16" end="37" title="Trampolining" label="trampoline gymnastics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5389" start="55" end="68" title="Olympic Games" label="Olympic sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q193036" start="95" end="105" title="acrobatics" label="acrobatics"/>
<link wikidata="Q327911" start="126" end="136" title="trampoline" label="trampoline"/>
<link wikidata="Q767472" start="291" end="301" title="somersault" label="somersault"/>
<link wikidata="Q104901506" start="655" end="677" title="double mini trampoline" label="double mini trampoline"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218163" start="682" end="690" title="tumbling (gymnastics)" label="tumbling"/>
<link wikidata="Q957395" start="725" end="738" title="George Nissen" label="George Nissen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7735" start="931" end="937" title="Diving (sport)" label="diving"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218163" start="942" end="950" title="Tumbling (gymnastics)" label="tumbling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="1039" end="1046" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q167270" start="1094" end="1103" title="trademark" label="trademark"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="1285" end="1298" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="1512" end="1524" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q5389" start="1555" end="1562" title="Olympic Games" label="Olympic"/>
<link wikidata="Q476300" start="4387" end="4398" title="competition" label="competition"/>
<link wikidata="Q680455" start="4767" end="4786" title="Trampoline World Championships" label="World Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q7693019" start="4811" end="4820" title="Ted Blake" label="Ted Blake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1159127" start="4905" end="4916" title="Dan Millman" label="Dan Millman"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="4956" end="4967" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7693019" start="4972" end="4981" title="Ted Blake" label="Ted Blake"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="5002" end="5008" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q16637622" start="5246" end="5281" title="International Trampoline Federation" label="International Trampoline Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143278" start="5294" end="5304" title="Twickenham" label="Twickenham"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="5449" end="5454" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q7693019" start="5763" end="5772" title="Ted Blake" label="Ted Blake"/>
<link wikidata="Q7190862" start="5847" end="5860" title="Picketts Lock" label="Picketts Lock"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="6499" end="6511" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="6736" end="6742" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q16145711" start="6855" end="6864" title="David Ross (trampolinist)" label="Dave Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q8567" start="7280" end="7298" title="2008 Olympic Games" label="2008 Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q956" start="7307" end="7314" title="Beijing" label="Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q828144" start="9611" end="9625" title="floor exercise" label="floor exercise"/>
<link wikidata="Q598168" start="9629" end="9634" title="Vault (gymnastics)" label="vault"/>
<link wikidata="Q326827" start="9647" end="9666" title="artistic gymnastics" label="artistic gymnastics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5389" start="9786" end="9799" title="Olympic Games" label="Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q641572" start="9839" end="9853" title="European Games" label="European Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q379079" start="9987" end="10027" title="Fédération Internationale de Gymnastique" label="Fédération Internationale de Gymnastique"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218163" start="10116" end="10124" title="Tumbling (gymnastics)" label="tumbling"/>
<link wikidata="Q159821" start="10504" end="10524" title="Summer Olympic Games" label="Summer Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q7833202" start="10732" end="10738" title="Trampolining terms" label="skills"/>
<link wikidata="Q767472" start="10786" end="10796" title="somersault" label="somersault"/>
<link wikidata="Q11659512" start="11399" end="11419" title="degree of difficulty" label="degree of difficulty"/>
<link wikidata="Q11659512" start="12907" end="12927" title="degree of difficulty" label="degree of difficulty"/>
<link wikidata="Q379079" start="13132" end="13135" title="Fédération Internationale de Gymnastique" label="FIG"/>
<link wikidata="Q762641" start="13175" end="13188" title="Jason Burnett" label="Jason Burnett"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="13192" end="13198" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141" start="13254" end="13274" title="Melbourne, Australia" label="Melbourne, Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q192700" start="13360" end="13381" title="Lake Placid, New York" label="Lake Placid, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="13477" end="13481" title="USSR" label="USSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="13507" end="13510" title="United Kingdom" label="GBR"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="13765" end="13768" title="Canada" label="CAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q762576" start="13901" end="13915" title="Karen Cockburn" label="Karen Cockburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q275153" start="13920" end="13939" title="Rosannagh Maclennan" label="Rosannagh Maclennan"/>
<link wikidata="Q379079" start="14501" end="14504" title="Fédération Internationale de Gymnastique" label="FIG"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="14852" end="14854" title="United Kingdom" label="UK"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="191361" wikidata="Q919565" url="?curid=191361" title="Marty Robbins">
<text>Martin David Robinson (September 26, 1925 – December 8, 1982), known professionally as Marty Robbins, was an American singer, songwriter, multi-instrumentalist, and NASCAR racing driver. Robbins was one of the most popular and successful country and western singers for most of his nearly four-decade career, which spanned from the late 1940s to the early 1980s. He was also an early outlaw country pioneer.

Born in Glendale, Arizona, Robbins taught himself guitar while serving in the U.S. Navy during World War II, and subsequently drew fame performing in clubs in and around his hometown. In 1952, he released his first No. 1 country song, &quot;I&#x27;ll Go On Alone&quot;. Four years later, he released his second No.1 hit &quot;Singing the Blues&quot;, and one year later, released two more No. 1 hits, &quot;A White Sport Coat&quot; and &quot;The Story of My Life&quot;. In 1959, Robbins released his signature song, &quot;El Paso&quot;, for which he won the Grammy Award for Best Country &amp; Western Recording. The song began Robbins&#x27; association with western balladry, a style which would become a staple of his career. Later releases that drew critical acclaim include &quot;Don&#x27;t Worry&quot;, &quot;Big Iron&quot;, &quot;Devil Woman&quot; and &quot;Honkytonk Man&quot;, the last for which the 1982 Clint Eastwood film is named, and in which Robbins made his final appearance before his death.

Over the course of his career, Robbins recorded more than 500 songs and 60 albums, and won two Grammy Awards, was elected to the Country Music Hall of Fame and Nashville Songwriters Hall of Fame, and was named the 1960s Artist of the Decade by the Academy of Country Music. His songs &quot;El Paso&quot; and &quot;Big Iron&quot; were ranked by the Western Writers of America among the Top 100 Western songs of all time. Robbins was a commercial success in both the country and pop genres, and his songs were covered by many other famous artists, including Johnny Cash, the Grateful Dead and Elvis Presley. Johnny Cash noted, &quot;there&#x27;s no greater country singer than Marty Robbins.&quot; His music continues to have an influence in pop culture today, featuring prominently in several films, television shows and video games.

==Early life==


Robbins was born Martin David Robinson on September 26, 1925, in Glendale, a suburb of Phoenix in Maricopa County. His parents, John &quot;Jack&quot; Robinson (1889–1975) and Emma Robinson (1889–1970) divorced in 1937.

Among the warmer memories of his childhood, Robbins recalled having listened to stories of the American West told by his maternal grandfather, &#x27;Texas Bob&#x27; Heckle (1847-1931), who was a traveling salesman, raconteur and local medicine man. 
Robbins later recalled: &quot;He had two little books of poetry he would sell. I used to sing him church songs and he would tell me stories. A lot of the songs I&#x27;ve written were brought about because of stories he told me. Like &#x27;Big Iron&#x27; I wrote because he was a Texas Ranger. At least he told me he was&quot;.

Robbins dropped out of high school in Glendale, Arizona, before his time in the Navy. Robbins would work as an amateur boxer, dig ditches, drive trucks, deliver ice, and serve as a mechanics helper.

At 17, Robbins left home to serve in the U.S. Navy as an LCT coxswain during World War II. He was stationed in the Solomon Islands in the Pacific Ocean. To pass the time during the war, he learned to play the guitar, started writing songs, and came to love Hawaiian music.

After his discharge from the military in 1947 and his marriage the following year, Robbins began to play at local venues in Phoenix, In the early 1950s Marty moved on to host his own show on KTYL and then his own television show &quot;Western Caravan&quot; on KPHO-TV in Phoenix. After Little Jimmy Dickens made a guest appearance on Robbins&#x27; TV show, Dickens got Robbins a record deal with Columbia Records.

==Career==

Robbins became known for his appearances at the Grand Ole Opry in Nashville, Tennessee. Music journalist Mary Harron wrote the following about him in &quot;The Guardian&quot;:
Robbins was a symbol of the Nashville establishment that younger country fans abandoned in the Seventies for the bleached-denim &quot;outlaw school&quot; of Waylon Jennings and Willie Nelson. Robbins belonged to the Jim Reeves era and wore his embroidered cowboy suits proudly. Best known for the western ballad, &quot;El Paso&quot;, his career also touched the rock &#x27;n&#x27; roll side of country in songs like &quot;White Sport Coat And A Pink Carnation&quot;, and he kept a touch of the dude about him to the end.

In 1980, Robbins appeared on the PBS music program &quot;Austin City Limits&quot; (season 5). In addition to his recordings and performances, Robbins was an avid race car driver, competing in 35 career NASCAR Grand National Series races with six top-10 finishes, including the 1973 Firecracker 400. In 1967, Robbins played himself in the car racing film &quot;Hell on Wheels&quot;. Robbins was partial to Dodges prepared by NASCAR Hall-of-Famer Cotton Owens, and owned and raced Chargers and then a 1978 Dodge Magnum. He was also the driver of the 60th Indianapolis 500 Buick Century pace car in 1976. His last race was in a Junior Johnson-built 1982 Buick Regal in the Atlanta Journal 500 on November 7, 1982, a month before his death.

==Personal life==
In 1948 Robbins married Marizona Baldwin, who claimed she&#x27;d always wanted to marry a singing cowboy. They had a son, Ronnie, and a daughter, Janet.

==Death==
Robbins developed cardiovascular disease early in life, and suffered a first myocardial infarction in 1969. After his third heart attack on December 2, 1982, he underwent quadruple coronary bypass surgery. He did not recover and died six days later, on December 8, at St. Thomas Hospital in Nashville. He was 57 years old.

==Music and honors==
Although by 1960 Robbins&#x27; output was largely western (and some country) music, his initial hits like &quot;Singing the Blues&quot;, &quot;Knee Deep in the Blues&quot;, &quot;The Story of My Life&quot;, &quot;She Was Only Seventeen&quot;, and &quot;A White Sport Coat and a Pink Carnation&quot; were generally regarded as more pop/teen idol material than his hits from 1960 onwards (&quot;El Paso&quot; etc.). His 1957 recording of &quot;A White Sport Coat and a Pink Carnation&quot; sold over one million copies, and was awarded a gold record.
His musical accomplishments include the Grammy Award for his 1959 hit and signature song &quot;El Paso&quot;, taken from his album &quot;Gunfighter Ballads and Trail Songs&quot;. &quot;El Paso&quot; was his first song to hit No. 1 on the pop chart in the 1960s. It was followed up, successfully, by &quot;Don&#x27;t Worry&quot;, which reached No. 3 on the pop chart in 1961, becoming his third, and last, Top 10 pop hit. &quot;El Paso&quot; was followed by one prequel and one sequel: &quot;Faleena (From El Paso)&quot; and &quot;El Paso City&quot;. Also in 1961, Robbins wrote the words and music and recorded &quot;I Told the Brook&quot;, a ballad later recorded by Billy Thorpe.

He won the Grammy Award for the Best Country &amp; Western Recording 1961 for his follow-up album &quot;More Gunfighter Ballads and Trail Songs&quot;, and was awarded the Grammy Award for Best Country Song in 1970, for &quot;My Woman, My Woman, My Wife&quot;. Robbins was named Artist of the Decade (1960–1969) by the Academy of Country Music, was elected to the Country Music Hall of Fame in 1982, was rewarded three awards at the 17th Annual Music City News Country Awards in 1983, and was given a Grammy Hall of Fame Award in 1998 for his song &quot;El Paso&quot;.

When Robbins was recording his 1961 hit &quot;Don&#x27;t Worry&quot; at the Bradley Studios in Nashville, session guitarist Grady Martin accidentally created the electric guitar &quot;fuzz&quot; effect – his six-string bass was run through a faulty channel in the studio&#x27;s mixing console. Robbins decided to keep it in the final version. The song reached No. 1 on the country chart, and No. 3 on the pop chart.
Robbins was inducted into the Nashville Songwriters Hall of Fame in 1975. For his contribution to the recording industry, Robbins has a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame at 6666 Hollywood Boulevard.

Robbins has been honored by many bands, including the Grateful Dead who covered &quot;El Paso&quot; and Bob Weir &amp; Kingfish who covered &quot;Big Iron&quot;. The Who&#x27;s 2006 album &quot;Endless Wire&quot; includes the song &quot;God Speaks of Marty Robbins&quot;. The song&#x27;s composer, Pete Townshend, explained that the song is about God deciding to create the universe just so he can hear some music, &quot;and most of all, one of his best creations, Marty Robbins.&quot; The Beasts of Bourbon released a song called &quot;The Day Marty Robbins Died&quot; on their 1984 debut album &quot;The Axeman&#x27;s Jazz&quot;. Both Frankie Laine and Elvis Presley, among others, recorded versions of Robbins&#x27; song &quot;You Gave Me a Mountain&quot;, with Laine&#x27;s recording reaching the pop and adult contemporary charts in 1969. Though Elvis never recorded any of Robbins&#x27; songs in the studio, he was a big fan and recorded &quot;You Gave Me a Mountain&quot; live in concert several times; it appeared on 15 Presley albums. Johnny Cash recorded a version of &quot;Big Iron&quot; as part of his American Recordings series, which is included in the &quot;Cash Unearthed&quot; box set. Cash also recorded other songs by Robbins, including &quot;I Couldn&#x27;t Keep From Crying&quot;, &quot;Kate&quot; and &quot;Song Of The Patriot&quot;. He held Robbins in high esteem, having him guest several times on his network TV show. &quot;Big Iron&quot; was also covered by Mike Ness on his album &quot;Under the Influences&quot;, on which he paid homage to country music artists. The song, originally released on Robbins&#x27; 1959 album &quot;Gunfighter Ballads and Trail Songs&quot;, gained renewed popularity following its use in the 2010 video game &quot;&quot;.

His song &quot;El Paso&quot; was featured in the series finale of the AMC TV series &quot;Breaking Bad&quot;. &quot;El Paso&quot; was also featured in the &quot;Only Fools and Horses&quot; prequel made by the BBC.

Robbins was awarded an honorary degree by Northern Arizona University.

In 2001, singer-songwriter Don McLean released his album, &quot;Sings Marty Robbins&quot;, which features a collection of songs recorded by Robbins in his career.

In 2016, a portion of Glendale Avenue in Robbins&#x27; hometown of Glendale, Arizona, was renamed &quot;Marty Robbins Boulevard&quot;.

Before Robbins died, he held a performance at the White House, alongside famous American singer Frank Sinatra.

He was named Man of the Decade by the Academy of Country Music in 1970.

== Political views ==

Robbins&#x27; political views remained firmly right-wing during his lifetime. During the 1960s as the opposition to the Vietnam War strengthened, Robbins&#x27; political views turned to the right. He supported Barry Goldwater in his 1964 United States presidential election campaign as a southern director for &quot;Stars for Barry&quot;. Two of his songs, &quot;Ain&#x27;t I Right&quot; and &quot;My Own Native Land&quot; written in the 1960s later became popular songs during the conservative resurgence in the 1980s. The lyrics of &quot;Ain&#x27;t I Right&quot; describe anti-war protesters as fifth columnists and communists. After Columbia Records refused to publish his more politically charged songs, Robbins&#x27; band member Bobby Sykes recorded the songs for Sims Records under the name Johnny Freedom.

==Racing career==
Robbins loved NASCAR racing. With his musical successes, he was able to finance his avocation. Robbins always tried to run at the big race tracks (Talladega Superspeedway, Daytona International Speedway) every year and a smattering of the smaller races when time permitted. Robbins had 6 top-ten finishes in his career, with a personal best top 5 finish at the 1974 Motor State 360 in Michigan.

Robbins&#x27; cars were built and maintained by Cotton Owens. They were painted two-toned magenta and chartreuse, usually carrying car number 42 (though 6, 22, and 777 were also used). Over the years, he ran a few makes and models (Plymouths, Dodges or Fords) before buying a 1972-bodied Dodge Charger from Owens. Robbins had a few major wrecks during the 1970s, and he had Owens rebuild the car to update the sheet metal to the 1973–1974 Charger specifications, and then finally 1978 Dodge Magnum sheet metal, which he raced until the end of 1980. Robbins&#x27; final NASCAR race car was a 1981 Buick Regal that he rented and drove in a few races in 1981 and 1982.

In 1972, at the Winston 500, Robbins stunned the competition by turning laps that were 15 mph faster than his qualifying time. After the race, NASCAR tried to bestow the Rookie of the Race award, but he would not accept it. He had knocked the NASCAR-mandated restrictors out of his carburetor and admitted he &quot;just wanted to see what it was like to run up front for once.&quot;

Robbins is credited with possibly saving Richard Childress&#x27; life at the 1974 Charlotte 500 by deliberately crashing into a wall rather than t-bone (broadside) Childress&#x27;s car that was stopped across the track.

In 1983, one year after Robbins&#x27; death, NASCAR honored him by naming the annual race at Fairgrounds Speedway the Marty Robbins 420.

Robbins&#x27; Dodge Magnum was restored by Owens and donated to the Talladega Museum by his family, and was displayed there from 1983 to 2008. The car is now in private hands in Southern California and raced on the Vintage NASCAR club circuit.

In 2014, Robbins&#x27; 1969 Dodge Charger Daytona was featured on an episode of Discovery Channels TV show &quot;Fat and Furious: Rolling Thunder&quot;. In that same year, an episode of Velocity&#x27;s &quot;AmeriCarna&quot; featured ex-race team owner Ray Evernham spearheading the restoration of another of Robbins&#x27; NASCAR racers, a 1964 Plymouth Belvedere.

For the 2016 Darlington throwback weekend, Kyle Larson&#x27;s No. 42 NASCAR Xfinity Series car was painted purple and gold in honor of Robbins. For the 2021 Goodyear 400, Tyler Reddick&#x27;s RCR #8 Nascar Cup car carries Robbins&#x27; signature magenta and chartreuse livery. For the 2022 running, Corey LaJoie&#x27;s Spire Motorsports #7 ran a throwback to Robbins&#x27; infamous 777 car that he ran in his career.

==Discography==

Robbins&#x27; discography consists of 52 studio albums, 13 compilation albums, and 100 singles. In his career, Robbins charted 17 Number One singles on the &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot Country Songs charts, as well as 82 Top 40 singles.

Robbins&#x27; highest-charting album is 1959&#x27;s &quot;Gunfighter Ballads and Trail Songs&quot;. It charted to #6 on the all-genre &quot;Billboard&quot; 200, and was also certified Platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America. The album&#x27;s first single, &quot;El Paso&quot;, became a hit on both the country and pop charts, charting to Number One on the Hot Country Songs as well as the &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100. While that would be his only pop Number One, in 1957, &quot;A White Sport Coat&quot; charted to #2, and in 1961, &quot;Don&#x27;t Worry&quot; charted to #3.

His final Top 10 single was &quot;Honkytonk Man&quot; from the 1982 eponymous film in which Robbins had a role. He died shortly before its release. Since his death, four posthumous studio albums have been released, but they made no impact on the charts.

==Filmography==

*&quot;The Badge of Marshal Brennan&quot; (1957, 74 minutes) as Felipe, a Mexican outlaw
*&quot;Raiders of Old California&quot; (1957, 72 minutes) as Timothy Voyle
*&quot;Buffalo Gun&quot; (1958, released in 1961, 74 minutes) as Marty Robbins, a lawman
*&quot;The Ballad of a Gunfighter&quot; (1963, 84 minutes) as Marty Robbins, an outlaw
*&quot;Country Music Caravan&quot; (1964) as Himself, singing
*&quot;Tennessee Jamboree&quot; (1964, 75 minutes) as Himself, singing 
*&quot;The Road to Nashville&quot; (1966, 109 minutes) as Himself, singing
*&quot;Hell on Wheels&quot; (1967, 97 minutes) as Marty, a race car driver
*&quot;From Nashville With Music&quot; (1969, 87 minutes) as Himself, singing
*&quot;Country Music&quot; (1972, 93 minutes) as Himself, touring as singer, and as a race car driver
*&quot;Guns of a Stranger&quot; (1973, 91 minutes) as Mathew Roberts
*&quot;Honkytonk Man&quot; (1982, 122 minutes) as Smoky, a recording session singer

==Motorsports career results==
===NASCAR===
() (Bold – Pole position awarded by qualifying time. &quot;Italics&quot; – Pole position earned by points standings or practice time. * – Most laps led.)
==== Grand National Series ====
==== Winston Cup Series ====
==== Daytona 500 ====
==References==
==Sources==
* Pruett, Barbara J. &quot;Marty Robbins: Fast Cars and Country Music&quot;. Lanham, MD: Scarecrow Press. 2007. 
* Diekman, Diane. &quot;Twentieth Century Drifter: The Life of Marty Robbins&quot; (Music in American Life). 2012.
* &quot;Fallout: New Vegas&quot; – Big Iron is used on Radio New Vegas, Mojave Music Radio, and Black Mountain Radio.

==External links==
* 
* Robbins page at Country Music Hall of Fame
* Robbins page at Western Music Association
* Robbins page at Nashville Songwriters Hall of Fame
* Robbins bio by Hank Davis at AllMusic
* Robbins page by Gaylen Duskey at NASCAR
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q919565" start="0" end="21" title="Marty Robbins" label="Martin David Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q919565" start="87" end="100" title="Marty Robbins" label="Marty Robbins"/>
<link wikidata="Q233929" start="165" end="171" title="NASCAR" label="NASCAR"/>
<link wikidata="Q5386" start="172" end="185" title="racing driver" label="racing driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q83440" start="238" end="257" title="Country music" label="country and western"/>
<link wikidata="Q964658" start="384" end="398" title="outlaw country" label="outlaw country"/>
<link wikidata="Q51682" start="417" end="434" title="Glendale, Arizona" label="Glendale, Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="487" end="496" title="United States Navy" label="U.S. Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="504" end="516" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q16996422" start="650" end="671" title="I&amp;#x27;ll Go On Alone" label="I&amp;#x27;ll Go On Alone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3372814" start="735" end="752" title="Singing the Blues" label="Singing the Blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q4660625" start="816" end="834" title="A White Sport Coat" label="A White Sport Coat"/>
<link wikidata="Q7766782" start="851" end="871" title="The Story of My Life (Marty Robbins song)" label="The Story of My Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q5351760" start="931" end="938" title="El Paso (song)" label="El Paso"/>
<link wikidata="Q5593781" start="967" end="1020" title="Grammy Award for Best Country &amp;amp; Western Recording" label="Grammy Award for Best Country &amp;amp; Western Recording"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425111" start="1068" end="1075" title="Western music (North America)" label="western"/>
<link wikidata="Q5292065" start="1193" end="1209" title="Don&amp;#x27;t Worry (Marty Robbins song)" label="Don&amp;#x27;t Worry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2902257" start="1223" end="1231" title="Big Iron" label="Big Iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q5267325" start="1245" end="1256" title="Devil Woman (Marty Robbins song)" label="Devil Woman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1627161" start="1317" end="1341" title="Honkytonk Man" label="1982 Clint Eastwood film"/>
<link wikidata="Q6777535" start="1476" end="1499" title="Marty Robbins discography" label="500 songs and 60 albums"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="1513" end="1526" title="Grammy Awards" label="Grammy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q680685" start="1547" end="1573" title="Country Music Hall of Fame" label="Country Music Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q376125" start="1578" end="1612" title="Nashville Songwriters Hall of Fame" label="Nashville Songwriters Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q337316" start="1666" end="1690" title="Academy of Country Music" label="Academy of Country Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q2565003" start="1766" end="1792" title="Western Writers of America" label="Western Writers of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q42775" start="1974" end="1985" title="Johnny Cash" label="Johnny Cash"/>
<link wikidata="Q212533" start="1991" end="2004" title="Grateful Dead" label="Grateful Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q303" start="2009" end="2022" title="Elvis Presley" label="Elvis Presley"/>
<link wikidata="Q51682" start="2334" end="2342" title="Glendale, Arizona" label="Glendale"/>
<link wikidata="Q16556" start="2356" end="2363" title="Phoenix, Arizona" label="Phoenix"/>
<link wikidata="Q58691" start="2367" end="2382" title="Maricopa County, Arizona" label="Maricopa County"/>
<link wikidata="Q12612" start="2584" end="2597" title="American West" label="American West"/>
<link wikidata="Q266750" start="2724" end="2736" title="medicine man" label="medicine man"/>
<link wikidata="Q51682" start="3105" end="3122" title="Glendale, Arizona" label="Glendale, Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="3308" end="3317" title="United States Navy" label="U.S. Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1169332" start="3324" end="3327" title="Landing craft tank" label="LCT"/>
<link wikidata="Q15647248" start="3328" end="3336" title="coxswain" label="coxswain"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="3344" end="3356" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q685" start="3382" end="3397" title="Solomon Islands" label="Solomon Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="3405" end="3418" title="Pacific Ocean" label="Pacific Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071834" start="3524" end="3538" title="Hawaiian music" label="Hawaiian music"/>
<link wikidata="Q843610" start="3551" end="3560" title="Military discharge" label="discharge"/>
<link wikidata="Q8719053" start="3655" end="3661" title="Music venue" label="venues"/>
<link wikidata="Q16556" start="3665" end="3672" title="Phoenix, Arizona" label="Phoenix"/>
<link wikidata="Q2722764" start="3711" end="3715" title="Host (radio)" label="host"/>
<link wikidata="Q6330753" start="3732" end="3736" title="KIHP (AM)" label="KTYL"/>
<link wikidata="Q3191480" start="3801" end="3808" title="KPHO" label="KPHO-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q16556" start="3812" end="3819" title="Phoenix, Arizona" label="Phoenix"/>
<link wikidata="Q706417" start="3827" end="3847" title="Little Jimmy Dickens" label="Little Jimmy Dickens"/>
<link wikidata="Q28228" start="3855" end="3871" title="guest appearance" label="guest appearance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754168" start="3920" end="3931" title="record deal" label="record deal"/>
<link wikidata="Q183387" start="3937" end="3953" title="Columbia Records" label="Columbia Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q7098695" start="4016" end="4030" title="Grand Ole Opry" label="Grand Ole Opry"/>
<link wikidata="Q23197" start="4034" end="4043" title="Nashville, Tennessee" label="Nashville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509" start="4045" end="4054" title="Tennessee" label="Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q348868" start="4073" end="4084" title="Mary Harron" label="Mary Harron"/>
<link wikidata="Q83440" start="4209" end="4216" title="Country music" label="country"/>
<link wikidata="Q964658" start="4278" end="4291" title="outlaw country" label="outlaw school"/>
<link wikidata="Q251287" start="4301" end="4316" title="Waylon Jennings" label="Waylon Jennings"/>
<link wikidata="Q206112" start="4321" end="4334" title="Willie Nelson" label="Willie Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q362435" start="4360" end="4370" title="Jim Reeves" label="Jim Reeves"/>
<link wikidata="Q7749" start="4506" end="4529" title="Rock and roll" label="rock &amp;#x27;n&amp;#x27; roll"/>
<link wikidata="Q83440" start="4538" end="4545" title="Country music" label="country"/>
<link wikidata="Q215616" start="4699" end="4702" title="PBS" label="PBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q3305766" start="4723" end="4741" title="Austin City Limits" label="Austin City Limits"/>
<link wikidata="Q5386" start="4828" end="4836" title="race car" label="race car"/>
<link wikidata="Q476300" start="4845" end="4854" title="Competition" label="competing"/>
<link wikidata="Q233929" start="4868" end="4874" title="NASCAR" label="NASCAR"/>
<link wikidata="Q9048316" start="4875" end="4896" title="Grand National Series" label="Grand National Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q4575603" start="4948" end="4963" title="1973 Medal of Honor Firecracker 400" label="Firecracker 400"/>
<link wikidata="Q12124739" start="5026" end="5040" title="Hell on Wheels (1967 film)" label="Hell on Wheels"/>
<link wikidata="Q27564" start="5071" end="5076" title="Dodge" label="Dodge"/>
<link wikidata="Q233929" start="5090" end="5096" title="NASCAR" label="NASCAR"/>
<link wikidata="Q5175715" start="5111" end="5123" title="Cotton Owens" label="Cotton Owens"/>
<link wikidata="Q669856" start="5145" end="5153" title="Dodge Charger" label="Chargers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234289" start="5170" end="5182" title="Dodge Magnum" label="Dodge Magnum"/>
<link wikidata="Q8032" start="5219" end="5235" title="Indianapolis 500" label="Indianapolis 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q651942" start="5236" end="5249" title="Buick Century" label="Buick Century"/>
<link wikidata="Q173089" start="5250" end="5258" title="pace car" label="pace car"/>
<link wikidata="Q280441" start="5262" end="5266" title="1976 Indianapolis 500" label="1976"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094434" start="5291" end="5305" title="Junior Johnson" label="Junior Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002872" start="5317" end="5328" title="Buick Regal" label="Buick Regal"/>
<link wikidata="Q380068" start="5336" end="5355" title="Atlanta Journal 500" label="Atlanta Journal 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q389735" start="5604" end="5626" title="cardiovascular disease" label="cardiovascular disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q186020" start="5757" end="5790" title="Coronary artery bypass surgery" label="quadruple coronary bypass surgery"/>
<link wikidata="Q7402238" start="5854" end="5873" title="St. Thomas Hospital (Nashville, Tennessee)" label="St. Thomas Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q23197" start="5877" end="5886" title="Nashville, Tennessee" label="Nashville"/>
<link wikidata="Q4660625" start="6184" end="6223" title="A White Sport Coat" label="A White Sport Coat and a Pink Carnation"/>
<link wikidata="Q241365" start="6467" end="6478" title="music recording sales certification" label="gold record"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="6520" end="6532" title="Grammy Award" label="Grammy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q5351760" start="6575" end="6582" title="El Paso (song)" label="El Paso"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028780" start="6617" end="6651" title="Gunfighter Ballads and Trail Songs" label="Gunfighter Ballads and Trail Songs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5292065" start="6785" end="6801" title="Don&amp;#x27;t Worry (Marty Robbins song)" label="Don&amp;#x27;t Worry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5351763" start="7010" end="7022" title="El Paso City (song)" label="El Paso City"/>
<link wikidata="Q2903740" start="7148" end="7160" title="Billy Thorpe" label="Billy Thorpe"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="7174" end="7186" title="Grammy Award" label="Grammy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q104841613" start="7267" end="7306" title="More Gunfighter Ballads and Trail Songs" label="More Gunfighter Ballads and Trail Songs"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="7334" end="7346" title="Grammy Award" label="Grammy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q337316" start="7481" end="7505" title="Academy of Country Music" label="Academy of Country Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q680685" start="7526" end="7552" title="Country Music Hall of Fame" label="Country Music Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q81180" start="7663" end="7688" title="Grammy Hall of Fame Award" label="Grammy Hall of Fame Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272855" start="7808" end="7823" title="Bradley Studios" label="Bradley Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541282" start="7856" end="7868" title="Grady Martin" label="Grady Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q899871" start="7910" end="7933" title="Distortion (music)" label="&amp;quot;fuzz&amp;quot; effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q654117" start="8010" end="8024" title="mixing console" label="mixing console"/>
<link wikidata="Q376125" start="8178" end="8212" title="Nashville Songwriters Hall of Fame" label="Nashville Songwriters Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q71719" start="8296" end="8318" title="Hollywood Walk of Fame" label="Hollywood Walk of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q868616" start="8327" end="8346" title="Hollywood Boulevard" label="Hollywood Boulevard"/>
<link wikidata="Q212533" start="8403" end="8416" title="Grateful Dead" label="Grateful Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q888316" start="8453" end="8461" title="Bob Weir" label="Bob Weir"/>
<link wikidata="Q93346" start="8511" end="8518" title="The Who" label="The Who"/>
<link wikidata="Q2005304" start="8543" end="8555" title="Endless Wire (The Who album)" label="Endless Wire"/>
<link wikidata="Q26933" start="8647" end="8661" title="Pete Townshend" label="Pete Townshend"/>
<link wikidata="Q744376" start="8839" end="8856" title="Beasts of Bourbon" label="Beasts of Bourbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q342774" start="8986" end="8999" title="Frankie Laine" label="Frankie Laine"/>
<link wikidata="Q303" start="9004" end="9017" title="Elvis Presley" label="Elvis Presley"/>
<link wikidata="Q928283" start="9079" end="9101" title="You Gave Me a Mountain" label="You Gave Me a Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q42775" start="9393" end="9404" title="Johnny Cash" label="Johnny Cash"/>
<link wikidata="Q2902257" start="9433" end="9441" title="Big Iron" label="Big Iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q2412260" start="9771" end="9790" title="The Johnny Cash Show (TV series)" label="his network TV show"/>
<link wikidata="Q713521" start="9833" end="9842" title="Mike Ness" label="Mike Ness"/>
<link wikidata="Q4004580" start="9862" end="9882" title="Under the Influences" label="Under the Influences"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028780" start="10004" end="10038" title="Gunfighter Ballads and Trail Songs" label="Gunfighter Ballads and Trail Songs"/>
<link wikidata="Q15015184" start="10177" end="10190" title="Felina (Breaking Bad)" label="series finale"/>
<link wikidata="Q294660" start="10198" end="10201" title="AMC (TV channel)" label="AMC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079" start="10218" end="10230" title="Breaking Bad" label="Breaking Bad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247858" start="10289" end="10310" title="Only Fools and Horses" label="Only Fools and Horses"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="10337" end="10340" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q139901" start="10385" end="10412" title="Northern Arizona University" label="Northern Arizona University"/>
<link wikidata="Q57339" start="10442" end="10452" title="Don McLean" label="Don McLean"/>
<link wikidata="Q7524189" start="10479" end="10498" title="Sings Marty Robbins" label="Sings Marty Robbins"/>
<link wikidata="Q51682" start="10646" end="10654" title="Glendale, Arizona" label="Glendale"/>
<link wikidata="Q816" start="10656" end="10663" title="Arizona" label="Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q35525" start="10765" end="10776" title="White House" label="White House"/>
<link wikidata="Q40912" start="10811" end="10824" title="Frank Sinatra" label="Frank Sinatra"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10865" end="10889" title="List of Academy of Country Music Awards ceremonies#1970s" label="Academy of Country Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q5254589" start="11025" end="11054" title="Opposition to United States involvement in the Vietnam War" label="opposition to the Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q319129" start="11133" end="11148" title="Barry Goldwater" label="Barry Goldwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q699646" start="11156" end="11196" title="1964 United States presidential election" label="1964 United States presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q111167892" start="11286" end="11304" title="Ain&amp;#x27;t I Right" label="Ain&amp;#x27;t I Right"/>
<link wikidata="Q5254589" start="11497" end="11516" title="Opposition to United States involvement in the Vietnam War" label="anti-war protesters"/>
<link wikidata="Q191594" start="11520" end="11532" title="fifth column" label="fifth column"/>
<link wikidata="Q4744322" start="11541" end="11552" title="Communists in the United States" label="communists."/>
<link wikidata="Q7521237" start="11692" end="11704" title="Sims Records" label="Sims Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q233929" start="11769" end="11775" title="NASCAR" label="NASCAR"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547320" start="11902" end="11925" title="Talladega Superspeedway" label="Talladega Superspeedway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179250" start="11927" end="11957" title="Daytona International Speedway" label="Daytona International Speedway"/>
<link wikidata="Q108486123" start="12121" end="12136" title="Motor State 360" label="Motor State 360"/>
<link wikidata="Q5175715" start="12199" end="12211" title="Cotton Owens" label="Cotton Owens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124857" start="12383" end="12391" title="Plymouth (automobile)" label="Plymouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q27564" start="12394" end="12399" title="Dodge" label="Dodge"/>
<link wikidata="Q44294" start="12404" end="12409" title="Ford Motor Company" label="Fords"/>
<link wikidata="Q669856" start="12439" end="12452" title="Dodge Charger" label="Dodge Charger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234289" start="12636" end="12648" title="Dodge Magnum" label="Dodge Magnum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002872" start="12747" end="12758" title="Buick Regal" label="Buick Regal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4575207" start="12834" end="12845" title="1972 Winston 500" label="Winston 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q233929" start="13061" end="13067" title="NASCAR" label="NASCAR"/>
<link wikidata="Q165435" start="13100" end="13110" title="carburetor" label="carburetor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7324733" start="13243" end="13260" title="Richard Childress" label="Richard Childress"/>
<link wikidata="Q841675" start="13516" end="13536" title="Fairgrounds Speedway" label="Fairgrounds Speedway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129898" start="13541" end="13558" title="Coors 420" label="Marty Robbins 420"/>
<link wikidata="Q844837" start="13739" end="13758" title="Southern California" label="Southern California"/>
<link wikidata="Q233929" start="13784" end="13790" title="NASCAR" label="NASCAR"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234165" start="13834" end="13855" title="Dodge Charger Daytona" label="Dodge Charger Daytona"/>
<link wikidata="Q43404" start="13886" end="13903" title="Discovery Channel" label="Discovery Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q11465" start="13992" end="14000" title="Velocity" label="Velocity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7297461" start="14059" end="14071" title="Ray Evernham" label="Ray Evernham"/>
<link wikidata="Q233929" start="14129" end="14135" title="NASCAR" label="NASCAR"/>
<link wikidata="Q1652882" start="14151" end="14169" title="Plymouth Belvedere" label="Plymouth Belvedere"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166378" start="14185" end="14195" title="Darlington Raceway" label="Darlington"/>
<link wikidata="Q5308142" start="14215" end="14226" title="Kyle Larson" label="Kyle Larson"/>
<link wikidata="Q233929" start="14241" end="14247" title="NASCAR" label="NASCAR"/>
<link wikidata="Q645499" start="14248" end="14262" title="Xfinity Series" label="Xfinity Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q106631095" start="14324" end="14341" title="2021 Goodyear 400" label="2021 Goodyear 400"/>
<link wikidata="Q16239757" start="14343" end="14356" title="Tyler Reddick" label="Tyler Reddick"/>
<link wikidata="Q233929" start="14371" end="14377" title="Nascar" label="Nascar"/>
<link wikidata="Q111630703" start="14457" end="14469" title="2022 Goodyear 400" label="2022 running"/>
<link wikidata="Q16233948" start="14471" end="14483" title="Corey LaJoie" label="Corey LaJoie"/>
<link wikidata="Q65091422" start="14491" end="14508" title="Spire Motorsports" label="Spire Motorsports"/>
<link wikidata="Q222910" start="14666" end="14683" title="compilation album" label="compilation album"/>
<link wikidata="Q862771" start="14785" end="14802" title="Hot Country Songs" label="Hot Country Songs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028780" start="14900" end="14934" title="Gunfighter Ballads and Trail Songs" label="Gunfighter Ballads and Trail Songs"/>
<link wikidata="Q188819" start="14976" end="15001" title="Billboard 200" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q200863" start="15042" end="15083" title="Recording Industry Association of America" label="Recording Industry Association of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q5351760" start="15122" end="15129" title="El Paso (song)" label="El Paso"/>
<link wikidata="Q180072" start="15249" end="15278" title="Billboard Hot 100" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q4660625" start="15340" end="15358" title="A White Sport Coat" label="A White Sport Coat"/>
<link wikidata="Q5292065" start="15399" end="15415" title="Don&amp;#x27;t Worry (Marty Robbins song)" label="Don&amp;#x27;t Worry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1627161" start="15506" end="15520" title="Honkytonk Man" label="eponymous film"/>
<link wikidata="Q114363290" start="15608" end="15618" title="Posthumous publication" label="posthumous"/>
<link wikidata="Q10856894" start="15717" end="15745" title="The Badge of Marshal Brennan" label="The Badge of Marshal Brennan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7283787" start="15806" end="15831" title="Raiders of Old California" label="Raiders of Old California"/>
<link wikidata="Q115516898" start="15881" end="15892" title="Buffalo Gun (film)" label="Buffalo Gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q130794195" start="15970" end="15996" title="The Ballad of a Gunfighter" label="The Ballad of a Gunfighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q24905881" start="16191" end="16212" title="The Road to Nashville" label="The Road to Nashville"/>
<link wikidata="Q12124739" start="16266" end="16280" title="Hell on Wheels (1967 film)" label="Hell on Wheels"/>
<link wikidata="Q21869391" start="16521" end="16539" title="Guns of a Stranger" label="Guns of a Stranger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1627161" start="16590" end="16603" title="Honkytonk Man" label="Honkytonk Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q680685" start="17363" end="17389" title="Country Music Hall of Fame" label="Country Music Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q2549530" start="17408" end="17433" title="Western Music Association" label="Western Music Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q376125" start="17452" end="17486" title="Nashville Songwriters Hall of Fame" label="Nashville Songwriters Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q31181" start="17518" end="17526" title="AllMusic" label="AllMusic"/>
<link wikidata="Q233929" start="17562" end="17568" title="NASCAR" label="NASCAR"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="191362" wikidata="Q2035435" url="?curid=191362" title="Trölladyngja">
<text>Situated in the Ódáðahraun lava field, Trölladyngja () is the biggest of the Icelandic shield volcanoes, reaching a height of above sea level, and rising almost above the surrounding desert and lava fields. It part of the Bárðarbunga volcanic system and has a volume of with some extensive lava flows to the north of Bárðarbunga.

It is about in diameter and its inclination is 4 to 5° in the lower slopes, but 6 to 8° at higher elevations. Its oblong crater is about in length, broad, and about deep.

Most of its tholeiitic basalt lava fields have flowed in a northerly direction, and the definite lava field has been dated at less than 4500 years old. Composition studies allow the separation of Trölladyngja lavas with their Bárðarbunga associations from other nearby older and younger Bárðarbunga basaltic lavas. This includes a Bárðarbunga volcanic system origin lava field branch, that possibly erupted from the fissure swarm south of Trölladyngja before 8000 years ago, that reached the valley of Bárðardalur, a distance of roughly and quite close to the northern Iceland sea coast. The shield volcano itself is situated north of latitude 64.7° where the strike direction of the fissure swarms formed in the last 10 million years and the 2014 dyke intrusion from Bárðarbunga towards the north have the orientation of the Northern volcanic zone. The Bárðarbunga central volcano to the south is definitely in the Eastern volcanic zone.

Reports of an eruption in 1961 at Trölladyngja are most likely attributed to nearby Askja Caldera, which erupted the same year. A potential confusion also exists geographically as in the distant past the name Trölladyngja had been used by some when writing about the Askja (Dynjufjöll, Dyngjufjall) volcanic system The volcano can now be definitely assigned to the Bárðarbunga volcanic system. The volcano and its lava flows overlay older lava that is about 8000 years old.

== See also ==

* Volcanism of Iceland
** List of volcanic eruptions in Iceland
** List of volcanoes in Iceland

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="None" start="16" end="26" title="Ódáðahraun" label="Ódáðahraun"/>
<link wikidata="Q488416" start="27" end="37" title="Lava plain" label="lava field"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035435" start="39" end="51" title="Trölladyngja" label="Trölladyngja"/>
<link wikidata="Q189" start="77" end="84" title="Iceland" label="Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q212057" start="87" end="101" title="shield volcano" label="shield volcano"/>
<link wikidata="Q125465" start="132" end="141" title="sea level" label="sea level"/>
<link wikidata="Q8514" start="183" end="189" title="desert" label="desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018862" start="222" end="233" title="Bárðarbunga" label="Bárðarbunga"/>
<link wikidata="Q2106459" start="515" end="532" title="tholeiitic basalt" label="tholeiitic basalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q40157" start="533" end="537" title="lava" label="lava"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1005" end="1016" title="Bárðardalur" label="Bárðardalur"/>
<link wikidata="Q662806" start="1251" end="1255" title="dike (geology)" label="dyke"/>
<link wikidata="Q61041319" start="1256" end="1265" title="Igneous intrusion" label="intrusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018862" start="1271" end="1282" title="Bárðarbunga" label="Bárðarbunga"/>
<link wikidata="Q28224929" start="1329" end="1351" title="North volcanic zone of Iceland" label="Northern volcanic zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q28224929" start="1419" end="1440" title="East volcanic zone of Iceland" label="Eastern volcanic zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q211665" start="1527" end="1540" title="Askja" label="Askja Caldera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018862" start="1808" end="1819" title="Bárðarbunga" label="Bárðarbunga"/>
<link wikidata="Q11282196" start="1936" end="1956" title="Volcanism of Iceland" label="Volcanism of Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q16423112" start="1960" end="1997" title="List of volcanic eruptions in Iceland" label="List of volcanic eruptions in Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q349932" start="2001" end="2029" title="List of volcanoes in Iceland" label="List of volcanoes in Iceland"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="191365" wikidata="Q12817455" url="?curid=191365" title="County of Nassau">
<text>The County of Nassau was a German state within the Holy Roman Empire and later part of the German Confederation. Its ruling dynasty, the male line of which is now extinct, was the House of Nassau.

==Origins==
Nassau, originally a county, developed on the lower Lahn river in what is known today as Rhineland-Palatinate. The town of Nassau was founded in 915. Dudo of Laurenburg held Nassau as a fiefdom as granted by the Bishopric of Worms. His son, Rupert, built the Nassau Castle there around 1125, declaring himself &quot;Count of Nassau&quot;. This title was not officially acknowledged by the Bishop of Worms until 1159 under the rule of Rupert&#x27;s son, Walram. By 1159, the County of Nassau effectively claimed rights of taxation, toll collection, and justice, at which point it can be considered to become a state.

The Nassauers held the territory between the Taunus and the Westerwald at the lower and middle Lahn. By 1128, they acquired the bailiwick of the Bishopric of Worms, which had numerous rights in the area, and thus created a link between their heritage at the lower Lahn and their possessions near Siegen. In the middle of the 12th century, this relationship was strengthened by the acquisition of parts of the Hesse-Thüringen feudal kingdom, namely the &quot;Herborner Mark&quot;, the &quot;Kalenberger Zent&quot; and the Court of Heimau (Löhnberg). Closely linked to this was the &quot;Lordship of Westerwald&quot;, also in Nassau&#x27;s possession at the time. At the end of the 12th century, the House acquired the &quot;Reichshof&quot; Wiesbaden, an important base in the southwest.

In 1255, after the Counts of Nassau acquired the estates of Weilburg, the sons of Count Henry II divided Nassau for the first time. Walram II received the county of Nassau-Weilburg. From 1328 on, his younger brother, Otto I, held the estates north of the Lahn river, namely the County of Nassau-Siegen and Nassau-Dillenburg. The boundary line was essentially the Lahn, with Otto receiving the northern part of the county with the cities of Siegen, Dillenburg, Herborn and Haiger and Walram retaining the section south of the river, including the cities of Weilburg and Idstein.

===County of Nassau-Weilburg===
Walram&#x27;s son Adolf became King of Germany in 1292. His son Count Gerlach abdicated in 1344 and the county was divided under his sons in 1355
*County of Nassau-Weilburg, again divided from 1442 to 1574
**County of Nassau-Saarbrücken (Elder)
**County of Nassau-Weilburg
*County of Nassau-Wiesbaden, again divided from 1480 to 1509
**County of Nassau-Idstein
**County of Nassau-Wiesbaden
fell back to Nassau-Weilburg in 1605
*County of Nassau-Sonnenberg, partitioned among Nassau-Wiesbaden and Nassau-Weilburg in 1405
In 1605, all parts of Nassau-Weilburg were again unified under Count Louis II; however, after his death in 1627, his sons divided the county again
*County of Nassau-Idstein, fell to Nassau-Ottweiler in 1721
*County of Nassau-Saarbrücken (Younger), divided again in 1640
**County of Nassau-Saarbrücken, fell to Nassau-Ottweiler in 1723
**County of Nassau-Ottweiler, fell to Nassau-Usingen in 1728
**County of Nassau-Usingen, Principality in 1688
*County of Nassau-Weilburg (Younger)
After Nassau-Usingen had inherited Nassau-Ottweiler with former Nassau-Idstein and Nassau-Saarbrücken, it was reunified with Nassau-Weilburg and raised to the Duchy of Nassau in 1806.

===County of Nassau-Dillenburg===
After the death of Count Otto I, his county was divided between his sons in 1303:
*County of Nassau-Dillenburg, fell to Nassau-Siegen in 1328
*County of Nassau-Hadamar (Elder), fell to Nassau-Dillenburg in 1394
*County of Nassau-Siegen, called Nassau-Dillenburg from 1328 on, again got divided from 1341 to 1561:
**County of Nassau-Beilstein (Elder)
**County of Nassau-Dillenburg (Elder)–1606)

In 1504, Henry III of Nassau-Dillenburg inherited the county&#x27;s estates at Breda in the Duchy of Brabant, while his younger brother William became Count of Nassau-Dillenburg in 1516. After the son of Henry III, René of Châlon died in 1544, Count William&#x27;s eldest son William the Silent became Prince of Orange and Lord of Breda, Stadtholder in the Low Countries from 1559 on. His younger brother, John VI, again reunited all Nassau-Dillenburg possessions in 1561, though the county was again divided after his death in 1606.

*County of Nassau-Hadamar (Younger), Principality in 1650, fell to Nassau-Diez in 1743
*County of Nassau-Siegen, (1607–23), again got divided from 1623 to 1734:
** County of Nassau-Siegen (Protestant), Principality in 1664, became extinct in 1734
** County of Nassau-Siegen (Catholic), Principality, fell to Nassau-Diez in 1743
*County of Nassau-Dillenburg, fell to Nassau-Beilstein in 1620
*County of Nassau-Beilstein (Younger), called Nassau-Dillenburg (Younger) from 1620 on, Principality in 1652, fell to Nassau-Dietz in 1739
*County of Nassau-Dietz, fell to Joachim Murat&#x27;s Grand Duchy of Berg after the dissolution of the Holy Roman Empire in 1806

The Counts of Nassau-Dietz, descendants of William Frederick were stadtholders of Friesland, Groningen and Drenthe and Princes of Orange from 1702 on. When they lost their Dutch possessions during the Napoleonic Wars, they were compensated with the Principality of Nassau-Orange-Fulda. Though they lost their German possessions in 1806, the House of Orange-Nassau, through female succession, was the reigning house of the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg until 1890 and is still the royal house of the Netherlands.

==Rulers==

===House of Nassau===

====Partitions of Nassau under House of Nassau rule====
====Table of rulers====

==Nassau&#x27;s successor states==
===Kings and Queens of the Netherlands (from the House of Orange-Nassau-Dietz)===

*1815–1840: William I, also Duke and Grand Duke of Luxemburg and Duke of Limburg
*1840–1849: William II, also Grand Duke of Luxemburg and Duke of Limburg
*1849–1890: William III, also Grand Duke of Luxemburg and Duke of Limburg
*1890–1948: Wilhelmina
Following defunct German laws that no longer have relevance due to the end of German nobility, the House of Orange-Nassau(-Dietz) has been extinct since the death of Wilhelmina (1962). Dutch laws and the Dutch nation do not consider it extinct.
*1948–1980: Juliana
*1980–2013: Beatrix
*2013-&quot;present&quot;: Willem-Alexander

===Grand Dukes of Luxembourg (from the House of Nassau-Weilburg)===
*1890–1905: Adolphe
*1905–1912: William IV
*1912–1919: Marie-Adélaïde, succession through a female onwards
*1919–1964: Charlotte
*1964–2000: Jean
*2000–present: Henri

==See also==
* House of Nassau
* County of Nassau-Saarbrücken
* Duchy of Nassau

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q12817455" start="4" end="20" title="County of Nassau" label="County of Nassau"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="51" end="68" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q151624" start="91" end="111" title="German Confederation" label="German Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q646085" start="180" end="195" title="House of Nassau" label="House of Nassau"/>
<link wikidata="Q103148" start="262" end="266" title="Lahn" label="Lahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200" start="299" end="319" title="Rhineland-Palatinate" label="Rhineland-Palatinate"/>
<link wikidata="Q158216" start="333" end="339" title="Nassau, Rhineland-Palatinate" label="Nassau"/>
<link wikidata="Q320154" start="360" end="378" title="Dudo of Laurenburg" label="Dudo of Laurenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q188063" start="396" end="403" title="fiefdom" label="fiefdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q314994" start="422" end="440" title="Bishopric of Worms" label="Bishopric of Worms"/>
<link wikidata="Q317022" start="451" end="457" title="Rupert I, Count of Laurenburg" label="Rupert"/>
<link wikidata="Q144672" start="469" end="482" title="Nassau Castle" label="Nassau Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q158884" start="872" end="878" title="Taunus" label="Taunus"/>
<link wikidata="Q640966" start="887" end="897" title="Westerwald" label="Westerwald"/>
<link wikidata="Q4996207" start="955" end="964" title="bailiwick" label="bailiwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q314994" start="972" end="990" title="Bishopric of Worms" label="Bishopric of Worms"/>
<link wikidata="Q3167" start="1123" end="1129" title="Siegen" label="Siegen"/>
<link wikidata="Q18998" start="1285" end="1292" title="Herborn (Hesse)" label="Herborn"/>
<link wikidata="Q599984" start="1365" end="1373" title="Löhnberg" label="Löhnberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1721" start="1566" end="1575" title="Wiesbaden" label="Wiesbaden"/>
<link wikidata="Q573599" start="1674" end="1682" title="Weilburg" label="Weilburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q317007" start="1702" end="1710" title="Henry II, Count of Nassau" label="Henry II"/>
<link wikidata="Q469260" start="1746" end="1755" title="Walram II, Count of Nassau" label="Walram II"/>
<link wikidata="Q697685" start="1779" end="1794" title="Nassau-Weilburg" label="Nassau-Weilburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q462493" start="1831" end="1837" title="Otto I, Count of Nassau" label="Otto I"/>
<link wikidata="Q103148" start="1869" end="1873" title="Lahn" label="Lahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q12817455" start="1920" end="1937" title="Nassau-Dillenburg" label="Nassau-Dillenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q3167" start="2054" end="2060" title="Siegen" label="Siegen"/>
<link wikidata="Q517381" start="2062" end="2072" title="Dillenburg" label="Dillenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q18998" start="2074" end="2081" title="Herborn (Hesse)" label="Herborn"/>
<link wikidata="Q516448" start="2086" end="2092" title="Haiger" label="Haiger"/>
<link wikidata="Q573599" start="2170" end="2178" title="Weilburg" label="Weilburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q525659" start="2183" end="2190" title="Idstein" label="Idstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q160101" start="2243" end="2248" title="Adolf, King of the Romans" label="Adolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q7883514" start="2256" end="2271" title="King of Germany" label="King of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q68712" start="2295" end="2302" title="Gerlach I, Count of Nassau-Wiesbaden" label="Gerlach"/>
<link wikidata="Q697685" start="2382" end="2397" title="Nassau-Weilburg" label="Nassau-Weilburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q15128058" start="2443" end="2461" title="Nassau-Saarbrücken" label="Nassau-Saarbrücken"/>
<link wikidata="Q559437" start="2814" end="2822" title="Louis II, Count of Nassau-Weilburg" label="Louis II"/>
<link wikidata="Q468096" start="3118" end="3132" title="Nassau-Usingen" label="Nassau-Usingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q836680" start="3386" end="3401" title="Duchy of Nassau" label="Duchy of Nassau"/>
<link wikidata="Q69450" start="3850" end="3880" title="Henry III of Nassau-Breda" label="Henry III of Nassau-Dillenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q40844" start="3920" end="3925" title="Breda" label="Breda"/>
<link wikidata="Q159856" start="3933" end="3949" title="Duchy of Brabant" label="Duchy of Brabant"/>
<link wikidata="Q688471" start="3977" end="3984" title="William I, Count of Nassau-Siegen" label="William"/>
<link wikidata="Q654855" start="4056" end="4070" title="René of Châlon" label="René of Châlon"/>
<link wikidata="Q78454" start="4117" end="4135" title="William the Silent" label="William the Silent"/>
<link wikidata="Q549449" start="4143" end="4159" title="Prince of Orange" label="Prince of Orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q325380" start="4179" end="4190" title="Stadtholder" label="Stadtholder"/>
<link wikidata="Q476033" start="4198" end="4211" title="Low Countries" label="Low Countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q71434" start="4247" end="4254" title="John VI, Count of Nassau-Dillenburg" label="John VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q151173" start="4939" end="4952" title="Joachim Murat" label="Joachim Murat"/>
<link wikidata="Q249428" start="4960" end="4979" title="Grand Duchy of Berg" label="Grand Duchy of Berg"/>
<link wikidata="Q702722" start="5079" end="5096" title="William Frederick, Prince of Nassau-Dietz" label="William Frederick"/>
<link wikidata="Q770" start="5118" end="5127" title="Friesland" label="Friesland"/>
<link wikidata="Q752" start="5129" end="5138" title="Groningen (province)" label="Groningen"/>
<link wikidata="Q772" start="5143" end="5150" title="Drenthe" label="Drenthe"/>
<link wikidata="Q549449" start="5155" end="5172" title="Princes of Orange" label="Princes of Orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q78994" start="5237" end="5252" title="Napoleonic Wars" label="Napoleonic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q3403552" start="5285" end="5320" title="Principality of Nassau-Orange-Fulda" label="Principality of Nassau-Orange-Fulda"/>
<link wikidata="Q155483" start="5377" end="5399" title="House of Orange-Nassau" label="House of Orange-Nassau"/>
<link wikidata="Q32" start="5473" end="5483" title="Luxembourg" label="Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="5531" end="5542" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q646085" start="5560" end="5575" title="House of Nassau" label="House of Nassau"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079957" start="5791" end="5800" title="William I of the Netherlands" label="William I"/>
<link wikidata="Q154287" start="5872" end="5882" title="William II of the Netherlands" label="William II"/>
<link wikidata="Q125649" start="5945" end="5956" title="William III of the Netherlands" label="William III"/>
<link wikidata="Q150747" start="6019" end="6029" title="Wilhelmina of the Netherlands" label="Wilhelmina"/>
<link wikidata="Q154946" start="6287" end="6294" title="Juliana of the Netherlands" label="Juliana"/>
<link wikidata="Q29574" start="6307" end="6314" title="Beatrix of the Netherlands" label="Beatrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q154952" start="6342" end="6358" title="Willem-Alexander of the Netherlands" label="Willem-Alexander"/>
<link wikidata="Q57302" start="6440" end="6447" title="Adolphe, Grand Duke of Luxembourg" label="Adolphe"/>
<link wikidata="Q158235" start="6460" end="6470" title="William IV, Grand Duke of Luxembourg" label="William IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q159075" start="6483" end="6497" title="Marie-Adélaïde, Grand Duchess of Luxembourg" label="Marie-Adélaïde"/>
<link wikidata="Q155608" start="6547" end="6556" title="Charlotte, Grand Duchess of Luxembourg" label="Charlotte"/>
<link wikidata="Q15988" start="6569" end="6573" title="Jean, Grand Duke of Luxembourg" label="Jean"/>
<link wikidata="Q16004" start="6589" end="6594" title="Henri, Grand Duke of Luxembourg" label="Henri"/>
<link wikidata="Q646085" start="6611" end="6626" title="House of Nassau" label="House of Nassau"/>
<link wikidata="Q15128058" start="6629" end="6657" title="County of Nassau-Saarbrücken" label="County of Nassau-Saarbrücken"/>
<link wikidata="Q836680" start="6660" end="6675" title="Duchy of Nassau" label="Duchy of Nassau"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="191366" wikidata="Q1215730" url="?curid=191366" title="Nassau">
<text>Nassau, derived from the town of Nassau on the Lahn River in Rhineland-Palatinate, Germany, gained historical significance through the House of Nassau. The noble dynasty later formed the Dutch royal House of Orange-Nassau following William I&#x27;s inheritance of the Principality of Orange in 1544, leading to the adoption of the name Nassau across various locations and institutions worldwide. The name traces its etymology to German &quot;nass&quot; (wet) and &quot;Au(e)&quot; (floodplain).

Nassau may refer to:

== Places ==
===Austria===
* Nassau (Groß Sankt Florian), incorporated village of Groß Sankt Florian

===Bahamas===
*Nassau, The Bahamas, capital city of the Bahamas, on the island of New Providence

===Canada===
*Nassau District, renamed Home District, regional division in Upper Canada from 1788 to 1792
*Nassau Street (Winnipeg), Manitoba
*Nassau Street, Toronto

===Cook Islands===
*Nassau (Cook Islands), one of the Northern Cook Islands

===Germany===
====Connected with Nassau, Rhineland-Palatinate====
* Nassau (region), the broader geographical and historical region comprising the former independent country of Nassau
* Nassau, Rhineland-Palatinate, a town founded in AD 915
* Bad Ems-Nassau, a collective municipality including the towns of Bad Ems and Nassau and its surrounding areas
* Nassau Castle, the ancestral seat of the House of Nassau
* Nassau Nature Park, a major nature park in Germany located within the historical state of Nassau
* County of Nassau, a German state within the Holy Roman Empire during the Middle Ages, or one of its many successor counties
* Duchy of Nassau, an independent German state between 1806 and 1866 and the ultimate successor of the medieval county
* Hesse-Nassau, a Prussian province formed following their annexation of the Duchy of Nassau (along with other territories)
* Province of Nassau, a short-lived province of Nazi Germany (1944–1945) created from the formal division of Hesse-Nassau 

====Other places in Germany====
* Nassau, Saxony, an incorporated village of Frauenstein in the Erzgebirge (Ore Mountains), Saxony
Nassau the Established County or State within the German Confederation or the HRE

===Indonesia===
*Nassau, a subdistrict in Toba Samosir Regency, North Sumatra
*Nassau Range, alternate name of the Sudirman Range in Indonesia

===Ireland===
*Nassau Street, Dublin

===Jamaica===
* Nassau Valley

===Netherlands===
*Baarle-Nassau, a town in the southern Netherlands

===Poland===
* Mokra, Opole Voivodeship (German: &quot;Mokrau&quot;, named &quot;Nassau O.S.&quot; 1936–1945)

===Slovenia===
* Nasova (formerly German: &quot;Nassau in der Steiermark&quot;)

===Taiwan===
* historic name for Taitung City

===United States===
* Nassau, Delaware
* Nassau County, Florida
* Nassau Village-Ratliff, Florida
* Nassau, Minnesota
* Nassau, New York (disambiguation)
* East Nassau, New York
* Nassau (town), New York, in Rensselaer County
* Nassau (village), New York 
* Nassau County, New York, on Long Island
* Nassau Island, former name of Long Island
* Nassau Lake in Rensselaer County
* Nassau Lake, New York, corresponding census-designated place
* Nassau Street (Manhattan), New York City
* Nassau Street (Princeton, New Jersey)
* Nassau Bay, Texas

==People==
===Nobles===
* House of Nassau, a European aristocratic dynasty
* House of Orange-Nassau, a noble dynasty from the Netherlands
* Louis of Nassau (1538–1574), Dutch general
* Maurice of Nassau, Prince of Orange (1567–1625), Dutch stadtholder 
* Sophia of Nassau (1836–1913), Queen consort of Sweden and Norway
* William Nassau de Zuylestein, 4th Earl of Rochford (1717–1781), British courtier, diplomat, and statesman
* House of Nassau-Siegen
* John Maurice of Nassau (1604–1679), Dutch colonial governor
* House of Nassau-Weilburg, a noble dynasty from Germany, monarchs of Luxembourg
* Adolf of Nassau (disambiguation)
* Adolph of Nassau-Weilburg (disambiguation)
* Maria of Nassau (disambiguation)
* William of Nassau (disambiguation)

===Surname===
*Charles William Nassau (1804–1878), Presbyterian minister, president of Lafayette College

===Given name===
*Nassau William Senior (1790–1864), English lawyer and economist

==Ships==
*, a UK Royal Navy name for many ships
*HNLMS &quot;Johan Maurits van Nassau&quot;, ships of the Netherlands navy
*MV &quot;Queen of Nassau&quot;, name of HMCS &quot;Canada&quot; after leaving government service
*&quot;Nassau&quot;-class battleship, an Imperial German battleship class
*SMS &quot;Nassau&quot;, a 1908 German battleship
*SS &quot;Nassau&quot;, a steam turbine-driven twin-screw passenger-and-cargo ocean liner, launched in 1928
*, a U.S. Navy ship name for several ships
*&quot;Nassau&quot;, the first steam ferry, built by Robert Fulton

==Other uses==
* &quot;Nassau&quot; (album), a 1995 album by The Sea and Cake
* Nassau (bet), a type of bet between golfers
* Nassau (crater), a lunar impact crater on the far side of the Moon
* Nassau (Staten Island Railway station), United States
* Nassau Club, a private club in Princeton, New Jersey, founded by Woodrow Wilson
* Nassau Coliseum, an arena in Uniondale, New York, United States
* Nassau Fjord, in Prince William Sound, Alaska
* Nassau grouper, an endangered species of fish
* Nassau Hall, Princeton University, New Jersey, United States
* Nassau Light Railway, a German railway company
* &quot;Nassau&quot;, a song by Shakira from &quot;Las Mujeres Ya No Lloran&quot;, 2024

==See also==
* Battle of Nassau (disambiguation)
* Fort Nassau (disambiguation)
* Nassau County (disambiguation)
* Nassau Street (disambiguation)
* Nassau Village (disambiguation)
* Orange-Nassau (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q158216" start="33" end="39" title="Nassau, Rhineland-Palatinate" label="Nassau"/>
<link wikidata="Q103148" start="47" end="51" title="Lahn" label="Lahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200" start="61" end="81" title="Rhineland-Palatinate" label="Rhineland-Palatinate"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="83" end="90" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q646085" start="135" end="150" title="House of Nassau" label="House of Nassau"/>
<link wikidata="Q155483" start="199" end="221" title="House of Orange-Nassau" label="House of Orange-Nassau"/>
<link wikidata="Q78454" start="232" end="248" title="William I, Prince of Orange" label="William I&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q2281221" start="268" end="290" title="Principality of Orange" label="Principality of Orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q193110" start="482" end="492" title="floodplain" label="floodplain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215730" start="496" end="502" title="Nassau" label="Nassau"/>
<link wikidata="Q666739" start="600" end="618" title="Groß Sankt Florian" label="Groß Sankt Florian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2467" start="635" end="654" title="Nassau, The Bahamas" label="Nassau, The Bahamas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5888328" start="757" end="770" title="Home District" label="Home District"/>
<link wikidata="Q6967585" start="825" end="849" title="Nassau Street (Winnipeg)" label="Nassau Street (Winnipeg)"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="876" end="883" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q961641" start="905" end="926" title="Nassau (Cook Islands)" label="Nassau (Cook Islands)"/>
<link wikidata="Q25212236" start="1030" end="1045" title="Nassau (region)" label="Nassau (region)"/>
<link wikidata="Q158216" start="1148" end="1176" title="Nassau, Rhineland-Palatinate" label="Nassau, Rhineland-Palatinate"/>
<link wikidata="Q54867485" start="1205" end="1219" title="Bad Ems-Nassau" label="Bad Ems-Nassau"/>
<link wikidata="Q144672" start="1317" end="1330" title="Nassau Castle" label="Nassau Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344130" start="1376" end="1394" title="Nassau Nature Park" label="Nassau Nature Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q12817455" start="1475" end="1491" title="County of Nassau" label="County of Nassau"/>
<link wikidata="Q836680" start="1601" end="1616" title="Duchy of Nassau" label="Duchy of Nassau"/>
<link wikidata="Q693356" start="1720" end="1732" title="Hesse-Nassau" label="Hesse-Nassau"/>
<link wikidata="Q449097" start="1844" end="1862" title="Province of Nassau" label="Province of Nassau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1965921" start="2000" end="2014" title="Nassau, Saxony" label="Nassau, Saxony"/>
<link wikidata="Q5911" start="2222" end="2242" title="Toba Samosir Regency" label="Toba Samosir Regency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420375" start="2295" end="2309" title="Sudirman Range" label="Sudirman Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q6967582" start="2339" end="2360" title="Nassau Street, Dublin" label="Nassau Street, Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q24236094" start="2378" end="2391" title="Nassau Valley" label="Nassau Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q9811" start="2412" end="2425" title="Baarle-Nassau" label="Baarle-Nassau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1943194" start="2478" end="2502" title="Mokra, Opole Voivodeship" label="Mokra, Opole Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2691537" start="2591" end="2597" title="Nasova" label="Nasova"/>
<link wikidata="Q713381" start="2688" end="2700" title="Taitung City" label="Taitung City"/>
<link wikidata="Q6967542" start="2724" end="2740" title="Nassau, Delaware" label="Nassau, Delaware"/>
<link wikidata="Q488818" start="2743" end="2765" title="Nassau County, Florida" label="Nassau County, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q2421958" start="2768" end="2799" title="Nassau Village-Ratliff, Florida" label="Nassau Village-Ratliff, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q2228508" start="2802" end="2819" title="Nassau, Minnesota" label="Nassau, Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q10990376" start="2822" end="2855" title="Nassau, New York (disambiguation)" label="Nassau, New York (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3458103" start="2858" end="2879" title="East Nassau, New York" label="East Nassau, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q11695104" start="2882" end="2905" title="Nassau (town), New York" label="Nassau (town), New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q3461963" start="2930" end="2956" title="Nassau (village), New York" label="Nassau (village), New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q54064" start="2960" end="2983" title="Nassau County, New York" label="Nassau County, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q18438" start="3002" end="3015" title="Nassau Island" label="Nassau Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q28229522" start="3046" end="3057" title="Nassau Lake" label="Nassau Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q108084190" start="3081" end="3102" title="Nassau Lake, New York" label="Nassau Lake, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q2597808" start="3144" end="3169" title="Nassau Street (Manhattan)" label="Nassau Street (Manhattan)"/>
<link wikidata="Q822217" start="3187" end="3224" title="Nassau Street (Princeton, New Jersey)" label="Nassau Street (Princeton, New Jersey)"/>
<link wikidata="Q427804" start="3227" end="3244" title="Nassau Bay, Texas" label="Nassau Bay, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q646085" start="3272" end="3287" title="House of Nassau" label="House of Nassau"/>
<link wikidata="Q155483" start="3323" end="3345" title="House of Orange-Nassau" label="House of Orange-Nassau"/>
<link wikidata="Q700300" start="3386" end="3401" title="Louis of Nassau" label="Louis of Nassau"/>
<link wikidata="Q164062" start="3431" end="3466" title="Maurice of Nassau, Prince of Orange" label="Maurice of Nassau, Prince of Orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q130408" start="3501" end="3517" title="Sophia of Nassau" label="Sophia of Nassau"/>
<link wikidata="Q2099455" start="3568" end="3618" title="William Nassau de Zuylestein, 4th Earl of Rochford" label="William Nassau de Zuylestein, 4th Earl of Rochford"/>
<link wikidata="Q736029" start="3676" end="3698" title="House of Nassau-Siegen" label="House of Nassau-Siegen"/>
<link wikidata="Q321492" start="3701" end="3723" title="John Maurice of Nassau" label="John Maurice of Nassau"/>
<link wikidata="Q697685" start="3763" end="3787" title="House of Nassau-Weilburg" label="House of Nassau-Weilburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q410886" start="3844" end="3876" title="Adolf of Nassau (disambiguation)" label="Adolf of Nassau (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4684408" start="3879" end="3921" title="Adolph of Nassau-Weilburg (disambiguation)" label="Adolph of Nassau-Weilburg (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q403979" start="3924" end="3956" title="Maria of Nassau (disambiguation)" label="Maria of Nassau (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2137628" start="3959" end="3993" title="William of Nassau (disambiguation)" label="William of Nassau (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q48138295" start="4010" end="4032" title="Charles William Nassau" label="Charles William Nassau"/>
<link wikidata="Q687552" start="4119" end="4140" title="Nassau William Senior" label="Nassau William Senior"/>
<link wikidata="Q2248241" start="4234" end="4276" title="HNLMS Johan Maurits van Nassau" label="HNLMS &amp;quot;Johan Maurits van Nassau&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5630741" start="4309" end="4339" title="MV Queen of Nassau" label="MV &amp;quot;Queen of Nassau&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q706063" start="4407" end="4442" title="Nassau-class battleship" label="&amp;quot;Nassau&amp;quot;-class battleship"/>
<link wikidata="Q656632" start="4481" end="4503" title="SMS Nassau" label="SMS &amp;quot;Nassau&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q279565" start="4531" end="4552" title="SS Nassau" label="SS &amp;quot;Nassau&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q192496" start="4734" end="4747" title="Robert Fulton" label="Robert Fulton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6967548" start="4766" end="4792" title="Nassau (album)" label="&amp;quot;Nassau&amp;quot; (album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6967549" start="4829" end="4841" title="Nassau (bet)" label="Nassau (bet)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3336227" start="4875" end="4890" title="Nassau (crater)" label="Nassau (crater)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6967546" start="4944" end="4982" title="Nassau (Staten Island Railway station)" label="Nassau (Staten Island Railway station)"/>
<link wikidata="Q20679814" start="5000" end="5011" title="Nassau Club" label="Nassau Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048921" start="5082" end="5097" title="Nassau Coliseum" label="Nassau Coliseum"/>
<link wikidata="Q6967573" start="5148" end="5160" title="Nassau Fjord" label="Nassau Fjord"/>
<link wikidata="Q943193" start="5196" end="5210" title="Nassau grouper" label="Nassau grouper"/>
<link wikidata="Q6967574" start="5244" end="5255" title="Nassau Hall" label="Nassau Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1965938" start="5307" end="5327" title="Nassau Light Railway" label="Nassau Light Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q124542156" start="5405" end="5429" title="Las Mujeres Ya No Lloran" label="Las Mujeres Ya No Lloran"/>
<link wikidata="Q4872837" start="5458" end="5491" title="Battle of Nassau (disambiguation)" label="Battle of Nassau (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q26261730" start="5494" end="5522" title="Fort Nassau (disambiguation)" label="Fort Nassau (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q228421" start="5525" end="5555" title="Nassau County (disambiguation)" label="Nassau County (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2083889" start="5558" end="5588" title="Nassau Street (disambiguation)" label="Nassau Street (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q130715300" start="5591" end="5622" title="Nassau Village (disambiguation)" label="Nassau Village (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16796609" start="5625" end="5655" title="Orange-Nassau (disambiguation)" label="Orange-Nassau (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="191371" wikidata="Q569779" url="?curid=191371" title="Universal Edition">
<text>Universal Edition (UE) is an Austrian classical music publishing firm. Founded in 1901 in Vienna, it originally intended to provide the core classical works and educational works to the Austrian market. The firm soon expanded to become one of the most important publishers of modernist and contemporary classical music.

== History ==
=== 20th century ===
Universal Edition was founded on 1 June 1901 in Vienna. It was formed by the publishers Bernhard Herzmansky (himself from the firm), and as an attempt to compete with the Leipzig-based publishers Breitkopf &amp; Härtel and Edition Peters. UE itself describes this as an attempt to &quot;simply to counter the predominance of the foreign music trade in Vienna with a domestic music publishing house&quot;. In a financial boost for UE, the Austrian Ministry of Education gave a 5 July 1901 decree that Austrian music schools should prefer UE editions over those by German publishers. The firm&#x27;s creation was announced next month in the &quot;Neues Wiener Tagblatt&quot;:

In 1904, UE acquired Aibl publishers, and so acquired the rights to works by Richard Strauss, Max Reger, and other composers. The arrival of Emil Hertzka as managing director in 1907, who remained until his death in 1932, really pushed the firm towards new music. Under Hertzka, UE signed contracts with a number of important contemporary composers, including Béla Bartók and Frederick Delius in 1908; Gustav Mahler, Arnold Schoenberg and Franz Schreker in 1909. Mahler&#x27;s &quot;Symphony No. 8&quot; was the first work UE acquired an original copyright to. Anton Webern and Alexander von Zemlinsky were signed in 1910, Karol Szymanowski in 1912, Leoš Janáček in 1917 and Kurt Weill in 1924. Through their association with Schoenberg, it also published many works by Alban Berg.

The firm&#x27;s avant garde directions continued after World War II, when UE published works by a number of significant composers, among these Luciano Berio, Pierre Boulez, Morton Feldman, Mauricio Kagel, György Kurtág, György Ligeti and Karlheinz Stockhausen. Later important additions to the catalogue include Harrison Birtwistle, Friedrich Cerha, Georg Friedrich Haas, Cristóbal Halffter, Georges Lentz, Arvo Pärt, David Sawer, Gisela Selden-Goth, and Johannes Maria Staud.

UE have also published several significant historical editions, including the complete works of Claudio Monteverdi. In collaboration with Schott, they have published the Wiener Urtext Edition series since 1972. Originally consisting of works for one or two performers by composers from Johann Sebastian Bach to Johannes Brahms, the series was later expanded to include a limited number of later works, such as the &quot;Ludus Tonalis&quot; of Paul Hindemith.

=== 21st century ===
On 19 October 2007, Universal Edition entered legal proceedings against the International Music Score Library Project, an online entity which seeks to make musical scores in the public domain available digitally. In response to a cease-and-desist letter from Universal Edition demanding that certain scores still covered by Austrian copyright be removed, IMSLP closed itself voluntarily, amidst controversy that UE&#x27;s demands lacked reasonable legal grounds. While Austrian copyright governs works published up to 70 years after its composer&#x27;s death, IMSLP is hosted in Canada, where copyright lasts twenty years fewer. The Internet Law professor Michael Geist wrote a column for the BBC, suggesting UE&#x27;s actions lacked reasonable legal ground. The International Music Score Library maintained that UE&#x27;s actions lacked legal justification, and reopened on 30 June 2008.

==References==
===Notes===
===Citations===
==External links==
* Universal Edition on IMSLP</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q569779" start="0" end="17" title="Universal Edition" label="Universal Edition"/>
<link wikidata="Q569779" start="19" end="21" title="Universal Edition" label="UE"/>
<link wikidata="Q9730" start="38" end="53" title="classical music" label="classical music"/>
<link wikidata="Q3972943" start="54" end="64" title="publishing" label="publishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2737099" start="82" end="86" title="1901 in music" label="1901"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741" start="90" end="96" title="Vienna" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q2426218" start="276" end="285" title="modernist music" label="modernist"/>
<link wikidata="Q612024" start="290" end="318" title="contemporary classical music" label="contemporary classical music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741" start="404" end="410" title="Vienna" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="444" end="463" title="Bernhard Herzmansky" label="Bernhard Herzmansky"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079" start="527" end="534" title="Leipzig" label="Leipzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q634246" start="552" end="574" title="Breitkopf &amp;amp; Härtel" label="Breitkopf &amp;amp; Härtel"/>
<link wikidata="Q468157" start="579" end="593" title="Edition Peters" label="Edition Peters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1654066" start="1001" end="1022" title="Neues Wiener Tagblatt" label="Neues Wiener Tagblatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q13894" start="1108" end="1123" title="Richard Strauss" label="Richard Strauss"/>
<link wikidata="Q57139" start="1125" end="1134" title="Max Reger" label="Max Reger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336218" start="1172" end="1184" title="Emil Hertzka" label="Emil Hertzka"/>
<link wikidata="Q83326" start="1391" end="1402" title="Béla Bartók" label="Béla Bartók"/>
<link wikidata="Q312698" start="1407" end="1423" title="Frederick Delius" label="Frederick Delius"/>
<link wikidata="Q7304" start="1433" end="1446" title="Gustav Mahler" label="Gustav Mahler"/>
<link wikidata="Q154770" start="1448" end="1465" title="Arnold Schoenberg" label="Arnold Schoenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q78528" start="1470" end="1484" title="Franz Schreker" label="Franz Schreker"/>
<link wikidata="Q270853" start="1514" end="1528" title="Symphony No. 8 (Mahler)" label="Symphony No. 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q190933" start="1592" end="1604" title="Anton Webern" label="Anton Webern"/>
<link wikidata="Q78524" start="1609" end="1632" title="Alexander von Zemlinsky" label="Alexander von Zemlinsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q295400" start="1654" end="1671" title="Karol Szymanowski" label="Karol Szymanowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q184933" start="1681" end="1693" title="Leoš Janáček" label="Leoš Janáček"/>
<link wikidata="Q55004" start="1706" end="1716" title="Kurt Weill" label="Kurt Weill"/>
<link wikidata="Q78475" start="1801" end="1811" title="Alban Berg" label="Alban Berg"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1869" end="1881" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q221450" start="1957" end="1970" title="Luciano Berio" label="Luciano Berio"/>
<link wikidata="Q156193" start="1972" end="1985" title="Pierre Boulez" label="Pierre Boulez"/>
<link wikidata="Q316427" start="1987" end="2001" title="Morton Feldman" label="Morton Feldman"/>
<link wikidata="Q178293" start="2003" end="2017" title="Mauricio Kagel" label="Mauricio Kagel"/>
<link wikidata="Q48184" start="2019" end="2032" title="György Kurtág" label="György Kurtág"/>
<link wikidata="Q154331" start="2034" end="2047" title="György Ligeti" label="György Ligeti"/>
<link wikidata="Q154556" start="2052" end="2073" title="Karlheinz Stockhausen" label="Karlheinz Stockhausen"/>
<link wikidata="Q354335" start="2126" end="2145" title="Harrison Birtwistle" label="Harrison Birtwistle"/>
<link wikidata="Q78794" start="2147" end="2162" title="Friedrich Cerha" label="Friedrich Cerha"/>
<link wikidata="Q49388" start="2164" end="2184" title="Georg Friedrich Haas" label="Georg Friedrich Haas"/>
<link wikidata="Q375388" start="2186" end="2204" title="Cristóbal Halffter" label="Cristóbal Halffter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1298330" start="2206" end="2219" title="Georges Lentz" label="Georges Lentz"/>
<link wikidata="Q189534" start="2221" end="2230" title="Arvo Pärt" label="Arvo Pärt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407526" start="2232" end="2243" title="David Sawer" label="David Sawer"/>
<link wikidata="Q42529291" start="2245" end="2263" title="Gisela Selden-Goth" label="Gisela Selden-Goth"/>
<link wikidata="Q305219" start="2269" end="2289" title="Johannes Maria Staud" label="Johannes Maria Staud"/>
<link wikidata="Q53068" start="2388" end="2406" title="Claudio Monteverdi" label="Claudio Monteverdi"/>
<link wikidata="Q536259" start="2430" end="2436" title="Schott Music" label="Schott"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339" start="2578" end="2599" title="Johann Sebastian Bach" label="Johann Sebastian Bach"/>
<link wikidata="Q7294" start="2603" end="2618" title="Johannes Brahms" label="Johannes Brahms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420025" start="2712" end="2725" title="Ludus Tonalis" label="Ludus Tonalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q57244" start="2735" end="2749" title="Paul Hindemith" label="Paul Hindemith"/>
<link wikidata="Q523660" start="2849" end="2890" title="International Music Score Library Project" label="International Music Score Library Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q19652" start="2951" end="2964" title="public domain" label="public domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q31726" start="3003" end="3019" title="cease-and-desist" label="cease-and-desist"/>
<link wikidata="Q981974" start="3429" end="3442" title="Michael Geist" label="Michael Geist"/>
<link wikidata="Q523660" start="3748" end="3753" title="IMSLP" label="IMSLP"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="191379" wikidata="Q57684" url="?curid=191379" title="Hermann Lotze">
<text>Rudolf Hermann Lotze (; ; 21 May 1817 – 1 July 1881) was a German philosopher and logician. He also had a medical degree and was well versed in biology. He argued that if the physical world is governed by mechanical laws and relations, then developments in the universe could be explained as the functioning of a world mind. His medical studies were pioneering works in scientific psychology.

==Biography==
Lotze was born in Bautzen, in the Kingdom of Saxony, the son of a physician. He was educated at the grammar school of Zittau; he had an enduring love of the classical authors, publishing a translation of Sophocles&#x27; &quot;Antigone&quot; into Latin verse in his middle life.

He attended the University of Leipzig as a student of philosophy and natural sciences, but entered officially as a student of medicine when he was seventeen. Lotze&#x27;s early studies were mostly governed by two distinct interests: the first was scientific, based upon mathematical and physical studies under the guidance of E. H. Weber, Alfred Wilhelm Volkmann, and Gustav Fechner. The other was his aesthetic and artistic interest, which was developed under the care of the speculative theist Christian Hermann Weisse. Weisse also influenced his later anti-psychologistic approach to the historiography of philosophy. He was attracted both by science and by the German idealism of Johann Gottlieb Fichte, Friedrich Wilhelm Joseph Schelling and Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel.

Lotze&#x27;s first work was his dissertation &quot;De futurae biologiae principibus philosophicis&quot;, with which he gained in July 1838 the degree of doctor of medicine. In 1840 he gained the degree of doctor of philosophy with his dissertation &quot;De summis continuorum&quot;. He laid the foundation of his philosophical system in his &quot;Metaphysik&quot; (Leipzig, 1841) and his &quot;Logik&quot; (1843), short books published while still a junior lecturer at Leipzig University, whence he moved to Göttingen, succeeding Johann Friedrich Herbart in the chair of philosophy.

His two early books remained unnoticed by the reading public. He first became known to a larger circle through a series of works which aimed at establishing the study of both the physical and mental phenomena of the human organism. He applied the same general principles which had been adopted in the investigation of inorganic phenomena. These later works considered the human organism in its normal and diseased states. They included his &quot;Allgemeine Pathologie und Therapie als mechanische Naturwissenschaften&quot; (1842, 2nd ed., 1848), the articles &quot;Lebenskraft&quot; (1843) and &quot;Seele und Seelenleben&quot; (1846) in Rudolf Wagner&#x27;s &quot;Handwörterbuch der Physiologie&quot;, his &quot;Allgemeine Physiologie des Körperlichen Lebens&quot; (1851), and his &quot;Medizinische Psychologie oder Physiologie der Seele&quot; (1852).

When Lotze published these works, medical science was still under the influence of Schelling&#x27;s philosophy of nature. The mechanical laws, to which external things were subject, were conceived as being valid only in the inorganic world. Mechanism was the unalterable connexion of every phenomenon &quot;a&quot; with other phenomena &quot;b&quot;, &quot;c&quot;, &quot;d&quot;, either as following or preceding it; mechanism was the inexorable form into which the events of this world are cast, and by which they are connected. The object of those writings was to establish the all-pervading rule of mechanism. But the mechanical view of nature is not identical with the materialistic. In the last of the above-mentioned works the question is discussed at great length how we have to consider mind, and the relation between mind and body; the answer is we have to consider mind as an immaterial principle, its action, however, on the body and vice versa as purely mechanical, indicated by the fixed laws of a psycho-physical mechanism.

These doctrines of Lotze, though pronounced with the distinct and reiterated reservation that they did not contain a solution of the philosophical question regarding the nature of mechanism, were nevertheless by many considered to be the last word of the philosopher, a decisive rejection of the reveries of Schelling and the idealistic theories of Hegel. Published as they were during the years when the modern school of German materialism was at its height, these works of Lotze were enrolled in the opposing camp of empirical philosophy.

The misinterpretations which he had suffered induced Lotze to publish a small polemical pamphlet (&quot;Streitschriften&quot;, 1857), in which he corrected two mistakes. His opposition to Hegel&#x27;s formalism had induced some to associate him with the materialistic school, others to count him among the followers of Herbart. Lotze denied that he belonged to the school of Herbart. However, he admitted that the monadology of Leibniz could be considered the forerunner of Herbart&#x27;s teachings and also of his own views.

==Philosophical work==

Lotze worked in a post-revolutionary time of transition between the idealistic and rationalist legacies of Leibniz, Kant and Hegel and the new materialism and scientific interpretation of reality.

He believed that everywhere in the wide realm of observation we find three distinct regions: the region of facts, the region of laws and the region of standards of value. These three regions are separate only in our thoughts, not in reality. Full understanding comes through conviction that the world of facts is the field in which those higher standards of moral and aesthetic value are being realized through the medium of laws. Such a union is, for him, only intelligible through the idea of a personal Deity, who in the creation and preservation of a world has voluntarily chosen certain forms and laws, through the natural operation of which the ends of His work are gained.

Lotze proposed a view called teleological idealism, whose central principle is the principle of teleomechanism, the idea that, in logic, metaphysics and science, mechanism is compatible with teleology.

Lotze&#x27;s lectures ranged over a wide field: he delivered annually lectures on psychology and on logic (the latter including a survey of the entirety of philosophical research, &quot;Encyclopädie der Philosophie&quot;), then at longer intervals lectures on metaphysics, philosophy of nature, philosophy of art, philosophy of religion, rarely on history of philosophy and ethics. In these lectures he expounded his peculiar views in a stricter form, and during the last decade of his life he embodied the substance of those courses in his &quot;System der Philosophie&quot;, of which only two volumes have appeared (vol. I &quot;Logik&quot;, 1st ed., 1874, 2nd ed., 1880; vol. II &quot;Metaphysik&quot;, 1879). The third and concluding volume, which was to treat in a more condensed form the principal problems of practical philosophy, of philosophy of art and religion, was not completed before his death.

A problem of a purely formal character for him was to try to bring unity and harmony into the scattered thoughts of our general culture. He wanted especially to investigate those conceptions which form the initial assumptions and conditions of the several sciences, and to fix the limits of their applicability.

The investigations will then naturally divide themselves into three parts, the first of which deals with

*those to our mind inevitable forms, or laws, in which we are obliged to think about things, if we think at all (metaphysics), the second being devoted to 
*the great region of facts, trying to apply the results of metaphysics to these, specially the two great regions of external and mental phenomena (cosmology and psychology), the third dealing with
*those standards of value from which we pronounce our aesthetic or ethical approval or disapproval.

His goal was to form some general idea how laws, facts and standards of value may be combined in one comprehensive view.

The world of many things surrounds us; our notions, by which we manage correctly or incorrectly to describe it, are also ready made. What remains to be done is, not to explain how such a world manages to be what it is, nor how we came to form these notions, but to eliminate those abstract notions which are inconsistent and jarring, or to remodel and define them so that they may constitute a consistent and harmonious view.

The course of things and their connexion is only thinkable by the assumption of a plurality of existences, the reality of which (as distinguished from our knowledge of them) can be conceived only as a multitude of relations. This quality of standing in relation to other things is that which gives to a thing its reality. And the nature of this reality again can neither be consistently represented as a fixed and hard substance nor as an unalterable something, but only as a fixed order of recurrence of continually changing events or impressions. The things themselves which exist and their changing phases must stand in some internal connexion; they themselves must be active or passive, capable of doing or suffering.

Why not interpret at once and render intelligible the common conception originating in natural science, viz. that of a system of laws which governs the many things? But, in attempting to make this conception quite clear and thinkable, we are forced to represent the connexion of things as a universal substance, the essence of which we conceive as a system of laws which underlies everything and in its own self connects everything, but is imperceptible, and known to us merely through the impressions it produces on us, which we call things. Practical life as well as those of science are equally served if we deprive the material things outside of us of an independence, and assign to them merely a connected existence through the universal substance by the action of which alone they can appear to us. He traced material things through our scientific discovery of them, back to the culture which gave them reality through this science, and ultimately back to the values which established this culture. This method is known as &quot;regressive analysis.&quot;

Lotze&#x27;s historical position is of much interest. Though he disclaims being a follower of Herbart, his formal definition of philosophy and his conception of the object of metaphysics are similar to those of Herbart, who defines philosophy as an attempt to remodel the notions given by experience. In this endeavor he forms with Herbart an opposition to the philosophies of Johann Gottlieb Fichte, Friedrich Wilhelm Joseph Schelling, and Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel which aimed at objective and absolute knowledge, and also to the criticism of Kant, which aimed at determining the validity of all human knowledge.

What, however, with the idealists was an object of thought alone, the absolute, for Lotze cannot be defined in rigorous philosophical language; the aspirations of the human heart, the contents of our feelings and desires, the aims of art and the tenets of religious faith must be grasped in order to fill the empty idea of the absolute with meaning. These manifestations of the divine spirit again cannot be traced and understood by reducing (as Hegel did) the growth of the human mind in the individual, in society and in history to the monotonous rhythm of a speculative schematism. The essence and worth which is in them reveals itself only to the student of detail, for reality is larger and wider than philosophy. The problem, &quot;how the one can be many&quot;, is only solved for us in the numberless examples in life and experience which surround us, for which we must retain a lifelong interest and which constitute the true field of all useful human work.

This conviction of the emptiness of terms and abstract notions, and of the fullness of individual life, led Lotze to combine in his writings the two courses into which German philosophical thought had been moving since the death of its great founder, Leibniz. We may define these courses by the terms esoteric and exoteric. The former was the academic quest to systematize everything and reduce all our knowledge to an intelligible principle. This attempt missed the deeper meaning of Leibniz&#x27;s philosophy. The latter was the unsystematized philosophy of general culture which we find in the work of the great writers of the classical period, Lessing, Winckelmann, Goethe, Schiller and Herder. All of these expressed in some degree their indebtedness to Leibniz. Lotze can be said to have brought philosophy out of the lecture-room into the market-place of life. By understanding and combining the strengths of each approach, he became the true successor of Leibniz.

The age in which Lotze lived and wrote in Germany did not appreciate the position he took up. Frequently misunderstood, yet rarely criticized, he was nevertheless greatly admired, listened to by devoted hearers and read by an increasing circle. But this circle never attained to the unity of a philosophical school.

==Works==
===Works in Latin and German===
* &quot;De futurae biologiae principiis philosophicis&quot; (1838). . Vol. 1, pp. 1–25
* &quot;De summis continuorum&quot; (1840).
* &quot;Gedichte&quot; (1840).
* &quot;Metaphysik&quot; (1841). Google (Oxford)
* &quot;Allgemeine Pathologie und Therapie als mechanische Naturwissenschaften&quot; (1842). , 1848. Google (Harvard)
* &quot;Logik&quot; (1843). Google (NYPL) , 1880.
* &quot;Ueber den Begriff der Schönheit&quot; (1845). Google (Oxford)
* &quot;Allgemeine Physiologie des körperlichen Lebens&quot; (1851). Google (Harvard)
* &quot;Medicinische Psychologie oder Physiologie der Seele&quot; (1852). Google (Oxford) Google (UMich)
* &quot;Mikrokosmus: Ideen zur Naturgeschichte und Geschichte der Menschheit&quot; (1856–64). , 1868–72. , 1884–88.
**, 1856. Google (Oxford) Google (UMich)
**, 1858. Google (Oxford) Google (UMich) Google (NYPL)
**, 1864. Google (Oxford) Google (NYPL)
* &quot;Streitschriften&quot; (1857). Google (Harvard)
* &quot;Geschichte der Aesthetik in Deutschland&quot; (1868). Google (Oxford)
* &quot;System der Philosophie&quot;.
**. &quot;Logik: Drei Bücher&quot; (1874). Google (Oxford) Google (UMich) Google (UWisc). , 1880.
**. &quot;Metaphysik: Drei Bücher&quot; (1879). , 1884.
* &quot;Geschichte der deutschen Philosophie seit Kant&quot; (1882). , 1894. Google (UWisc)
* &quot;Grundzüge der Psychologie&quot; (1881). Google (Harvard) , 1882. Google (Oxford)
* &quot;Grundzüge der Naturphilosophie&quot; (1882). Google (Oxford)
* &quot;Grundzüge der praktischen Philosophie&quot; (1882). , 1884. Google (UCal)
* &quot;Grundzüge der Religionsphilosophie&quot; (1883). , 1884. Google (Oxford)
* &quot;Grundzüge der Logik und Encyclopädie der Philosophie&quot; (1883). , 1885. Google (UCal)
* &quot;Grundzüge der Metaphysik&quot; (1883). Google (Oxford)
* &quot;Grundzüge der Aesthetik&quot; (1884).
* &quot;Kleine Schriften&quot; (1885–91).
**, 1885. Google (Oxford) Google (Stanford) Google (UWisc)
**, 1886. Google (Harvard)
**, 1891. Google (UWisc)

===Translations in English===
;Lotze&#x27;s Outlines of Philosophy
**. &quot;Outlines of Metaphysic&quot; (1884). IA (UCal) IA (UVictoria) 1886. Google (UMich)
**. &quot;Outlines of the Philosophy of Religion&quot; (1885). Google (UWisc)
***, 1886. IA (OISE) 1895. IA (St. Michael&#x27;s) 1901. Google (UWisc)
**. &quot;Outlines of Practical Philosophy&quot; (1885). Google (UCal)
**. &quot;Outlines of Psychology&quot; (1886). Google (UMich) IA (UToronto)
**. &quot;Outlines of Aesthetics&quot; (1886). Google (UMich) IA (UToronto)
**. &quot;Outlines of Logic&quot; (1887). Google (UMich) IA (UToronto) 1892. Google (Harvard)

;Lotze&#x27;s System of Philosophy
**. &quot;Logic: In Three Books&quot; (1884). Google (Oxford) IA (State Central) IA (UToronto).
***, 1888. . IA (St. Basil&#x27;s) IA (UIllinois) IA (Osmania) Google (Stanford)
***, 1888. . IA (St. Basil&#x27;s) IA (UIllinois).
**. &quot;Metaphysic: In Three Books&quot; (1884). Google (Oxford) IA (State Central) IA (UToronto)
***, 1887. . IA (Osmania) Google (Harvard)
***, 1887. . IA (Osmania)

;Other works
*&quot;Microcosmus: An Essay Concerning Man and His Relation to the World&quot; (1885).
**. IA (Union) , 1887. IA (UCal) IA (KCPL) , 1888. Google (Harvard) IA (St. Michael&#x27;s)
**. IA (Union) , 1887. IA (UCal) , 1888.Google (Harvard) IA (St. Michael&#x27;s)

==See also==
*Teleology in biology

==Notes==
==References==
*William R. Woodward, &quot;Hermann Lotze: An Intellectual Biography&quot;, Cambridge University Press, 2015.
*Michele Vagnetti, &quot;Hermann Lotze on the mind-body problem and the 19th century philosophy and psychology: with special attention to William James&quot;, Dissertation: Universität Paderborn, 2020.

== External links ==
* 
* Rudolf Hermann Lotze (1817–1881) entry by Nikolay Milkov in the &quot;Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy&quot;
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q57684" start="0" end="20" title="Hermann Lotze" label="Rudolf Hermann Lotze"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891" start="66" end="77" title="philosopher" label="philosopher"/>
<link wikidata="Q8078" start="82" end="90" title="logician" label="logician"/>
<link wikidata="Q420" start="144" end="151" title="biology" label="biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q9418" start="381" end="391" title="psychology" label="psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q14835" start="426" end="433" title="Bautzen" label="Bautzen"/>
<link wikidata="Q153015" start="442" end="459" title="Kingdom of Saxony" label="Kingdom of Saxony"/>
<link wikidata="Q157200" start="526" end="532" title="Zittau" label="Zittau"/>
<link wikidata="Q7235" start="612" end="621" title="Sophocles" label="Sophocles"/>
<link wikidata="Q241077" start="634" end="642" title="Antigone (Sophocles)" label="Antigone"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="654" end="659" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q154804" start="703" end="724" title="University of Leipzig" label="University of Leipzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q76889" start="1013" end="1024" title="Ernst Heinrich Weber" label="E. H. Weber"/>
<link wikidata="Q70792" start="1026" end="1049" title="Alfred Wilhelm Volkmann" label="Alfred Wilhelm Volkmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q76881" start="1055" end="1069" title="Gustav Fechner" label="Gustav Fechner"/>
<link wikidata="Q440582" start="1164" end="1182" title="speculative theist" label="speculative theist"/>
<link wikidata="Q697259" start="1183" end="1207" title="Christian Hermann Weisse" label="Christian Hermann Weisse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2853345" start="1242" end="1261" title="anti-psychologistic" label="anti-psychologistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891" start="1278" end="1306" title="historiography of philosophy" label="historiography of philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q679842" start="1352" end="1367" title="German idealism" label="German idealism"/>
<link wikidata="Q102585" start="1371" end="1393" title="Johann Gottlieb Fichte" label="Johann Gottlieb Fichte"/>
<link wikidata="Q60070" start="1395" end="1429" title="Friedrich Wilhelm Joseph Schelling" label="Friedrich Wilhelm Joseph Schelling"/>
<link wikidata="Q9235" start="1434" end="1463" title="Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel" label="Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel"/>
<link wikidata="Q913404" start="1619" end="1637" title="doctor of medicine" label="doctor of medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q752297" start="1671" end="1691" title="doctor of philosophy" label="doctor of philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q152838" start="1974" end="1983" title="University of Göttingen" label="Göttingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q76685" start="1996" end="2020" title="Johann Friedrich Herbart" label="Johann Friedrich Herbart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078867" start="3005" end="3025" title="philosophy of nature" label="philosophy of nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q17103443" start="3146" end="3155" title="Mechanism (philosophy)" label="Mechanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7081" start="4367" end="4385" title="German materialism" label="German materialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q83368" start="4464" end="4484" title="Empiricism" label="empirical philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q76685" start="4806" end="4813" title="Herbart" label="Herbart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211539" start="4901" end="4911" title="monadology" label="monadology"/>
<link wikidata="Q9047" start="4915" end="4922" title="Gottfried Leibniz" label="Leibniz"/>
<link wikidata="Q9047" start="5145" end="5152" title="Leibniz" label="Leibniz"/>
<link wikidata="Q9312" start="5154" end="5158" title="Immanuel Kant" label="Kant"/>
<link wikidata="Q9235" start="5163" end="5168" title="Hegel" label="Hegel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7081" start="5181" end="5192" title="materialism" label="materialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9510" start="5226" end="5233" title="reality" label="reality"/>
<link wikidata="Q35277" start="6054" end="6065" title="metaphysics" label="metaphysics"/>
<link wikidata="Q17103443" start="6079" end="6088" title="Mechanism (philosophy)" label="mechanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q192121" start="6108" end="6117" title="teleology" label="teleology"/>
<link wikidata="Q9418" start="6202" end="6212" title="psychology" label="psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q8078" start="6220" end="6225" title="logic" label="logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q35277" start="6380" end="6391" title="metaphysics" label="metaphysics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7860" start="6407" end="6413" title="nature" label="nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q35986" start="6415" end="6432" title="philosophy of art" label="philosophy of art"/>
<link wikidata="Q209295" start="6434" end="6456" title="philosophy of religion" label="philosophy of religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q27654" start="6468" end="6489" title="history of philosophy" label="history of philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9465" start="6494" end="6500" title="ethics" label="ethics"/>
<link wikidata="Q338" start="7752" end="7761" title="cosmology" label="cosmology"/>
<link wikidata="Q9418" start="7766" end="7776" title="psychology" label="psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q76685" start="10332" end="10339" title="Herbart" label="Herbart"/>
<link wikidata="Q111165739" start="10352" end="10376" title="definition of philosophy" label="definition of philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q102585" start="10615" end="10637" title="Johann Gottlieb Fichte" label="Johann Gottlieb Fichte"/>
<link wikidata="Q60070" start="10639" end="10673" title="Friedrich Wilhelm Joseph Schelling" label="Friedrich Wilhelm Joseph Schelling"/>
<link wikidata="Q9235" start="10679" end="10708" title="Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel" label="Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1789540" start="10774" end="10783" title="Critical philosophy" label="criticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9312" start="10787" end="10791" title="Immanuel Kant" label="Kant"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988482" start="12127" end="12135" title="esoteric" label="esoteric"/>
<link wikidata="Q5420700" start="12140" end="12148" title="exoteric" label="exoteric"/>
<link wikidata="Q211364" start="12258" end="12267" title="principle" label="principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q34628" start="12474" end="12481" title="Gotthold Ephraim Lessing" label="Lessing"/>
<link wikidata="Q57280" start="12483" end="12494" title="Johann Joachim Winckelmann" label="Winckelmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q5879" start="12496" end="12502" title="Goethe" label="Goethe"/>
<link wikidata="Q22670" start="12504" end="12512" title="Schiller" label="Schiller"/>
<link wikidata="Q155547" start="12517" end="12523" title="Johann Gottfried Herder" label="Herder"/>
<link wikidata="Q9047" start="12585" end="12592" title="Leibniz" label="Leibniz"/>
<link wikidata="Q6420235" start="15002" end="15018" title="Kleine Schriften" label="Kleine Schriften"/>
<link wikidata="Q28453786" start="16498" end="16518" title="Teleology in biology" label="Teleology in biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q259513" start="16954" end="16989" title="Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy" label="Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="191383" wikidata="Q2734988" url="?curid=191383" title="Anti-English sentiment">
<text>Anti-English sentiment, also known as Anglophobia (from Latin &quot;Anglus&quot; &quot;English&quot; and Greek φόβος, &quot;phobos&quot;, &quot;fear&quot;), refers to opposition, dislike, fear, hatred, oppression, persecution, and discrimination of English people and/or England. It can be observed in various contexts within the United Kingdom and in countries outside of it. In the UK, Benjamin Disraeli and George Orwell highlighted anti-English sentiments among Welsh, Irish, and Scottish nationalisms. In Scotland, Anglophobia is influenced by Scottish identity. Football matches and tournaments often see manifestations of anti-English sentiment, including assaults and attacks on English individuals. In Wales, historical factors such as English language imposition and cultural suppression have contributed to anti-English sentiment. In Northern Ireland, anti-English sentiment, arising from complex historical and political dynamics, was exemplified in the IRA&#x27;s targeting of England during the Troubles.

Outside the UK, anti-English sentiment exists in countries like Australia, New Zealand, France, Ireland, Russia, India, the United States, and Argentina. In Australia and New Zealand, stereotypes of English immigrants as complainers have fueled such sentiment. France has historical conflicts with England, like the Hundred Years&#x27; War, contributing to animosity. In Ireland and, to a lesser extent, the United States, anti-English sentiment is rooted in Irish nationalism and hostility towards the Anglo-Irish community. Russia has seen waves of Anglophobia due to historical events and suspicions of British meddling. Argentina&#x27;s anti-British sentiment is linked to the Falklands War and perceptions of British imperialism.

Generally, the term is sometimes used more loosely as a synonym for anti-British sentiment. Its opposite is Anglophilia.

==Within the United Kingdom==
British statesman and Prime Minister Benjamin Disraeli said that the proud English were sprung from &quot;a horde of Baltic pirates who were never heard of in the greater annals of the world.&quot; In his essay &quot;Notes on Nationalism&quot;, written in May 1945 and published in the first issue of the intellectual magazine &quot;Polemic&quot; (October 1945), George Orwell wrote that &quot;Welsh, Irish and Scottish nationalism have points of difference but are alike in their anti-English orientation&quot;.

===Scotland===
A 2005 study by Hussain and Millar of the Department of Politics at the University of Glasgow examined the prevalence of Anglophobia in relation to Islamophobia in Scotland. One finding of the report suggested that national &quot;phobias&quot; have common roots independent of the nations they are directed towards. The study states that

The study goes on to say (of the English living in Scotland): &quot;Few of the English (only 16 per cent) see the conflict between Scots and English as even &#x27;fairly serious&#x27;.&quot; Hussain and Millar&#x27;s study found that Anglophobia was slightly less prevalent than Islamophobia but that, unlike Islamophobia, Anglophobia correlated with a strong sense of Scottish identity.

In 1999, an inspector and race relations officer with Lothian and Borders Police said that a correlation had been noticed between the establishment of the Scottish Parliament and anti-English incidents. Hussain and Millar&#x27;s research suggested that Anglophobia had fallen slightly since the introduction of devolution.

In 2009, a woman originally from England was assaulted in an allegedly anti-English racially motivated attack. Similar cases have been connected with football matches and tournaments, particularly international tournaments where the English and Scottish football teams often compete with each other. A spate of anti-English attacks occurred in 2006 during the FIFA World Cup. In one incident a 7-year-old boy wearing an England shirt was punched in the head in an Edinburgh park.

In 1998, 19 year-old apprentice mechanic Mark Ayton was punched to the ground and kicked to death by three youths. The father of the victim explicitly cited Ayton&#x27;s English accent as a contributing factor in the attack. Court proceedings recorded the fact that the attackers were singing &#x27;Flower of Scotland&#x27; which includes the lines &#x27;And sent them homeward, Tae think again&#x27;; an allusion about ridding Scotland of the English, immediately prior to the attack. The attackers served less than a year in prison for the killing. 

In 2017, former Scottish Journalist of the Year Kevin McKenna penned an article in &quot;The National&quot; labelling English people living in Scotland as &#x27;colonising wankers&#x27; .

In 2020, groups of Scottish nationalists picketed the English border, airports and railway stations sporting hazmat suits and dogs intent on stopping English people from crossing the England-Scotland border. The Scottish Secretary Alistair Jack accused Scotland&#x27;s First Minister Nicola Sturgeon of having incited the incident by inaccurately using Covid statistics to stoke anti-English sentiment 

===Wales===

The Laws in Wales Acts 1535 and 1542, also known as the &quot;Acts of Union&quot;, passed by the Parliament of England, annexed Wales to the Kingdom of England and replaced the Welsh language and Welsh law with the English language and English law. Section 20 of the 1535 Act made English the only language of the law courts and stated that those who used Welsh would not be appointed to any public office in Wales. The Welsh language was supplanted in many public spheres with the use of the Welsh Not in some schools. The Not, the use of which was never government policy, was later described as a symbol of English cultural oppression.

Since the Glyndŵr Rising of the early 15th century, Welsh nationalism has been primarily non-violent. The Welsh militant group Meibion Glyndŵr () were responsible for arson attacks on English-owned second homes in Wales from 1979 to 1994, motivated by cultural anti-English sentiment. Meibion Glyndŵr also attempted arson against several estate agents in Wales and England and against the offices of the Conservative Party in London.

In 2000, the Chairman of Swansea Bay Race Equality Council said that &quot;Devolution has brought a definite increase in anti-English behaviour&quot; citing three women who believed that they were being discriminated against in their careers because they could not speak Welsh. In 2001 Dafydd Elis-Thomas, a former leader of Plaid Cymru, said that there was an anti-English strand to Welsh nationalism.

On 21 April 2023, it was reported that Plaid Cymru councillor, Terry Davies had been suspended for a rant of discriminatory xenophobia. Davies referred to two colleagues as &quot;outsiders&quot; after telling them that &quot;Wales is for Welsh people.&quot;

On 11 January 2024, It was reported that a note which was sent to an address in Aberystwyth Ceredigion, with racial slurs about English people from Birmingham.
The note which called for Brummies to &#x27;go back home to Brummyland&#x27;. It also called the West Midlands accent &#x27;vomit-inducing&#x27;, and urged the occupant to &#x27;take a few thousand, other people back with them&#x27;. The note which Dyfed-Powys Police are treating as a hate crime, read: &#x27;Iorwerth Ave was once a nice, quiet, pleasant residential area until a load of [people] from the Midlands hit&#x27;, and &#x27;Low-life like you should be forced to live in fenced in sites, preferably back where you came from.&#x27; 

===Northern Ireland===
During the Troubles, the Irish Republican Army (IRA) mainly attacked targets in Northern Ireland and England, not Scotland or Wales, although the IRA planted a bomb at Sullom Voe Terminal in Shetland during a visit by the Queen in May 1981. The ancestry of most people in the Loyalist and Unionist communities is Scottish rather than English. In the Protestant community, the English are identified with British politicians and are sometimes resented for their perceived abandonment of loyalist communities.

==Outside the United Kingdom==
In his 1859 essay &quot;A Few Words on Non-Intervention&quot;, John Stuart Mill notes that England &quot;finds itself, in respect of its foreign policy, held up to obloquy as the type of egoism and selfishness; as a nation which thinks of nothing but of out-witting and out-generalling its neighbours&quot; and urges his fellow countrymen against &quot;the mania of professing to act from meaner motives than those by which we are really actuated&quot;.

===Australia and New Zealand===

&quot;Pommy&quot; or &quot;Pom&quot; (acronym for &#x27;Prisoner of [her] Majesty) is a common Australasian and South African slang word for the English, often combined with &quot;whing[e]ing&quot; (complaining) to make the expression &quot;whingeing Pom&quot; – an English immigrant who stereotypically complains about everything. Although the term is sometimes applied to British immigrants generally, it is usually applied specifically to the English, by both Australians and New Zealanders. From the 19th century, there were feelings among established Australians that many immigrants from England were poorly skilled, unwanted by their home country and unappreciative of the benefits of their new country.

In recent years, complaints about two newspaper articles blaming English tourists for littering a local beach and calling the English &quot;Filthy Poms&quot; in the headlines and &quot;Poms fill the summer of our discontent&quot;, were accepted as complaints and settled through conciliation by the Australian Human Rights Commission when the newspapers published apologies. Letters and articles which referred to English people as &quot;Poms&quot; or &quot;Pommies&quot; did not meet the threshold for racial hatred. In 2007 a complaint to Australia&#x27;s Advertising Standards Bureau about a television commercial using the term &quot;Pom&quot; was upheld and the commercial was withdrawn.

===France===
After the Norman Conquest of 1066, Anglo-Norman French replaced Old English as the official language of England. In the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries, the Plantagenet kings of England lost most of their possessions in France, began to consider England to be their primary domain and turned to the English language. King Edward I, when issuing writs for summoning parliament in 1295, claimed that the King of France planned to invade England and extinguish the English language, &quot;a truly detestable plan which may God avert&quot;. In 1346, Edward III exhibited in Parliament a forged ordinance, in which Philip VI of France would have called for the destruction of the English nation and country. The Hundred Years&#x27; War (1337–1453) between England and France changed societies on both sides of the Channel.

The English and French were engaged in numerous wars in the following centuries. England&#x27;s conflict with Scotland provided France with an opportunity to destabilise England and there was a firm friendship (known as the Auld Alliance) between France and Scotland from the late-thirteenth century to the mid-sixteenth century. The alliance eventually foundered because of growing Protestantism in Scotland. Opposition to Protestantism became a major feature of later French Anglophobia (and conversely, fear of Catholicism was a hallmark of Francophobia). Antipathy and intermittent hostilities between France and Britain, as distinct from England, continued during later centuries.

=== Ireland ===
There is a long tradition of Anglophobia within Irish nationalism. Much of this was grounded in the hostility felt by the largely Catholic Irish for the Anglo-Irish people, which was mainly Anglican. In Ireland before the Great Famine, anti-English hostility was deep-seated and was manifested in increased anti-English hostility organised by United Irishmen. In post-famine Ireland, anti-English hostility was adopted into the philosophy and foundation of the Irish nationalist movement. At the turn of the 20th century, the Celtic Revival movement associated the search for a cultural and national identity with an increasing anti-colonial and anti-English sentiment. Anti-English themes manifested in national organisations seen as promoting native Irish values, with the emergence of groups like Sinn Féin. One popular nationalist slogan was &quot;England&#x27;s difficulty is Ireland&#x27;s opportunity&quot; and the well-known anti-World-War-I song &quot;Who is Ireland&#x27;s Enemy?&quot; used past events to conclude that it was England, and furthermore that Irish people ought to &quot;pay those devils back&quot;.

The Gaelic Athletic Association (GAA) was founded in 1884 as a counter-measure against the Anglo-Irish Athletic Association, which promoted and supervised British sports such as English football in Ireland. The GAA was founded in the anti-English ideas of Thomas Croke, Archbishop of Cashel and Emly. From 1886 to 1971 the GAA focused national pride into distinctly non-English activities. Members were forbidden to belong to organisations that played &quot;English&quot; games and the organisation countered the Anglicisation in Irish society. With the development in Ireland of Irish games and the arts, the Celtic revivalists and nationalists identified characteristics of what they defined as the &quot;Irish Race&quot;. A nationalistic identity developed, as the opposite of the Anglo-Saxons and untainted by the Anglo-Irish. A sense of national identity and Irish distinctiveness as well as an anti-English assertiveness was reinforced to Catholics by teachers in hedge schools.

A feeling of anti-English sentiment intensified within Irish nationalism during the Boer Wars, leading to xenophobia underlined by Anglophobia. Two units of Irish commandos fought with the Boer against British forces during the Second Boer War (1899–1902). J. Donnolly, a member of the brigade, wrote to the editor of the &quot;Irish News&quot; in 1901:

It was not for the love of the Boer we were fighting; it was for the hatred of the English. (J. Donnolly letter to the &quot;Irish News&quot;, 1901)

The pro-Boer movement gained widespread support in Ireland, and over 20,000 supporters demonstrated in Dublin in 1899 where Irish nationalism, anti-English and pro-Boer attitudes were one and the same. There was a pro-Boer movement in England as well but the English pro-Boer movement was not based on anti-English sentiments. These opposing views and animosity led the English and Irish pro-Boer groups to maintain a distance from one another. Despite this, far more Irishmen joined various Irish Regiments of the British Army during this time, more so than pro-Boer commandos.

The W. B. Yeats play &quot;The Countess Cathleen&quot;, written in 1892, has anti-English overtones comparing the English gentry to demons who come for Irish souls. Films set during the Irish War of Independence, such as &quot;The Informer&quot; (1935) and the &quot;Plough and the Stars&quot; (1936), were criticised by the BBFC for the director John Ford&#x27;s anti-English content and in recent years, &quot;Michael Collins&quot; and &quot;The Wind That Shakes the Barley&quot; (despite being a joint British-Irish production) have led to accusations of Anglophobia in the British press. In 2006, Antony Booth, the father-in-law of Tony Blair, claimed he was the victim of anti-English vandalism and discrimination while living in County Cavan, Ireland, with his wife. In August 2008 an English pipe fitter based in Dublin was awarded €20,000 for the racial abuse and discrimination he received at his workplace.

In 2011, tensions and anti-English or anti-British feelings flared in relation to the proposed visit of Queen Elizabeth II, the first British monarch to visit Ireland in 100 years. The invitation by the President of Ireland, Mary McAleese, and the Irish government, was hailed by the Irish press as a historic visit but was criticised by Sinn Féin President Gerry Adams. An anti-Queen demonstration was held at the GPO Dublin by a small group of Irish Republicans on 26 February 2011, and a mock trial and decapitation of an effigy of Queen Elizabeth II were carried out by socialist republican group Éirígí. Other protests included one Dublin publican (the father of Celtic player Anthony Stokes) hanging a banner declaring &quot;the Queen will never be welcome in this country&quot;.

In 2018, the Irish author and journalist Megan Nolan wrote an opinion piece for &quot;The New York Times&quot; that detailed how she had come to hate England and English people.

===Russia===
Despite having formed an alliance between the two nations since Tsarist rule, due to the Great Game, a wave of widespread Anglophobia took hold in Russia, with the fear of English meddling and intervention. During the Russo-Japanese War, there was a sentiment in Russia that England was behind Japan&#x27;s militarism against Russia in the Far East, leading to a strained relationship between Britain and Russia. The UK and Russia were allies in World War I until the Bolshevik Revolution of 1918, and the capitalistic West became a target for the new Communist International (&quot;Comintern.&quot;). In 1924, these tensions were briefly cooled when the Labour government of Prime Minister Ramsay MacDonald formally recognized the Soviet Union and established diplomatic relations between the two countries. The two were allies again starting in 1941. During the Cold War, Britain firmly sided with the West against the Soviet Union and the relationship between the two continues to remain dubious even today. Before 2018 FIFA World Cup, there had been controversies regarding Anglophobia in Russia.

===United States===
In the early years of the Republic, Anglophobia was particularly associated with the Jeffersonian Republicans in the 1790s, who warned that close ties with Great Britain were especially dangerous because that nation was an enemy of American Republicanism. By contrast, the opposing Federalist party warned that the Jeffersonians were too sympathetic to the radicalism of the French Revolution. The Origins of the War of 1812 involved claimed violations against American neutrality by the United Kingdom during the Napoleonic Wars. The Treaty of Ghent, ratified in 1815 and ending the War of 1812, established peaceful relations for the two countries that has lasted more than two centuries, though this was stressed at times in the years following the treaty by events such as the Trent Affair of 1861 and the Fenian Raids in 1866–1871.

In the final days of the 1888 presidential campaign, a Republican operative claiming to be a British immigrant in America named Charles F. Murchison tricked the British ambassador Lord Sackville-West into indicating Britain&#x27;s support for the Democratic candidate Grover Cleveland. The deliberatly fabricated act forced Sackville-west to return to Britain.
The Great Rapprochement was the convergence of social and political objectives between the United Kingdom and the United States from 1895 until World War I began in 1914. The most notable sign of improving relations during the Great Rapprochement was Britain&#x27;s actions during the Spanish–American War (started 1898). Initially Britain supported the Spanish Empire and its colonial rule over Cuba, since the perceived threat of American occupation and a territorial acquisition of Cuba by the United States might harm British trade and commercial interests within its own imperial possessions in the West Indies. However, after the United States made genuine assurances that it would grant Cuba&#x27;s independence (which eventually occurred in 1902 under the terms dictated in the Platt Amendment), the British abandoned this policy and ultimately sided with the United States, unlike most other European powers who supported Spain. In return the US government supported Britain during the Boer War, although many Americans favoured the Boers.

In 2002, academic John Moser said that, although Anglophobia is now &quot;almost completely absent&quot; from American society, this was not always the case. He stated that &quot;there were strains of Anglophobia present in virtually every populist movement of the late 19th and early 20th centuries,&quot; with the Populist Party, for example, &quot;referring to England as a &#x27;monster&#x27; that had &#x27;seized upon the fresh energy of America and is steadily fixing its fangs into our social life.&#x27;&quot;

Reasons suggested for the faltering of Anglophobia included the impact of the Second World War, and reduced political support for Irish nationalist movements compared with that in earlier periods. Moser also said:

The film industry is widely perceived to give a British nationality to a disproportionate number of villains.

====Anglophobia in the Irish-American community====
The Irish-American community in the United States has historically shown antipathy towards Britain for its role in controlling Ireland. The large Irish Catholic element provided a major base for demands for Irish independence, and occasioned anti-British rhetoric, especially at election time. Anglophobia thus has been a defining feature of the Irish-American experience. Bolstered by their support of Irish nationalism, Irish-American communities have been staunchly anti-English since the 1850s, and this sentiment is fostered within the Irish-American identity. Irish immigrants arrived poor and within a generation or two prospered. Many subscribed cash from their weekly wage to keep up the anti-English agitation. Anglophobia was a common theme in Democratic Party politics. Irish-American newspapers, like the pro-Catholic &quot;Truth Teller&quot; which was founded in 1825 by an anti-English priest, were influential in the identity of the community.

Anti-English feelings among Irish-Americans spread to American culture through Irish-American performers in popular blackface minstrel shows. These imparted both elements of the Irish-American performers&#x27; own national bias, and the popular stereotypical image that the English people were bourgeois, aloof, or upper class. Sentiments quickly turned into direct and violent action when in the 1860s the Fenian Brotherhood Society invaded Canada to provoke a United States-British war in hope it would lead to Irish independence. Violence is said to have included direct action by Fenian sympathisers, with the assassination of Thomas D&#x27;Arcy McGee, himself an Irish Canadian and Irish nationalist who was against the invasion, although he was very critical of the Orange Order, and it has long been suspected they were his true killers. Goldwin Smith, professor at Cornell University, wrote in the &quot;North American Review&quot; that &quot;hatred of England&quot; was used as a tool to win the Irish-American vote. A similar observation was made in 1900 by U.S. Secretary of State John Hay, who criticised the Prairie Populist and his own Democratic party&#x27;s political pandering to attract the support of the Irish diaspora:

Well into the early 20th century anti-English sentiment was increasing with famine memorials in the Irish-American communities, which &quot;served as a wellspring for their obsessive and often corrosive antipathy,&quot; as noted in the British Parliament in 1915:

Some newspapers, including the &quot;San Francisco Leader&quot; and the &quot;New York Irish World&quot;, first published in 1823, were renowned for their anti-English articles. The &quot;Irish World&quot; blamed the mainland United Kingdom for the depopulation and desolate state of Ireland&#x27;s industries. One newspaper, the &quot;Gaelic American&quot;, called a student performance of the British national anthem by some girls of Irish heritage from a convent school an act of disloyalty, where they were taught to reverence the traditions of the hereditary enemy of their race and religion.

A commemorative stamp by philanthropist Andrew Carnegie on a century of peace between America and Great Britain was criticised by the Irish-American press. In recent years American political commentators, such as Pat Buchanan, have highlighted the anti-English stance of the Irish Diaspora in the United States of America.

===Argentina===
In 1982 the two countries fought a small short conflict in the Falklands War, decisively won by the UK. Relations have become friendly since then.

Anglophobia in Argentina has been studied by the historian Ema Cibotti in &quot;Dear Enemies. From Beresford to Maradona, the true story of relations between the English and Argentines&quot;. In its prologue, entitled &quot;Against the English it is better&quot;, the social historian states

That feeling has not been constant or unanimous. Characters such as Manuel Belgrano, who had faced the English invasions of Buenos Aires in 1806 and 1807 or Mariano Moreno, among the independence leaders, supported policies similar to those of the British and the dispute over the Falkland Islands did not sour relations. The 1929 crisis and the coup that overthrew Hipólito Yrigoyen in 1930, with the fall in export prices, will be the determining factors in the appearance of an Anglophobic sentiment linked to the rejection of neo-colonialism or British imperialism. This is what the Spanish pedagogue Lorenzo Luzuriaga observed upon arriving in Argentina in 1940, who in a letter to Américo Castro analysed the different attitudes towards the outbreak of the World War

Philosopher Mario Bunge, in an interview granted to Jorge Fontevecchia on May 4, 2008, collected in Reportajes 2, alluded to the spread of Anglophobic sentiment in the years of the conflict, explainable &quot;because many of the companies had been owned by the English&quot; and attributed to this feeling the approach to Nazism of Carlos Astrada, introducer of existentialist philosophy in Argentina. But it will be with the Falklands War in 1982 when Anglophobic sentiment spread to a good part of society.

===India===
Anglophobic sentiment in India is rooted in the colonial legacy of British rule, starting with the rule of the British East India Company and continuing under the British Raj. Oppressive and exploitative practices, the imposition of British culture, language, and education, along with economic policies that favoured British interests at the expense of Indian welfare, fuelled a sense of injustice and subjugation among Indians. Key events such as the Indian Rebellion of 1857, the Jallianwala Bagh massacre of 1919, and the economic hardships imposed by British policies during events like the Bengal famine of 1943 intensified this animosity. Post-independence, Anglophobia has persisted in various forms, often manifesting as resistance to Western cultural dominance and the lingering impact of colonial attitudes in modern Indian society. This historical context has fostered a complex relationship with the English language and British cultural elements, where they are both integrated into Indian society and simultaneously viewed with suspicion or disdain by some. The legacy of colonial exploitation has left a deep imprint on India&#x27;s collective memory, contributing to a continued wariness of British influence in both political and cultural spheres.

==See also==

* Anglophile
* Racism
* Anti-Canadian sentiment § Quebec - where anti-Anglophone sentiment is often described as Anglophobia
* List of phobias
* Perfidious Albion
* Views of Lyndon LaRouche and the LaRouche movement
* Stereotypes of British people

==References==
==Further reading==

===France===
* Acomb, Frances Dorothy. &quot;Anglophobia in France, 1763–1789: an essay in the history of constitutionalism and nationalism&quot; (Duke University Press, 1950)
* Bell, Philip J. &quot;France and Britain, 1900–1940. Entente and Estrangement&quot; (Longman, 1996)
* Berthon, Simon. &quot;Allies at War: The Bitter Rivalry among Churchill, Roosevelt, and de Gaulle&quot; (2001). 356 pp.
* Black, Jeremy. &quot;Natural and Necessary Enemies: Anglo-French Relations in the Eighteenth Century&quot; (1986)
* Brunschwig, Henri. &quot;Anglophobia and French African Policy&quot; (Yale University Press, 1971).
* Gibson, Robert. &quot;The Best of Enemies: Anglo-French Relations Since the Norman Conquest&quot; (2nd ed. 2011) major scholarly study excerpt and text search
* Horne, Alistair, &quot;Friend or Foe: An Anglo-Saxon History of France&quot; (Weidenfeld &amp; Nicolson, 2005).
* Johnson, Douglas, et al. &quot; Britain and France: Ten Centuries&quot; (1980) table of contents
* Newman, Gerald. &quot;Anti-French Propaganda and British Liberal Nationalism in the Early Nineteenth Century: Suggestions Toward a General Interpretation.&quot; &quot;Victorian Studies&quot; (1975): 385–418. in JSTOR
* Otte, T. G. &quot;From &quot;War-in-Sight&quot; to Nearly War: Anglo–French Relations in the Age of High Imperialism, 1875–1898.&quot; &quot;Diplomacy and Statecraft&quot; (2006) 17#4 pp: 693–714.
* Pickles, Dorothy. &quot;The Uneasy Entente. French Foreign Policy and Franco-British Misunderstandings&quot; (1966)
* Schmidt, H. D. &quot;The Idea and Slogan of &#x27;Perfidious Albion&#x27;&quot; &quot;Journal of the History of Ideas&quot; (1953) pp: 604–616. in JSTOR; on French distrust of &quot;Albion&quot; (i.e. England)
* Tombs, R. P. and I. Tombs, &quot;That Sweet Enemy: Britain and France, the History of a Love-Hate Relationship&quot; (Pimlico, 2007)

===Germany===
* Frederick, Suzanne Y. &quot;The Anglo-German Rivalry, 1890–1914,&quot; pp. 306–336 in William R. Thompson, ed. &quot;Great power rivalries&quot; (1999) online
* Geppert, Dominik, and Robert Gerwarth, eds. &quot;Wilhelmine Germany and Edwardian Britain: Essays on Cultural Affinity&quot; (2009)
* Görtemaker, Manfred. &quot;Britain and Germany in the Twentieth Century&quot; (2005)
* Hoerber, Thomas. &quot;Prevail or perish: Anglo-German naval competition at the beginning of the twentieth century,&quot; &quot;European Security&quot; (2011) 20#1, pp. 65–79.
* Kennedy, Paul M. &quot;Idealists and realists: British views of Germany, 1864–1939,&quot; &quot;Transactions of the Royal Historical Society&quot; 25 (1975) pp: 137–56; compares the views of idealists (pro-German) and realists (anti-German)
* Kennedy, Paul. &quot;The Rise of the Anglo-German Antagonism 1860–1914&quot; (London, 1980) excerpt and text search; influential synthesis
* Major, Patrick. &quot;Britain and Germany: A Love-Hate Relationship?&quot; &quot;German History,&quot; October 2008, Vol. 26 Issue 4, pp. 457–468.
* Milton, Richard. &quot;Best of Enemies: Britain and Germany: 100 Years of Truth and Lies&quot; (2004), popular history covers 1845–1945 focusing on public opinion and propaganda; 368pp excerpt and text search
* Ramsden, John. &quot;Don’t Mention the War: The British and the Germans since 1890&quot; (London, 2006).
* Rüger, Jan. &quot;Revisiting the Anglo-German Antagonism,&quot; &quot;Journal of Modern History&quot; (2011) 83#3, pp. 579–617 in JSTOR
* Scully, Richard. &quot;British Images of Germany: Admiration, Antagonism, and Ambivalence, 1860–1914&quot; (Palgrave Macmillan, 2012) 375pp

===United States===
* Cook, James G. &quot;Anglophobia: An Analysis of Anti-British Prejudice in the United States&quot; (1919) online
* Crapol, Edward P. &quot;America for Americans: Economic Nationalism and Anglophobia in the Late Nineteenth Century&quot; (Greenwood, 1973)
* Frost, Jennifer. &quot;Dissent and Consent in the&quot; Good War&quot;: Hedda Hopper, Hollywood Gossip, and World War II Isolationism.&quot; &quot;Film History: An International Journal&quot; 22#2 (2010): 170–181.
* Ellis, Sylvia. &quot;Historical Dictionary of Anglo-American Relations&quot; (2009) and text search
* Foreman, Amanda. &quot;A World on Fire: Britain’s Crucial Role in the American Civil War&quot; (Random House, 2011), 958 pp.
** Geoffrey Wheatcroft, &quot;How the British Nearly Supported the Confederacy,&quot; &quot;New York Times Sunday Book Review&quot; June 30, 2011 online
* Gleason, Mark C. &quot;From Associates to Antagonists: The United States, Great Britain, the First World War, and the Origins of War Plan Red, 1914–1919&quot; (PhD. Dissertation University of North Texas, 2012); Online; &quot;War Plan Red&quot; was the American Army&#x27;s plan for war against Great Britain.
* Haynes, Sam W. &quot;Unfinished Revolution: The Early American Republic in a British World&quot; (2010)
* Louis, William Roger; &quot;Imperialism at Bay: The United States and the Decolonization of the British Empire, 1941–1945&quot; (1978)
* Moser, John E. &quot;Twisting the Lion&#x27;s Tail: American Anglophobia between the World Wars&quot; (New York University Press, 1999)
* Perkins, Bradford. &quot;Prologue to war: England and the United States, 1805–1812 &quot; (1961) full text online
* Peskin, Lawrence A. &quot;Conspiratorial Anglophobia and the War of 1812.&quot; &quot;Journal of American History&quot; 98#3 (2011): 647–669. online
* Tuffnell, Stephen. &quot;&quot;Uncle Sam is to be Sacrificed&quot;: Anglophobia in Late Nineteenth-Century Politics and Culture.&quot; &quot;American Nineteenth Century History&quot; 12#1 (2011): 77–99.

===Anglophobic publications===
* Gelli, Frank Julian. &quot;The Dark Side of England&quot;, (London, 2014, )</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2734988" start="0" end="22" title="Anti-English sentiment" label="Anti-English sentiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2734988" start="38" end="49" title="Anti-English sentiment" label="Anglophobia"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="56" end="61" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="105" end="110" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q42406" start="249" end="263" title="English people" label="English people"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="271" end="278" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="330" end="344" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q82006" start="388" end="405" title="Benjamin Disraeli" label="Benjamin Disraeli"/>
<link wikidata="Q3335" start="410" end="423" title="George Orwell" label="George Orwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2670915" start="466" end="471" title="Welsh nationalism" label="Welsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2021987" start="473" end="478" title="Irish nationalism" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q3336993" start="484" end="505" title="Scottish nationalism" label="Scottish nationalisms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1114749" start="549" end="566" title="Scottish national identity" label="Scottish identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="711" end="716" title="Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="745" end="761" title="English language" label="English language"/>
<link wikidata="Q26" start="845" end="861" title="Northern Ireland" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q175284" start="966" end="969" title="Irish Republican Army" label="IRA"/>
<link wikidata="Q815436" start="1005" end="1017" title="the Troubles" label="the Troubles"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="1084" end="1093" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="1095" end="1106" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="1108" end="1114" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q27" start="1116" end="1123" title="Republic of Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="1125" end="1131" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="1133" end="1138" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="1144" end="1157" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q414" start="1163" end="1172" title="Argentina" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q12551" start="1336" end="1359" title="Hundred Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Hundred Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="1428" end="1441" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q48249" start="1701" end="1714" title="Falklands War" label="Falklands War"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="1734" end="1753" title="British Empire" label="British imperialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4774120" start="1824" end="1846" title="anti-British sentiment" label="anti-British sentiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q541557" start="1864" end="1875" title="Anglophile" label="Anglophilia"/>
<link wikidata="Q82006" start="1945" end="1962" title="Benjamin Disraeli" label="Benjamin Disraeli"/>
<link wikidata="Q7062629" start="2125" end="2145" title="Notes on Nationalism" label="Notes on Nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209280" start="2241" end="2248" title="Polemic (magazine)" label="Polemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3335" start="2271" end="2284" title="George Orwell" label="George Orwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q192775" start="2509" end="2530" title="University of Glasgow" label="University of Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q486296" start="2585" end="2597" title="Islamophobia" label="Islamophobia"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="2601" end="2609" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6684771" start="3219" end="3245" title="Lothian and Borders Police" label="Lothian and Borders Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q206171" start="3320" end="3339" title="Scottish Parliament" label="Scottish Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q744894" start="3476" end="3486" title="Devolution in the United Kingdom" label="devolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q37285" start="3849" end="3863" title="2006 FIFA World Cup" label="FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q988326" start="5133" end="5165" title="Laws in Wales Acts 1535 and 1542" label="Laws in Wales Acts 1535 and 1542"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130737" start="5226" end="5247" title="Parliament of England" label="Parliament of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q179876" start="5270" end="5288" title="Kingdom of England" label="Kingdom of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q9309" start="5306" end="5320" title="Welsh language" label="Welsh language"/>
<link wikidata="Q5165011" start="5325" end="5334" title="Welsh law" label="Welsh law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="5344" end="5360" title="English language" label="English language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138780" start="5365" end="5376" title="English law" label="English law"/>
<link wikidata="Q41487" start="5443" end="5453" title="law courts" label="law courts"/>
<link wikidata="Q31728" start="5521" end="5534" title="public office" label="public office"/>
<link wikidata="Q3058291" start="5622" end="5631" title="Welsh Not" label="Welsh Not"/>
<link wikidata="Q4126360" start="5779" end="5793" title="Glyndŵr Rising" label="Glyndŵr Rising"/>
<link wikidata="Q2977822" start="5896" end="5911" title="Meibion Glyndŵr" label="Meibion Glyndŵr"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="6173" end="6191" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q23051" start="6229" end="6236" title="Swansea" label="Swansea"/>
<link wikidata="Q333841" start="6490" end="6508" title="Dafydd Elis-Thomas" label="Dafydd Elis-Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q10691" start="6529" end="6540" title="Plaid Cymru" label="Plaid Cymru"/>
<link wikidata="Q10691" start="6647" end="6658" title="Plaid Cymru" label="Plaid Cymru"/>
<link wikidata="Q213154" start="6947" end="6958" title="Aberystwyth" label="Aberystwyth"/>
<link wikidata="Q217829" start="6959" end="6969" title="Ceredigion" label="Ceredigion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2256" start="7015" end="7025" title="Birmingham" label="Birmingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q4978814" start="7053" end="7060" title="Brummie dialect" label="Brummie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7985941" start="7124" end="7144" title="West Midlands English" label="West Midlands accent"/>
<link wikidata="Q3403354" start="7276" end="7294" title="Dyfed-Powys Police" label="Dyfed-Powys Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q459409" start="7313" end="7323" title="hate crime" label="hate crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q850235" start="7434" end="7442" title="Midlands" label="Midlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q815436" start="7602" end="7614" title="the Troubles" label="the Troubles"/>
<link wikidata="Q175284" start="7620" end="7641" title="Irish Republican Army" label="Irish Republican Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q3503500" start="7763" end="7782" title="Sullom Voe Terminal" label="Sullom Voe Terminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q47134" start="7786" end="7794" title="Shetland" label="Shetland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3120476" start="7908" end="7916" title="Ulster Scots people" label="Scottish"/>
<link wikidata="Q7251652" start="7945" end="7955" title="Protestantism in Ireland" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q4656729" start="8159" end="8190" title="A Few Words on Non-Intervention" label="A Few Words on Non-Intervention"/>
<link wikidata="Q50020" start="8198" end="8214" title="John Stuart Mill" label="John Stuart Mill"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8629" end="8634" title="Alternative names for the British#Pommy" label="Pommy"/>
<link wikidata="Q45256" start="8718" end="8729" title="Australasia" label="Australasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="8735" end="8747" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q167172" start="8911" end="8926" title="stereotype" label="stereotypically"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="9086" end="9095" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="9102" end="9113" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q4056090" start="9634" end="9668" title="Australian Human Rights Commission" label="Australian Human Rights Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q854995" start="9930" end="9951" title="television commercial" label="television commercial"/>
<link wikidata="Q200485" start="10052" end="10067" title="Norman Conquest" label="Norman Conquest"/>
<link wikidata="Q35214" start="10077" end="10096" title="Anglo-Norman language" label="Anglo-Norman French"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="10106" end="10117" title="Old English" label="Old English"/>
<link wikidata="Q106151" start="10203" end="10214" title="House of Plantagenet" label="Plantagenet"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="10266" end="10272" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q57798" start="10368" end="10376" title="Edward I of England" label="Edward I"/>
<link wikidata="Q130969" start="10448" end="10462" title="Philip IV of France" label="King of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q129247" start="10592" end="10602" title="Edward III of England" label="Edward III"/>
<link wikidata="Q7100802" start="10629" end="10645" title="Ordinance of Normandy" label="forged ordinance"/>
<link wikidata="Q170586" start="10656" end="10675" title="Philip VI of France" label="Philip VI of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q12551" start="10753" end="10776" title="Hundred Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Hundred Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q34640" start="10855" end="10862" title="English Channel" label="Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q771662" start="11089" end="11102" title="Auld Alliance" label="Auld Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="11248" end="11261" title="Protestantism" label="Protestantism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="11379" end="11390" title="Catholicism" label="Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q909355" start="11409" end="11421" title="Francophobia" label="Francophobia"/>
<link wikidata="Q28282" start="11424" end="11433" title="France–United Kingdom relations" label="Antipathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2021987" start="11616" end="11633" title="Irish nationalism" label="Irish nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2849692" start="11721" end="11732" title="Anglo-Irish" label="Anglo-Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423963" start="11758" end="11766" title="Anglican" label="Anglican"/>
<link wikidata="Q188371" start="11790" end="11802" title="Great Famine (Ireland)" label="Great Famine"/>
<link wikidata="Q535030" start="11911" end="11926" title="Society of United Irishmen" label="United Irishmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672822" start="12094" end="12108" title="Celtic Revival" label="Celtic Revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q76382" start="12368" end="12377" title="Sinn Féin" label="Sinn Féin"/>
<link wikidata="Q85759303" start="12420" end="12475" title="England&amp;#x27;s difficulty is Ireland&amp;#x27;s opportunity" label="England&amp;#x27;s difficulty is Ireland&amp;#x27;s opportunity"/>
<link wikidata="Q4964909" start="12529" end="12557" title="Who is Ireland&amp;#x27;s Enemy?" label="Who is Ireland&amp;#x27;s Enemy?"/>
<link wikidata="Q548520" start="12697" end="12724" title="Gaelic Athletic Association" label="Gaelic Athletic Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="12879" end="12887" title="Association football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q2423107" start="12949" end="12961" title="Thomas Croke" label="Thomas Croke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364316" start="12977" end="12992" title="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Cashel and Emly" label="Cashel and Emly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2849692" start="13511" end="13522" title="Anglo-Irish" label="Anglo-Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1592999" start="13663" end="13675" title="hedge school" label="hedge school"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13763" end="13772" title="Military history of South Africa#Boer Wars" label="Boer Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q11714026" start="13836" end="13851" title="Irish commandos" label="Irish commandos"/>
<link wikidata="Q188201" start="13868" end="13872" title="Boer" label="Boer"/>
<link wikidata="Q215112" start="13907" end="13922" title="Second Boer War" label="Second Boer War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761" start="14287" end="14293" title="Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q40213" start="14768" end="14779" title="W. B. Yeats" label="W. B. Yeats"/>
<link wikidata="Q7727770" start="14791" end="14812" title="The Countess Cathleen" label="The Countess Cathleen"/>
<link wikidata="Q208297" start="14950" end="14975" title="Irish War of Independence" label="Irish War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q463869" start="14991" end="15003" title="The Informer (1935 film)" label="The Informer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2076128" start="15031" end="15051" title="The Plough and the Stars (film)" label="Plough and the Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q861670" start="15089" end="15093" title="British Board of Film Classification" label="BBFC"/>
<link wikidata="Q51114" start="15111" end="15120" title="John Ford" label="John Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q430535" start="15176" end="15191" title="Michael Collins (film)" label="Michael Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q827106" start="15208" end="15239" title="The Wind That Shakes the Barley (film)" label="The Wind That Shakes the Barley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2852815" start="15365" end="15377" title="Antony Booth" label="Antony Booth"/>
<link wikidata="Q9545" start="15400" end="15410" title="Tony Blair" label="Tony Blair"/>
<link wikidata="Q187402" start="15499" end="15511" title="County Cavan" label="County Cavan"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="15786" end="15804" title="Elizabeth II" label="Queen Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q739941" start="15816" end="15831" title="Monarchy of the United Kingdom" label="British monarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q213702" start="15885" end="15905" title="President of Ireland" label="President of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q174662" start="15907" end="15920" title="Mary McAleese" label="Mary McAleese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672817" start="15930" end="15946" title="Irish government" label="Irish government"/>
<link wikidata="Q76382" start="16020" end="16029" title="Sinn Féin" label="Sinn Féin"/>
<link wikidata="Q76139" start="16040" end="16051" title="Gerry Adams" label="Gerry Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016240" start="16178" end="16183" title="trial" label="trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q204933" start="16188" end="16200" title="decapitation" label="decapitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3086688" start="16283" end="16289" title="Éirígí" label="Éirígí"/>
<link wikidata="Q19593" start="16350" end="16356" title="Celtic F.C." label="Celtic"/>
<link wikidata="Q529425" start="16364" end="16378" title="Anthony Stokes" label="Anthony Stokes"/>
<link wikidata="Q105357690" start="16510" end="16521" title="Megan Nolan" label="Megan Nolan"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="16555" end="16573" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="16619" end="16626" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q42406" start="16631" end="16645" title="English people" label="English people"/>
<link wikidata="Q216702" start="16746" end="16760" title="the Great Game" label="the Great Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q159950" start="16879" end="16897" title="Russo-Japanese War" label="Russo-Japanese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q163931" start="17213" end="17236" title="Communist International" label="Communist International"/>
<link wikidata="Q166646" start="17352" end="17368" title="Ramsay MacDonald" label="Ramsay MacDonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="17525" end="17533" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q170645" start="17679" end="17698" title="2018 FIFA World Cup" label="2018 FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q42186" start="17868" end="17892" title="Jeffersonian Republicans" label="Jeffersonian Republicans"/>
<link wikidata="Q42189" start="18065" end="18081" title="Federalist party" label="Federalist party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7102647" start="18181" end="18207" title="Origins of the War of 1812" label="Origins of the War of 1812"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324198" start="18318" end="18333" title="Treaty of Ghent" label="Treaty of Ghent"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166330" start="18564" end="18576" title="Trent Affair" label="Trent Affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q2996302" start="18593" end="18605" title="Fenian Raids" label="Fenian Raids"/>
<link wikidata="Q16931623" start="18770" end="18789" title="Murchison letter" label="tricked the British"/>
<link wikidata="Q6087823" start="18801" end="18820" title="Lionel Sackville-West, 2nd Baron Sackville" label="Lord Sackville-West"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737903" start="18982" end="19005" title="The Great Rapprochement" label="The Great Rapprochement"/>
<link wikidata="Q12583" start="19267" end="19287" title="Spanish–American War" label="Spanish–American War"/>
<link wikidata="Q80702" start="19336" end="19350" title="Spanish Empire" label="Spanish Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2039931" start="19359" end="19372" title="Captaincy General of Cuba" label="colonial rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q241" start="19378" end="19382" title="Cuba" label="Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q669037" start="19586" end="19597" title="West Indies" label="West Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q863445" start="19768" end="19783" title="Platt Amendment" label="Platt Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q215112" start="19977" end="19985" title="Second Boer War" label="Boer War"/>
<link wikidata="Q180490" start="20272" end="20289" title="populist movement" label="populist movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q337794" start="20348" end="20362" title="People&amp;#x27;s Party (United States)" label="Populist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="20630" end="20646" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q380675" start="20771" end="20784" title="Cinema of the United States" label="film industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075293" start="20934" end="20948" title="Irish-American" label="Irish-American"/>
<link wikidata="Q880808" start="22007" end="22016" title="blackface" label="blackface"/>
<link wikidata="Q588666" start="22017" end="22030" title="minstrel show" label="minstrel show"/>
<link wikidata="Q2097602" start="22298" end="22316" title="Fenian Brotherhood" label="Fenian Brotherhood"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="22333" end="22339" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2119451" start="22522" end="22546" title="Thomas D&amp;#x27;Arcy McGee" label="Thomas D&amp;#x27;Arcy McGee"/>
<link wikidata="Q3154490" start="22559" end="22573" title="Irish Canadian" label="Irish Canadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345321" start="22663" end="22675" title="Orange Order" label="Orange Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q3110133" start="22736" end="22749" title="Goldwin Smith" label="Goldwin Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q49115" start="22764" end="22782" title="Cornell University" label="Cornell University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3344093" start="22803" end="22824" title="North American Review" label="North American Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q117101" start="22983" end="22991" title="John Hay" label="John Hay"/>
<link wikidata="Q337794" start="23012" end="23028" title="People&amp;#x27;s Party (United States)" label="Prairie Populist"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="23041" end="23057" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic party"/>
<link wikidata="Q5516605" start="23733" end="23748" title="Gaelic American" label="Gaelic American"/>
<link wikidata="Q40807" start="23792" end="23815" title="God Save the Queen" label="British national anthem"/>
<link wikidata="Q185733" start="24021" end="24035" title="Philanthropy" label="philanthropist"/>
<link wikidata="Q484265" start="24036" end="24051" title="Andrew Carnegie" label="Andrew Carnegie"/>
<link wikidata="Q149127" start="24209" end="24221" title="Pat Buchanan" label="Pat Buchanan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075293" start="24271" end="24285" title="Irish-American" label="Irish Diaspora"/>
<link wikidata="Q48249" start="24399" end="24412" title="Falklands War" label="Falklands War"/>
<link wikidata="Q315507" start="24845" end="24860" title="Manuel Belgrano" label="Manuel Belgrano"/>
<link wikidata="Q587151" start="24880" end="24913" title="British invasions of the River Plate" label="English invasions of Buenos Aires"/>
<link wikidata="Q9648" start="25058" end="25074" title="Falkland Islands" label="Falkland Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q297134" start="25143" end="25160" title="Hipólito Yrigoyen" label="Hipólito Yrigoyen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4402025" start="25164" end="25168" title="1930 Argentine coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="1930"/>
<link wikidata="Q4356395" start="25382" end="25399" title="Lorenzo Luzuriaga" label="Lorenzo Luzuriaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q482275" start="25464" end="25478" title="Américo Castro" label="Américo Castro"/>
<link wikidata="Q708853" start="25563" end="25574" title="Mario Bunge" label="Mario Bunge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2939300" start="25883" end="25897" title="Carlos Astrada" label="Carlos Astrada"/>
<link wikidata="Q48249" start="25977" end="25990" title="Falklands War" label="Falklands War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001966" start="26172" end="26210" title="Company rule in India" label="rule of the British East India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q129286" start="26236" end="26247" title="British Raj" label="British Raj"/>
<link wikidata="Q129864" start="26526" end="26550" title="Indian Rebellion of 1857" label="Indian Rebellion of 1857"/>
<link wikidata="Q208855" start="26556" end="26581" title="Jallianwala Bagh massacre" label="Jallianwala Bagh massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q522837" start="26669" end="26690" title="Bengal famine of 1943" label="Bengal famine of 1943"/>
<link wikidata="Q541557" start="27356" end="27366" title="Anglophile" label="Anglophile"/>
<link wikidata="Q8461" start="27369" end="27375" title="Racism" label="Racism"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27378" end="27410" title="Anti-Canadian sentiment#Quebec" label="Anti-Canadian sentiment § Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q987355" start="27424" end="27434" title="Anglophone" label="Anglophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q327658" start="27481" end="27496" title="List of phobias" label="List of phobias"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194204" start="27499" end="27516" title="Perfidious Albion" label="Perfidious Albion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7928823" start="27519" end="27569" title="Views of Lyndon LaRouche and the LaRouche movement" label="Views of Lyndon LaRouche and the LaRouche movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q65071964" start="27572" end="27601" title="Stereotypes of British people" label="Stereotypes of British people"/>
<link wikidata="Q88586807" start="27654" end="27676" title="Frances Dorothy Acomb" label="Acomb, Frances Dorothy"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="191386" wikidata="Q7263687" url="?curid=191386" title="Pyrophobia">
<text>Pyrophobia is a fear of fire, which can be considered irrational if beyond what is considered normal. This phobia is ancient and primordial, perhaps since humanity&#x27;s discovery of fire. Usually pertaining to humans&#x27; comprehensible reaction to fire itself, the fear of fire by other animals cannot be considered pyrophobic, as they are thought not to understand its purpose beyond general danger.

==Signs and symptoms==
When witnessing fire or smoke (even if the fire poses no threat, such as a candle), suspecting a fire is nearby, or (in some cases) visualizing fires, pyrophobes exhibit typical psychological and physiological symptoms of fear and panic: acute stress, fast heartbeat, shortness of breath, tightness in chest, sweating, nausea, shaking or trembling, dry mouth, needing to go to the bathroom, dizziness and/or fainting. A pyrophobe may also attempt to avoid or flee from fires, and avoid situations where harmless fire may be present (such as a barbecue or a campfire). The severity of pyrophobia can range from inconvenient to disturbing a person&#x27;s daily functioning.

==Causes==
The most common cause of pyrophobia is that fire poses a potential threat to life safety (which is identical in animals). However, people who are intensely pyrophobic cannot even get close to or tolerate even a small controlled fire, such as fireplace, bonfire or lit candle. In many cases a bad childhood experience with fire may have triggered the condition.

==Treatment==
Exposure therapy is the most common way to treat pyrophobia. This method involves showing patients fires in order of increasing size, from a lit cigarette up to a stove or grill flame.

Another method of treatment is talk therapy, in which a patient tells a therapist about the cause of this fear. This can calm the patient to make them less afraid of controlled fire.

People can relieve pyrophobia by interacting with other pyrophobes to share their experiences that caused fear. Alternatively, pyrophobia can be treated using hypnosis.

Medication can also be used to treat pyrophobic people, although since it has side effects, the method is not highly recommended.

==See also==
*List of phobias
*Pyromania, its exact opposite

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7263687" start="0" end="10" title="Pyrophobia" label="Pyrophobia"/>
<link wikidata="Q44619" start="16" end="20" title="fear" label="fear"/>
<link wikidata="Q3196" start="24" end="28" title="fire" label="fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q44619" start="651" end="655" title="fear" label="fear"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640582" start="667" end="679" title="Fight-or-flight response" label="acute stress"/>
<link wikidata="Q209583" start="681" end="695" title="Tachycardia" label="fast heartbeat"/>
<link wikidata="Q188008" start="697" end="716" title="shortness of breath" label="shortness of breath"/>
<link wikidata="Q461696" start="972" end="980" title="barbecue" label="barbecue"/>
<link wikidata="Q329981" start="986" end="994" title="campfire" label="campfire"/>
<link wikidata="Q446198" start="1489" end="1505" title="Exposure therapy" label="Exposure therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q183257" start="1706" end="1718" title="talk therapy" label="talk therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8609" start="2018" end="2026" title="hypnosis" label="hypnosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q327658" start="2174" end="2189" title="List of phobias" label="List of phobias"/>
<link wikidata="Q622604" start="2191" end="2200" title="Pyromania" label="Pyromania"/>
</links>
</doc>
