<doc id="187317" wikidata="Q131214" url="?curid=187317" title="Antenna (radio)">
<text>In radio engineering, an antenna (American English) or aerial (British English) is an electronic device that converts an alternating electric current into radio waves (transmitting), or radio waves into an electric current (receiving). It is the interface between radio waves propagating through space and electric currents moving in metal conductors, used with a transmitter or receiver. In transmission, a radio transmitter supplies an electric current to the antenna&#x27;s terminals, and the antenna radiates the energy from the current as electromagnetic waves (radio waves). In reception, an antenna intercepts some of the power of a radio wave in order to produce an electric current at its terminals, that is applied to a receiver to be amplified. Antennas are essential components of all radio equipment.

An antenna is an array of conductor segments (elements), electrically connected to the receiver or transmitter. Antennas can be designed to transmit and receive radio waves in all horizontal directions equally (omnidirectional antennas), or preferentially in a particular direction (directional, or high-gain, or &quot;beam&quot; antennas). An antenna may include components not connected to the transmitter, parabolic reflectors, horns, or parasitic elements, which serve to direct the radio waves into a beam or other desired radiation pattern. Strong directivity and good efficiency when transmitting are hard to achieve with antennas with dimensions that are much smaller than a half wavelength.

The first antennas were built in 1886 by German physicist Heinrich Hertz in his pioneering experiments to prove the existence of electromagnetic waves predicted by the 1867 electromagnetic theory of James Clerk Maxwell. Hertz placed dipole antennas at the focal point of parabolic reflectors for both transmitting and receiving. Starting in 1895, Guglielmo Marconi began development of antennas practical for long-distance, wireless telegraphy, for which he received the 1909 Nobel Prize in physics.

==Terminology==

The words &quot;antenna&quot; and &quot;aerial&quot; are used interchangeably. Occasionally the equivalent term &quot;aerial&quot; is used to specifically mean an elevated horizontal wire antenna. The origin of the word &quot;antenna&quot; relative to wireless apparatus is attributed to Italian radio pioneer Guglielmo Marconi. In the summer of 1895, Marconi began testing his wireless system outdoors on his father&#x27;s estate near Bologna and soon began to experiment with long wire &quot;aerials&quot; suspended from a pole. In Italian a tent pole is known as &quot;l&#x27;antenna centrale&quot;, and the pole with the wire was simply called &quot;l&#x27;antenna&quot;. Until then wireless radiating transmitting and receiving elements were known simply as &quot;terminals&quot;. Because of his prominence, Marconi&#x27;s use of the word &quot;antenna&quot; spread among wireless researchers and enthusiasts, and later to the general public.

&quot;Antenna&quot; may refer broadly to an entire assembly including support structure, enclosure (if any), etc., in addition to the actual RF current-carrying components. A receiving antenna may include not only the passive metal receiving elements, but also an integrated preamplifier or mixer, especially at and above microwave frequencies.

==Overview==


Antennas are required by any radio receiver or transmitter to couple its electrical connection to the electromagnetic field. Radio waves are electromagnetic waves which carry signals through space at the speed of light with almost no transmission loss.
Antennas can be classified as omnidirectional, radiating energy approximately equally in all horizontal directions, or directional, where radio waves are concentrated in some direction(s). A so-called beam antenna is unidirectional, designed for maximum response in the direction of the other station, whereas many other antennas are intended to accommodate stations in various directions but are not truly omnidirectional. Since antennas obey reciprocity the same radiation pattern applies to transmission as well as reception of radio waves. A hypothetical antenna that radiates equally in all directions (vertical as well as all horizontal angles) is called an &quot;isotropic radiator&quot;; however, these cannot exist in practice nor would they be particularly desired. For most terrestrial communications, rather, there is an advantage in &quot;reducing&quot; radiation toward the sky or ground in favor of horizontal direction(s).
A dipole antenna oriented horizontally sends no energy in the direction of the conductor – this is called the antenna null – but is usable in most other directions. A number of such dipole elements can be combined into an antenna array such as the Yagi–Uda in order to favor a single horizontal direction, thus termed a beam antenna.
The dipole antenna, which is the basis for most antenna designs, is a balanced component, with equal but opposite voltages and currents applied at its two terminals. The vertical antenna is a &quot;monopole&quot; antenna, not balanced with respect to ground. The ground (or any large conductive surface) plays the role of the second conductor of a monopole. Since monopole antennas rely on a conductive surface, they may be mounted with a &quot;ground plane&quot; to approximate the effect of being mounted on the Earth&#x27;s surface.

More complex antennas increase the directivity of the antenna. Additional elements in the antenna structure, which need not be directly connected to the receiver or transmitter, increase its directionality. Antenna &quot;gain&quot; describes the concentration of radiated power into a particular solid angle of space. &quot;Gain&quot; is perhaps an unfortunately chosen term, by comparison with amplifier &quot;gain&quot; which implies a net increase in power. In contrast, for antenna &quot;gain&quot;, the power increased in the desired direction is at the expense of power reduced in undesired directions. Unlike amplifiers, antennas are electrically &quot;passive&quot; devices which conserve total power, and there is no increase in total power above that delivered from the power source (the transmitter), only improved distribution of that fixed total.

A phased array consists of two or more simple antennas which are connected together through an electrical network. This often involves a number of parallel dipole antennas with a certain spacing. Depending on the relative phase introduced by the network, the same combination of dipole antennas can operate as a &quot;broadside array&quot; (directional normal to a line connecting the elements) or as an &quot;end-fire array&quot; (directional along the line connecting the elements). Antenna arrays may employ any basic (omnidirectional or weakly directional) antenna type, such as dipole, loop or slot antennas. These elements are often identical.

Log-periodic and frequency-independent antennas employ self-similarity in order to be operational over a wide range of bandwidths. The most familiar example is the log-periodic dipole array which can be seen as a number (typically 10 to 20) of connected dipole elements with progressive lengths in an endfire array making it rather directional; it finds use especially as a rooftop antenna for television reception. On the other hand, a Yagi–Uda antenna (or simply &quot;Yagi&quot;), with a somewhat similar appearance, has only one dipole element with an electrical connection; the other parasitic elements interact with the electromagnetic field in order to realize a highly directional antenna but with a narrow bandwidth.

Even greater directionality can be obtained using &quot;aperture antennas&quot; such as the parabolic reflector or horn antenna. Since high directivity in an antenna depends on it being large compared to the wavelength, highly directional antennas (thus with high antenna gain) become more practical at higher frequencies (UHF and above).

At low frequencies (such as AM broadcast), arrays of vertical towers are used to achieve directionality and they will occupy large areas of land. For reception, a long Beverage antenna can have significant directivity. For non directional portable use, a short vertical antenna or small loop antenna works well, with the main design challenge being that of impedance matching. With a vertical antenna a &quot;loading coil&quot; at the base of the antenna may be employed to cancel the reactive component of impedance; small loop antennas are tuned with parallel capacitors for this purpose.

An antenna lead-in is the transmission line, or feed line, which connects the antenna to a transmitter or receiver. The &quot;antenna feed&quot; may refer to all components connecting the antenna to the transmitter or receiver, such as an impedance matching network in addition to the transmission line. In a so-called &quot;aperture antenna&quot;, such as a horn or parabolic dish, the &quot;feed&quot; may also refer to a basic radiating antenna embedded in the entire system of reflecting elements (normally at the focus of the parabolic dish or at the throat of a horn) which could be considered the one active element in that antenna system. A microwave antenna may also be fed directly from a waveguide in place of a (conductive) transmission line.
An antenna counterpoise, or ground plane, is a structure of conductive material which improves or substitutes for the ground. It may be connected to or insulated from the natural ground. In a monopole antenna, this aids in the function of the natural ground, particularly where variations (or limitations) of the characteristics of the natural ground interfere with its proper function. Such a structure is normally connected to the return connection of an unbalanced transmission line such as the shield of a coaxial cable.

An electromagnetic wave refractor in some aperture antennas is a component which due to its shape and position functions to selectively delay or advance portions of the electromagnetic wavefront passing through it. The refractor alters the spatial characteristics of the wave on one side relative to the other side. It can, for instance, bring the wave to a focus or alter the wave front in other ways, generally in order to maximize the directivity of the antenna system. This is the radio equivalent of an optical lens.

An antenna coupling network is a passive network (generally a combination of inductive and capacitive circuit elements) used for impedance matching in between the antenna and the transmitter or receiver. This may be used to minimize losses on the feed line, by reducing transmission line&#x27;s standing wave ratio, and to present the transmitter or receiver with a standard resistive impedance needed for its optimum operation. The feed point location(s) is selected, and antenna elements electrically similar to tuner components may be incorporated in the antenna structure itself, to improve the match.

==Reciprocity==

It is a fundamental property of antennas that most of the electrical characteristics of an antenna, such as those described in the next section (e.g. gain, radiation pattern, impedance, bandwidth, resonant frequency and polarization), are the same whether the antenna is transmitting or receiving. For example, the &quot;receiving pattern&quot; (sensitivity to incoming signals as a function of direction) of an antenna when used for reception is identical to the radiation pattern of the antenna when it is &quot;driven&quot; and functions as a radiator, even though the current and voltage distributions on the antenna itself are different for receiving and sending. This is a consequence of the reciprocity theorem of electromagnetics. Therefore, in discussions of antenna properties no distinction is usually made between receiving and transmitting terminology, and the antenna can be viewed as either transmitting or receiving, whichever is more convenient.

A necessary condition for the aforementioned reciprocity property is that the materials in the antenna and transmission medium are linear and reciprocal. &quot;Reciprocal&quot; (or &quot;bilateral&quot;) means that the material has the same response to an electric current or magnetic field in one direction, as it has to the field or current in the opposite direction. Most materials used in antennas meet these conditions, but some microwave antennas use high-tech components such as isolators and circulators, made of nonreciprocal materials such as ferrite. These can be used to give the antenna a different behavior on receiving than it has on transmitting, which can be useful in applications like radar.

==Resonant antennas==
The majority of antenna designs are based on the &quot;resonance&quot; principle. This relies on the behaviour of moving electrons, which reflect off surfaces where the dielectric constant changes, in a fashion similar to the way light reflects when optical properties change. In these designs, the reflective surface is created by the end of a conductor, normally a thin metal wire or rod, which in the simplest case has a &quot;feed point&quot; at one end where it is connected to a transmission line. The conductor, or &quot;element&quot;, is aligned with the electrical field of the desired signal, normally meaning it is perpendicular to the line from the antenna to the source (or receiver in the case of a broadcast antenna).

The radio signal&#x27;s electrical component induces a voltage in the conductor. This causes an electrical current to begin flowing in the direction of the signal&#x27;s instantaneous field. When the resulting current reaches the end of the conductor, it reflects, which is equivalent to a 180 degree change in phase. If the conductor is of a wavelength long, current from the feed point will undergo 90 degree phase change by the time it reaches the end of the conductor, reflect through 180 degrees, and then another 90 degrees as it travels back. That means it has undergone a total 360 degree phase change, returning it to the original signal. The current in the element thus adds to the current being created from the source at that instant. This process creates a standing wave in the conductor, with the maximum current at the feed.

The ordinary half-wave dipole is probably the most widely used antenna design. This consists of two  wavelength elements arranged end-to-end, and lying along essentially the same axis (or &quot;collinear&quot;), each feeding one side of a two-conductor transmission wire. The physical arrangement of the two elements places them 180 degrees out of phase, which means that at any given instant one of the elements is driving current into the transmission line while the other is pulling it out. The monopole antenna is essentially one half of the half-wave dipole, a single  wavelength element with the other side connected to ground or an equivalent ground plane (or &quot;counterpoise&quot;). Monopoles, which are one-half the size of a dipole, are common for long-wavelength radio signals where a dipole would be impractically large. Another common design is the folded dipole which consists of two (or more) half-wave dipoles placed side by side and connected at their ends but only one of which is driven.

The standing wave forms with this desired pattern at the design operating frequency, , and antennas are normally designed to be this size. However, feeding that element with 3  (whose wavelength is that of ) will also lead to a standing wave pattern. Thus, an antenna element is &quot;also&quot; resonant when its length is of a wavelength. This is true for all odd multiples of  wavelength. This allows some flexibility of design in terms of antenna lengths and feed points. Antennas used in such a fashion are known to be &quot;harmonically operated&quot;. Resonant antennas usually use a linear conductor (or &quot;element&quot;), or pair of such elements, each of which is about a quarter of the wavelength in length (an odd multiple of quarter wavelengths will also be resonant). Antennas that are required to be small compared to the wavelength sacrifice efficiency and cannot be very directional. Since wavelengths are so small at higher frequencies (UHF, microwaves) trading off performance to obtain a smaller physical size is usually not required.

=== Current and voltage distribution ===

The quarter-wave elements imitate a series-resonant electrical element due to the standing wave present along the conductor. At the resonant frequency, the standing wave has a current peak and voltage node (minimum) at the feed. In electrical terms, this means that at that position, the element has minimum impedance magnitude, generating the maximum current for minimum voltage. This is the ideal situation, because it produces the maximum output for the minimum input, producing the highest possible efficiency. Contrary to an ideal (lossless) series-resonant circuit, a finite resistance remains (corresponding to the relatively small voltage at the feed-point) due to the antenna&#x27;s resistance to radiating, as well as any conventional electrical losses from producing heat.

Recall that a current will reflect when there are changes in the electrical properties of the material. In order to efficiently transfer the received signal into the transmission line, it is important that the transmission line has the same impedance as its connection point on the antenna, otherwise some of the signal will be reflected backwards into the body of the antenna; likewise part of the transmitter&#x27;s signal power will be reflected back to transmitter, if there is a change in electrical impedance where the feedline joins the antenna. This leads to the concept of impedance matching, the design of the overall system of antenna and transmission line so the impedance is as close as possible, thereby reducing these losses. Impedance matching is accomplished by a circuit called an antenna tuner or impedance matching network between the transmitter and antenna. The impedance match between the feedline and antenna is measured by a parameter called the standing wave ratio (SWR) on the feedline.

Consider a half-wave dipole designed to work with signals with wavelength 1 m, meaning the antenna would be approximately 50 cm from tip to tip. If the element has a length-to-diameter ratio of 1000, it will have an inherent impedance of about 63 ohms resistive. Using the appropriate transmission wire or balun, we match that resistance to ensure minimum signal reflection. Feeding that antenna with a current of 1 Ampere will require 63 Volts, and the antenna will radiate 63 Watts (ignoring losses) of radio frequency power. Now consider the case when the antenna is fed a signal with a wavelength of 1.25 m; in this case the current induced by the signal would arrive at the antenna&#x27;s feedpoint out-of-phase with the signal, causing the net current to drop while the voltage remains the same. Electrically this appears to be a very high impedance. The antenna and transmission line no longer have the same impedance, and the signal will be reflected back into the antenna, reducing output. This could be addressed by changing the matching system between the antenna and transmission line, but that solution only works well at the new design frequency.

The result is that the resonant antenna will efficiently feed a signal into the transmission line only when the source signal&#x27;s frequency is close to that of the design frequency of the antenna, or one of the resonant multiples. This makes resonant antenna designs inherently narrow-band: Only useful for a small range of frequencies centered around the resonance(s).

=== Electrically short antennas ===

It is possible to use simple impedance matching techniques to allow the use of monopole or dipole antennas substantially shorter than the or  wave, respectively, at which they are resonant. As these antennas are made shorter (for a given frequency) their impedance becomes dominated by a series capacitive (negative) reactance; by adding an appropriate size &quot;loading coil&quot; – a series inductance with equal and opposite (positive) reactance – the antenna&#x27;s capacitive reactance may be cancelled leaving only a pure resistance.

Sometimes the resulting (lower) electrical resonant frequency of such a system (antenna plus matching network) is described using the concept of &quot;electrical length&quot;, so an antenna used at a lower frequency than its resonant frequency is called an &quot;electrically short antenna&quot;

For example, at 30 MHz (10 m wavelength) a true resonant  wave monopole would be almost 2.5 meters long, and using an antenna only 1.5 meters tall would require the addition of a loading coil. Then it may be said that the coil has lengthened the antenna to achieve an electrical length of 2.5 meters. However, the resulting resistive impedance achieved will be quite a bit lower than that of a true  wave (resonant) monopole, often requiring further impedance matching (a transformer) to the desired transmission line. For ever shorter antennas (requiring greater &quot;electrical lengthening&quot;) the radiation resistance plummets (approximately according to the square of the antenna length), so that the mismatch due to a net reactance away from the electrical resonance worsens. Or one could as well say that the equivalent resonant circuit of the antenna system has a higher Q factor and thus a reduced bandwidth, which can even become inadequate for the transmitted signal&#x27;s spectrum. Resistive losses due to the loading coil, relative to the decreased radiation resistance, entail a reduced electrical efficiency, which can be of great concern for a transmitting antenna, but bandwidth is the major factor that sets the size of antennas at 1 MHz and lower frequencies.

=== Arrays and reflectors ===

The radiant flux as a function of the distance from the transmitting antenna varies according to the inverse-square law, since that describes the geometrical divergence of the transmitted wave. For a given incoming flux, the power acquired by a receiving antenna is proportional to its &quot;effective area&quot;. This parameter compares the amount of power captured by a receiving antenna in comparison to the flux of an incoming wave (measured in terms of the signal&#x27;s power density in watts per square metre). A half-wave dipole has an effective area of about 0.13  seen from the broadside direction. If higher gain is needed one cannot simply make the antenna larger. Due to the constraint on the effective area of a receiving antenna detailed below, one sees that for an already-efficient antenna design, the only way to increase gain (effective area) is by &quot;reducing&quot; the antenna&#x27;s gain in another direction.

If a half-wave dipole is not connected to an external circuit but rather shorted out at the feedpoint, then it becomes a resonant half-wave element which efficiently produces a standing wave in response to an impinging radio wave. Because there is no load to absorb that power, it retransmits all of that power, possibly with a phase shift which is critically dependent on the element&#x27;s exact length. Thus such a conductor can be arranged in order to transmit a second copy of a transmitter&#x27;s signal in order to affect the radiation pattern (and feedpoint impedance) of the element electrically connected to the transmitter. Antenna elements used in this way are known as passive radiators.

A Yagi–Uda array uses passive elements to greatly increase gain in one direction (at the expense of other directions). A number of parallel approximately half-wave elements (of very specific lengths) are situated parallel to each other, at specific positions, along a boom; the boom is only for support and not involved electrically. Only one of the elements is electrically connected to the transmitter or receiver, while the remaining elements are passive. The Yagi produces a fairly large gain (depending on the number of passive elements) and is widely used as a directional antenna with an antenna rotor to control the direction of its beam. It suffers from having a rather limited bandwidth, restricting its use to certain applications.

Rather than using one driven antenna element along with passive radiators, one can build an array antenna in which multiple elements are &quot;all&quot; driven by the transmitter through a system of power splitters and transmission lines in relative phases so as to concentrate the RF power in a single direction. What&#x27;s more, a phased array can be made &quot;steerable&quot;, that is, by changing the phases applied to each element the radiation pattern can be shifted &quot;without&quot; physically moving the antenna elements. Another common array antenna is the log-periodic dipole array which has an appearance similar to the Yagi (with a number of parallel elements along a boom) but is totally dissimilar in operation as all elements are connected electrically to the adjacent element with a phase reversal; using the log-periodic principle it obtains the unique property of maintaining its performance characteristics (gain and impedance) over a very large bandwidth.

When a radio wave hits a large conducting sheet it is reflected (with the phase of the electric field reversed) just as a mirror reflects light. Placing such a reflector behind an otherwise non-directional antenna will insure that the power that would have gone in its direction is redirected toward the desired direction, increasing the antenna&#x27;s gain by a factor of at least 2. Likewise, a corner reflector can insure that all of the antenna&#x27;s power is concentrated in only one quadrant of space (or less) with a consequent increase in gain. Practically speaking, the reflector need not be a solid metal sheet, but can consist of a curtain of rods aligned with the antenna&#x27;s polarization; this greatly reduces the reflector&#x27;s weight and wind load. Specular reflection of radio waves is also employed in a parabolic reflector antenna, in which a &quot;curved&quot; reflecting surface effects focussing of an incoming wave toward a so-called feed antenna; this results in an antenna system with an effective area comparable to the size of the reflector itself. Other concepts from geometrical optics are also employed in antenna technology, such as with the lens antenna.

==Characteristics==

The antenna&#x27;s power gain (or simply &quot;gain&quot;) also takes into account the antenna&#x27;s efficiency, and is often the primary figure of merit. Antennas are characterized by a number of performance measures which a user would be concerned with in selecting or designing an antenna for a particular application. A plot of the directional characteristics in the space surrounding the antenna is its &quot;radiation pattern&quot;.

=== Bandwidth ===
The frequency range or &quot;bandwidth&quot; over which an antenna functions well can be very wide (as in a log-periodic antenna) or narrow (as in a small loop antenna); outside this range the antenna impedance becomes a poor match to the transmission line and transmitter (or receiver). Use of the antenna well away from its design frequency affects its radiation pattern, reducing its directive gain.

Generally an antenna will not have a feed-point impedance that matches that of a transmission line; a matching network between antenna terminals and the transmission line will improve power transfer to the antenna. A non-adjustable matching network will most likely place further limits the usable bandwidth of the antenna system. It may be desirable to use tubular elements, instead of thin wires, to make an antenna; these will allow a greater bandwidth. Or, several thin wires can be grouped in a &quot;cage&quot; to simulate a thicker element. This widens the bandwidth of the resonance.

Amateur radio antennas that operate at several frequency bands which are widely separated from each other may connect elements resonant at those different frequencies in parallel. Most of the transmitter&#x27;s power will flow into the resonant element while the others present a high impedance. Another solution uses &quot;traps&quot;, parallel resonant circuits which are strategically placed in breaks created in long antenna elements. When used at the trap&#x27;s particular resonant frequency the trap presents a very high impedance (parallel resonance) effectively truncating the element at the location of the trap; if positioned correctly, the truncated element makes a proper resonant antenna at the trap frequency. At substantially higher or lower frequencies the trap allows the full length of the broken element to be employed, but with a resonant frequency shifted by the net reactance added by the trap.

The bandwidth characteristics of a resonant antenna element can be characterized according to its &quot;&quot; where the resistance involved is the radiation resistance, which represents the emission of energy from the resonant antenna to free space.

The &#x27; of a narrow band antenna can be as high as 15. On the other hand, the reactance at the same off-resonant frequency of one using thick elements is much less, consequently resulting in a &#x27; as low as 5. These two antennas may perform equivalently at the resonant frequency, but the second antenna will perform over a bandwidth 3 times as wide as the antenna consisting of a thin conductor.

Antennas for use over much broader frequency ranges are achieved using further techniques. Adjustment of a matching network can, in principle, allow for any antenna to be matched at any frequency. Thus the small loop antenna built into most AM broadcast (medium wave) receivers has a very narrow bandwidth, but is tuned using a parallel capacitance which is adjusted according to the receiver tuning. On the other hand, log-periodic antennas are &quot;not&quot; resonant at any single frequency but can (in principle) be built to attain similar characteristics (including feedpoint impedance) over any frequency range. These are therefore commonly used (in the form of directional log-periodic dipole arrays) as television antennas.

===Gain===

Gain is a parameter which measures the degree of directivity of the antenna&#x27;s radiation pattern. A high-gain antenna will radiate most of its power in a particular direction, while a low-gain antenna will radiate over a wide angle. The &quot;antenna gain&quot;, or &quot;power gain&quot; of an antenna is defined as the ratio of the intensity (power per unit surface area) formula_1 radiated by the antenna in the direction of its maximum output, at an arbitrary distance, divided by the intensity formula_2 radiated at the same distance by a hypothetical isotropic antenna which radiates equal power in all directions. This dimensionless ratio is usually expressed logarithmically in decibels, these units are called &quot;decibels-isotropic&quot; (dBi)
: formula_3

A second unit used to measure gain is the ratio of the power radiated by the antenna to the power radiated by a half-wave dipole antenna formula_4; these units are called &quot;decibels-dipole&quot; (dBd)
: formula_5

Since the gain of a half-wave dipole is 2.15 dBi and the logarithm of a product is additive, the gain in dBi is just 2.15 decibels greater than the gain in dBd
: formula_6

High-gain antennas have the advantage of longer range and better signal quality, but must be aimed carefully at the other antenna. An example of a high-gain antenna is a parabolic dish such as a satellite television antenna. Low-gain antennas have shorter range, but the orientation of the antenna is relatively unimportant. An example of a low-gain antenna is the whip antenna found on portable radios and cordless phones. Antenna gain should not be confused with amplifier gain, a separate parameter measuring the increase in signal power due to an amplifying device placed at the front-end of the system, such as a low-noise amplifier.

===Effective area or aperture===

The &quot;effective area&quot; or effective aperture of a receiving antenna expresses the portion of the power of a passing electromagnetic wave which the antenna delivers to its terminals, expressed in terms of an equivalent area. For instance, if a radio wave passing a given location has a flux of 1 pW / m2 (10−12 Watts per square meter) and an antenna has an effective area of 12 m2, then the antenna would deliver 12 pW of RF power to the receiver (30 microvolts RMS at 75 ohms). Since the receiving antenna is not equally sensitive to signals received from all directions, the effective area is a function of the direction to the source.

Due to reciprocity (discussed above) the gain of an antenna used for transmitting must be proportional to its effective area when used for receiving. Consider an antenna with no loss, that is, one whose electrical efficiency is 100%. It can be shown that its effective area averaged over all directions must be equal to , the wavelength squared divided by . Gain is defined such that the average gain over all directions for an antenna with 100% electrical efficiency is equal to 1. Therefore, the effective area in terms of the gain in a given direction is given by:
:formula_7

For an antenna with an efficiency of less than 100%, both the effective area and gain are reduced by that same amount. Therefore, the above relationship between gain and effective area still holds. These are thus two different ways of expressing the same quantity. eff is especially convenient when computing the power that would be received by an antenna of a specified gain, as illustrated by the above example.

===Radiation pattern===

The radiation pattern of an antenna is a plot of the relative field strength of the radio waves emitted by the antenna at different angles in the far field. It is typically represented by a three-dimensional graph, or polar plots of the horizontal and vertical cross sections. The pattern of an ideal isotropic antenna, which radiates equally in all directions, would look like a sphere. Many nondirectional antennas, such as monopoles and dipoles, emit equal power in all horizontal directions, with the power dropping off at higher and lower angles; this is called an omnidirectional pattern and when plotted looks like a torus or donut.

The radiation of many antennas shows a pattern of maxima or &quot;&quot;lobes&quot; at various angles, separated by &quot;nulls&quot;, angles where the radiation falls to zero. This is because the radio waves emitted by different parts of the antenna typically interfere, causing maxima at angles where the radio waves arrive at distant points in phase, and zero radiation at other angles where the radio waves arrive out of phase. In a directional antenna designed to project radio waves in a particular direction, the lobe in that direction is designed larger than the others and is called the &quot;main lobe&quot;. The other lobes usually represent unwanted radiation and are called &quot;sidelobes&quot;. The axis through the main lobe is called the &quot;principal axis&quot; or &quot;boresight axis&quot;&quot;.

The polar diagrams (and therefore the efficiency and gain) of Yagi antennas are tighter if the antenna is tuned for a narrower frequency range, e.g. the grouped antenna compared to the wideband. Similarly, the polar plots of horizontally polarized yagis are tighter than for those vertically polarized.

===Field regions===

The space surrounding an antenna can be divided into three concentric regions: The reactive near-field (also called the inductive near-field), the radiating near-field (Fresnel region) and the far-field (Fraunhofer) regions. These regions are useful to identify the field structure in each, although the transitions between them are gradual; there are no clear boundaries.

The far-field region is far enough from the antenna to ignore its size and shape: It can be assumed that the electromagnetic wave is purely a radiating plane wave (electric and magnetic fields are in phase and perpendicular to each other and to the direction of propagation). This simplifies the mathematical analysis of the radiated field.

===Efficiency===

&quot;Efficiency&quot; of a transmitting antenna is the ratio of power actually radiated (in all directions) to the power absorbed by the antenna terminals. The power supplied to the antenna terminals which is not radiated is converted into heat. This is usually through loss resistance in the antenna&#x27;s conductors, or loss between the reflector and feed horn of a parabolic antenna.

Antenna efficiency is separate from impedance matching, which may also reduce the amount of power radiated using a given transmitter. If an SWR meter reads 150 W of incident power and 50 W of reflected power, that means 100 W have actually been absorbed by the antenna (ignoring transmission line losses). How much of that power has actually been radiated cannot be directly determined through electrical measurements at (or before) the antenna terminals, but would require (for instance) careful measurement of field strength. The loss resistance and efficiency of an antenna can be calculated once the field strength is known, by comparing it to the power supplied to the antenna.

The loss resistance will generally affect the feedpoint impedance, adding to its resistive component. That resistance will consist of the sum of the radiation resistance &#x27;rad and the loss resistance &#x27;loss. If a current &#x27; is delivered to the terminals of an antenna, then a power of &#x27;2 &#x27;rad will be radiated and a power of &#x27;2 &#x27;loss will be lost as heat. Therefore, the efficiency of an antenna is equal to . Only the total resistance &#x27;rad + &quot;&quot;loss can be directly measured.

According to reciprocity, the efficiency of an antenna used as a receiving antenna is identical to its efficiency as a transmitting antenna, described above. The power that an antenna will deliver to a receiver (with a proper impedance match) is reduced by the same amount. In some receiving applications, the very inefficient antennas may have little impact on performance. At low frequencies, for example, atmospheric or man-made noise can mask antenna inefficiency. For example, CCIR Rep. 258-3 indicates man-made noise in a residential setting at 40 MHz is about 28 dB above the thermal noise floor. Consequently, an antenna with a 20 dB loss (due to inefficiency) would have little impact on system noise performance. The loss within the antenna will affect the intended signal and the noise/interference identically, leading to no reduction in signal to noise ratio (SNR).

Antennas which are not a significant fraction of a wavelength in size are inevitably inefficient due to their small radiation resistance. AM broadcast radios include a small loop antenna for reception which has an extremely poor efficiency. This has little effect on the receiver&#x27;s performance, but simply requires greater amplification by the receiver&#x27;s electronics. Contrast this tiny component to the massive and very tall towers used at AM broadcast stations for transmitting at the very same frequency, where every percentage point of reduced antenna efficiency entails a substantial cost.

The definition of antenna gain or &quot;power gain&quot; already includes the effect of the antenna&#x27;s efficiency. Therefore, if one is trying to radiate a signal toward a receiver using a transmitter of a given power, one need only compare the gain of various antennas rather than considering the efficiency as well. This is likewise true for a receiving antenna at very high (especially microwave) frequencies, where the point is to receive a signal which is strong compared to the receiver&#x27;s noise temperature. However, in the case of a directional antenna used for receiving signals with the intention of &quot;rejecting&quot; interference from different directions, one is no longer concerned with the antenna efficiency, as discussed above. In this case, rather than quoting the antenna gain, one would be more concerned with the &quot;directive gain&quot;, or simply &quot;directivity&quot; which does &quot;not&quot; include the effect of antenna (in)efficiency. The directive gain of an antenna can be computed from the published gain divided by the antenna&#x27;s efficiency. In equation form, gain = directivity × efficiency.

===Polarization===

The orientation and physical structure of an antenna determine the &quot;polarization&quot; of the electric field of the radio wave transmitted by it. For instance, an antenna composed of a linear conductor (such as a dipole or whip antenna) oriented vertically will result in vertical polarization; if turned on its side the same antenna&#x27;s polarization will be horizontal.

Reflections generally affect polarization. Radio waves reflected off the ionosphere can change the wave&#x27;s polarization. For line-of-sight communications or ground wave propagation, horizontally or vertically polarized transmissions generally remain in about the same polarization state at the receiving location. Using a vertically polarized antenna to receive a horizontally polarized wave (or visa-versa) results in relatively poor reception.

An antenna&#x27;s polarization can sometimes be inferred directly from its geometry. When the antenna&#x27;s conductors &quot;viewed from a reference location&quot; appear along one line, then the antenna&#x27;s polarization will be linear in that very direction. In the more general case, the antenna&#x27;s polarization must be determined through analysis. For instance, a turnstile antenna mounted horizontally (as is usual), from a distant location on Earth, appears as a horizontal line segment, so its radiation received there is horizontally polarized. But viewed at a downward angle from an airplane, the same antenna does &quot;not&quot; meet this requirement; in fact its radiation is elliptically polarized when viewed from that direction. In some antennas the state of polarization will change with the frequency of transmission. The polarization of a commercial antenna is an essential specification.

In the most general case, polarization is elliptical, meaning that over each cycle the electric field vector traces out an ellipse. Two special cases are linear polarization (the ellipse collapses into a line) as discussed above, and circular polarization (in which the two axes of the ellipse are equal). In linear polarization the electric field of the radio wave oscillates along one direction. In circular polarization, the electric field of the radio wave rotates around the axis of propagation. Circular or elliptically polarized radio waves are designated as right-handed or left-handed using the &quot;thumb in the direction of the propagation&quot; rule. Note that for circular polarization, optical researchers use the opposite right-hand rule from the one used by radio engineers.

It is best for the receiving antenna to match the polarization of the transmitted wave for optimum reception. Otherwise there will be a loss of signal strength: when a linearly polarized antenna receives linearly polarized radiation at a relative angle of θ, then there will be a power loss of cos2θ . A circularly polarized antenna can be used to equally well match vertical or horizontal linear polarizations, suffering a 3 dB signal reduction. However it will be blind to a circularly polarized signal of the opposite orientation.

===Impedance matching===

Maximum power transfer requires matching the impedance of an antenna system (as seen looking into the transmission line) to the complex conjugate of the impedance of the receiver or transmitter. In the case of a transmitter, however, the desired matching impedance might not exactly correspond to the dynamic output impedance of the transmitter as analyzed as a source impedance but rather the design value (typically 50 Ohms) required for efficient and safe operation of the transmitting circuitry. The intended impedance is normally resistive, but a transmitter (and some receivers) may have limited additional adjustments to cancel a certain amount of reactance, in order to &quot;tweak&quot; the match.

When a transmission line is used in between the antenna and the transmitter (or receiver) one generally would like an antenna system whose impedance is resistive and nearly the same as the characteristic impedance of that transmission line, in addition to matching the impedance that the transmitter (or receiver) expects. The match is sought to minimize the amplitude of standing waves (measured via the standing wave ratio; SWR) that a mismatch raises on the line, and the increase in transmission line losses it entails.

====Antenna tuning at the antenna====
Antenna tuning, in the strict sense of modifying the antenna itself, generally refers only to cancellation of any reactance seen at the antenna terminals, leaving only a resistive impedance which might or might not be exactly the desired impedance (that of the available transmission line).

Although an antenna may be designed to have a purely resistive feedpoint impedance (such as a dipole 97% of a half wavelength long) at just one frequency, this will very likely not be exactly true at other frequencies that the antenna is eventually used for. In most cases, in principle the physical length of the antenna can be &quot;trimmed&quot; to obtain a pure resistance, although this is rarely convenient. On the other hand, the addition of a contrary inductance or capacitance can be used to cancel a residual capacitive or inductive reactance, respectively, and may be more convenient than lowering and trimming or extending the antenna, then hoisting it back.

Antenna reactance may be removed using lumped elements, such as capacitors or inductors in the main path of current traversing the antenna, often near the feedpoint, or by incorporating capacitive or inductive structures into the conducting body of the antenna to cancel the feedpoint reactance – such as open-ended &quot;spoke&quot; radial wires, or looped parallel wires – hence genuinely tune the antenna to resonance. In addition to those reactance-neutralizing add-ons, antennas of any kind may include a transformer and / or transformer balun at their feedpoint, to change the resistive part of the impedance to more nearly match the feedline&#x27;s characteristic impedance.

====Line matching at the radio====
Antenna tuning in the loose sense, performed by an impedance matching device (somewhat inappropriately named an &quot;antenna tuner&quot;, or the older, more appropriate term &quot;transmatch&quot;) goes beyond merely removing reactance and includes transforming the remaining resistance to match the feedline and radio.

An additional problem is matching the remaining resistive impedance to the characteristic impedance of the transmission line: A general impedance matching network (an &quot;antenna tuner&quot; or ATU) will have at least two adjustable elements to correct both components of impedance. Any matching network will have both power losses and power restrictions when used for transmitting.

Commercial antennas are generally designed to approximately match standard 50 Ohm coaxial cables, at standard frequencies; the design expectation is that a matching network will be merely used to &#x27;tweak&#x27; any residual mismatch.

====Extreme examples of loaded small antennas====
In some cases matching is done in a more extreme manner, not simply to cancel a small amount of residual reactance, but to resonate an antenna whose resonance frequency is quite different from the intended frequency of operation.

;Short vertical &quot;whip&quot;: For instance, for practical reasons a &quot;whip antenna&quot; can be made significantly shorter than a quarter-wavelength and then resonated, using a so-called loading coil.

: The physically large inductor at the base of the antenna has an inductive reactance which is the opposite of the capacitative reactance that the short vertical antenna has at the desired operating frequency. The result is a pure resistance seen at feedpoint of the loading coil; although, without further measures, the resistance will be somewhat lower than would be desired to match commercial coax.

;Small &quot;magnetic&quot; loop: Another extreme case of impedance matching occurs when using a small loop antenna (usually, but not always, for receiving) at a relatively low frequency, where it appears almost as a pure inductor. When such an inductor is resonated via a capacitor attached in parallel across its feedpoint, the capacitor not only cancels the reactance but also greatly magnifies the very small radiation resistance of a small loop to produce a better-matched feedpoint resistance.

: This is the type of antenna used in most portable AM broadcast receivers (other than car radios): The standard AM antenna is a loop of wire wound around a ferrite rod (a &quot;loopstick antenna&quot;). The loop is resonated by a coupled tuning capacitor, which is configured to match the receiver&#x27;s tuning, in order to keep the antenna resonant at the chosen receive frequency over the AM broadcast band.

==Effect of ground==

Ground reflections is one of the common types of multipath.

The radiation pattern and even the driving point impedance of an antenna can be influenced by the dielectric constant and especially conductivity of nearby objects. For a terrestrial antenna, the ground is usually one such object of importance. The antenna&#x27;s height above the ground, as well as the electrical properties (permittivity and conductivity) of the ground, can then be important. Also, in the particular case of a monopole antenna, the ground (or an artificial ground plane) serves as the return connection for the antenna current thus having an additional effect, particularly on the impedance seen by the feed line.

When an electromagnetic wave strikes a plane surface such as the ground, part of the wave is transmitted into the ground and part of it is reflected, according to the Fresnel coefficients. If the ground is a very good conductor then almost all of the wave is reflected (180° out of phase), whereas a ground modeled as a (lossy) dielectric can absorb a large amount of the wave&#x27;s power. The power remaining in the reflected wave, and the phase shift upon reflection, strongly depend on the wave&#x27;s angle of incidence and polarization. The dielectric constant and conductivity (or simply the complex dielectric constant) is dependent on the soil type and is a function of frequency.

For very low frequencies to high frequencies (&lt; 30 MHz), the ground behaves as a lossy dielectric, thus the ground is characterized both by a conductivity and permittivity (dielectric constant) which can be measured for a given soil (but is influenced by fluctuating moisture levels) or can be estimated from certain maps. At lower mediumwave frequencies the ground acts mainly as a good conductor, which AM broadcast (0.5–1.7 MHz) antennas depend on.

At frequencies between 3–30 MHz, a large portion of the energy from a horizontally polarized antenna reflects off the ground, with almost total reflection at the grazing angles important for ground wave propagation. That reflected wave, with its phase reversed, can either cancel or reinforce the direct wave, depending on the antenna height in wavelengths and elevation angle (for a sky wave).

On the other hand, vertically polarized radiation is not well reflected by the ground except at grazing incidence or over very highly conducting surfaces such as sea water. However the grazing angle reflection important for ground wave propagation, using vertical polarization, is &quot;in phase&quot; with the direct wave, providing a boost of up to 6 dB, as is detailed below.
At VHF and above (&gt; 30 MHz) the ground becomes a poorer reflector. However, for shortwave frequencies, especially below ~15 MHz, it remains a good reflector especially for horizontal polarization and grazing angles of incidence. That is important as these higher frequencies usually depend on horizontal line-of-sight propagation (except for satellite communications), the ground then behaving almost as a mirror.

The net quality of a ground reflection depends on the topography of the surface. When the irregularities of the surface are much smaller than the wavelength, the dominant regime is that of specular reflection, and the receiver sees both the real antenna and an image of the antenna under the ground due to reflection. But if the ground has irregularities not small compared to the wavelength, reflections will not be coherent but shifted by random phases. With shorter wavelengths (higher frequencies), this is generally the case.

Whenever both the receiving or transmitting antenna are placed at significant heights above the ground (relative to the wavelength), waves reflected specularly by the ground will travel a longer distance than direct waves, inducing a phase shift which can sometimes be significant. When a sky wave is launched by such an antenna, that phase shift is always significant unless the antenna is very close to the ground (compared to the wavelength).
The phase of reflection of electromagnetic waves depends on the polarization of the incident wave. Given the larger refractive index of the ground (typically  ≈ 2) compared to air ( = 1), the phase of horizontally polarized radiation is reversed upon reflection (a phase shift of  radians, or 180°). On the other hand, the vertical component of the wave&#x27;s electric field is reflected at grazing angles of incidence approximately &quot;in phase&quot;. These phase shifts apply as well to a ground modeled as a good electrical conductor.

This means that a receiving antenna &quot;sees&quot; an image of the emitting antenna but with &#x27;reversed&#x27; currents (opposite in direction and phase) if the emitting antenna is horizontally oriented (and thus horizontally polarized). However, the received current will be in the same absolute direction and phase if the emitting antenna is vertically polarized.

The actual antenna which is &quot;transmitting&quot; the original wave then also may &quot;receive&quot; a strong signal from its own image from the ground. This will induce an additional current in the antenna element, changing the current at the feedpoint for a given feedpoint voltage. Thus the antenna&#x27;s impedance, given by the ratio of feedpoint voltage to current, is altered due to the antenna&#x27;s proximity to the ground. This can be quite a significant effect when the antenna is within a wavelength or two of the ground. But as the antenna height is increased, the reduced power of the reflected wave (due to the inverse square law) allows the antenna to approach its asymptotic feedpoint impedance given by theory. At lower heights, the effect on the antenna&#x27;s impedance is &quot;very&quot; sensitive to the exact distance from the ground, as this affects the phase of the reflected wave relative to the currents in the antenna. Changing the antenna&#x27;s height by a quarter wavelength, then changes the phase of the reflection by 180°, with a completely different effect on the antenna&#x27;s impedance.

The ground reflection has an important effect on the net far field radiation pattern in the vertical plane, that is, as a function of elevation angle, which is thus different between a vertically and horizontally polarized antenna. Consider an antenna at a height above the ground, transmitting a wave considered at the elevation angle . For a vertically polarized transmission the magnitude of the electric field of the electromagnetic wave produced by the direct ray plus the reflected ray is:

::formula_8

Thus the &quot;power&quot; received can be as high as 4 times that due to the direct wave alone (such as when  = 0), following the &quot;square&quot; of the cosine. The sign inversion for the reflection of horizontally polarized emission instead results in:

::formula_9

where:
* formula_10 is the electrical field that would be received by the direct wave if there were no ground.
* is the elevation angle of the wave being considered.
* formula_11 is the wavelength.
* formula_12 is the height of the antenna (half the distance between the antenna and its image).

For horizontal propagation between transmitting and receiving antennas situated near the ground reasonably far from each other, the distances traveled by the direct and reflected rays are nearly the same. There is almost no relative phase shift. If the emission is polarized vertically, the two fields (direct and reflected) add and there is maximum of received signal. If the signal is polarized horizontally, the two signals subtract and the received signal is largely cancelled. The vertical plane radiation patterns are shown in the image at right. With vertical polarization there is always a maximum for  = 0, horizontal propagation (left pattern). For horizontal polarization, there is cancellation at that angle. The above formulae and these plots assume the ground as a perfect conductor. These plots of the radiation pattern correspond to a distance between the antenna and its image of 2.5  . As the antenna height is increased, the number of lobes increases as well.

The difference in the above factors for the case of  = 0 is the reason that most broadcasting (transmissions intended for the public) uses vertical polarization. For receivers near the ground, horizontally polarized transmissions suffer cancellation. For best reception the receiving antennas for these signals are likewise vertically polarized. In some applications where the receiving antenna must work in any position, as in mobile phones, the base station antennas use mixed polarization, such as linear polarization at an angle (with both vertical and horizontal components) or circular polarization.

On the other hand, analog television transmissions are usually horizontally polarized, because in urban areas buildings can reflect the electromagnetic waves and create ghost images due to multipath propagation. Using horizontal polarization, ghosting is reduced because the amount of reflection in the horizontal polarization off the side of a building is generally less than in the vertical direction. Vertically polarized analog television have been used in some rural areas. In digital terrestrial television such reflections are less problematic, due to robustness of binary transmissions and error correction.

==Modeling antennas with line equations==

: In the first approximation, the current in a thin antenna is distributed&lt;br&gt;exactly as in a transmission line. — Schelkunoff &amp; Friis (1952)

The flow of current in wire antennas is identical to the solution of counter-propagating waves in a single conductor transmission line, which can be solved using the telegrapher&#x27;s equations.
Solutions of currents along antenna elements are more conveniently and accurately obtained by numerical methods, so transmission-line techniques have largely been abandoned for precision modelling, but they continue to be a widely used source of useful, simple approximations that describe well the impedance profiles of antennas.

Unlike transmission lines, currents in antennas contribute power to the radiated part electromagnetic field, which can be modeled using radiation resistance.
The end of an antenna element corresponds to an unterminated (open) end of a single-conductor transmission line, resulting in a reflected wave identical to the incident wave, with its voltage &quot;in&quot; phase with the incident wave

and its current in the &quot;opposite&quot; phase (thus net zero current, where there is, after all, no further conductor). The combination of the incident and reflected wave, just as in a transmission line, forms a standing wave with a current node at the conductor&#x27;s end, and a voltage node one-quarter wavelength from the end (if the element is at least that long).

In a &quot;resonant antenna&quot;, the feedpoint of the antenna is at one of those voltage nodes. Due to discrepancies from the simplified version of the transmission line model, the voltage one quarter wavelength from the current node is not exactly zero, but it is near a minimum, and small compared to the much large voltage at the conductor&#x27;s end. Hence, a feed point matching the antenna at that spot requires a relatively small voltage but large current (the currents from the two waves add in-phase there), thus a relatively low feedpoint impedance.

Feeding the antenna at other points involves a large voltage, thus a large impedance, and usually one that is primarily reactive (low power factor), which is a terrible impedance match to available transmission lines. Therefore, it is usually desired for an antenna to operate as a resonant element with each conductor having a length of one quarter wavelength (or any other odd multiples of a quarter wavelength).

For instance, a half-wave dipole has two such elements (one connected to each conductor of a balanced transmission line) about one quarter wavelength long. Depending on the conductors&#x27; diameters, a small deviation from this length is adopted in order to reach the point where the antenna current and the (small) feedpoint voltage are exactly in phase. Then the antenna presents a purely resistive impedance, and ideally one close to the characteristic impedance of an available transmission line.

Despite these useful properties, resonant antennas have the disadvantage that they achieve resonance (purely resistive feedpoint impedance) only at a fundamental frequency, and perhaps some of its harmonics, and the feedpoint resistance is larger at higher-order resonances. Therefore, resonant antennas can only achieve their good performance within a limited bandwidth, depending on the  at the resonance.

==Mutual impedance and interaction between antennas==
The electric and magnetic fields emanating from a driven antenna element will generally affect the voltages and currents in nearby antennas, antenna elements, or other conductors. This is particularly true when the affected conductor is a resonant element (multiple of half-wavelengths in length) at about the same frequency, as is the case where the conductors are all part of the same active or passive antenna array.

Because the affected conductors are in the near-field, one can &quot;not&quot; just treat two antennas as transmitting and receiving a signal according to the Friis transmission formula for instance, but must calculate the &quot;mutual impedance&quot; matrix which takes into account both voltages and currents (interactions through both the electric and magnetic fields). Thus using the mutual impedances calculated for a specific geometry, one can solve for the radiation pattern of a Yagi–Uda antenna or the currents and voltages for each element of a phased array. Such an analysis can also describe in detail reflection of radio waves by a ground plane or by a corner reflector and their effect on the impedance (and radiation pattern) of an antenna in its vicinity.

Often such near-field interactions are undesired and pernicious. Currents in random metal objects near a transmitting antenna will often be in poor conductors, causing loss of RF power in addition to unpredictably altering the characteristics of the antenna. By careful design, it is possible to reduce the electrical interaction between nearby conductors. For instance, the 90 degree angle in between the two dipoles composing the turnstile antenna insures no interaction between these, allowing these to be driven independently (but actually with the same signal in quadrature phases in the turnstile antenna design).

==Antenna types==

Antennas can be classified by operating principles or by their application. Different authorities placed antennas in narrower or broader categories. Generally these include

* Dipole and monopole antennas
* Array antennas
* Loop antennas
* Aperture antennas
* Traveling wave antennas
* Log-periodic antenna
* Spiral antenna
* Horn antenna
* Adcock antenna
* Sector antenna
* Helical antenna
These antenna types and others are summarized in greater detail in the overview article, Antenna types, as well as in each of the linked articles in the list above, and in even more detail in articles which those link to.

== See also ==

* Antenna feed
* :Category:Radio frequency antenna types
* :Category:Radio frequency propagation
* Cellular repeater
* Counterpoise
* Detection
* DXing
* Electromagnetism
* Feedline matching unit
* Mobile broadband modem
* Numerical Electromagnetics Code
* Radial (radio)
* Radio masts and towers
* RF connector
* Smart antenna
* TETRA
* Transmitter hunting
* Shortwave broadband antenna
* Personal RF safety monitor


==Footnotes==
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2176252" start="3" end="20" title="radio engineering" label="radio engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q131214" start="25" end="32" title="Antenna (radio)" label="antenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q7976" start="34" end="50" title="American English" label="American English"/>
<link wikidata="Q131214" start="55" end="61" title="Antenna (radio)" label="aerial"/>
<link wikidata="Q7979" start="63" end="78" title="British English" label="British English"/>
<link wikidata="Q124164" start="121" end="149" title="alternating current" label="alternating electric current"/>
<link wikidata="Q4262" start="155" end="165" title="radio wave" label="radio wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q190157" start="364" end="375" title="transmitter" label="transmitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q159391" start="379" end="387" title="receiver (radio)" label="receiver"/>
<link wikidata="Q118093" start="392" end="404" title="transmission (telecommunications)" label="transmission"/>
<link wikidata="Q12969754" start="544" end="564" title="electromagnetic radiation" label="electromagnetic wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q159391" start="584" end="593" title="receiver (radio)" label="reception"/>
<link wikidata="Q211554" start="745" end="754" title="amplifier" label="amplified"/>
<link wikidata="Q872" start="797" end="802" title="radio" label="radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q124291" start="841" end="859" title="conductor (material)" label="conductor segments"/>
<link wikidata="Q116550052" start="861" end="869" title="driven element" label="elements"/>
<link wikidata="Q2176348" start="1026" end="1049" title="omnidirectional antenna" label="omnidirectional antenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q769152" start="1098" end="1109" title="directional antenna" label="directional"/>
<link wikidata="Q4928259" start="1224" end="1243" title="Parabolic antenna" label="parabolic reflector"/>
<link wikidata="Q759117" start="1246" end="1251" title="horn antenna" label="horns"/>
<link wikidata="Q116550052" start="1256" end="1274" title="passive radiator" label="parasitic elements"/>
<link wikidata="Q571921" start="1343" end="1360" title="radiation pattern" label="radiation pattern"/>
<link wikidata="Q8225412" start="1369" end="1380" title="directivity" label="directivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q41364" start="1503" end="1513" title="wavelength" label="wavelength"/>
<link wikidata="Q41257" start="1574" end="1588" title="Heinrich Hertz" label="Heinrich Hertz"/>
<link wikidata="Q9095" start="1715" end="1734" title="James Clerk Maxwell" label="James Clerk Maxwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126859" start="1749" end="1763" title="dipole antenna" label="dipole antenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087850" start="1787" end="1806" title="parabolic reflector" label="parabolic reflector"/>
<link wikidata="Q36488" start="1863" end="1880" title="Guglielmo Marconi" label="Guglielmo Marconi"/>
<link wikidata="Q38104" start="1992" end="2014" title="Nobel Prize in physics" label="Nobel Prize in physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q36488" start="2344" end="2361" title="Guglielmo Marconi" label="Guglielmo Marconi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891" start="2470" end="2477" title="Bologna" label="Bologna"/>
<link wikidata="Q652" start="2568" end="2575" title="Italian language" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3396184" start="3124" end="3126" title="Radio frequency" label="RF"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357187" start="3274" end="3279" title="frequency mixer" label="mixer"/>
<link wikidata="Q127995" start="3305" end="3314" title="microwave" label="microwave"/>
<link wikidata="Q872" start="3469" end="3474" title="Radio" label="Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q12969754" start="3485" end="3506" title="electromagnetic waves" label="electromagnetic waves"/>
<link wikidata="Q2111" start="3548" end="3562" title="speed of light" label="speed of light"/>
<link wikidata="Q905921" start="3578" end="3595" title="absorption (electromagnetic radiation)" label="transmission loss"/>
<link wikidata="Q2176348" start="3627" end="3642" title="omnidirectional antenna" label="omnidirectional"/>
<link wikidata="Q769152" start="3716" end="3727" title="Directional antenna" label="directional"/>
<link wikidata="Q769152" start="3798" end="3810" title="beam antenna" label="beam antenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747478" start="4041" end="4052" title="Reciprocity (electromagnetism)" label="reciprocity"/>
<link wikidata="Q571921" start="4062" end="4079" title="radiation pattern" label="radiation pattern"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542992" start="4267" end="4285" title="isotropic radiator" label="isotropic radiator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126859" start="4538" end="4552" title="dipole antenna" label="dipole antenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q4771249" start="4758" end="4771" title="antenna array" label="antenna array"/>
<link wikidata="Q745829" start="4784" end="4792" title="Yagi–Uda antenna" label="Yagi–Uda"/>
<link wikidata="Q2708162" start="4940" end="4948" title="balanced" label="balanced"/>
<link wikidata="Q1466248" start="5068" end="5076" title="Monopole antenna" label="monopole"/>
<link wikidata="Q116550052" start="6067" end="6074" title="passive radiator" label="passive"/>
<link wikidata="Q727898" start="6270" end="6282" title="phased array" label="phased array"/>
<link wikidata="Q185553" start="6490" end="6495" title="Phase (waves)" label="phase"/>
<link wikidata="Q262372" start="6974" end="6989" title="self-similarity" label="self-similarity"/>
<link wikidata="Q249998" start="7038" end="7047" title="Bandwidth (signal processing)" label="bandwidth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433783" start="7083" end="7108" title="log-periodic antenna" label="log-periodic dipole array"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7220" end="7233" title="Antenna array#Types" label="endfire array"/>
<link wikidata="Q745829" start="7356" end="7372" title="Yagi–Uda antenna" label="Yagi–Uda antenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q116550052" start="7508" end="7526" title="passive radiator" label="parasitic elements"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087850" start="7738" end="7757" title="parabolic reflector" label="parabolic reflector"/>
<link wikidata="Q759117" start="7761" end="7773" title="horn antenna" label="horn antenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q251537" start="7910" end="7922" title="antenna gain" label="antenna gain"/>
<link wikidata="Q628096" start="7969" end="7972" title="UHF" label="UHF"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377707" start="8014" end="8026" title="AM broadcast" label="AM broadcast"/>
<link wikidata="Q511263" start="8154" end="8170" title="Beverage antenna" label="Beverage antenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q381015" start="8273" end="8285" title="Magnetic loop antenna" label="loop antenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761108" start="8343" end="8361" title="impedance matching" label="impedance matching"/>
<link wikidata="Q193972" start="8471" end="8502" title="electrical reactance" label="reactive component of impedance"/>
<link wikidata="Q381015" start="8504" end="8523" title="Magnetic loop antenna" label="small loop antennas"/>
<link wikidata="Q693004" start="8604" end="8621" title="transmission line" label="transmission line"/>
<link wikidata="Q4771256" start="8626" end="8635" title="feed line" label="feed line"/>
<link wikidata="Q4771256" start="8704" end="8716" title="antenna feed" label="antenna feed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761108" start="8817" end="8835" title="impedance matching" label="impedance matching"/>
<link wikidata="Q11233438" start="9277" end="9286" title="waveguide" label="waveguide"/>
<link wikidata="Q693004" start="9314" end="9331" title="transmission line" label="transmission line"/>
<link wikidata="Q4381739" start="9344" end="9356" title="Counterpoise (ground system)" label="counterpoise"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547722" start="9361" end="9373" title="ground plane" label="ground plane"/>
<link wikidata="Q183389" start="9843" end="9856" title="coaxial cable" label="coaxial cable"/>
<link wikidata="Q768575" start="10367" end="10379" title="optical lens" label="optical lens"/>
<link wikidata="Q568420" start="10385" end="10409" title="Antenna tuner" label="antenna coupling network"/>
<link wikidata="Q177897" start="10459" end="10468" title="inductance" label="inductive"/>
<link wikidata="Q164399" start="10473" end="10483" title="capacitance" label="capacitive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761108" start="10511" end="10529" title="impedance matching" label="impedance matching"/>
<link wikidata="Q188364" start="10677" end="10696" title="standing wave ratio" label="standing wave ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q568420" start="10896" end="10901" title="Antenna tuner" label="tuner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761108" start="10977" end="10986" title="impedance matching" label="the match"/>
<link wikidata="Q251537" start="11156" end="11160" title="Antenna gain" label="gain"/>
<link wikidata="Q571921" start="11162" end="11179" title="radiation pattern" label="radiation pattern"/>
<link wikidata="Q179043" start="11181" end="11190" title="Electrical impedance" label="impedance"/>
<link wikidata="Q249998" start="11192" end="11201" title="Bandwidth (signal processing)" label="bandwidth"/>
<link wikidata="Q172858" start="11203" end="11221" title="resonant frequency" label="resonant frequency"/>
<link wikidata="Q193760" start="11226" end="11238" title="Polarization (waves)" label="polarization"/>
<link wikidata="Q190157" start="11277" end="11289" title="Transmitter" label="transmitting"/>
<link wikidata="Q159391" start="11293" end="11302" title="Radio receiver" label="receiving"/>
<link wikidata="Q571921" start="11470" end="11487" title="radiation pattern" label="radiation pattern"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747478" start="11704" end="11723" title="reciprocity (electromagnetism)" label="reciprocity theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q15854269" start="12101" end="12107" title="linear function" label="linear"/>
<link wikidata="Q962002" start="12456" end="12464" title="isolator (microwave)" label="isolator"/>
<link wikidata="Q162869" start="12470" end="12480" title="circulator" label="circulator"/>
<link wikidata="Q5105088" start="12523" end="12530" title="Ferrite (magnet)" label="ferrite"/>
<link wikidata="Q47528" start="12674" end="12679" title="radar" label="radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4027242" start="12873" end="12892" title="dielectric constant" label="dielectric constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q693004" start="13189" end="13206" title="transmission line" label="transmission line"/>
<link wikidata="Q123300" start="14208" end="14221" title="standing wave" label="standing wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126859" start="14292" end="14308" title="half-wave dipole" label="half-wave dipole"/>
<link wikidata="Q1466248" start="14777" end="14793" title="monopole antenna" label="monopole antenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501125" start="14905" end="14911" title="Ground (electricity)" label="ground"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547722" start="14929" end="14941" title="ground plane" label="ground plane"/>
<link wikidata="Q4381739" start="14952" end="14964" title="Counterpoise (ground system)" label="counterpoise"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126859" start="15144" end="15157" title="folded dipole" label="folded dipole"/>
<link wikidata="Q628096" start="16248" end="16251" title="UHF" label="UHF"/>
<link wikidata="Q127995" start="16253" end="16263" title="microwaves" label="microwaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q732473" start="16427" end="16442" title="LC circuit" label="series-resonant"/>
<link wikidata="Q179043" start="16699" end="16718" title="electrical impedance" label="impedance magnitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778924" start="17083" end="17106" title="radiation resistance" label="resistance to radiating"/>
<link wikidata="Q106603432" start="17136" end="17153" title="electrical resistance" label="electrical losses"/>
<link wikidata="Q179043" start="17417" end="17426" title="Electrical impedance" label="impedance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761108" start="17758" end="17776" title="impedance matching" label="impedance matching"/>
<link wikidata="Q568420" start="17975" end="17988" title="antenna tuner" label="antenna tuner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761108" start="17992" end="18018" title="impedance matching" label="impedance matching network"/>
<link wikidata="Q188364" start="18147" end="18166" title="standing wave ratio" label="standing wave ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761108" start="19793" end="19811" title="impedance matching" label="impedance matching"/>
<link wikidata="Q41364" start="19906" end="19910" title="wavelength" label="wave"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20122" end="20146" title="loading coil#Radio antenna" label="&amp;quot;loading coil&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q474129" start="20457" end="20474" title="electrical length" label="electrical length"/>
<link wikidata="Q830521" start="21485" end="21493" title="Q factor" label="Q factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1225223" start="21601" end="21617" title="Copper loss" label="Resistive losses"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21708" end="21729" title="#Efficiency" label="electrical efficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253356" start="21922" end="21934" title="radiant flux" label="radiant flux"/>
<link wikidata="Q333094" start="22019" end="22037" title="inverse-square law" label="inverse-square law"/>
<link wikidata="Q571946" start="22210" end="22224" title="antenna aperture" label="effective area"/>
<link wikidata="Q27137" start="22270" end="22275" title="electric power" label="power"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22671" end="22676" title="#Effective area or aperture" label="below"/>
<link wikidata="Q116550052" start="23536" end="23552" title="passive radiator" label="passive radiator"/>
<link wikidata="Q745829" start="23558" end="23566" title="Yagi–Uda antenna" label="Yagi–Uda"/>
<link wikidata="Q4771262" start="24151" end="24164" title="antenna rotor" label="antenna rotor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4771249" start="24392" end="24405" title="array antenna" label="array antenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q727898" start="24634" end="24646" title="phased array" label="phased array"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433783" start="24871" end="24896" title="log-periodic dipole array" label="log-periodic dipole array"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134067" start="25679" end="25695" title="Corner reflector antenna" label="corner reflector"/>
<link wikidata="Q2441902" start="26041" end="26050" title="Wind Engineering" label="wind load"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087850" start="26109" end="26128" title="parabolic reflector" label="parabolic reflector"/>
<link wikidata="Q190909" start="26195" end="26204" title="Focus (optics)" label="focussing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7884069" start="26244" end="26256" title="Feed horn" label="feed antenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q467980" start="26383" end="26401" title="geometrical optics" label="geometrical optics"/>
<link wikidata="Q4262151" start="26460" end="26472" title="lens antenna" label="lens antenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q251537" start="26515" end="26525" title="gain (antenna)" label="power gain"/>
<link wikidata="Q571921" start="26911" end="26928" title="radiation pattern" label="radiation pattern"/>
<link wikidata="Q249998" start="26984" end="26993" title="bandwidth (signal processing)" label="bandwidth"/>
<link wikidata="Q571921" start="27310" end="27327" title="radiation pattern" label="radiation pattern"/>
<link wikidata="Q185727" start="27952" end="27965" title="Amateur radio" label="Amateur radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q830521" start="28969" end="28981" title="Q factor" label="&amp;quot;&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778924" start="29019" end="29039" title="radiation resistance" label="radiation resistance"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29733" end="29751" title="Loop antenna#AM broadcast receiving antennas" label="small loop antenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433783" start="29947" end="29967" title="log-periodic antenna" label="log-periodic antenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433783" start="30208" end="30234" title="Log-periodic antenna" label="log-periodic dipole arrays"/>
<link wikidata="Q251537" start="30273" end="30277" title="Gain (antenna)" label="Gain"/>
<link wikidata="Q8225412" start="30322" end="30333" title="directivity" label="directivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q571921" start="30356" end="30373" title="radiation pattern" label="radiation pattern"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061524" start="30611" end="30620" title="intensity (physics)" label="intensity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542992" start="30834" end="30851" title="Isotropic radiator" label="isotropic antenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q11197" start="30944" end="30953" title="logarithm" label="logarithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q5329" start="30963" end="30970" title="decibel" label="decibel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126859" start="31158" end="31174" title="half-wave dipole" label="half-wave dipole"/>
<link wikidata="Q4928259" start="31607" end="31621" title="parabolic antenna" label="parabolic dish"/>
<link wikidata="Q209588" start="31632" end="31652" title="satellite television" label="satellite television"/>
<link wikidata="Q2852702" start="31802" end="31814" title="whip antenna" label="whip antenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195934" start="31844" end="31858" title="cordless phone" label="cordless phone"/>
<link wikidata="Q854659" start="31902" end="31916" title="gain (electromagnetics)" label="amplifier gain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151304" start="32055" end="32074" title="low-noise amplifier" label="low-noise amplifier"/>
<link wikidata="Q571946" start="32121" end="32135" title="Antenna effective area" label="effective area"/>
<link wikidata="Q3396184" start="32540" end="32542" title="radio frequency" label="RF"/>
<link wikidata="Q223323" start="32580" end="32583" title="root mean square" label="RMS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747478" start="32764" end="32775" title="Reciprocity (electromagnetism)" label="reciprocity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1225223" start="32935" end="32939" title="Copper loss" label="loss"/>
<link wikidata="Q111941537" start="32960" end="32981" title="antenna efficiency" label="electrical efficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q111941537" start="33203" end="33224" title="antenna efficiency" label="electrical efficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q111941537" start="33360" end="33370" title="antenna efficiency" label="efficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q571921" start="33781" end="33798" title="radiation pattern" label="radiation pattern"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542992" start="34078" end="34095" title="Isotropic radiator" label="isotropic antenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q12507" start="34157" end="34163" title="sphere" label="sphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q1466248" start="34203" end="34212" title="monopole antenna" label="monopoles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126859" start="34217" end="34224" title="dipole antenna" label="dipoles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2176348" start="34347" end="34370" title="Omnidirectional antenna" label="omnidirectional pattern"/>
<link wikidata="Q12510" start="34401" end="34406" title="torus" label="torus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7068944" start="34540" end="34544" title="Null (radio)" label="null"/>
<link wikidata="Q136980" start="34679" end="34688" title="Interference (wave propagation)" label="interfere"/>
<link wikidata="Q185553" start="34762" end="34770" title="in phase" label="in phase"/>
<link wikidata="Q185553" start="34836" end="34848" title="out of phase" label="out of phase"/>
<link wikidata="Q769152" start="34855" end="34874" title="directional antenna" label="directional antenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q2040092" start="35111" end="35119" title="sidelobe" label="sidelobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4771250" start="35209" end="35218" title="Antenna boresight" label="boresight"/>
<link wikidata="Q5042828" start="36303" end="36313" title="Electrical efficiency" label="Efficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1225223" start="36568" end="36583" title="Copper loss" label="loss resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761108" start="36723" end="36741" title="impedance matching" label="impedance matching"/>
<link wikidata="Q188364" start="36827" end="36830" title="standing wave ratio" label="SWR"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365197" start="37199" end="37213" title="field strength" label="field strength"/>
<link wikidata="Q1225223" start="37375" end="37390" title="Copper loss" label="loss resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778924" start="37520" end="37540" title="radiation resistance" label="radiation resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747478" start="37908" end="37919" title="Reciprocity (electromagnetism)" label="reciprocity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761108" start="38121" end="38136" title="impedance match" label="impedance match"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="38949" end="38961" title="loop antenna#AM broadcast receiving antennas" label="loop antenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q251537" start="39399" end="39411" title="antenna gain" label="antenna gain"/>
<link wikidata="Q251537" start="40175" end="40187" title="antenna gain" label="antenna gain"/>
<link wikidata="Q193760" start="40621" end="40633" title="polarization (waves)" label="polarization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126859" start="40766" end="40772" title="dipole antenna" label="dipole"/>
<link wikidata="Q2852702" start="40776" end="40788" title="whip antenna" label="whip antenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q162219" start="41001" end="41011" title="ionosphere" label="ionosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q605931" start="41057" end="41085" title="line-of-sight propagation" label="line-of-sight communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q5610983" start="41089" end="41100" title="ground wave" label="ground wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q5157313" start="41728" end="41736" title="Computational electromagnetics" label="analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q385314" start="41754" end="41771" title="turnstile antenna" label="turnstile antenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q2101564" start="42278" end="42291" title="specification (technical standard)" label="specification"/>
<link wikidata="Q14953420" start="42336" end="42346" title="elliptically polarized" label="elliptical"/>
<link wikidata="Q40112" start="42417" end="42424" title="ellipse" label="ellipse"/>
<link wikidata="Q6553479" start="42448" end="42467" title="linear polarization" label="linear polarization"/>
<link wikidata="Q5121676" start="42528" end="42549" title="circular polarization" label="circular polarization"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42846" end="42887" title="Circular polarization#Left/right handedness conventions" label="designated as right-handed or left-handed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366301" start="43032" end="43047" title="right-hand rule" label="right-hand rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q5329" start="43513" end="43515" title="decibel" label="dB"/>
<link wikidata="Q381040" start="43776" end="43793" title="complex conjugate" label="complex conjugate"/>
<link wikidata="Q241868" start="44010" end="44026" title="Thevenin&amp;#x27;s theorem" label="source impedance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164612" start="44545" end="44569" title="characteristic impedance" label="characteristic impedance"/>
<link wikidata="Q123300" start="44728" end="44741" title="standing wave" label="standing wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q188364" start="44761" end="44780" title="standing wave ratio" label="standing wave ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087319" start="44942" end="44954" title="sensu stricto" label="strict sense"/>
<link wikidata="Q193972" start="45891" end="45900" title="electrical reactance" label="reactance"/>
<link wikidata="Q5322" start="45947" end="45956" title="capacitor" label="capacitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5325" start="45961" end="45969" title="inductor" label="inductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087319" start="46264" end="46273" title="sensu stricto" label="genuinely"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="46393" end="46404" title="Transformer types#RF transformer anchor" label="transformer"/>
<link wikidata="Q805838" start="46426" end="46431" title="balun" label="balun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164612" start="46539" end="46563" title="characteristic impedance" label="characteristic impedance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087319" start="46616" end="46634" title="sensu lato" label="in the loose sense"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761108" start="46652" end="46670" title="impedance matching" label="impedance matching"/>
<link wikidata="Q568420" start="46719" end="46732" title="antenna tuner" label="antenna tuner"/>
<link wikidata="Q568420" start="46776" end="46798" title="antenna tuner" label="&amp;quot;transmatch&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164612" start="46998" end="47022" title="characteristic impedance" label="characteristic impedance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761108" start="47059" end="47077" title="impedance matching" label="impedance matching"/>
<link wikidata="Q568420" start="47096" end="47109" title="antenna tuner" label="antenna tuner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761108" start="47212" end="47228" title="impedance matching" label="matching network"/>
<link wikidata="Q47083" start="47387" end="47390" title="Ohm (unit)" label="Ohm"/>
<link wikidata="Q183389" start="47391" end="47404" title="coaxial cable" label="coaxial cable"/>
<link wikidata="Q2852702" start="47906" end="47918" title="whip antenna" label="whip antenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q41364" start="47974" end="47984" title="wavelength" label="wavelength"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="48023" end="48035" title="loading coil#Radio antenna" label="loading coil"/>
<link wikidata="Q183389" start="48435" end="48439" title="coaxial cable" label="coax"/>
<link wikidata="Q381015" start="48545" end="48557" title="loop antenna" label="loop antenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778924" start="48855" end="48875" title="radiation resistance" label="radiation resistance"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="48881" end="48891" title="loop antenna#small loop anchor" label="small loop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377707" start="48995" end="49007" title="AM broadcast" label="AM broadcast"/>
<link wikidata="Q5105088" start="49100" end="49107" title="ferrite (magnet)" label="ferrite"/>
<link wikidata="Q381015" start="49121" end="49138" title="loopstick antenna" label="loopstick antenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q65402698" start="49572" end="49584" title="electrical conductivity" label="conductivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q211569" start="49766" end="49778" title="permittivity" label="permittivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547722" start="49916" end="49928" title="ground plane" label="ground plane"/>
<link wikidata="Q838055" start="50241" end="50261" title="Fresnel coefficients" label="Fresnel coefficients"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196575" start="50580" end="50598" title="angle of incidence (optics)" label="angle of incidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q193760" start="50603" end="50615" title="polarization (waves)" label="polarization"/>
<link wikidata="Q549933" start="50769" end="50789" title="VLF" label="very low frequencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q15115271" start="50793" end="50809" title="high frequency" label="high frequencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q184996" start="50855" end="50865" title="dielectric" label="dielectric"/>
<link wikidata="Q65402698" start="50910" end="50922" title="Electrical resistivity and conductivity" label="conductivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q211569" start="50927" end="50939" title="permittivity" label="permittivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q466814" start="51100" end="51110" title="mediumwave" label="mediumwave"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377707" start="51173" end="51185" title="AM broadcast" label="AM broadcast"/>
<link wikidata="Q5610983" start="51412" end="51423" title="ground wave" label="ground wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639901" start="51605" end="51613" title="sky wave" label="sky wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q368646" start="52079" end="52088" title="shortwave" label="shortwave"/>
<link wikidata="Q605931" start="52303" end="52328" title="line-of-sight propagation" label="line-of-sight propagation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079524" start="52603" end="52622" title="specular reflection" label="specular reflection"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079524" start="53095" end="53105" title="specular reflection" label="specularly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639901" start="53235" end="53243" title="sky wave" label="sky wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q193760" start="53456" end="53468" title="polarization (waves)" label="polarization"/>
<link wikidata="Q174102" start="53508" end="53524" title="refractive index" label="refractive index"/>
<link wikidata="Q333094" start="54937" end="54955" title="inverse square law" label="inverse square law"/>
<link wikidata="Q571921" start="55505" end="55522" title="radiation pattern" label="radiation pattern"/>
<link wikidata="Q41364" start="56406" end="56416" title="wavelength" label="wavelength"/>
<link wikidata="Q17517" start="57924" end="57936" title="mobile phone" label="mobile phone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379116" start="57943" end="57955" title="base station" label="base station"/>
<link wikidata="Q5121676" start="58079" end="58100" title="circular polarization" label="circular polarization"/>
<link wikidata="Q551540" start="58272" end="58284" title="ghosting (television)" label="ghost images"/>
<link wikidata="Q11827794" start="58292" end="58313" title="multipath propagation" label="multipath propagation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083894" start="58585" end="58615" title="digital terrestrial television" label="digital terrestrial television"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062839" start="58701" end="58717" title="Error detection and correction" label="error correction"/>
<link wikidata="Q446277" start="58884" end="58895" title="Sergei Alexander Schelkunoff" label="Schelkunoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q722425" start="58902" end="58907" title="Harald T. Friis" label="Friis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4379653" start="59016" end="59045" title="single-wire transmission line" label="single conductor transmission"/>
<link wikidata="Q693004" start="59046" end="59050" title="transmission line" label="line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156880" start="59082" end="59110" title="telegrapher&amp;#x27;s equations" label="telegrapher&amp;#x27;s equations"/>
<link wikidata="Q5157313" start="59206" end="59223" title="Computational electromagnetics" label="numerical methods"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778924" start="59580" end="59600" title="radiation resistance" label="radiation resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q123300" start="60055" end="60068" title="standing wave" label="standing wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q552311" start="60225" end="60241" title="Electrical resonance" label="resonant antenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761108" start="60591" end="60611" title="impedance matching" label="matching the antenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q750454" start="60911" end="60923" title="power factor" label="power factor"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="61429" end="61439" title="Dipole antenna#Impedance of dipoles of various lengths" label="is adopted"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164612" start="61635" end="61659" title="characteristic impedance" label="characteristic impedance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148098" start="61893" end="61901" title="harmonic" label="harmonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q830521" start="62085" end="62085" title="Q factor" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q4771249" start="62564" end="62577" title="antenna array" label="antenna array"/>
<link wikidata="Q601459" start="62739" end="62765" title="Friis transmission equation" label="Friis transmission formula"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="62809" end="62825" title="Yagi–Uda antenna#Mutual impedance" label="mutual impedance"/>
<link wikidata="Q745829" start="63067" end="63083" title="Yagi–Uda antenna" label="Yagi–Uda antenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q4771249" start="63135" end="63147" title="Antenna array" label="phased array"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547722" start="63225" end="63237" title="ground plane" label="ground plane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134067" start="63246" end="63262" title="Corner reflector antenna" label="corner reflector"/>
<link wikidata="Q385314" start="63785" end="63802" title="turnstile antenna" label="turnstile antenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126859" start="64169" end="64175" title="Dipole antenna" label="Dipole"/>
<link wikidata="Q1466248" start="64180" end="64196" title="monopole antenna" label="monopole antenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q4771249" start="64200" end="64213" title="Array antenna" label="Array antenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q381015" start="64217" end="64229" title="Loop antenna" label="Loop antenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q4928259" start="64233" end="64250" title="Parabolic antenna" label="Aperture antennas"/>
<link wikidata="Q21113045" start="64253" end="64275" title="Traveling wave antenna" label="Traveling wave antenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433783" start="64279" end="64299" title="Log-periodic antenna" label="Log-periodic antenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q7577752" start="64302" end="64316" title="Spiral antenna" label="Spiral antenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q759117" start="64319" end="64331" title="Horn antenna" label="Horn antenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q4680954" start="64334" end="64348" title="Adcock antenna" label="Adcock antenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q3618429" start="64351" end="64365" title="Sector antenna" label="Sector antenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1936665" start="64368" end="64383" title="Helical antenna" label="Helical antenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q60773120" start="64473" end="64486" title="Antenna types" label="Antenna types"/>
<link wikidata="Q4771256" start="64625" end="64637" title="Antenna feed" label="Antenna feed"/>
<link wikidata="" start="64640" end="64679" title=":Category:Radio frequency antenna types" label=":Category:Radio frequency antenna types"/>
<link wikidata="" start="64682" end="64719" title=":Category:Radio frequency propagation" label=":Category:Radio frequency propagation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4207343" start="64722" end="64739" title="Cellular repeater" label="Cellular repeater"/>
<link wikidata="Q5177014" start="64742" end="64754" title="Counterpoise" label="Counterpoise"/>
<link wikidata="Q5720030" start="64757" end="64766" title="Detection" label="Detection"/>
<link wikidata="Q844865" start="64769" end="64774" title="DXing" label="DXing"/>
<link wikidata="Q11406" start="64777" end="64793" title="Electromagnetism" label="Electromagnetism"/>
<link wikidata="Q568420" start="64796" end="64818" title="antenna tuner" label="Feedline matching unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1549420" start="64821" end="64843" title="Mobile broadband modem" label="Mobile broadband modem"/>
<link wikidata="Q630242" start="64846" end="64877" title="Numerical Electromagnetics Code" label="Numerical Electromagnetics Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q17105433" start="64880" end="64894" title="Radial (radio)" label="Radial (radio)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068623" start="64897" end="64919" title="Radio masts and towers" label="Radio masts and towers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164724" start="64922" end="64934" title="RF connector" label="RF connector"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187868" start="64937" end="64950" title="Smart antenna" label="Smart antenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060363" start="64953" end="64958" title="Terrestrial Trunked Radio" label="TETRA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2447204" start="64961" end="64980" title="Transmitter hunting" label="Transmitter hunting"/>
<link wikidata="Q905779" start="64983" end="65010" title="Shortwave broadband antenna" label="Shortwave broadband antenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q7170535" start="65013" end="65039" title="Personal RF safety monitor" label="Personal RF safety monitor"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="187320" wikidata="Q710057" url="?curid=187320" title="Josiah Bartlett">
<text>Josiah Bartlett ( – May 19, 1795) was an American Founding Father, physician, , a delegate to the Continental Congress for New Hampshire, and a signatory to the Declaration of Independence and Articles of Confederation. He was a member of the convention which framed the Constitution of the United States in 1787. He served as the first governor of New Hampshire and chief justice of the New Hampshire Superior Court of Judicature, now the New Hampshire Supreme Court.

Bartlett practiced medicine over 40 years. During that time, he promoted wellness practices, including diet, exercise, fresh air, and a contented mind. He fostered using messages from one&#x27;s body to improve one&#x27;s health, like drinking when thirsty and covering up when sick with chills. He managed an outbreak of throat distemper, or diphtheria, with Peruvian bark, also known as quinine, with much greater success than traditional treatments. When his was very sick himself, he took cold cider, versus a warm drink, at intervals to break a fever.

As governor, Bartlett worked to ensure the state&#x27;s success by supporting farming and businesses, improving the state&#x27;s infrastructure, codifying and enacting laws, adding special judges, and paying off the state&#x27;s debt. He ran a farm and orchards over his life. His wife Mary Bartlett took on that responsibility when Bartlett was away at the Continental Congress in Pennsylvania. Bartlett and his wife wrote letters to one another that provide insight into the life of a founding father, the trials they experienced and conquered as they fought for a country independent from British rule, and their strength in creating a stable life for themselves and their twelve children, eight of whom survived.

==Personal life==
Josiah Bartlett, born on November 21, 1729, in Amesbury, in the Province of Massachusetts Bay, was the seventh and last child of Hannah (née Webster) and Stephen Bartlett, a shoemaker. Bartlett had some education from the town schoolmaster and possibly circuit schools. He learned Latin and Greek, most likely from a relative, Reverend Doctor John Webster. In 1745, Bartlett studied medicine in his hometown under Dr. Nehemiah Ordway, a relative. He also studied from Ordway&#x27;s and other physician&#x27;s medical books. After a five-year apprenticeship, he moved to Kingston, New Hampshire in 1750, where he lived with Reverend Joseph Secombe. One year later, he purchased twelve acres for a farm.

On January 15, 1754, he married Mary Bartlett of Newton, New Hampshire. She was his cousin, the daughter of his uncle, Deacon Joseph Bartlett and Sarah (née Hoyt) Bartlett. The Bartletts had twelve children, eight who lived to adulthood. They were: Mary (1754), Lois (1756), Miriam (1758), Rhoda (1760), Levi (1763), Josiah (1768), Ezra (1770), and Sarah (1773). All three of his sons and seven of his grandsons would follow his dream as physicians. 

Bartlett was a freemason and encouraged his son Josiah to join. Bartlett and Mary remained married until her death on July 14, 1789.

== Career ==
=== Medicine ===

In 1750, he moved to Kingston, New Hampshire, in Rockingham County, and opened his medical practice.
Kingston at that time was a frontier settlement.

Bartlett actively practiced medicine for 40 years. During that time, he tested both traditional and new treatments for optimal efficacy. A virulent form a throat distemper or diphtheria, with a fever and canker, spread throughout Kingston in 1754. Bartlett experimented with therapy using several available drugs and empirically discovered that Peruvian bark, also known as quinine, relieved symptoms long enough to allow recovery. He also realized the benefits of curing fevers with cool liquids, like apple cider, taken at intervals. He tried this when he was quite ill, against his physician&#x27;s orders, with success. Beginning June 25, 1765, Bartlett and Dr. Amos Gale were partners in a medical practice in Kingston for a period of three years.

Bartlett believed in fostering wellness, including exercise, diet, fresh air, and following cues of one&#x27;s body, like drinking when thirsty and covering up when sick with the chills. He also believed &quot;to keep the mind as Easy and Contented as possible&quot; were &quot;of much more Service than a multiplicity of Medicines&quot;.

In 1790, Bartlett secured legislation recognizing the New Hampshire Medical Society. He was elected chief executive of New Hampshire, serving as president in 1791 and 1792. In 1790, he delivered the commencement address at Dartmouth College when his son Ezra graduated. Bartlett was awarded an honorary Doctorate of Medicine the same day his son was awarded the same degree.

=== Farming and real estate ===
While in Kingston, Bartlett grew crops on his twelve-acre farm beginning in 1751. As a young adult, he also made money dealing in lumber and buying and selling real estate. After he was married, the Bartletts planted and harvested crops, like corn and beans, with the help of servants. They had an orchard with peach, apple, plum, and cherry trees.

=== Politics ===
Bartlett became active in the political affairs of Kingston, and in 1765, he was elected to the Provincial Assembly. Bartlett conducted discussions with Colonial Governor Benning Wentworth (1741–1766) and the Provincial Assembly to mediate dissension caused by the Stamp Act of 1765 (enacted by the Parliament of Great Britain). He opposed the Townshend Acts of 1767 and 1768 and aligned politically with the patriots, or Whigs. Bartlett was member of the colonial legislature until 1775.

While a legislator, Bartlett was at odds with both Governor Wentworths, Benning and John, who endorsed the Kingdom of Great Britain&#x27;s agenda over the needs of the people of New Hampshire. In an unsuccessful attempt to influence Bartlett, Governor Benning Wentworth appointed him as justice of the peace in 1765. Two years later, Colonial Governor John Wentworth (1767–1775) did the same. Bartlett organized the 7th Regiment of the New Hampshire Milition and in 1770, he was a colonel of the militia.

Wanting independence from the Kingdom of Great Britain, Bartlett participated in revolutionary causes beginning in 1774. He joined the Provincial Assembly&#x27;s Committee of Correspondence and the Committee of Safety in May. In response, the governor immediately dissolved the Provincial Assembly, which resulted in the termination of the royal government in New Hampshire. A temporary government was organized with the Provincial Congress, when that assembly was not in session, the Committee of Safety took the lead. Bartlett retained his seat in the Assembly. The Committee of Correspondence reassembled the representatives and selected delegates to the upcoming Continental Congress.
Also in May, his house was burned down, likely by Tories. Bartlett was chosen to represent New Hampshire at the First Continental Congress (September 5 to October 26, 1774), but declined because his house was razed. He moved his family out to the farmhouse and began rebuilding immediately. The Josiah Bartlett House was declared a National Historic Landmark in 1971.

He was named an &quot;accessory after the fact&quot; for the Capture of Fort William and Mary (December 14, 1774) in New Castle, New Hampshire. Governor Wentworth dismissed him from his positions as a justice of the peace and militia colonel in February 1775.

=== Founding father and military leader ===

Bartlett was a member of the Continental Congress in 1775, 1776 and 1778. He was selected as a delegate in 1775, and attended the Second Session of the Continental Congress where he sat on the civil government, secrecy, safety, marine, and munitions Committees.

When the question of declaring independence from Great Britain was officially brought up in 1776, as a representative of the northernmost colony Bartlett was the first to be asked, and he answered in the affirmative. He was the second signer of the Declaration of Independence (July 4, 1776). He signed the engrossed copy on August 2, 1776.

After asking for relief, a couple of men from New Hampshire joined the delegation and that allowed Bartlett to return to New Hampshire in 1777. Bartlett organized regiments to respond to an anticipated threat from Montreal. He led the troops with supplies to Bennington, New Hampshire to join up with Gen. John Stark&#x27;s forces. He brought medical supplies that were needed for the Battle of Bennington (August 16, 1777). In 1779, Bartlett was made a colonel in the militia.

Bartlett was reelected to the Continental Congress on March 14, 1778, and returned to Pennsylvania by May 21, 1778. He served on the committee that drafted the Articles of Confederation and he signed the instrument. Bartlett withdrew his seat on October 31, 1778, to return to New Hampshire to attend to personal business.

While he was away from home, his wife Mary, pregnant part of that time, had managed the planting and harvesting of crops, cared for their large family, and oversaw the servants&#x27; work.

Bartlett and Mary wrote letters to one another that provide insight into their lives during the revolution. Pauline Maier in &quot;The old revolutionaries : political lives in the age of Samuel Adams&quot; states: &quot;In the midst of change, some revolutionaries cultivated continuity. For Josiah and Mary Bartlett, the permanent alterations the Revolution brought to them and their provincial world were grafted upon a larger field of stability. Josiah might help design a national government that would determine the happiness of all future generations, but the seasons would come as always, the drought and worms at most a little earlier, a little later; and even the failure of the Revolution would have been, it seemed, but another of the troubles that marked men&#x27;s existence and for which Providence would again somehow provide.&quot;

=== Later career ===

He became chief justice of the Court of Common Pleas in 1778. In 1779, he returned to his role as a judge, serving in the Court of Common Pleas until 1782 when he became associate justice for the New Hampshire Supreme Court.

Bartlett was a delegate from New Hampshire at the convention that framed the Constitution of the United States in 1787. He argued for ratification, which took place on June 21, 1788. New Hampshire was the ninth state to ratify the Constitution.

In 1788, Bartlett was made the chief justice of the state supreme court. The legislature of the new state of New Hampshire selected him to be a U. S. Senator in 1789, but he declined the office. He resigned as chief justice that year. He was also a candidate in that year&#x27;s gubernatorial election, finishing a distant third behind John Sullivan and incumbent Acting President John Pickering.

Bartlett was governor of New Hampshire from 1790, initially called chief executive or president. When the new state constitution of 1792 took effect in 1793, his title became governor. He resigned on January 29, 1794, because of declining health. During his tenure, Bartlett developed the foundation for New Hampshire to operate successfully as a state by evaluating existing laws and making new ones, regulating the use of gold and silver coins, establishing special judges, and working with the legislature. He made provisions for payment of the state&#x27;s debt. He also improved New Hampshire&#x27;s infrastructure, maintaining and building roads, bridges, and canals. For the state&#x27;s economy, he supported agriculture and businesses.

==Death and legacy==
Bartlett retired to his home in Kingston and died there on May 19, 1795. The cause of death was paralysis. He is buried next to his wife Mary in the Plains Cemetery, behind the First Universalist Church in Kingston. Seven-inch medallions located at Bartlett and his wife&#x27;s graves were awarded by the Daughters of the American Revolution and the Sons of the American Revolution.

A bronze statue of Bartlett stands in the town square of Amesbury, Massachusetts. His portrait hangs in the State House in Concord, New Hampshire, drawn from an original by John Trumbull. Bartlett, New Hampshire, is named in his honor, along with the Josiah Bartlett Elementary School. Bartlett is featured on a New Hampshire historical marker (number 46) along New Hampshire Route 111 in Kingston. The Bartlett School in Amesbury, which operated from 1870 until 1968, operates since then as the Bartlett Museum, Inc., a nonprofit museum.

The poem &quot;One of the Signers&quot; was written by John Greenleaf Whittier to honor Bartlett.

The main character in the NBC drama series &quot;The West Wing&quot;, President Josiah Bartlet, is a fictional character depicted as a descendant of the Declaration of Independence signatory.

==See also==

* Memorial to the 56 Signers of the Declaration of Independence

==Notes==
==References==
==Bibliography==
* 
* 
* 

==External links==
* Society of Descendants of the Signers of the Declaration of Independence
* The Papers of Josiah Bartlett at Dartmouth College Library</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q710057" start="0" end="15" title="Josiah Bartlett" label="Josiah Bartlett"/>
<link wikidata="Q186539" start="50" end="65" title="Founding Fathers of the United States" label="Founding Father"/>
<link wikidata="Q26718" start="98" end="118" title="Continental Congress" label="Continental Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q759" start="123" end="136" title="New Hampshire" label="New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q127912" start="161" end="188" title="United States Declaration of Independence" label="Declaration of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q493620" start="193" end="218" title="Articles of Confederation" label="Articles of Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11698" start="271" end="304" title="Constitution of the United States" label="Constitution of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589687" start="337" end="362" title="governor of New Hampshire" label="governor of New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3001117" start="440" end="467" title="New Hampshire Supreme Court" label="New Hampshire Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q134649" start="813" end="823" title="diphtheria" label="diphtheria"/>
<link wikidata="Q3133417" start="830" end="843" title="Jesuit&amp;#x27;s bark" label="Peruvian bark"/>
<link wikidata="Q189522" start="859" end="866" title="quinine" label="quinine"/>
<link wikidata="Q96086494" start="1314" end="1327" title="Mary Bartlett" label="Mary Bartlett"/>
<link wikidata="Q26718" start="1386" end="1406" title="Continental Congress" label="Continental Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q54176" start="1811" end="1819" title="Amesbury, Massachusetts" label="Amesbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079909" start="1828" end="1857" title="Province of Massachusetts Bay" label="Province of Massachusetts Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2507958" start="1901" end="1904" title="née" label="née"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304507" start="2334" end="2357" title="Kingston, New Hampshire" label="Kingston, New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q96086494" start="2499" end="2512" title="Mary Bartlett" label="Mary Bartlett"/>
<link wikidata="Q2417020" start="2516" end="2537" title="Newton, New Hampshire" label="Newton, New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q41726" start="2934" end="2943" title="freemason" label="freemason"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304507" start="3105" end="3128" title="Kingston, New Hampshire" label="Kingston, New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q54438" start="3133" end="3150" title="Rockingham County, New Hampshire" label="Rockingham County"/>
<link wikidata="Q2585693" start="3362" end="3370" title="efficacy" label="efficacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460232" start="3374" end="3382" title="virulence" label="virulent"/>
<link wikidata="Q134649" start="3410" end="3420" title="diphtheria" label="diphtheria"/>
<link wikidata="Q811596" start="3439" end="3445" title="canker" label="canker"/>
<link wikidata="Q3133417" start="3580" end="3593" title="Jesuit&amp;#x27;s bark" label="Peruvian bark"/>
<link wikidata="Q189522" start="3609" end="3616" title="quinine" label="quinine"/>
<link wikidata="Q49116" start="4552" end="4569" title="Dartmouth College" label="Dartmouth College"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5200" end="5219" title="Colonial government in the Thirteen Colonies#Assembly" label="Provincial Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q4889852" start="5275" end="5292" title="Benning Wentworth" label="Benning Wentworth"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5313" end="5332" title="Executive Council of New Hampshire#Colonial era" label="Provincial Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335777" start="5369" end="5386" title="Stamp Act 1765" label="Stamp Act of 1765"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739604" start="5403" end="5430" title="Parliament of Great Britain" label="Parliament of Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2093092" start="5448" end="5462" title="Townshend Acts" label="Townshend Acts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365374" start="5513" end="5521" title="Patriot (American Revolution)" label="patriots"/>
<link wikidata="Q7280467" start="5526" end="5531" title="Radical Whigs" label="Whigs"/>
<link wikidata="Q886792" start="5678" end="5682" title="Sir John Wentworth, 1st Baronet" label="John"/>
<link wikidata="Q161885" start="5701" end="5725" title="Kingdom of Great Britain" label="Kingdom of Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q886792" start="5946" end="5960" title="Sir John Wentworth, 1st Baronet" label="John Wentworth"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6030" end="6052" title="New Hampshire Militia#Colonia era" label="New Hampshire Milition"/>
<link wikidata="Q161885" start="6130" end="6154" title="Kingdom of Great Britain" label="Kingdom of Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986806" start="6262" end="6289" title="Committees of correspondence" label="Committee of Correspondence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2985399" start="6298" end="6317" title="Committee of safety (American Revolution)" label="Committee of Safety"/>
<link wikidata="Q3433953" start="6839" end="6845" title="Tory" label="Tories"/>
<link wikidata="Q252612" start="6901" end="6927" title="First Continental Congress" label="First Continental Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q6290418" start="7084" end="7105" title="Josiah Bartlett House" label="Josiah Bartlett House"/>
<link wikidata="Q624232" start="7121" end="7147" title="National Historic Landmark" label="National Historic Landmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q96374412" start="7219" end="7251" title="Capture of Fort William and Mary" label="Capture of Fort William and Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2723772" start="7275" end="7300" title="New Castle, New Hampshire" label="New Castle, New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q26718" start="7493" end="7513" title="Continental Congress" label="Continental Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q42008" start="7758" end="7770" title="sovereignty" label="independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q23666" start="7776" end="7789" title="Great Britain" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q127912" start="7976" end="8003" title="United States Declaration of Independence" label="Declaration of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="8283" end="8291" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2417391" start="8328" end="8353" title="Bennington, New Hampshire" label="Bennington, New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1701806" start="8375" end="8385" title="John Stark" label="John Stark"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754313" start="8454" end="8474" title="Battle of Bennington" label="Battle of Bennington"/>
<link wikidata="Q493620" start="8708" end="8733" title="Articles of Confederation" label="Articles of Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3001117" start="10129" end="10156" title="New Hampshire Supreme Court" label="New Hampshire Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q11698" start="10236" end="10269" title="Constitution of the United States" label="Constitution of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="10549" end="10562" title="United States Senate" label="U. S. Senator"/>
<link wikidata="Q886420" start="10741" end="10754" title="John Sullivan (general)" label="John Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q15451755" start="10786" end="10800" title="John Pickering (judge)" label="John Pickering"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164213" start="10913" end="10931" title="Constitution of New Hampshire" label="state constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q117700158" start="11719" end="11734" title="Plains Cemetery" label="Plains Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q5454031" start="11747" end="11772" title="First Universalist Church (Kingston, New Hampshire)" label="First Universalist Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541947" start="11875" end="11911" title="Daughters of the American Revolution" label="Daughters of the American Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q3072229" start="11920" end="11951" title="Sons of the American Revolution" label="Sons of the American Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q54176" start="12011" end="12034" title="Amesbury, Massachusetts" label="Amesbury, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q3269508" start="12062" end="12073" title="New Hampshire State House" label="State House"/>
<link wikidata="Q28249" start="12077" end="12099" title="Concord, New Hampshire" label="Concord, New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q369263" start="12127" end="12140" title="John Trumbull" label="John Trumbull"/>
<link wikidata="Q809447" start="12142" end="12165" title="Bartlett, New Hampshire" label="Bartlett, New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7008162" start="12266" end="12297" title="New Hampshire historical markers" label="New Hampshire historical marker"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12299" end="12308" title="List of New Hampshire historical markers (26–50)#46" label="number 46"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046780" start="12316" end="12339" title="New Hampshire Route 111" label="New Hampshire Route 111"/>
<link wikidata="Q4865412" start="12450" end="12471" title="Bartlett Museum, Inc." label="Bartlett Museum, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q458372" start="12549" end="12572" title="John Greenleaf Whittier" label="John Greenleaf Whittier"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="12619" end="12622" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q3577037" start="12642" end="12655" title="The West Wing" label="The West Wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q16895034" start="12802" end="12863" title="Memorial to the 56 Signers of the Declaration of Independence" label="Memorial to the 56 Signers of the Declaration of Independence"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="187321" wikidata="Q17062795" url="?curid=187321" title="Transport Salaried Staffs' Association">
<text>The Transport Salaried Staffs&#x27; Association (TSSA) is a trade union for workers in the transport and travel industries in the United Kingdom and Ireland. Its head office is in London, and it has regional offices in Bristol, Derby, Dublin, York and Glasgow.

TSSA has approximately 18,000 members in the UK and Ireland. While principally a union for people in the railway industry, the effect of the nationalisation and subsequent privatisations following the Second World War has meant that it has members working for railway companies, shipping companies, bus companies, travel agencies, airlines, call centres, and IT companies.

==History==
The union was founded in Sheffield in 1897 as the National Association of General Railway Clerks, although it was a narrow decision to found the union. The railway companies were strongly opposed to trade unions and two earlier attempts to form a clerks&#x27; union had failed and, discouraged, the organisers decided by a majority of only one vote to try a third time - this time successfully. In 1899 it was renamed the Railway Clerks&#x27; Association (RCA), and in 1951 it adopted its current name.

The union has been involved in at least one London Underground strike, between 6 and 7 September 2010.

In July 2015, TSSA endorsed Jeremy Corbyn&#x27;s campaign in the Labour Party leadership election. TSSA National Political Officer, Sam Tarry spearheaded Corbyn&#x27;s second leadership campaign.

In September 2021, TSSA announced that it was in talks about merging the union with the North American Boilermakers Union with the viewpoint of completing the merger by 1 July 2022. In January 2022, union representatives voted by 88% to agree to the merger, however the Boilermakers withdrew from the merger later in the year.

In early 2022, the union was granted an injunction on an employee who has accused Manuel Cortes, the general secretary of the TSSA of sexual harassment and of bullying by senior staff members. Cortes claimed that he had no memory of the evening due to excessive drinking. The injunction forbade the woman from talking about the alleged harassment and bullying. Later that year an inquiry was opened into the union, led by Helena Kennedy KC, to examine allegations of sexual harassment and bullying towards women within the union, with Manuel Cortes resigning with immediate effect a month later. The Kennedy inquiry reported in February 2023 that the union had seen a culture of sexual harassment and sexual assault over the course of several years along with coercive behaviour. Kennedy called for several senior leaders of the union to resign and that external auditors should be brought in to examine the union&#x27;s finances. An earlier critical report which concluded that equality, diversity and inclusion objectives were not being met was not made public until February 2023.

In May 2023 TSSA members elected a new President, Melissa Heywood, and Treasurer, Mary Sithole. This was the first time TSSA had elected women to both National Officer positions at the same time. Later in 2023 TSSA members elected a new General Secretary, Maryam Eslamdoust, who was the first woman and the first person of colour to hold the post.

==Office holders==
===General Secretaries===

:1897: Charles Bassett-Vincent
:1898: John Hereford
:1898: F. Parrish (acting)
:1899: John Stopford Challener
:1906: William J. West (acting)
:1906: Alexander Walkden
:1936: William Stott
:1940: Charles Gallie
:1947: Fred Bostock
:1948: Percy Heady (acting)
:1949: George Thorneycroft
:1953: Bill Webber
:1963: John Bothwell
:1968: Percy Coldrick
:1973: David Mackenzie
:1977: Tom Bradley (acting)
:1977: Tom Jenkins
:1982: Bert Lyons
:1989: Richard Rosser
:2004: Gerry Doherty
:2011: Manuel Cortes
:2022: Frank Ward (acting) 
:2023: Peter Pendle (Interim Joint General Secretary)
:2023: Maryam Eslamdoust

===Presidents===
:1897: J. Batty Langley
:1899: W. D. Leaver
:1900: Fortescue Flannery
:1906: William J. West
:1908: George Lathan
:1912: Herbert Romeril
:1916: W. E. Williams
:1919: Harry Gill
:1932: Fred Simpson
:1937: Frederick Watkins
:1943: Percy Morris
:1953: James Haworth
:1956: Ray Gunter
:1964: Tom Bradley
:1977: Walter Johnson
:1981: Jim Mills
:1987: Geoff Henman
:1993: Brenda Hanks 
:1997: David Horton
:2001: David Porter
:2005: Andy Bain
:2011: Harriet Yeo
:2013: Mick Carney
:2023: Marios Alexandrou
:2023: Melissa Heywood

===Treasurers===
:1906: J. M. Roberts
:1920: W. E. Williams
:1927: Arnold Ernest Townend
:1934: Frederick Watkins MP
:1937: Percy Morris
:1943: James Haworth MP
:1953: Ray J. Gunter MP
:1956: Lord Lindgren
:1961: Tom G. Bradley MP
:1965: Walter Johnson MP
:1977: Jock Newall (acting)
:1977: Jim Mills
:1981: Stanley Cohen MP
:1984: Geoff Henman
:1987: Brenda Hanks
:1993: Peter Holloway (acting)
:1993: David Horton
:1997: David Porter
:2001: Annie Breen
:2004: Amarjit Singh (acting)
:2004: Andy Bain
:2005: Harriet Yeo
:2011: Mick Carney
:2013: Andy Bain
:2015: Jason Turvey
:2019: Al Stoten 
:2023: Nicola Jukes 
:2023: Mary Sithole

==References==
==External links==

* TSSA British website
* TSSA Irish website 
* or Return&quot; - the official history of the TSSA 
*Catalogue of the TSSA archives, held at the Modern Records Centre, University of Warwick</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q17062795" start="4" end="47" title="Transport Salaried Staffs&amp;#x27; Association" label="Transport Salaried Staffs&amp;#x27; Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q17062795" start="49" end="53" title="Transport Salaried Staffs&amp;#x27; Association" label="TSSA"/>
<link wikidata="Q178790" start="60" end="71" title="trade union" label="trade union"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="130" end="144" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q27" start="149" end="156" title="Republic of Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="180" end="186" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q23154" start="219" end="226" title="Bristol" label="Bristol"/>
<link wikidata="Q43475" start="228" end="233" title="Derby" label="Derby"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761" start="235" end="241" title="Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q42462" start="243" end="247" title="York" label="York"/>
<link wikidata="Q4093" start="252" end="259" title="Glasgow" label="Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565868" start="367" end="374" title="railway" label="railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q178564" start="403" end="418" title="nationalisation" label="nationalisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q161500" start="434" end="447" title="privatisation" label="privatisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="463" end="479" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q42448" start="673" end="682" title="Sheffield" label="Sheffield"/>
<link wikidata="Q16996904" start="1196" end="1221" title="London Underground strike" label="London Underground strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q291169" start="1284" end="1297" title="Jeremy Corbyn" label="Jeremy Corbyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q20983361" start="1305" end="1313" title="2015 Jeremy Corbyn Labour Party leadership campaign" label="campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q20647581" start="1321" end="1353" title="2015 Labour Party (UK) leadership election" label="Labour Party leadership election"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1360" end="1386" title="National Political Officer" label="National Political Officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q76363937" start="1388" end="1397" title="Sam Tarry" label="Sam Tarry"/>
<link wikidata="Q25184760" start="1410" end="1450" title="2016 Labour Party leadership election (UK)" label="Corbyn&amp;#x27;s second leadership campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q6048865" start="1556" end="1574" title="International Brotherhood of Boilermakers, Iron Ship Builders, Blacksmiths, Forgers and Helpers" label="Boilermakers Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q337151" start="2203" end="2217" title="Helena Kennedy" label="Helena Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q123148269" start="3122" end="3139" title="Maryam Eslamdoust" label="Maryam Eslamdoust"/>
<link wikidata="Q42160278" start="3268" end="3291" title="Charles Bassett-Vincent" label="Charles Bassett-Vincent"/>
<link wikidata="Q28924203" start="3347" end="3370" title="John Stopford Challener" label="John Stopford Challener"/>
<link wikidata="Q63197130" start="3378" end="3393" title="William J. West (UK politician)" label="William J. West"/>
<link wikidata="Q4720318" start="3410" end="3427" title="Alexander Walkden" label="Alexander Walkden"/>
<link wikidata="Q27827741" start="3435" end="3448" title="William Stott (trade unionist)" label="William Stott"/>
<link wikidata="Q26258800" start="3456" end="3470" title="Charles Gallie" label="Charles Gallie"/>
<link wikidata="Q36066037" start="3478" end="3490" title="Fred Bostock" label="Fred Bostock"/>
<link wikidata="Q63206686" start="3498" end="3509" title="Percy Heady" label="Percy Heady"/>
<link wikidata="Q47094120" start="3526" end="3545" title="George Thorneycroft" label="George Thorneycroft"/>
<link wikidata="Q26837320" start="3553" end="3564" title="Bill Webber (trade unionist)" label="Bill Webber"/>
<link wikidata="Q60794341" start="3572" end="3585" title="John Bothwell (trade unionist)" label="John Bothwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q56248313" start="3593" end="3607" title="Percy Coldrick (trade unionist)" label="Percy Coldrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q56248314" start="3615" end="3630" title="David Mackenzie (trade unionist)" label="David Mackenzie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7815034" start="3638" end="3649" title="Tom Bradley (UK politician)" label="Tom Bradley"/>
<link wikidata="Q67656962" start="3666" end="3677" title="Tom Jenkins (trade unionist)" label="Tom Jenkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q4895206" start="3685" end="3695" title="Bert Lyons (trade unionist)" label="Bert Lyons"/>
<link wikidata="Q378126" start="3703" end="3717" title="Richard Rosser, Lord Rosser" label="Richard Rosser"/>
<link wikidata="Q57242699" start="3725" end="3738" title="Gerry Doherty" label="Gerry Doherty"/>
<link wikidata="Q19975728" start="3746" end="3759" title="Manuel Cortes" label="Manuel Cortes"/>
<link wikidata="Q123148269" start="3849" end="3866" title="Maryam Eslamdoust" label="Maryam Eslamdoust"/>
<link wikidata="Q6104810" start="3892" end="3908" title="J. Batty Langley" label="J. Batty Langley"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3916" end="3928" title="W. D. Leaver" label="W. D. Leaver"/>
<link wikidata="Q6134097" start="3936" end="3954" title="Fortescue Flannery" label="Fortescue Flannery"/>
<link wikidata="Q63197130" start="3962" end="3977" title="William J. West (UK politician)" label="William J. West"/>
<link wikidata="Q5541552" start="3985" end="3998" title="George Lathan" label="George Lathan"/>
<link wikidata="Q19605005" start="4006" end="4021" title="Herbert Romeril" label="Herbert Romeril"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4029" end="4043" title="W. E. Williams" label="W. E. Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q7790461" start="4051" end="4061" title="Harry Gill (politician)" label="Harry Gill"/>
<link wikidata="Q5496273" start="4069" end="4081" title="Fred Simpson (politician)" label="Fred Simpson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5497526" start="4089" end="4106" title="Frederick Charles Watkins" label="Frederick Watkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q7167494" start="4114" end="4126" title="Percy Morris" label="Percy Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q6135736" start="4134" end="4147" title="James Haworth" label="James Haworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7297562" start="4155" end="4165" title="Ray Gunter" label="Ray Gunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7815034" start="4173" end="4184" title="Tom Bradley (UK politician)" label="Tom Bradley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7965289" start="4192" end="4206" title="Walter Johnson (UK politician)" label="Walter Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4214" end="4223" title="Jim Mills (UK trade unionist)" label="Jim Mills"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4231" end="4243" title="Geoff Henman" label="Geoff Henman"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4251" end="4263" title="Brenda Hanks" label="Brenda Hanks"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4272" end="4284" title="David Horton (UK trade unionist)" label="David Horton"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4292" end="4304" title="David Porter (British trade unionist)" label="David Porter"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4312" end="4321" title="Andy Bain" label="Andy Bain"/>
<link wikidata="Q5664386" start="4329" end="4340" title="Harriet Yeo" label="Harriet Yeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q16886171" start="4476" end="4497" title="Arnold Ernest Townend" label="Arnold Ernest Townend"/>
<link wikidata="Q5497526" start="4505" end="4522" title="Frederick Charles Watkins" label="Frederick Watkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q7167494" start="4533" end="4545" title="Percy Morris" label="Percy Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q6135736" start="4553" end="4566" title="James Haworth" label="James Haworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7297562" start="4577" end="4590" title="Ray J. Gunter" label="Ray J. Gunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5541741" start="4601" end="4614" title="George Lindgren, Baron Lindgren" label="Lord Lindgren"/>
<link wikidata="Q7815034" start="4622" end="4636" title="Tom G. Bradley" label="Tom G. Bradley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7965289" start="4647" end="4661" title="Walter Johnson (UK politician)" label="Walter Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4700" end="4709" title="Jim Mills (trade unionist)" label="Jim Mills"/>
<link wikidata="Q7597590" start="4717" end="4730" title="Stanley Cohen (politician)" label="Stanley Cohen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5664386" start="4918" end="4929" title="Harriet Yeo" label="Harriet Yeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6888832" start="5225" end="5269" title="Modern Records Centre, University of Warwick" label="Modern Records Centre, University of Warwick"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="187324" wikidata="Q5014111" url="?curid=187324" title="CR Vasco da Gama">
<text>Club de Regatas Vasco da Gama (; English: Vasco da Gama Club of Rowing), commonly referred to as Vasco da Gama or simply Vasco, is a sports club based in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. Although originally a rowing club and then a multi-sport club, Vasco is mostly known for its men&#x27;s football team, which currently competes in the Campeonato Brasileiro Série A, the top tier of the Brazilian football league system, and in the Campeonato Carioca, the state of Rio de Janeiro&#x27;s premier state league. 

Named after Vasco da Gama 400 years after his European–Asian sea route in 1498, the club was founded in 1898 as a rowing club by Brazilian workers, Portuguese Brazilians and newly arrived Portuguese immigrants. Vasco created its football department in 1915, with professionalism officially adopted in 1933 – pioneer in Brazil. In addition to its main departments of football and rowing, Vasco has other sports departments since the 1910s. Its youth academy, which has brought up international footballers such as Romário, Philippe Coutinho, Hilderaldo Bellini, Roberto Dinamite and Edmundo, is well known for its socio-educational methodology.

At the national level, Vasco da Gama has won four Campeonato Brasileiro Série A, three Torneio Rio–São Paulo and one Copa do Brasil. In international club football, the club has won one Copa Libertadores, one South American Championship of Champions, and one Copa Mercosur. At the state level, the club has also won 24 Campeonato Carioca. The golden generation of Vasco da Gama, dubbed &quot;Expresso da Vitória&quot; (Victory Express), won five state titles in the eight-year span between 1945 and 1952, and led Vasco to become the first continental club champion ever with the 1948 South American Championship of Champions title. This team, which included Moacir Barbosa, Ademir de Menezes, Friaça, Danilo Alvim, Augusto da Costa, and Chico, among others, is considered one of the greatest teams of its generation and of all time.

With fans worldwide, Vasco da Gama is one of the most widely supported clubs in Brazil, the Rio de Janeiro state and the Americas. Vasco plays its home matches in São Januário stadium since its inauguration in 1927. Occasionally, the club has also played their home matches in Maracanã stadium since its inauguration in 1950. Vasco holds long-standings rivalries with Flamengo, Fluminense and Botafogo. Originally from rowing in the 1900s and extending to football in the 1920s as &quot;O Clássico dos Milhões&quot; (the Derby of Millions), the Vasco–Flamengo rivalry is considered of the main rivalries of Brazilian sports and one of the most prominent football rivalries in the world.

==History==
===Foundation===
In the late 19th century, rowing was the most important sport in Rio de Janeiro. At this time, four young men – Henrique Ferreira Monteiro, Luís Antônio Rodrigues, José Alexandre d&#x27;Avelar Rodrigues and Manuel Teixeira de Souza Júnior – who did not want to travel to Niterói to row with the boats of Gragoatá Club, decided to found a rowing club.

On 21 August 1898, in a room of the &quot;Sons of Talma Dramatic Society&quot;, 62 members (mostly Portuguese immigrants) formed Club de Regatas Vasco da Gama (Vasco da Gama Rowing Club). Inspired by the celebrations of the 4th centenary of the first sail from Europe to India, the founders named the club in honor of Portuguese explorer Vasco da Gama. The club&#x27;s colors were chosen as black and white; black was chosen as a representation of the unknown seas Vasco da Gama sailed through, and white represented his victorious route. The first kit used these colors in a half and half combination, with the Order of Christ Cross in the center symbolizing the Christian faith just like in the sails of Gama&#x27;s São Gabriel carrack. The emblem was created shortly after too; it was round with a sailboat bearing the Cross pattée.

On 26 November 1915, Vasco and Lusitania Sport Clube, another sports club founded by the local Portuguese community in Brazil and named after Lusitania which is often used as an alternative name for Portugal itself, merged, resulting in the creation of Vasco&#x27;s footballing department. Beginning in the lower leagues, the club&#x27;s first match was played on 3 May 1916; a 10–1 loss to Paladino FC.

===1920s: Overcoming social &amp; class inequality===
During the 1920s, football in Brazil was a sport for the elites, and Vasco da Gama&#x27;s racially diverse squad did not appease them. Some players were required to take a literacy exam before putting on their boots.

Vasco won its first top-division title with the 1923 Campeonato Carioca, becoming champion with a team including whites, blacks and &quot;mulatto&quot; players of different social classes.

In 1924, Vasco da Gama was pressured by the Metropolitan League to ban some players who were not considered adequate to play in the aristocratic league, notably because they were black or mulato and/or poor. After Vasco refused to comply with such a ban, the other big teams, including Fluminense, Flamengo and Botafogo created the Metropolitan Athletic Association and prohibited Vasco from participating unless it complied with their racist demands.

As a result, the former President of Vasco, José Augusto Prestes, responded with a letter that became known as the Historic Response (&quot;Resposta Histórica&quot;), which revolutionized the practice of sports in Brazil. After a few years, the racism barriers fell, and Vasco became known as &quot;Clube de todas as raças&quot; (Club of all races). The club had led the move toward a more inclusive football culture, forward-thinking not employed by leaders from other Rio-based clubs like Fluminense, Flamengo and Botafogo.

Even though the club was not the first to field black players, it was the first one to win a league with them, which led to an outcry to ban &quot;blue-collar workers&quot; from playing in the league—a move that in practice meant barring blacks from playing.

In 1925, Vasco was readmitted into the &quot;elite&quot; league, with its black and mulatto players. By 1933, when football became professional in Brazil, most of the big clubs had black players.

On 21 April 1927, Vasco&#x27;s Stadium was inaugurated with a match against Santos. Santos won the match 5–3. On 26 April 1931, Vasco had a historic 7–0 victory over rivals Flamengo; this is the largest victory margin between the two clubs.

=== 1944–53: &quot;Expresso da Vitória&quot; ===

Between 1944 and 1953, the club was nicknamed &quot;Expresso da Vitória&quot; (Victory Express), as Vasco won several competitions in that period, such as the Rio de Janeiro championship in 1945, 1947, 1949, 1950, and 1952, and the South American Club Championship, the world&#x27;s first ever continental club tournament, in 1948. In 1953, Vasco da Gama won its first intercontinental trophy, the Torneio Intercontinental Octogonal Rivadavia Correa Meyer. Players such as Ademir de Menezes, Moacyr Barbosa, Bellini and Ipojucan starred in Vasco&#x27;s colors during that period. Also that year the club won the , defeating Colombian champions Millonarios and Chilean club Colo-Colo.

=== 1956–59: Super-Superchampions Generation ===
In 1956, the Vascaínos became Campeonato Carioca champions and Little World Cup runner-up, losing the title to Di Stefano&#x27;s Real Madrid, which Vasco would beat in a friendly shortly after the tournament, becoming the first non-European club to defeat a European Champion. In 1957, this generation toured Europe and won 10 consecutive matches, including yet another victory against European champion Real Madrid (4–3) on 14 June, which sealed the 1957 Tournoi de Paris title - this match was the first ever, at a competitive level, between two continental champions. It also was the only international tournament Real didn&#x27;t win between 1955 and 1960. Vasco would also beat Athletic Bilbao (Spanish League and Cup champions in the previous year) by winning the Teresa Herrera Trophy with a 4–2 scoreline, and Barcelona (Spanish Cup champion a week earlier) inside Les Corts, with a historic scoreline of 2–7, the second worst defeat ever suffered at home by the Catalan team, and largest in international matches. Benfica (Portuguese champion and Latin Cup runner-up) was also a victim of Vasco on this tour, losing to the Brazilian club with another impressive result, 5–2, in Lisbon on 30 June 1957.

In early 1958, just before the World Cup, Vasco won the Rio-São Paulo Tournament, the most important championship in Brazil at the time, which included legendary teams such as Pele&#x27;s Santos, Garrincha&#x27;s Botafogo, Zagallo&#x27;s Flamengo, and Tele Santana&#x27;s Fluminense. After this memorable title, three Vasco players had important parts in the campaign for Brazil&#x27;s first World Cup title: Vavá (who scored five goals in the World Cup, including two in the final) and defenders Orlando and Bellini (Bellini was still the Brazilian captain). After the World Cup, the team then won one of the greatest Carioca Championships of all time. In an epic competition against Zagallo&#x27;s Flamengo and Garrincha&#x27;s Botafogo, which ended in a three-way tie on 32 points and required two extra tiebreaker tournaments to decide the champion, Vasco became the 1958 Campeonato Carioca &quot;super-superchampion&quot;.

In 1959, the team went on to beat great European teams like Italian champion Milan and Atletico de Madrid (European Cup semi-finalist that year). Vasco was also Rio-São Tournament runner-up that year, only behind Pele&#x27;s Santos. Still in 1959, five Vasco players were called up for the 1959 Copa America: Paulinho, Orlando, Bellini, Coronel (defenders) and Almir (striker), with the four aforementioned Vasco players almost always being included in the starting eleven. Vasco, together with Botafogo, was the club that gave the most players to the Brazil national team in that period. Many think this Vasco was one of the best clubs of the world at the time, and maybe the best in 1957–58.

=== 1960s: Mediocre campaigns ===
The 1960s were a difficult period for the club, having only average performances with the exception of 1965 and 1966; in the 1965 Campeonato Brasileiro (known as Taça Brasil at the time), Vasco reached the final, losing to Pele&#x27;s Santos 1–6 on aggregate. In the 1966 Torneio Rio-São Paulo, the club ended the tournament in a four way tie. Since there was no tiebreaking criteria, a quadrangular involving Botafogo, Corinthians, Santos and Vasco should have been played, but due to the preparation of the Brazil national team for the 1966 FIFA World Cup, the CBD decided to proclaim all four clubs as champions.

=== 1970s: First League Title ===
In 1970, under star players Roberto Dinamite and Edgardo Andrada, Vasco won the Campeonato Carioca for the first time in 12 years. In 1974, they won their first league title, with Roberto Dinamite as the top scorer. In addition, they became the first team from Rio to win the league. Cruzeiro and Vasco had ended the season with the same number of points, meaning that a second match had to be played; Vasco later beat Cruzeiro 2–1 and won the title.

=== 1997–2000: Second Golden era ===
After winning the Campeonato Brasileiro in 1997, beating Palmeiras in the final, Vasco started its &quot;Projeto Tóquio&quot;, and invested US$10 million to win the 1998 Copa Libertadores. Vasco da Gama won the Copa Libertadores in its Centenary Year, beating Barcelona of Ecuador in the finals 4–1 on aggregate, and 50 years after winning its first South American trophy (South American Championship of Champions).

By winning the Copa Libertadores title, Vasco da Gama earned a berth in the 1998 Intercontinental Cup, where they faced the 1997–98 UEFA Champions League winners Real Madrid and lost 2–1.

As a result of their Copa Libertadores title two years prior, Vasco earned a berth for the inaugural 2000 FIFA Club World Championship held in Brazil. They beat Manchester United of England, Necaxa of Mexico, and South Melbourne of Australia in the group stage to reach the final. It finished 0–0 after extra time in an all-Brazilian clash with Corinthians, but Vasco lost 3–4 in the penalty shootout.

Vasco&#x27;s Copa Mercosur campaign that year began with a 4–3 loss to Peñarol, but Vasco eventually qualified to the knockout round with ten points. In the quarter finals, Vasco eliminated Rosario Central on penalties after the Argentine side scored a late equalizer to send the game to a penalty shootout. In the semi-finals, Vasco eliminated River Plate 5–1 on aggregate, with a famous 4–1 victory at Estadio Monumental in the first leg. Vasco qualified to the finals against Palmeiras, and typically the finals are played over two legs, but a third match would be needed if a different team won each leg. This ended up being the case; Vasco had won the first leg 2–0, but Palmeiras won the second leg 1–0 six days later. On 20 December 2000, in a match which is still considered as one of the best in Brazilian football history, Vasco found itself trailing 3–0 at half-time, and Palmeiras had scored 2 goals in less than a minute; Vasco managed to score 3 goals to level the match at 3–3 with five minutes remaining, while playing with 10 men after Júnior Baiano got a red card in the 77th minute. In the 93rd minute, Romário scored a decisive goal and Vasco won the match 4–3.

Vasco also won the Copa João Havelange in 2000. Seen as a controversial competition organized by Clube dos 13 rather than CBF, Vasco played São Caetano in the finals. The club drew the first game 1–1 at Estádio Palestra Itália, and the second game was called off by Rio de Janeiro State Governor Anthony Garotinho in the first half because a fence collapsed at São Januário, which resulted in many injuries. Despite the disaster, Vasco won the rescheduled second leg 3–1 at the Maracana to lift the trophy for its fourth national league title.

=== 2001–2008: Decline ===
In the 2001 Copa Libertadores, Vasco became the first team to win all six group games, which included big victories (0–3 and 4–1), against Colombian champions América de Cali. In the round of 16, the club eliminated Deportes Concepción, but then suffered a 4–0 aggregate loss against eventual champions Boca Juniors, which was considered a disappointing elimination despite the high hopes that were set after their perfect group stage run.

Shortly after the 2001 season, the club experienced a sharp decline, finishing 15th in 2002 and narrowly avoiding relegation in 2003 and 2004, although in 2005 they qualified for the 2006 Copa Sudamericana with a 12th-placed finish. Vasco&#x27;s 2006 season was decent, finishing sixth in the league and gaining qualification for the following years Sudamericana, as well as reaching the Copa do Brasil final for the first time, losing to Flamengo.

==== 2008: Relegation ====

The team finished the 2008 Série A in a disastrous 18th place and was relegated to the second division for the first time since its foundation after a 0–2 home loss against Vitória. Until then, it had been one of only six clubs to have never been relegated from the first division, along with Cruzeiro, Flamengo, Santos and São Paulo. (The last two did not participate in the 1979 Brazilian Championship, in order to avoid conflicts with Paulista Championship schedule.)

Despite suffering relegation, Vasco had a respectable run in the Copa do Brasil, making it al the way to the semi-finals where they were eliminated by eventual champion Sport Recife on penalties.

Vasco immediately secured their return to Serie A, sealing promotion to the 2010 Série A on 7 November 2009 with a 2–1 victory over Juventude in front of a Serie B-record 81,000 fans at Maracanã, and finishing as Serie B champions as well.

=== 2010–present: Inconsistency ===
In the 2010 league season, their first season back in the top flight since relegation, Vasco finished in 11th place, and qualified for the 2011 Copa Sudamericana. In the 2010 Copa do Brasil, Vasco reached the quartefinals, being eliminated by Vitória on away goals.

==== 2011–2012: Copa do Brasil title and Return to Copa Libertadores ====
Vasco had a poor start to the 2011 season, losing four consecutive games in the Guanabara Cup, which led to the sacking of Paulo Gusmāo and the appointment of Ricardo Gomes. With the arrival of Gomes, combined with the arrivals of Alecsandro, Bernardo, and Diego Souza, the club fared better in the Rio Cup, losing only once on their way to the final, where they lost on penalties to Flamengo. In the Copa do Brasil, Vasco were unbeaten on their way to the finals, where they beat Coritiba on away goals and lifted the trophy for the first time in the club&#x27;s history; just three days after the first leg, Coritiba beat Vasco 5–1 in the league. Despite the heavy defeat, Vasco enjoyed an excellent league campaign, finishing only 2 points behind Corinthians. A win on the last matchday would&#x27;ve given them the title, as Corinthians drew their match, but Flamengo held Vasco to a draw. The club also ended the year as semifinalists in the Copa Sudamericana, a competition that saw the club defeat Palmeiras on away goals, and achieve comeback victories against Aurora and Universitario, before being eliminated by eventual champion Universidad de Chile. The season was dubbed as Vasco&#x27;s &quot;Redemption Year&quot;, with many lauding Vasco as one of Brazilian football&#x27;s elite teams once again.

Vasco&#x27;s played their first final of the 2012 season in the Guanabara Cup, losing 1–3 to Fluminense after eliminating Flamengo in the semifinals. Two months later, they were playing a final again, this time losing to Botafogo in the Rio Cup, eliminating Flamengo in the semifinals again.

Vasco qualified for the 2012 Copa Libertadores as Brazilian Cup champion, marking a return to the top South American competition after 12 years. In the group stage, Vasco finished second tied with Libertad on points and only losing once. Vasco beat Lanús on penalties in the round of 16, to set a quarterfinal matchup with Corinthians, who eliminated Vasco 1–0 with an 88th-minute goal by Paulinho. In the Brazilian Championship, the team set the record for 54 consecutive rounds in the top 4 (continuing from the 2011 and 2012 seasons), although they ultimately finished in fifth and missed out on qualifying for the Libertadores the following year due to poor form, losing six of their last ten games.
==== 2013: Second relegation ====
After a good season in 2012, Vasco started their 2013 poorly and were hampered by financial issues. In the Taca Rio, the club had a terrible campaign and finished seventh of eight in the table. By the end of the year, the club had been relegated for the second time in 5 years and just the second time in their history, which was secured with a 5–1 defeat to Atletico Paranaense on the final matchday. In the Copa do Brasil the team entered in the round of 16, beating Nacional and then being eliminated by Goiás on away goals, despite winning the second leg 3–2.

==== 2014–2021: Double relegation, back-to-back Carioca titles ====
After one season in the Série B during 2014, Vasco gained promotion and in May 2015 won the Campeonato Carioca after a 12-year hiatus. However, they were relegated again in the 2015 edition, placing eighteenth. In 2016, Vasco became back-to-back Carioca champions and had a 34-match unbeaten streak, their longest in official games. Once again, they were promoted after one season in Série B. However, in the 2020 season, they were relegated for the fourth time and then failed to gain promotion during the 2021 season, placing tenth.

==== 2022: Takeover by 777 Partners and return to Série A ====
On 22 February 2022 it was announced that 777 Partners, a Miami-based private investment firm founded by Steven W. Pasko and Josh Wander, bought a controlling stake in Vasco da Gama. According to the terms of the deal, 777 Partners acquired a 70% stake in the club which was valued at approximately $330 million.

On 6 November 2022, Vasco sealed their return to Série A after a two-year absence, finishing fourth in the league table. Their promotion was secured after a difficult 1–0 victory against Ituano, through a penalty scored by Nenê.

The club finished 15th in the 2023 Série A and improved this with a 10th-placed finish in the 2024 Série A.

==Identity==

===Logo===
Vasco&#x27;s first shield was created in 1898. The current shield with the diagonal sash was not adopted until the 1920s. The current shield bears a black background, with a white diagonal sash going left to right, that has a sailboat in the center, and letters CR and VG being directly left and below the sailboat respectively.

In 1980, an outline was added to the logo. The logo has gone through various changes throughout the years, but still resembles the main layout used in 1920. The current logo, adopted in 2021, curved the sails of the sailboat and the flag on top, emphasized the waves, added a front spine to the sailboat, and removed the rectangles that had been present in the 2015 logo.

Given the 2017 Royal Patronage, the shied logo can be topped by the Portuguese royal heraldic crown.

===Kit evolution===
Vasco da Gama is one of the oldest Brazilian clubs and has had several different kits in its history. Vasco da Gama&#x27;s first kit, used in rowing, was created in 1898, and was primarily black, with a left white diagonal sash.

Vasco&#x27;s first football kit, created in 1916, was completely black, and was easily identified because of the presence of a white tie and a belt. In 1929, the tie and the belt were removed. However, the kit remained all-black. In the 1930s, the home kit&#x27;s color was changed again; it became black with a white right diagonal sash.

In 1945, the kit&#x27;s color was changed to white, and a black diagonal sash was introduced. The sash was introduced because the club&#x27;s manager at the time, Uruguayan Ondino Viera liked the sash used in his previous club&#x27;s kit, River Plate of Argentina, and adopted this pattern in Vasco&#x27;s away kit. So, both kits had a right-to-left diagonal sash.

In the 1970s the Order of Christ Cross was replaced with the cross pattée, which is still used today.

In 1988, the sash located on the back of the shirt was removed. At the beginning of the 90s, stars representing the club&#x27;s titles began to be used above the logo, and numbers were black and white instead of red. In 1996, the sash located on the back was returned. This kit became very similar to the 1945 one, with the exception of the addition of a thin red line that outlines the sash.

Vasco currently has three kits. The home shirt&#x27;s main color is black with a white sash. The short and the socks are black. The away kit is similar to the home kit, but the main color is white, the sash is black, and the shorts and socks are white. In 2009–10 the third kit was all white, with a red &quot;cross of the Knights Templar&quot;. In 2010, the away kit changed to black in honor of 1923&#x27;s team, which was willing to give up playing in the following year due to other clubs&#x27; opposition to Vasco having black players.

From July 2009, after breaking the partnership with Champs, to 2013, the official jerseys were produced by Penalty. Since 2020, the kits are made by Kappa (brand).

===Anthems===
Vasco&#x27;s official anthem was composed in 1918, by Joaquim Barros Ferreira da Silva, and it was the club&#x27;s first anthem. There is another official anthem, created in the 1930s, called &quot;Meu Pavilhão&quot; (meaning &quot;My Pavilion&quot;), whose lyrics were composed by João de Freitas and music by Hernani Correia. This anthem replaced the previous one. The club&#x27;s most popular anthem, however, is an unofficial anthem composed by Lamartine Babo in 1942.

=== Royal Patronage ===
Since 2017, Vasco has been able to use the word Royal before its name, &quot;Real Club de Regatas Vasco da Gama&quot;, through the Royal Decree of the Head of the Portuguese Royal House, Duarte Pio, Duke of Bragança, which renewed and conferred the Royal Patronage on Vasco da Gama. The royal title would be granted to the club in 1908, in its first decade of existence, on the occasion of the visit of the King Carlos I to Brazil, who had already decided to renew and confer the title of &quot;Royal Society&quot;, which Vasco had already enjoyed during the period when Luís I was King of Portugal, but was prevented from doing so by the regicide of February 1, 1908.

==Stadium==
Vasco da Gama&#x27;s stadium is São Januário, inaugurated in 1927, with a maximum capacity of 35,000 people. For national matches, however, the stadium could only fit at most 21,880 people for security reasons. Occasionally, Vasco uses the 78,000-seater Maracanã for derbies or international matches.

==Supporters==

According to census and polls, Vasco da Gama is the second most supported club in Rio de Janeiro state, and varies between the third and fifth most supported club in Brazil, with an estimate of more than 15 million supporters in the country.
Vasco fans are very diverse stretching across social class lines, however the core of most Vasco support lies within the working class of the Northern Zone of Rio de Janeiro and Rio outskirt cities like Niterói. Vasco da Gama have significant support in other regions in Brazil, notably the Northeastern and North regions as well as strongholds in southern Minas Gerais, Espírito Santo and in Santa Catarina. Vasco also have a huge support in Distrito Federal; a study conducted by TV Globo concluded that Vasco were the second-most supported team in the city, behind Flamengo. As of 29 June 2022, the club has 60,326 &quot;sócios&quot; in its membership program, having its peak in December 2019 with more than 178,000 memberships. In April 2023, CNN carried out a survey that revealed that Vasco is the team with the most fans considered &quot;fanatics&quot; in the Southeast Region clubs and among the G-12 (Big Twelve), in addition to being the third in the country.

; Main &quot;torcidas organizadas&quot;

*&quot;Força Jovem do Vasco&quot;
*&quot;Guerreiros do Almirante&quot;
*&quot;Ira Jovem&quot;
*&quot;Torcida Organizada do Vasco&quot;
*&quot;Rasta do Vasco&quot;
*&quot;Força Independente&quot;
*&quot;Mancha Negra&quot;
*&quot;Vasconha&quot;
*&quot;União Vascaína&quot;
*&quot;Super Jovem&quot;
*&quot;Loucos pelo Vasco&quot;
; Notable or public supporters

* Agepê (1942–1995): singer.
* Aldir Blanc (1946–2020): writer.
* Antônio Pitanga (1939–): actor.
* Aracy de Almeida (1914–1988): singer.
* Bia Feres (1988–): swimmer.
* Branca Feres (1988–): swimmer.
* Sérgio Cabral Filho (1963–): journalist, politician, Governor of Rio de Janeiro state from 2007 to 2014.
* Camila Morgado (1975–): actress.
* Camila Pitanga (1977–): actress.
* Carlos Drummond de Andrade (1902–1987): poet.
* Casimiro (1993–): streamer.
* Chacrinha (1917–1988): communicator.
* Chico Anysio (1931–2012): comedian.
* Philippe Coutinho (1992–): footballer, former Vasco da Gama player (2009–2010).
* Cabo Daciolo (1976–): firefighter, politician, Federal Deputy of Brazil for Rio de Janeiro from 2015 to 2019.
* Edmundo (1971–): former footballer, former Vasco da Gama player (1992; 1996–1997; 1999–2000; 2003; 2008).
* Eduardo Paes (1969–): bachelor, politician, Mayor of Rio de Janeiro city since 2021 and from 2009 to 2017.
* Erasmo Carlos (1941–2022): singer.
* Fátima Bernardes (1962–): journalist.
* Fernanda Abreu (1961–): singer.
* Ferreira Gullar (1930–2016): poet.
* Gonzaguinha (1945–1991): singer.
* Iza (1990–): singer.
* Jamelão (1913–2008): singer.
* João Gilberto (1931–2019): singer.
* José Paulo Lanyi (1970–): journalist, writer, and filmmaker.
* Juliana Paes (1979–): actress.
* Kevin O Chris (1996–): singer.
* Lexa (1995–): singer.
* Lindbergh Farias (1969–): politician, Federal Deputy of Brazil for Rio de Janeiro since 2023.
* Luiz Melodia (1951–2017): singer.
* Marcelo Camelo (1978–): singer.
* Marcos Palmeira (1963–): actor.
* Mart&#x27;nália (1965–): singer.
* Martinho da Vila (1938–): singer.
* Miguel Falabella (1955–): actor.
* Murilo Rosa (1970–): actor.
* Nelson Cavaquinho (1911–1986): singer.
* Nelson Sargento (1924–2021): singer.
* Paulinho da Viola (1942–): singer.
* Paulo Coelho (1947–): writer.
* Pelé (1940–2022): former footballer, three-time World Cup champion.
* Nelson Piquet (1952–): former racing driver, three-time Formula One world champion.
* Fábio Porchat (1983–): comedian.
* Rachel de Queiroz (1910–2003): author.
* Renato Aragão (1935–): comedian.
* Roberto Carlos (1941–): singer.
* Rodrigo Hilbert (1980–): actor.
* Rodrigo Santoro (1975–): actor.
* Rubem Fonseca (1925–2020): writer.
* Sônia Braga (1950–): actress.
* Taís Araújo (1978–): actress.
* Tay Melo (1995–): professional wrestler.
* Teresa Cristina (1968–): singer.
* João Ubaldo Ribeiro (1941–2014): writer.
* Viviane Araújo (1975–): actress.
* Whindersson Nunes (1995–): comedian.
==Honours==
Vasco&#x27;s first trophy was the 1923 Campeonato Carioca, during the club&#x27;s debut season in the state&#x27;s first division, won by a squad in which the majority of players were black and which greatly influenced the fight against racism in Brazilian football. For a large portion of fans, the club&#x27;s most important honour is not a trophy, but rather the &quot;Resposta Histórica&quot;, a letter sent in 1924 refusing the discriminatory order of the Rio de Janeiro league, which wanted to ban Vasco from its competitions if it did not disaffiliate twelve of its players (all black).

Vasco is the first Brazilian team (club or national team) to win an international tournament and the first club in the world to win a continental-level tournament, the 1948 South American Championship of Champions. The club was also the first to win an intercontinental tournament contested by two continental champion clubs, the 1957 Tournoi de Paris, against Real Madrid in the final.

In terms of the number of trophies won, Vasco&#x27;s most successful decade was the 1990s, when the club won two Campeonato Brasileiro titles, four Campeonato Carioca, one Torneio Rio–São Paulo, one Copa Libertadores and one Copa Mercosul.

===Official tournaments===
* 
* shared record

===Others tournaments===

====International====
*Torneio Luiz Aranha (1): 1940
*Chile International Tournament (1): 1953
*Torneio Internacional do Rio de Janeiro (2): 1953, 1965
*Teresa Herrera Trophy (1): 1957
*Chile International Triangular Tournament (1): 1957
*Lima Quadrangular Tournament (1): 1957
*Santiago Tournament (2): 1957, 1963
*Pentagonal Tournament of Mexico (1): 1963
*Trofeo Ciudad de Sevilla (1): 1979
*Festa d&#x27;Elx Trophy (1): 1979
*Colombino Trophy (1): 1980
*Torneio Madeira Autonomia (1): 1981
*Summer Tournament (1): 1982
*TAP Cup (1): 1987
*Los Angeles Golden Cup (1): 1987
*Ramón de Carranza Trophy (3): 1987, 1988, 1989
*Metz Tournament (1): 1989
*Friendship Tournament (1): 1991
*Ciutat de Barcelona Trophy (1): 1993
*Trofeo Ciudad de Zaragoza (1): 1993
*Troféu Ciudad de Palma de Mallorca (1): 1995
*Trofeo Bortolotti (1): 1997

====Inter-state====
*Taça dos Campeões Estaduais Rio–São Paulo: 1936
*Torneio Cinquentenário da Federação Pernambucana (1): 1965
*Torneio Imprensa de Santa Catarina (1): 1977
*Torneio José Fernandes (1): 1980
*Torneio João Castelo (1): 1982
*Taça Cidade de Juiz de Fora (2): 1986, 1987
*Copa da Hora (1): 2010

====State====
*Taça Guanabara (13): 1965, 1976, 1977, 1986, 1987, 1990, 1992, 1994, 1998, 2000, 2003, 2016, 2019
*Taça Rio (11): 1984, 1988, 1992, 1993, 1998, 1999, 2001, 2003, 2004, 2017, 2021
*Other Campeonato Carioca rounds (9): 1972, 1973, 1974, 1975, 1977, 1980, 1981, 1988, 1997
*Torneio Municipal (4): 1944, 1945, 1946, 1947
*Torneio Relâmpago (2): 1944, 1946
*Torneio Extra (2): 1973, 1990
*Torneio Início (10): 1926, 1929, 1930, 1931, 1932, 1942, 1944, 1945

===Runners-up===
*FIFA Club World Cup (1): 2000
*Intercontinental Cup (1): 1998
*Copa Interamericana (1): 1998
*Campeonato Brasileiro Série A (4): 1965, 1979, 1984, 2011
*Copa do Brasil (1): 2006
*Supercopa do Brasil (1): 1990
*Torneio Rio–São Paulo (7): 1950, 1952, 1953, 1957, 1959, 1965, 2000
*Campeonato Carioca (26): 1926, 1928, 1930, 1931, 1935, 1944, 1948, 1961, 1968, 1974, 1976, 1978, 1979-I, 1980, 1981, 1986, 1990, 1996, 1997, 1999, 2000, 2001, 2004, 2014, 2018, 2019

===Youth team===
*Copa do Brasil Sub-20 (1): 2020
*Supercopa do Brasil Sub-20 (1): 2020
*Copa São Paulo de Futebol Júnior (1): 1992
*Taça Belo Horizonte de Juniores (3): 1991, 1992, 2013
*Copa Macaé de Juvenis (1): 1998

==Statistics==
Key:


Campeonato Brasileiro


Copa do Brasil
South American Championship / Copa Libertadores
Tournoi de Paris / Intercontinental Cup / FIFA Club World Cup

==Players==
===First team squad===
&lt;onlyinclude&gt;












&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;

====Youth academy====




====Other players with contract====




===Out on loan===




== Personnel ==

=== Coaching and medical staff ===

* Head coach: Fábio Carille
* First-team goalkeeping coach: Mateus Famer
* First-team fitness coach: Cyro Bueno, Marcelo Arouca
* Medical staff: Ricardo Bastos, Rodrigo Sasson
* Academy director: Rodrigo Dias

Source:

=== Management staff ===
* Associative club (69% SAF):
** Chairman: Pedrinho 
** Vice-chairman: Paulo Cesar Salomão

* 777 Partners (31% SAF): Joshua Wander, Andres Blazquez, Donald Dransfield, Nicolas Maya, Steven W. Pasko
*Football director: Marcelo Sant&#x27;Ana
*Technical director: Felipe Jorge Loureiro
* Football manager: Clauber Rocha
Source:

==Former head coaches==

* Ramón Platero (1922–1926)
* &quot;Harry&quot; Welfare (1927–1937)
* Floriano Peixoto Corrêa (1937–1938)
* Russinho (1938)
* Carlos Scarone (1938–1939)
* Ramón Platero (1939–1940)
* Gentil Cardoso (1940)
* &quot;Harry&quot; Welfare (1940–1942)
* Telêmaco Frazão de Lima (1942)
* &quot;Harry&quot; Welfare (1942–1943)
* Ondino Viera (1943–1946)
* Ernesto Santos (1946)
* Roque Calocero (1946–1947)
* Otto Glória (1947)
* Flávio Costa (1947–1951)
* Otto Glória (1951–1952)
* Gentil Cardoso (1952–1953)
* Flávio Costa (1953–56)
* Martim Francisco (1956–1957)
* Gradim (1957–1959)
* Yustrich (1959–60)
* Ely (1960)
* Filpo Núñez (1960)
* Ely (1960)
* Abel Picabea (1960–1961)
* Martim Francisco (1961)
* Ely (1961)
* Paulo Amaral (1961–62)
* Jorge Vieira (1962–1963)
* Otto Glória (1963)
* Eduardo Pelegrini (1963)
* Duque (1964)
* Ely (1964)
* Zezé Moreira (1965–1966)
* Ely (1966)
* Célio de Souza (1966)
* Zizinho (1967)
* Gentil Cardoso (1967)
* Ademir (1967)
* Paulinho (1968)
* Pinga (1968–1969)
* Evaristo de Macedo (1969)
* Paulinho (1969)
* Célio de Souza (1969)
* Tim (1970)
* Paulo Amaral (1971)
* (1971)
* Zizinho (1972)
* Célio de Souza (1972)
* Mário Travaglini (1972–75)
* Paulo Emilio (1976)
* Orlando Fantoni (1977–78)
* Carlos Froner (1979)
* Gílson Nuñes (1979)
* Otto Glória (1979)
* Orlando Fantoni (1980)
* Gílson Nuñes (1980)
* Mário Zagallo (1980–81)
* Antônio Lopes (1981–83)
* Zanata (1983)
* Júlio César Leal (1983)
* Otto Glória (1983)
* Júlio César Leal (1983)
* Edu Coimbra (1984–1885)
* Antônio Lopes (1985–1886)
* Cláudio Garcia (1986)
* Joel Santana (1986–1887)
* Sebastião Lazaroni (1987–1988)
* Zanata (1988–1989)
* Orlando Lelé (1989)
* Sérgio Cosme (1989)
* Alcir Portela (1990)
* Nelsinho Rosa (1989)
* Alcir Portela (1990)
* Mário Zagallo (1990–1991)
* Antônio Lopes (1991)
* Nelsinho Rosa (1992)
* Joel Santana (1992–1993)
* Alcir Portela (1993)
* Gaúcho (1993)
* Jair Pereira (1994)
* Sebastião Lazaroni (1994)
* Nelsinho Rosa (1995)
* Abel Braga (1995)
* Alcir Portela (1995)
* Jair Pereira (1995)
* Zanata (1995–1996)
* Alcir Portela (1996)
* Carlos Alberto Silva (1996)
* Alcir Portela (1996)
* Antônio Lopes (1996–2000)
* Abel Braga (2000)
* Alcir Portela &quot;(interim)&quot; (2000)
* Tita (1 January 2000 – 30 June 2000)
* Oswaldo de Oliveira (2000)
* Joel Santana (2000–01)
* Alcir Portela (2001)
* Hélio dos Anjos (2001)
* Paulo César Gusmão (2001)
* Evaristo de Macedo (2002)
* Antônio Lopes (2002–03)
* Mauro Galvão (2003)
* Geninho (15 December 2003 – 27 September 2004)
* Joel Santana (27 September 2004 – 20 April 2005)
* Dário Lourenço (2005)
* Renato Gaúcho (18 July 2005 – 12 April 2007)
* Celso Roth (15 April 2007 – 22 October 2007)
* Romário &quot;(interim)&quot; (22 October 2007 – 25 October 2007)
* Valdir Espinosa (26 October 2007 – 31 December 2007)
* Romário (1 January 2008 – 9 February 2008)
* Alfredo Sampaio (2008)
* Antônio Lopes (31 March 2008 – 7 August 2008)
* Tita (7 August 2008 – 17 September 2008)
* Renato Gaúcho (18 September 2008 – 7 December 2008)
* Dorival Júnior (12 December 2008 – 7 December 2009)
* Vágner Mancini (12 December 2009 – 26 March 2010)
* Gaúcho &quot;(interim)&quot; (30 March 2010 – 18 May 2010)
* Celso Roth (18 May 2010 – 12 June 2010)
* PC Gusmão (13 June 2010 – 28 January 2011)
* Ricardo Gomes (2 February 2011 – 28 August 2012)
* Cristóvão Borges (29 August 2011 – 10 September 2012)
* Gaúcho &quot;(interim)&quot; (11 September 2012 – 13 September 2012)
* Marcelo Oliveira (13 September 2012 – 5 November 2012)
* Gaúcho (6 November 2012 – 21 March 2013)
* Paulo Autuori (22 March 2013 – 9 July 2013)
* Dorival Júnior (11 July 2013 – 28 October 2013)
* Adílson Batista (2013–14)
* Joel Santana (2014)
* Doriva (Jan 2015 – July 2015)
* Celso Roth (July 2015 – Aug 2015)
* Jorginho (Aug 2015 – Nov 2016)
* Cristóvão Borges (Dec 2016 – March 2017)
* Milton Mendes (March 2017 – Aug 2017)
* Zé Ricardo (Aug 2017 – Jun 2018)
* Jorginho (Jun 2018 – Aug 2018)
* Alberto Valentim (Aug 2018 – April 2019)
* Vanderlei Luxemburgo (May 2019 – December 2019)
* Abel Braga (January 2020 – May 2020)
* Ramon Menezes (May 2020 – October 2020)
* Ricardo Sá Pinto (October 2020 – December 2020)
* Vanderlei Luxemburgo (December 2020 – February 2021 )
* Siston &quot;(interim)&quot; (2021)
* Cabo (2021) 
* A. Gomes &quot;(interim)&quot; (2021)
* Lisca (2021)
* Diniz (2021)
* Cortez &quot;(interim)&quot; (2021)
* Zé Ricardo (2022)
* Faro &quot;(interim)&quot; (2022)
* M. Souza (2022)
* Maurício Barbieri (2023)
* Ramón Díaz (15 July 2023 – 27 April 2024)
* Rafael Paiva &quot;(interim)&quot; (28 April 2024 – )
* Álvaro Pacheco (2024)
==Top scorers==
Source:
==Rivalries==
Vasco&#x27;s biggest rivals are the other clubs in Rio de Janeiro: Flamengo, Botafogo and Fluminense. However, Vasco also attracts antipathy from fans of several other clubs across the country. According to a survey released by ESPN, Vasco is the third most hated club in the country, behind Flamengo and Corinthians, the clubs with the largest number of fans. This is mainly due to the past history of controversial managers and players who passed through the club.

Vasco&#x27;s biggest rivalry is against Flamengo, called the &quot;Clássico dos Milhões&quot; (Derby of the Millions), usually played at the Maracanã and whose name comes from the fact that Flamengo and Vasco have the largest fanbases in the Rio de Janeiro and two of the 5 largest of Brazil. The teams first met in 1922, with Flamengo winning 1–0. This rivalry has the highest average attendance in the Serie A.

Vasco holds other strong local rivalry with Fluminense, whose matches are known as &quot;Clássico dos Gigantes&quot; (Giants Derby). The derby gets its name because of the &quot;giant&quot; matches between the two, mainly the finals of the 1984 Campeonato Brasileiro Série A, which Flumiense won, and the 1985 Copa Libertadores group stage matches, which ended in two draws. The 1984 final had an attendance of 128,781 people, one of the largest in the history of Brazilian football.

The &quot;Clássico da Amizade&quot; (Friendship Derby) is the rivlary between Vasco and Botafogo, that gets its name due to the &quot;mild&quot; rivalry both have, due to Vasco having a large margin of victories over Botafogo and there being few decisive matches between them. Nevertheless, Botafogo is one of Vasco&#x27;s cross-city rivals and their matches usually draw crowds. In 2021, Botafogo beat Vasco 4–0 in the Serie B, virtually eliminating any possibility of promotion for Vasco, while Botafogo put themselves closer to promotion. The first match between the two clubs was in 1923, a 3–1 victory for Vasco.

The matches between Vasco and America are known as &quot;Clássico da Paz&quot; (Peace Derby). During the 20th century America was one of the top clubs in Rio, but towards the turn of the 21st century it declined in performance. On 12 February 2011, Vasco thrashed America 9–0, one of the worst defeats of any derby.

==Legacy==
Due to Vasco&#x27;s tradition, several clubs are named after it, including Associação Desportiva Vasco da Gama, of Acre state, founded in 1952, Vasco Esporte Clube, of Sergipe state, founded in 1931, Esporte Clube Vasco da Gama, of Americana, São Paulo state, founded in 1958, Vasco Sports Club, which is an Indian football club founded in 1951, and CR Vasco da Gama Football Club, which is a South African football club founded in 1980. Tomazinho Futebol Clube, from São João de Meriti, Rio de Janeiro state, founded in 1930, has a logo strongly inspired by Vasco&#x27;s logo, and share the same colors.

==Other sports==

Although best known as a football, rowing and swimming club, Vasco da Gama is actually a comprehensive sports club. Its basketball section, CR Vasco da Gama Basquete (three times Brazilian Champion and four times South-American Champion) produced former NBA player Nenê. The club is also the first Brazilian club to play against an NBA team, against San Antonio Spurs, in 1999, in the McDonald&#x27;s Championship final. Its rowing team is one of the best of Brazil and of the continent, which swimmers regularly represent Brazil in international competitions. Vasco da Gama also has a four-times National Champion women&#x27;s soccer team as well. Vasco&#x27;s beach soccer team is one of the best in the world, being once World Champion, three times South-American Champion and many times National Champion. In addition to these, Vasco has many other sports with World, South American and Brazilian titles.

==See also==
* CR Vasco da Gama (women)
* CR Vasco da Gama (basketball)
* CR Vasco da Gama (beach soccer)

==References==
*&quot;Enciclopédia do Futebol Brasileiro&quot;, Volume 1 – Lance, Rio de Janeiro: Aretê Editorial S/A, 2001.
==External links==
*Torcida Força Jovem Vasco (archived)
*Unofficial Home Page
*Vasco da Gama Unofficial Home Page (archived)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5014111" start="0" end="29" title="CR Vasco da Gama" label="Club de Regatas Vasco da Gama"/>
<link wikidata="Q5014111" start="97" end="110" title="CR Vasco da Gama" label="Vasco da Gama"/>
<link wikidata="Q5014111" start="121" end="126" title="CR Vasco da Gama" label="Vasco"/>
<link wikidata="Q847017" start="133" end="144" title="sports club" label="sports club"/>
<link wikidata="Q8678" start="154" end="176" title="Rio de Janeiro, Brazil" label="Rio de Janeiro, Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="282" end="290" title="Association football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q206813" start="329" end="358" title="Campeonato Brasileiro Série A" label="Campeonato Brasileiro Série A"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152339" start="380" end="412" title="Brazilian football league system" label="Brazilian football league system"/>
<link wikidata="Q765749" start="425" end="443" title="Campeonato Carioca" label="Campeonato Carioca"/>
<link wikidata="Q41428" start="449" end="472" title="Rio de Janeiro (state)" label="state of Rio de Janeiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q82899" start="488" end="500" title="State football leagues in Brazil" label="state league"/>
<link wikidata="Q7328" start="516" end="529" title="Vasco da Gama" label="Vasco da Gama"/>
<link wikidata="Q951383" start="550" end="582" title="Portuguese discovery of the sea route to India" label="European–Asian sea route in 1498"/>
<link wikidata="Q2615416" start="652" end="673" title="Portuguese Brazilians" label="Portuguese Brazilians"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="692" end="713" title="Portuguese Brazilians#Portuguese immigration to Brazil" label="Portuguese immigrants"/>
<link wikidata="Q2111991" start="767" end="782" title="Professionalism in association football" label="professionalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4119268" start="947" end="960" title="Youth system" label="youth academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2400646" start="983" end="1008" title="List of Brazil international footballers" label="international footballers"/>
<link wikidata="Q178649" start="1017" end="1024" title="Romário" label="Romário"/>
<link wikidata="Q311872" start="1026" end="1043" title="Philippe Coutinho" label="Philippe Coutinho"/>
<link wikidata="Q262826" start="1045" end="1063" title="Hilderaldo Bellini" label="Hilderaldo Bellini"/>
<link wikidata="Q550019" start="1065" end="1081" title="Roberto Dinamite" label="Roberto Dinamite"/>
<link wikidata="Q445541" start="1086" end="1093" title="Edmundo (footballer)" label="Edmundo"/>
<link wikidata="Q206813" start="1199" end="1228" title="Campeonato Brasileiro Série A" label="Campeonato Brasileiro Série A"/>
<link wikidata="Q2030503" start="1236" end="1257" title="Torneio Rio–São Paulo" label="Torneio Rio–São Paulo"/>
<link wikidata="Q843989" start="1266" end="1280" title="Copa do Brasil" label="Copa do Brasil"/>
<link wikidata="Q184795" start="1335" end="1352" title="Copa Libertadores" label="Copa Libertadores"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030886" start="1358" end="1398" title="South American Championship of Champions" label="South American Championship of Champions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053642" start="1408" end="1421" title="Copa Mercosur" label="Copa Mercosur"/>
<link wikidata="Q765749" start="1468" end="1486" title="Campeonato Carioca" label="Campeonato Carioca"/>
<link wikidata="Q1220534" start="1492" end="1509" title="golden generation" label="golden generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q10278821" start="1541" end="1560" title="Expresso da Vitória" label="Expresso da Vitória"/>
<link wikidata="Q765749" start="1595" end="1607" title="Campeonato Carioca" label="state titles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030886" start="1728" end="1773" title="South American Championship of Champions" label="1948 South American Championship of Champions"/>
<link wikidata="Q703920" start="1807" end="1821" title="Moacir Barbosa" label="Moacir Barbosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q332012" start="1823" end="1840" title="Ademir de Menezes" label="Ademir de Menezes"/>
<link wikidata="Q720548" start="1842" end="1848" title="Friaça" label="Friaça"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164053" start="1850" end="1862" title="Danilo Alvim" label="Danilo Alvim"/>
<link wikidata="Q769862" start="1864" end="1880" title="Augusto da Costa" label="Augusto da Costa"/>
<link wikidata="Q927470" start="1886" end="1891" title="Chico (footballer, born 1922)" label="Chico"/>
<link wikidata="Q41428" start="2075" end="2095" title="Rio de Janeiro (state)" label="Rio de Janeiro state"/>
<link wikidata="Q828" start="2104" end="2112" title="Americas" label="Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q721419" start="2146" end="2166" title="Estádio São Januário" label="São Januário stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q155174" start="2260" end="2276" title="Maracanã Stadium" label="Maracanã stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q17479" start="2351" end="2359" title="CR Flamengo" label="Flamengo"/>
<link wikidata="Q80987" start="2361" end="2371" title="Fluminense FC" label="Fluminense"/>
<link wikidata="Q80958" start="2376" end="2384" title="Botafogo de Futebol e Regatas" label="Botafogo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2980483" start="2470" end="2492" title="Clássico dos Milhões" label="O Clássico dos Milhões"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495055" start="2590" end="2606" title="Sport in Brazil" label="Brazilian sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q159354" start="2726" end="2732" title="Sport rowing" label="rowing"/>
<link wikidata="Q8678" start="2765" end="2779" title="Rio de Janeiro" label="Rio de Janeiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q178725" start="2971" end="2978" title="Niterói" label="Niterói"/>
<link wikidata="Q7328" start="3390" end="3403" title="Vasco da Gama" label="Vasco da Gama"/>
<link wikidata="Q528186" start="3664" end="3685" title="Order of Christ Cross" label="Order of Christ Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="3716" end="3731" title="Christian faith" label="Christian faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q383217" start="3758" end="3789" title="São Gabriel (ship)" label="Gama&amp;#x27;s São Gabriel carrack"/>
<link wikidata="Q964444" start="3874" end="3886" title="Cross pattée" label="Cross pattée"/>
<link wikidata="Q188650" start="4031" end="4040" title="Lusitania" label="Lusitania"/>
<link wikidata="Q9677573" start="4614" end="4637" title="1923 Campeonato Carioca" label="1923 Campeonato Carioca"/>
<link wikidata="Q80987" start="5042" end="5052" title="Fluminense Football Club" label="Fluminense"/>
<link wikidata="Q17479" start="5054" end="5062" title="Clube de Regatas do Flamengo" label="Flamengo"/>
<link wikidata="Q80958" start="5067" end="5075" title="Botafogo de Futebol e Regatas" label="Botafogo"/>
<link wikidata="Q80955" start="6269" end="6275" title="Santos FC" label="Santos"/>
<link wikidata="Q765749" start="6644" end="6671" title="Campeonato Carioca" label="Rio de Janeiro championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030886" start="6717" end="6749" title="South American Club Championship (football)" label="South American Club Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q106610493" start="6883" end="6940" title="Torneio Octogonal Rivadavia Correa Meyer" label="Torneio Intercontinental Octogonal Rivadavia Correa Meyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q332012" start="6958" end="6975" title="Ademir Marques de Menezes" label="Ademir de Menezes"/>
<link wikidata="Q703920" start="6977" end="6991" title="Moacyr Barbosa" label="Moacyr Barbosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q262826" start="6993" end="7000" title="Hilderaldo Bellini" label="Bellini"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987345" start="7005" end="7013" title="Ipojucan" label="Ipojucan"/>
<link wikidata="Q391984" start="7129" end="7140" title="Millonarios F.C." label="Millonarios"/>
<link wikidata="Q207373" start="7158" end="7167" title="Colo-Colo" label="Colo-Colo"/>
<link wikidata="Q16141664" start="7249" end="7267" title="1956 Campeonato Carioca" label="Campeonato Carioca"/>
<link wikidata="Q4139" start="7282" end="7298" title="Pequeña Copa del Mundo" label="Little World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q164546" start="7330" end="7340" title="Alfredo Di Stéfano" label="Di Stefano"/>
<link wikidata="Q10383406" start="7670" end="7691" title="1957 Tournoi de Paris" label="1957 Tournoi de Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q8687" start="7902" end="7917" title="Athletic Bilbao" label="Athletic Bilbao"/>
<link wikidata="Q918368" start="7989" end="8010" title="Teresa Herrera Trophy" label="Teresa Herrera Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7156" start="8037" end="8046" title="FC Barcelona" label="Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q918580" start="8092" end="8101" title="Camp de Les Corts" label="Les Corts"/>
<link wikidata="Q131499" start="8242" end="8249" title="Benfica" label="Benfica"/>
<link wikidata="Q4216" start="8275" end="8284" title="Latin Cup" label="Latin Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q132533" start="8462" end="8471" title="1958 FIFA World Cup" label="World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2030503" start="8487" end="8511" title="Rio-São Paulo Tournament" label="Rio-São Paulo Tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q311445" start="8840" end="8844" title="Vavá" label="Vavá"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078991" start="8907" end="8912" title="1958 FIFA World Cup Final" label="final"/>
<link wikidata="Q438483" start="8928" end="8935" title="Orlando Peçanha" label="Orlando"/>
<link wikidata="Q262826" start="8940" end="8947" title="Hilderaldo Bellini" label="Bellini"/>
<link wikidata="Q9677699" start="9302" end="9325" title="1958 Campeonato Carioca" label="1958 Campeonato Carioca"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543" start="9437" end="9442" title="A.C. Milan" label="Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q8701" start="9447" end="9465" title="Atletico de Madrid" label="Atletico de Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q309316" start="9467" end="9493" title="1958-59 European Cup" label="European Cup semi-finalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q907176" start="9650" end="9667" title="1959 South American Championship (Argentina)" label="1959 Copa America"/>
<link wikidata="Q2712962" start="9669" end="9677" title="Paulinho de Almeida" label="Paulinho"/>
<link wikidata="Q438483" start="9679" end="9686" title="Orlando Peçanha" label="Orlando"/>
<link wikidata="Q262826" start="9688" end="9695" title="Hilderaldo Bellini" label="Bellini"/>
<link wikidata="Q4419134" start="9697" end="9704" title="Coronel (footballer)" label="Coronel"/>
<link wikidata="Q217974" start="9721" end="9726" title="Almir (footballer, born 1969)" label="Almir"/>
<link wikidata="Q3981712" start="10214" end="10240" title="1965 Campeonato Brasileiro Série A" label="1965 Campeonato Brasileiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q18610701" start="10356" end="10382" title="1966 Torneio Rio-São Paulo" label="1966 Torneio Rio-São Paulo"/>
<link wikidata="Q83459" start="10598" end="10618" title="Brazil national football team" label="Brazil national team"/>
<link wikidata="Q134202" start="10627" end="10646" title="1966 FIFA World Cup" label="1966 FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q244754" start="10652" end="10655" title="Confederação Brasileira de Futebol" label="CBD"/>
<link wikidata="Q550019" start="10768" end="10784" title="Roberto Dinamite" label="Roberto Dinamite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757383" start="10789" end="10804" title="Edgardo Andrada" label="Edgardo Andrada"/>
<link wikidata="Q16142598" start="10820" end="10838" title="1970 Campeonato Carioca" label="Campeonato Carioca"/>
<link wikidata="Q2604508" start="11247" end="11268" title="1997 Campeonato Brasileiro Série A" label="Campeonato Brasileiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q2604508" start="11272" end="11276" title="1997 Campeonato Brasileiro Série A" label="1997"/>
<link wikidata="Q80964" start="11286" end="11295" title="Sociedade Esportiva Palmeiras" label="Palmeiras"/>
<link wikidata="Q7249502" start="11334" end="11348" title="Projeto Tóquio" label="Projeto Tóquio"/>
<link wikidata="Q522980" start="11394" end="11416" title="1998 Copa Libertadores" label="1998 Copa Libertadores"/>
<link wikidata="Q248782" start="11489" end="11498" title="Barcelona Sporting Club" label="Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q736" start="11502" end="11509" title="Ecuador" label="Ecuador"/>
<link wikidata="Q4593470" start="11517" end="11523" title="1998 Copa Libertadores Finals" label="finals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030886" start="11602" end="11642" title="South American Club Championship 1948" label="South American Championship of Champions"/>
<link wikidata="Q2537077" start="11722" end="11747" title="1998 Intercontinental Cup" label="1998 Intercontinental Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q241409" start="11770" end="11799" title="1997–98 UEFA Champions League" label="1997–98 UEFA Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q8682" start="11808" end="11819" title="Real Madrid C.F." label="Real Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q500565" start="11936" end="11969" title="2000 FIFA Club World Championship" label="2000 FIFA Club World Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q18656" start="11996" end="12013" title="Manchester United F.C." label="Manchester United"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280895" start="12026" end="12032" title="Club Necaxa" label="Necaxa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1510813" start="12048" end="12063" title="South Melbourne FC" label="South Melbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q35933" start="12180" end="12191" title="Sport Club Corinthians Paulista" label="Corinthians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053642" start="12251" end="12264" title="Copa Mercosur" label="Copa Mercosur"/>
<link wikidata="Q2666989" start="12274" end="12283" title="2000 Copa Mercosur" label="that year"/>
<link wikidata="Q16320" start="12309" end="12316" title="Peñarol" label="Peñarol"/>
<link wikidata="Q318307" start="12428" end="12443" title="Rosario Central" label="Rosario Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q276354" start="12642" end="12660" title="Estadio Monumental (Buenos Aires)" label="Estadio Monumental"/>
<link wikidata="Q80964" start="12717" end="12726" title="Sociedade Esportiva Palmeiras" label="Palmeiras"/>
<link wikidata="Q440945" start="13291" end="13304" title="Júnior Baiano" label="Júnior Baiano"/>
<link wikidata="Q178649" start="13360" end="13367" title="Romário" label="Romário"/>
<link wikidata="Q2453542" start="13440" end="13459" title="Copa João Havelange" label="Copa João Havelange"/>
<link wikidata="Q2300355" start="13518" end="13530" title="Clube dos 13" label="Clube dos 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q244754" start="13543" end="13546" title="Brazilian Football Confederation" label="CBF"/>
<link wikidata="Q290940" start="13561" end="13572" title="Associação Desportiva São Caetano" label="São Caetano"/>
<link wikidata="Q10282423" start="13580" end="13586" title="Copa João Havelange Final" label="finals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370747" start="13624" end="13647" title="Estádio Palestra Itália" label="Estádio Palestra Itália"/>
<link wikidata="Q525804" start="13717" end="13734" title="Anthony Garotinho" label="Anthony Garotinho"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130286" start="14000" end="14022" title="2001 Copa Libertadores" label="2001 Copa Libertadores"/>
<link wikidata="Q391987" start="14152" end="14167" title="América de Cali" label="América de Cali"/>
<link wikidata="Q2317166" start="14209" end="14228" title="Deportes Concepción (Chile)" label="Deportes Concepción"/>
<link wikidata="Q170703" start="14296" end="14308" title="Boca Juniors" label="Boca Juniors"/>
<link wikidata="Q2668158" start="14521" end="14525" title="2002 Campeonato Brasileiro Série A" label="2002"/>
<link wikidata="Q608707" start="14562" end="14566" title="2003 Campeonato Brasileiro Série A" label="2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q2668146" start="14571" end="14575" title="2004 Campeonato Brasileiro Série A" label="2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q2456742" start="14589" end="14593" title="2005 Campeonato Brasileiro Série A" label="2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130452" start="14617" end="14639" title="2006 Copa Sudamericana" label="2006 Copa Sudamericana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649803" start="14822" end="14842" title="2006 Copa do Brasil" label="Copa do Brasil final"/>
<link wikidata="Q2638632" start="14934" end="14946" title="2008 Campeonato Brasileiro Série A" label="2008 Série A"/>
<link wikidata="Q383984" start="14999" end="15014" title="2009 Campeonato Brasileiro Série B" label="second division"/>
<link wikidata="Q274465" start="15085" end="15092" title="Esporte Clube Vitória" label="Vitória"/>
<link wikidata="Q188277" start="15205" end="15213" title="Cruzeiro Esporte Clube" label="Cruzeiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q17479" start="15215" end="15223" title="Clube de Regatas do Flamengo" label="Flamengo"/>
<link wikidata="Q80955" start="15225" end="15231" title="Santos Futebol Clube" label="Santos"/>
<link wikidata="Q38568" start="15236" end="15245" title="São Paulo Futebol Clube" label="São Paulo"/>
<link wikidata="Q580242" start="15288" end="15315" title="1979 Campeonato Brasileiro Série A" label="1979 Brazilian Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2250592" start="15449" end="15463" title="2008 Copa do Brasil" label="Copa do Brasil"/>
<link wikidata="Q219098" start="15553" end="15565" title="Sport Club do Recife" label="Sport Recife"/>
<link wikidata="Q2073506" start="15657" end="15669" title="2010 Campeonato Brasileiro Série A" label="2010 Série A"/>
<link wikidata="Q910453" start="15713" end="15722" title="Esporte Clube Juventude" label="Juventude"/>
<link wikidata="Q155174" start="15767" end="15775" title="Estádio do Maracanã" label="Maracanã"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130488" start="15997" end="16019" title="2011 Copa Sudamericana" label="2011 Copa Sudamericana"/>
<link wikidata="Q568721" start="16028" end="16047" title="2010 Copa do Brasil" label="2010 Copa do Brasil"/>
<link wikidata="Q4620619" start="16229" end="16240" title="2011 CR Vasco da Gama season" label="2011 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q1991849" start="16279" end="16292" title="2011 Campeonato Carioca" label="Guanabara Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q7155193" start="16322" end="16334" title="PC Gusmão" label="Paulo Gusmāo"/>
<link wikidata="Q440999" start="16358" end="16371" title="Ricardo Gomes" label="Ricardo Gomes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002761" start="16430" end="16440" title="Alecsandro" label="Alecsandro"/>
<link wikidata="Q823057" start="16442" end="16450" title="Bernardo (footballer, born 1990)" label="Bernardo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2449294" start="16456" end="16467" title="Diego Souza (footballer, born 1985)" label="Diego Souza"/>
<link wikidata="Q266672" start="16600" end="16614" title="2011 Copa do Brasil" label="Copa do Brasil"/>
<link wikidata="Q4620824" start="16656" end="16662" title="2011 Copa do Brasil finals" label="finals"/>
<link wikidata="Q478317" start="16680" end="16688" title="Coritiba Foot Ball Club" label="Coritiba"/>
<link wikidata="Q2270683" start="16901" end="16907" title="2011 Campeonato Brasileiro Série A" label="league"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130488" start="17146" end="17163" title="2011 Copa Sudamericana" label="Copa Sudamericana"/>
<link wikidata="Q80964" start="17204" end="17213" title="Sociedade Esportiva Palmeiras" label="Palmeiras"/>
<link wikidata="Q127925" start="17268" end="17274" title="Club Aurora" label="Aurora"/>
<link wikidata="Q19066" start="17279" end="17292" title="Club Universitario de Deportes" label="Universitario"/>
<link wikidata="Q737753" start="17339" end="17359" title="Club Universidad de Chile" label="Universidad de Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q922849" start="17462" end="17480" title="Football in Brazil" label="Brazilian football"/>
<link wikidata="Q4625020" start="17558" end="17569" title="2012 CR Vasco da Gama season" label="2012 season"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17577" end="17590" title="2012 Campeonato Carioca#Taça Guanabara" label="Guanabara Cup"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17750" end="17757" title="2012 Campeonato Carioca#Taça Rio" label="Rio Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130337" start="17830" end="17852" title="2012 Copa Libertadores" label="2012 Copa Libertadores"/>
<link wikidata="Q848642" start="18003" end="18011" title="Club Libertad" label="Libertad"/>
<link wikidata="Q324589" start="18055" end="18060" title="Club Atlético Lanús" label="Lanús"/>
<link wikidata="Q73082" start="18195" end="18203" title="Paulinho (footballer, born July 1988)" label="Paulinho"/>
<link wikidata="Q1825052" start="18212" end="18234" title="2012 Campeonato Brasileiro Série A" label="Brazilian Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q975242" start="18651" end="18659" title="2013 Campeonato Carioca" label="Taca Rio"/>
<link wikidata="Q506832" start="18903" end="18922" title="Atletico paranaense" label="Atletico Paranaense"/>
<link wikidata="Q4629261" start="18953" end="18967" title="2013 Copa do Brasil" label="Copa do Brasil"/>
<link wikidata="Q513549" start="19013" end="19021" title="Nacional Futebol Clube" label="Nacional"/>
<link wikidata="Q816779" start="19051" end="19056" title="Goiás Esporte Clube" label="Goiás"/>
<link wikidata="Q16534924" start="19201" end="19220" title="2014 Campeonato Brasileiro Série B" label="Série B during 2014"/>
<link wikidata="Q18472566" start="19269" end="19287" title="2015 Campeonato Carioca" label="Campeonato Carioca"/>
<link wikidata="Q18560516" start="19354" end="19366" title="2015 Campeonato Brasileiro Serie A" label="2015 edition"/>
<link wikidata="Q21529721" start="19391" end="19395" title="2016 Campeonato Brasileiro Série B" label="2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q21716818" start="19423" end="19440" title="2016 Campeonato Carioca" label="Carioca champions"/>
<link wikidata="Q73621335" start="19586" end="19597" title="2020 Campeonato Brasileiro Série A" label="2020 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q104806802" start="19684" end="19695" title="2021 Campeonato Brasileiro Série B" label="2021 season"/>
<link wikidata="" start="19818" end="19830" title=":en:777 Partners" label="777 Partners"/>
<link wikidata="Q1675351" start="20277" end="20283" title="Ituano FC" label="Ituano"/>
<link wikidata="Q316836" start="20313" end="20317" title="Nenê (footballer, born 1981)" label="Nenê"/>
<link wikidata="Q114834825" start="20350" end="20362" title="2023 Campeonato Brasileiro Série A" label="2023 Série A"/>
<link wikidata="Q120537029" start="20414" end="20426" title="2024 Campeonato Brasileiro Série A" label="2024 Série A"/>
<link wikidata="Q77" start="22012" end="22019" title="Uruguay" label="Uruguay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2023788" start="22022" end="22034" title="Ondino Viera" label="Ondino Viera"/>
<link wikidata="Q15799" start="22088" end="22099" title="Club Atlético River Plate" label="River Plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q414" start="22103" end="22112" title="Argentina" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q528186" start="22232" end="22253" title="Order of Christ Cross" label="Order of Christ Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q41300" start="23022" end="23050" title="Knights Templar" label="cross of the Knights Templar"/>
<link wikidata="Q735873" start="23403" end="23416" title="Kappa (brand)" label="Kappa (brand)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262756" start="24118" end="24146" title="Duarte Pio, Duke of Braganza" label="Duarte Pio, Duke of Bragança"/>
<link wikidata="Q158874" start="24343" end="24351" title="Carlos I of Portugal" label="Carlos I"/>
<link wikidata="Q156175" start="24502" end="24508" title="Luís I of Portugal" label="Luís I"/>
<link wikidata="Q2665185" start="24570" end="24598" title="Lisbon Regicide" label="regicide of February 1, 1908"/>
<link wikidata="Q721419" start="24645" end="24657" title="São Januário" label="São Januário"/>
<link wikidata="Q155174" start="24867" end="24875" title="Maracanã Stadium" label="Maracanã"/>
<link wikidata="Q193432" start="24995" end="25004" title="Fan (person)" label="supported"/>
<link wikidata="Q8678" start="25315" end="25346" title="Rio de Janeiro" label="Northern Zone of Rio de Janeiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q2720540" start="25351" end="25370" title="Greater Rio de Janeiro" label="Rio outskirt cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q178725" start="25376" end="25383" title="Niterói" label="Niterói"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136194" start="25464" end="25476" title="Northeast Region, Brazil" label="Northeastern"/>
<link wikidata="Q478465" start="25481" end="25486" title="North Region, Brazil" label="North"/>
<link wikidata="Q39109" start="25521" end="25542" title="Minas Gerais" label="southern Minas Gerais"/>
<link wikidata="Q43233" start="25544" end="25558" title="Espírito Santo" label="Espírito Santo"/>
<link wikidata="Q41115" start="25566" end="25580" title="Santa Catarina (state)" label="Santa Catarina"/>
<link wikidata="Q119158" start="25616" end="25632" title="Federal District (Brazil)" label="Distrito Federal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3587" start="25655" end="25663" title="TV Globo" label="TV Globo"/>
<link wikidata="Q61037218" start="25921" end="25924" title="CNN Brazil" label="CNN"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088815" start="26041" end="26057" title="Southeast Region, Brazil" label="Southeast Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q55605426" start="26078" end="26082" title="G-12 (Brazilian football)" label="G-12"/>
<link wikidata="Q20716693" start="26227" end="26250" title="Guerreiros do Almirante" label="Guerreiros do Almirante"/>
<link wikidata="Q2826788" start="26547" end="26552" title="Agepê" label="Agepê"/>
<link wikidata="Q4713827" start="26576" end="26587" title="Aldir Blanc" label="Aldir Blanc"/>
<link wikidata="Q9618212" start="26611" end="26626" title="Antônio Pitanga" label="Antônio Pitanga"/>
<link wikidata="Q4783603" start="26645" end="26661" title="Aracy de Almeida" label="Aracy de Almeida"/>
<link wikidata="Q4902394" start="26685" end="26694" title="Bia and Branca Feres" label="Bia Feres"/>
<link wikidata="Q4902394" start="26715" end="26727" title="Bia and Branca Feres" label="Branca Feres"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860610" start="26748" end="26767" title="Sérgio Cabral Filho" label="Sérgio Cabral Filho"/>
<link wikidata="Q41428" start="26813" end="26833" title="Rio de Janeiro (state)" label="Rio de Janeiro state"/>
<link wikidata="Q2934809" start="26855" end="26869" title="Camila Morgado" label="Camila Morgado"/>
<link wikidata="Q2934814" start="26890" end="26904" title="Camila Pitanga" label="Camila Pitanga"/>
<link wikidata="Q379745" start="26925" end="26951" title="Carlos Drummond de Andrade" label="Carlos Drummond de Andrade"/>
<link wikidata="Q108757134" start="26973" end="26981" title="Casimiro (streamer)" label="Casimiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1789957" start="27003" end="27012" title="Chacrinha" label="Chacrinha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1789876" start="27042" end="27054" title="Chico Anysio" label="Chico Anysio"/>
<link wikidata="Q311872" start="27080" end="27097" title="Philippe Coutinho" label="Philippe Coutinho"/>
<link wikidata="Q19944687" start="27162" end="27174" title="Cabo Daciolo" label="Cabo Daciolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q320289" start="27209" end="27233" title="Chamber of Deputies" label="Federal Deputy of Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q41428" start="27238" end="27252" title="Rio de Janeiro (state)" label="Rio de Janeiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q445541" start="27274" end="27281" title="Edmundo (footballer)" label="Edmundo"/>
<link wikidata="Q972007" start="27382" end="27394" title="Eduardo Paes" label="Eduardo Paes"/>
<link wikidata="Q8678" start="27435" end="27454" title="Rio de Janeiro" label="Rio de Janeiro city"/>
<link wikidata="Q2085377" start="27491" end="27504" title="Erasmo Carlos" label="Erasmo Carlos"/>
<link wikidata="Q18315" start="27528" end="27544" title="Fátima Bernardes" label="Fátima Bernardes"/>
<link wikidata="Q43947" start="27568" end="27582" title="Fernanda Abreu" label="Fernanda Abreu"/>
<link wikidata="Q722119" start="27602" end="27617" title="Ferreira Gullar" label="Ferreira Gullar"/>
<link wikidata="Q777949" start="27639" end="27650" title="Gonzaguinha" label="Gonzaguinha"/>
<link wikidata="Q43148140" start="27674" end="27677" title="Iza (singer)" label="Iza"/>
<link wikidata="Q3504775" start="27697" end="27704" title="Jamelão" label="Jamelão"/>
<link wikidata="Q192359" start="27728" end="27741" title="João Gilberto" label="João Gilberto"/>
<link wikidata="Q10310267" start="27765" end="27781" title="José Paulo Lanyi" label="José Paulo Lanyi"/>
<link wikidata="Q466954" start="27828" end="27840" title="Juliana Paes" label="Juliana Paes"/>
<link wikidata="Q85875015" start="27861" end="27874" title="Kevin O Chris" label="Kevin O Chris"/>
<link wikidata="Q19921685" start="27894" end="27898" title="Lexa (singer)" label="Lexa"/>
<link wikidata="Q10318449" start="27918" end="27934" title="Lindbergh Farias" label="Lindbergh Farias"/>
<link wikidata="Q320289" start="27956" end="27980" title="Chamber of Deputies" label="Federal Deputy of Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q41428" start="27985" end="27999" title="Rio de Janeiro (state)" label="Rio de Janeiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q6701485" start="28014" end="28026" title="Luiz Melodia" label="Luiz Melodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6756517" start="28050" end="28064" title="Marcelo Camelo" label="Marcelo Camelo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2639361" start="28084" end="28099" title="Marcos Palmeira" label="Marcos Palmeira"/>
<link wikidata="Q6774067" start="28118" end="28133" title="Mart&amp;#x27;nália" label="Mart&amp;#x27;nália"/>
<link wikidata="Q385498" start="28153" end="28169" title="Martinho da Vila" label="Martinho da Vila"/>
<link wikidata="Q6844544" start="28189" end="28205" title="Miguel Falabella" label="Miguel Falabella"/>
<link wikidata="Q969294" start="28224" end="28235" title="Murilo Rosa" label="Murilo Rosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3817099" start="28254" end="28271" title="Nelson Cavaquinho" label="Nelson Cavaquinho"/>
<link wikidata="Q10336113" start="28295" end="28310" title="Nelson Sargento" label="Nelson Sargento"/>
<link wikidata="Q241801" start="28334" end="28351" title="Paulinho da Viola" label="Paulinho da Viola"/>
<link wikidata="Q12881" start="28371" end="28383" title="Paulo Coelho" label="Paulo Coelho"/>
<link wikidata="Q12897" start="28403" end="28407" title="Pelé" label="Pelé"/>
<link wikidata="Q19317" start="28451" end="28460" title="FIFA World Cup" label="World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q171346" start="28473" end="28486" title="Nelson Piquet" label="Nelson Piquet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="28529" end="28540" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q10286900" start="28559" end="28572" title="Fábio Porchat" label="Fábio Porchat"/>
<link wikidata="Q283964" start="28594" end="28611" title="Rachel de Queiroz" label="Rachel de Queiroz"/>
<link wikidata="Q848556" start="28635" end="28648" title="Renato Aragão" label="Renato Aragão"/>
<link wikidata="Q465191" start="28670" end="28684" title="Roberto Carlos (singer)" label="Roberto Carlos"/>
<link wikidata="Q7357353" start="28704" end="28719" title="Rodrigo Hilbert" label="Rodrigo Hilbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q294819" start="28738" end="28753" title="Rodrigo Santoro" label="Rodrigo Santoro"/>
<link wikidata="Q470133" start="28772" end="28785" title="Rubem Fonseca" label="Rubem Fonseca"/>
<link wikidata="Q238993" start="28809" end="28820" title="Sônia Braga" label="Sônia Braga"/>
<link wikidata="Q2732423" start="28841" end="28852" title="Taís Araújo" label="Taís Araújo"/>
<link wikidata="Q40194003" start="28873" end="28881" title="Tay Melo" label="Tay Melo"/>
<link wikidata="Q10380505" start="28916" end="28931" title="Teresa Cristina (singer)" label="Teresa Cristina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140743" start="28951" end="28970" title="João Ubaldo Ribeiro" label="João Ubaldo Ribeiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q5578205" start="28994" end="29008" title="Viviane Araújo (actress)" label="Viviane Araújo"/>
<link wikidata="Q27839478" start="29029" end="29046" title="Whindersson Nunes" label="Whindersson Nunes"/>
<link wikidata="" start="29450" end="29468" title=":pt:Resposta Histórica" label="Resposta Histórica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030886" start="29841" end="29886" title="South American Championship of Champions" label="1948 South American Championship of Champions"/>
<link wikidata="Q10383406" start="30003" end="30024" title="1957 Tournoi de Paris" label="1957 Tournoi de Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q8682" start="30034" end="30045" title="Real Madrid CF" label="Real Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="" start="30398" end="30417" title=":pt:Torneio Luiz Aranha" label="Torneio Luiz Aranha"/>
<link wikidata="" start="30471" end="30510" title=":pt:Torneio Internacional do Rio de Janeiro" label="Torneio Internacional do Rio de Janeiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q918368" start="30528" end="30549" title="Teresa Herrera Trophy" label="Teresa Herrera Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4299691" start="30734" end="30758" title="Trofeo Ciudad de Sevilla" label="Trofeo Ciudad de Sevilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q3392145" start="30770" end="30793" title="Festa d&amp;#x27;Elx Trophy" label="Festa d&amp;#x27;Elx Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031693" start="30805" end="30821" title="Colombino Trophy" label="Colombino Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="" start="30833" end="30858" title=":pt:Torneio Madeira Autonomia" label="Torneio Madeira Autonomia"/>
<link wikidata="" start="30918" end="30940" title=":es:Copa de Oro de 1987" label="Los Angeles Golden Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q616871" start="30952" end="30976" title="Ramón de Carranza Trophy" label="Ramón de Carranza Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2538994" start="31060" end="31086" title="Ciutat de Barcelona Trophy" label="Ciutat de Barcelona Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3999280" start="31098" end="31123" title="Trofeo Ciudad de Zaragoza" label="Trofeo Ciudad de Zaragoza"/>
<link wikidata="" start="31135" end="31169" title=":es:Trofeo Ciudad de Palma" label="Troféu Ciudad de Palma de Mallorca"/>
<link wikidata="Q10384949" start="31181" end="31198" title="Trofeo Bortolotti" label="Trofeo Bortolotti"/>
<link wikidata="Q3000364" start="31231" end="31272" title="Taça dos Campeões Estaduais Rio – São Paulo" label="Taça dos Campeões Estaduais Rio–São Paulo"/>
<link wikidata="" start="31497" end="31509" title=":pt:Copa da Hora" label="Copa da Hora"/>
<link wikidata="Q2298603" start="31536" end="31550" title="Taça Guanabara" label="Taça Guanabara"/>
<link wikidata="Q2525574" start="31635" end="31643" title="Taça Rio" label="Taça Rio"/>
<link wikidata="Q765749" start="31722" end="31740" title="Campeonato Carioca" label="Campeonato Carioca"/>
<link wikidata="Q2398004" start="31807" end="31824" title="Taça da Prefeitura do Distrito Federal" label="Torneio Municipal"/>
<link wikidata="" start="31854" end="31871" title=":pt:Torneio Relâmpago" label="Torneio Relâmpago"/>
<link wikidata="" start="31889" end="31902" title=":pt:Torneio Extra" label="Torneio Extra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3535352" start="31920" end="31934" title="Torneio Início Carioca" label="Torneio Início"/>
<link wikidata="Q223366" start="32007" end="32026" title="FIFA Club World Cup" label="FIFA Club World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q182473" start="32038" end="32058" title="Intercontinental Cup (1960–2004)" label="Intercontinental Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075670" start="32070" end="32089" title="Copa Interamericana" label="Copa Interamericana"/>
<link wikidata="Q206813" start="32101" end="32130" title="Campeonato Brasileiro Série A" label="Campeonato Brasileiro Série A"/>
<link wikidata="Q843989" start="32160" end="32174" title="Copa do Brasil" label="Copa do Brasil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1720030" start="32186" end="32205" title="Supercopa do Brasil" label="Supercopa do Brasil"/>
<link wikidata="Q2030503" start="32217" end="32238" title="Torneio Rio–São Paulo" label="Torneio Rio–São Paulo"/>
<link wikidata="Q765749" start="32286" end="32304" title="Campeonato Carioca" label="Campeonato Carioca"/>
<link wikidata="Q5168244" start="32487" end="32508" title="Copa do Brasil Sub-20" label="Copa do Brasil Sub-20"/>
<link wikidata="Q48876686" start="32520" end="32546" title="Supercopa do Brasil Sub-20" label="Supercopa do Brasil Sub-20"/>
<link wikidata="Q3690829" start="32558" end="32590" title="Copa São Paulo de Futebol Júnior" label="Copa São Paulo de Futebol Júnior"/>
<link wikidata="Q7690481" start="32602" end="32633" title="Taça Belo Horizonte de Juniores" label="Taça Belo Horizonte de Juniores"/>
<link wikidata="Q5168197" start="32657" end="32678" title="Copa Macaé de Juvenis" label="Copa Macaé de Juvenis"/>
<link wikidata="Q206813" start="32712" end="32733" title="Campeonato Brasileiro Série A" label="Campeonato Brasileiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q843989" start="32736" end="32750" title="Copa do Brasil" label="Copa do Brasil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030886" start="32751" end="32778" title="South American Championship of Champions" label="South American Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q184795" start="32781" end="32798" title="Copa Libertadores" label="Copa Libertadores"/>
<link wikidata="Q2443763" start="32799" end="32815" title="Tournoi de Paris" label="Tournoi de Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q182473" start="32818" end="32838" title="Intercontinental Cup (1960–2004)" label="Intercontinental Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q223366" start="32841" end="32860" title="FIFA Club World Cup" label="FIFA Club World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q27057684" start="33106" end="33119" title="Fábio Carille" label="Fábio Carille"/>
<link wikidata="Q118252000" start="33360" end="33363" title="Sociedade Anônima do Futebol" label="SAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q2602055" start="33379" end="33387" title="Pedrinho (footballer, born 1977)" label="Pedrinho"/>
<link wikidata="Q104536386" start="33430" end="33442" title="777 Partners" label="777 Partners"/>
<link wikidata="Q2579383" start="33598" end="33619" title="Felipe (footballer, born 1977)" label="Felipe Jorge Loureiro"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="33690" end="33703" title="Ramón Platero" label="Ramón Platero"/>
<link wikidata="Q204960" start="33718" end="33743" title="Henry Welfare" label="&amp;quot;Harry&amp;quot; Welfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q9261014" start="33758" end="33781" title="Floriano Peixoto Corrêa" label="Floriano Peixoto Corrêa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2538974" start="33796" end="33804" title="Russinho (footballer, born 1902)" label="Russinho"/>
<link wikidata="Q2601916" start="33814" end="33828" title="Carlos Scarone" label="Carlos Scarone"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="33843" end="33856" title="Ramón Platero" label="Ramón Platero"/>
<link wikidata="Q3760147" start="33871" end="33885" title="Gentil Cardoso" label="Gentil Cardoso"/>
<link wikidata="Q204960" start="33895" end="33920" title="Henry Welfare" label="&amp;quot;Harry&amp;quot; Welfare"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="33935" end="33958" title="Telêmaco Frazão de Lima" label="Telêmaco Frazão de Lima"/>
<link wikidata="Q204960" start="33968" end="33993" title="Henry Welfare" label="&amp;quot;Harry&amp;quot; Welfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q2023788" start="34008" end="34020" title="Ondino Viera" label="Ondino Viera"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="34035" end="34049" title="Ernesto Santos" label="Ernesto Santos"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="34059" end="34073" title="Roque Calocero" label="Roque Calocero"/>
<link wikidata="Q2410553" start="34088" end="34099" title="Otto Glória" label="Otto Glória"/>
<link wikidata="Q945169" start="34109" end="34121" title="Flávio Costa" label="Flávio Costa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2410553" start="34136" end="34147" title="Otto Glória" label="Otto Glória"/>
<link wikidata="Q3760147" start="34162" end="34176" title="Gentil Cardoso" label="Gentil Cardoso"/>
<link wikidata="Q945169" start="34191" end="34203" title="Flávio Costa" label="Flávio Costa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3850019" start="34216" end="34232" title="Martim Francisco" label="Martim Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q9262190" start="34247" end="34253" title="Gradim" label="Gradim"/>
<link wikidata="Q2422699" start="34268" end="34276" title="Yustrich" label="Yustrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334423" start="34289" end="34292" title="Ely do Amparo" label="Ely"/>
<link wikidata="Q10282384" start="34302" end="34313" title="Filpo Núñez" label="Filpo Núñez"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334423" start="34323" end="34326" title="Ely do Amparo" label="Ely"/>
<link wikidata="Q9560530" start="34336" end="34348" title="Abel Picabea" label="Abel Picabea"/>
<link wikidata="Q3850019" start="34363" end="34379" title="Martim Francisco" label="Martim Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334423" start="34389" end="34392" title="Ely do Amparo" label="Ely"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370535" start="34402" end="34414" title="Paulo Amaral" label="Paulo Amaral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1703925" start="34427" end="34439" title="Jorge Vieira (Brazilian footballer)" label="Jorge Vieira"/>
<link wikidata="Q2410553" start="34454" end="34465" title="Otto Glória" label="Otto Glória"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="34475" end="34492" title="Eduardo Pelegrini" label="Eduardo Pelegrini"/>
<link wikidata="Q10264362" start="34502" end="34507" title="Duque (footballer)" label="Duque"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334423" start="34517" end="34520" title="Ely do Amparo" label="Ely"/>
<link wikidata="Q2546156" start="34530" end="34542" title="Zezé Moreira" label="Zezé Moreira"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334423" start="34557" end="34560" title="Ely do Amparo" label="Ely"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="34570" end="34584" title="Célio de Souza" label="Célio de Souza"/>
<link wikidata="Q207085" start="34594" end="34601" title="Zizinho" label="Zizinho"/>
<link wikidata="Q3760147" start="34611" end="34625" title="Gentil Cardoso" label="Gentil Cardoso"/>
<link wikidata="Q332012" start="34635" end="34641" title="Ademir Marques de Menezes" label="Ademir"/>
<link wikidata="Q2712962" start="34651" end="34659" title="Paulinho de Almeida" label="Paulinho"/>
<link wikidata="Q254747" start="34669" end="34674" title="Pinga (footballer, born 1924)" label="Pinga"/>
<link wikidata="Q553061" start="34689" end="34707" title="Evaristo de Macedo" label="Evaristo de Macedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2712962" start="34717" end="34725" title="Paulinho de Almeida" label="Paulinho"/>
<link wikidata="Q2475786" start="34759" end="34762" title="Tim (footballer)" label="Tim"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370535" start="34772" end="34784" title="Paulo Amaral" label="Paulo Amaral"/>
<link wikidata="Q207085" start="34803" end="34810" title="Zizinho" label="Zizinho"/>
<link wikidata="Q441570" start="34844" end="34860" title="Mário Travaglini" label="Mário Travaglini"/>
<link wikidata="Q6140482" start="34873" end="34885" title="Paulo Emilio (football manager)" label="Paulo Emilio"/>
<link wikidata="Q3885955" start="34895" end="34910" title="Orlando Fantoni" label="Orlando Fantoni"/>
<link wikidata="" start="34923" end="34936" title=":pt:Carlos Benevenuto Froner" label="Carlos Froner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1970523" start="34946" end="34958" title="Gílson Nuñes" label="Gílson Nuñes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2410553" start="34968" end="34979" title="Otto Glória" label="Otto Glória"/>
<link wikidata="Q3885955" start="34989" end="35004" title="Orlando Fantoni" label="Orlando Fantoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q1970523" start="35014" end="35026" title="Gílson Nuñes" label="Gílson Nuñes"/>
<link wikidata="Q311511" start="35036" end="35049" title="Mário Zagallo" label="Mário Zagallo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2658746" start="35062" end="35075" title="Antônio Lopes" label="Antônio Lopes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5041715" start="35088" end="35094" title="Carlos Alberto Zanata Amato" label="Zanata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1627846" start="35104" end="35120" title="Júlio César Leal" label="Júlio César Leal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2410553" start="35130" end="35141" title="Otto Glória" label="Otto Glória"/>
<link wikidata="Q1627846" start="35151" end="35167" title="Júlio César Leal" label="Júlio César Leal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2548141" start="35177" end="35188" title="Eduardo Antunes Coimbra" label="Edu Coimbra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2658746" start="35203" end="35216" title="Antônio Lopes" label="Antônio Lopes"/>
<link wikidata="" start="35231" end="35245" title=":pt:Cláudio Galbo Garcia" label="Cláudio Garcia"/>
<link wikidata="Q552929" start="35255" end="35267" title="Joel Santana" label="Joel Santana"/>
<link wikidata="Q552799" start="35282" end="35300" title="Sebastião Lazaroni" label="Sebastião Lazaroni"/>
<link wikidata="Q5041715" start="35315" end="35321" title="Carlos Alberto Zanata Amato" label="Zanata"/>
<link wikidata="Q3886008" start="35336" end="35348" title="Orlando Lelé" label="Orlando Lelé"/>
<link wikidata="Q10376120" start="35358" end="35370" title="Sérgio Cosme" label="Sérgio Cosme"/>
<link wikidata="Q9600265" start="35380" end="35393" title="Alcir Portela" label="Alcir Portela"/>
<link wikidata="Q3874519" start="35403" end="35416" title="Nelsinho Rosa" label="Nelsinho Rosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q9600265" start="35426" end="35439" title="Alcir Portela" label="Alcir Portela"/>
<link wikidata="Q311511" start="35449" end="35462" title="Mário Zagallo" label="Mário Zagallo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2658746" start="35477" end="35490" title="Antônio Lopes" label="Antônio Lopes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3874519" start="35500" end="35513" title="Nelsinho Rosa" label="Nelsinho Rosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q552929" start="35523" end="35535" title="Joel Santana" label="Joel Santana"/>
<link wikidata="Q9600265" start="35550" end="35563" title="Alcir Portela" label="Alcir Portela"/>
<link wikidata="Q9697317" start="35573" end="35579" title="Gaúcho (footballer, born 1953)" label="Gaúcho"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649880" start="35589" end="35601" title="Jair Pereira da Silva" label="Jair Pereira"/>
<link wikidata="Q552799" start="35611" end="35629" title="Sebastião Lazaroni" label="Sebastião Lazaroni"/>
<link wikidata="Q3874519" start="35639" end="35652" title="Nelsinho Rosa" label="Nelsinho Rosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2311308" start="35662" end="35672" title="Abel Braga" label="Abel Braga"/>
<link wikidata="Q9600265" start="35682" end="35695" title="Alcir Portela" label="Alcir Portela"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649880" start="35705" end="35717" title="Jair Pereira da Silva" label="Jair Pereira"/>
<link wikidata="Q5041715" start="35727" end="35733" title="Carlos Alberto Zanata Amato" label="Zanata"/>
<link wikidata="Q9600265" start="35748" end="35761" title="Alcir Portela" label="Alcir Portela"/>
<link wikidata="Q2561848" start="35771" end="35791" title="Carlos Alberto Silva" label="Carlos Alberto Silva"/>
<link wikidata="Q9600265" start="35801" end="35814" title="Alcir Portela" label="Alcir Portela"/>
<link wikidata="Q2658746" start="35824" end="35837" title="Antônio Lopes" label="Antônio Lopes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2311308" start="35852" end="35862" title="Abel Braga" label="Abel Braga"/>
<link wikidata="Q9600265" start="35872" end="35885" title="Alcir Portela" label="Alcir Portela"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353800" start="35917" end="35921" title="Tita (footballer, born 1958)" label="Tita"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155027" start="35956" end="35975" title="Oswaldo de Oliveira" label="Oswaldo de Oliveira"/>
<link wikidata="Q552929" start="35985" end="35997" title="Joel Santana" label="Joel Santana"/>
<link wikidata="Q9600265" start="36010" end="36023" title="Alcir Portela" label="Alcir Portela"/>
<link wikidata="Q2607445" start="36033" end="36048" title="Hélio dos Anjos" label="Hélio dos Anjos"/>
<link wikidata="Q7155193" start="36058" end="36076" title="Paulo César Gusmão" label="Paulo César Gusmão"/>
<link wikidata="Q553061" start="36086" end="36104" title="Evaristo de Macedo" label="Evaristo de Macedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2658746" start="36114" end="36127" title="Antônio Lopes" label="Antônio Lopes"/>
<link wikidata="Q928184" start="36140" end="36152" title="Mauro Galvão" label="Mauro Galvão"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373640" start="36162" end="36169" title="Geninho" label="Geninho"/>
<link wikidata="Q552929" start="36211" end="36223" title="Joel Santana" label="Joel Santana"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36262" end="36276" title="Dário Lourenço" label="Dário Lourenço"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345763" start="36286" end="36299" title="Renato Gaúcho" label="Renato Gaúcho"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079402" start="36333" end="36343" title="Celso Roth" label="Celso Roth"/>
<link wikidata="Q178649" start="36380" end="36387" title="Romário" label="Romário"/>
<link wikidata="Q2346451" start="36448" end="36463" title="Valdir Espinosa" label="Valdir Espinosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q178649" start="36503" end="36510" title="Romário" label="Romário"/>
<link wikidata="Q2835633" start="36548" end="36563" title="Alfredo Sampaio" label="Alfredo Sampaio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2658746" start="36573" end="36586" title="Antônio Lopes" label="Antônio Lopes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353800" start="36621" end="36625" title="Tita (footballer, born 1958)" label="Tita"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345763" start="36664" end="36677" title="Renato Gaúcho" label="Renato Gaúcho"/>
<link wikidata="Q1608978" start="36718" end="36732" title="Dorival Júnior" label="Dorival Júnior"/>
<link wikidata="Q1625330" start="36772" end="36786" title="Vágner Mancini" label="Vágner Mancini"/>
<link wikidata="Q9697317" start="36824" end="36830" title="Gaúcho (footballer, born 1953)" label="Gaúcho"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079402" start="36885" end="36895" title="Celso Roth" label="Celso Roth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7155193" start="36927" end="36936" title="Paulo César Gusmão" label="PC Gusmão"/>
<link wikidata="Q440999" start="36972" end="36985" title="Ricardo Gomes" label="Ricardo Gomes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1629089" start="37023" end="37039" title="Cristóvão Borges" label="Cristóvão Borges"/>
<link wikidata="Q9697317" start="37079" end="37085" title="Gaúcho (footballer, born 1953)" label="Gaúcho"/>
<link wikidata="Q1988077" start="37150" end="37166" title="Marcelo Oliveira" label="Marcelo Oliveira"/>
<link wikidata="Q9697317" start="37207" end="37213" title="Gaúcho (footballer, born 1953)" label="Gaúcho"/>
<link wikidata="Q714229" start="37250" end="37263" title="Paulo Autuori" label="Paulo Autuori"/>
<link wikidata="Q1608978" start="37296" end="37310" title="Dorival Júnior" label="Dorival Júnior"/>
<link wikidata="Q380411" start="37346" end="37361" title="Adílson Batista" label="Adílson Batista"/>
<link wikidata="Q552929" start="37374" end="37386" title="Joel Santana" label="Joel Santana"/>
<link wikidata="Q555339" start="37396" end="37402" title="Doriva" label="Doriva"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079402" start="37428" end="37438" title="Celso Roth" label="Celso Roth"/>
<link wikidata="Q163750" start="37464" end="37472" title="Jorginho (footballer, born 1964)" label="Jorginho"/>
<link wikidata="Q1629089" start="37497" end="37513" title="Cristóvão Borges" label="Cristóvão Borges"/>
<link wikidata="Q19973714" start="37540" end="37553" title="Milton Mendes" label="Milton Mendes"/>
<link wikidata="Q24338838" start="37580" end="37590" title="Zé Ricardo" label="Zé Ricardo"/>
<link wikidata="Q163750" start="37615" end="37623" title="Jorginho (footballer, born 1964)" label="Jorginho"/>
<link wikidata="Q2276922" start="37648" end="37664" title="Alberto Valentim" label="Alberto Valentim"/>
<link wikidata="Q314281" start="37691" end="37711" title="Vanderlei Luxemburgo" label="Vanderlei Luxemburgo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2311308" start="37741" end="37751" title="Abel Braga" label="Abel Braga"/>
<link wikidata="Q181139" start="37780" end="37793" title="Ramon Menezes" label="Ramon Menezes"/>
<link wikidata="Q447031" start="37822" end="37838" title="Ricardo Sá Pinto" label="Ricardo Sá Pinto"/>
<link wikidata="Q314281" start="37872" end="37892" title="Vanderlei Luxemburgo" label="Vanderlei Luxemburgo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3564614" start="37928" end="37934" title="Siston (footballer)" label="Siston"/>
<link wikidata="Q20087778" start="37966" end="37970" title="Marcelo Cabo" label="Cabo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="37981" end="37989" title="Alexandre Costa da Silva Gomes" label="A. Gomes"/>
<link wikidata="Q10318908" start="38021" end="38026" title="Lisca (football manager)" label="Lisca"/>
<link wikidata="Q10281320" start="38036" end="38041" title="Fernando Diniz" label="Diniz"/>
<link wikidata="Q109588358" start="38051" end="38057" title="Fábio Cortez" label="Cortez"/>
<link wikidata="Q24338838" start="38089" end="38099" title="Zé Ricardo" label="Zé Ricardo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="38109" end="38113" title="Emílio Faro" label="Faro"/>
<link wikidata="Q101424710" start="38145" end="38153" title="Maurício Souza (footballer)" label="M. Souza"/>
<link wikidata="Q51924094" start="38163" end="38180" title="Maurício Barbieri" label="Maurício Barbieri"/>
<link wikidata="Q348557" start="38190" end="38200" title="Ramón Díaz" label="Ramón Díaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q108032921" start="38290" end="38304" title="Álvaro Pacheco" label="Álvaro Pacheco"/>
<link wikidata="Q17479" start="38417" end="38425" title="CR Flamengo" label="Flamengo"/>
<link wikidata="Q80958" start="38427" end="38435" title="Botafogo de Futebol e Regatas" label="Botafogo"/>
<link wikidata="Q80987" start="38440" end="38450" title="Fluminense FC" label="Fluminense"/>
<link wikidata="Q3046147" start="38578" end="38582" title="ESPN (Brazil)" label="ESPN"/>
<link wikidata="Q35933" start="38655" end="38666" title="Sport Club Corinthians Paulista" label="Corinthians"/>
<link wikidata="Q17479" start="38858" end="38866" title="Clube de Regatas do Flamengo" label="Flamengo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2980483" start="38885" end="38905" title="Clássico dos Milhões" label="Clássico dos Milhões"/>
<link wikidata="Q80987" start="39276" end="39286" title="Fluminense FC" label="Fluminense"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="39321" end="39342" title="Clássico dos Gigantes" label="Clássico dos Gigantes"/>
<link wikidata="Q541980" start="39472" end="39506" title="1984 Campeonato Brasileiro Série A" label="1984 Campeonato Brasileiro Série A"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130217" start="39537" end="39559" title="1985 Copa Libertadores" label="1985 Copa Libertadores"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="39727" end="39746" title="Clássico da Amizade" label="Clássico da Amizade"/>
<link wikidata="Q80958" start="39805" end="39813" title="Botafogo de Futebol e Regatas" label="Botafogo"/>
<link wikidata="Q463147" start="40366" end="40373" title="America RJ" label="America"/>
<link wikidata="Q2868248" start="40739" end="40774" title="Associação Desportiva Vasco da Gama" label="Associação Desportiva Vasco da Gama"/>
<link wikidata="Q7916412" start="40808" end="40827" title="Vasco Esporte Clube" label="Vasco Esporte Clube"/>
<link wikidata="Q43783" start="40832" end="40839" title="Sergipe" label="Sergipe"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="40864" end="40891" title="Esporte Clube Vasco da Gama" label="Esporte Clube Vasco da Gama"/>
<link wikidata="Q467421" start="40896" end="40905" title="Americana, São Paulo" label="Americana"/>
<link wikidata="Q944337" start="40941" end="40958" title="Vasco Sports Club" label="Vasco Sports Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094623" start="41014" end="41044" title="Vasco da Gama (South Africa)" label="CR Vasco da Gama Football Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q7818579" start="41102" end="41125" title="Tomazinho Futebol Clube" label="Tomazinho Futebol Clube"/>
<link wikidata="Q459690" start="41132" end="41150" title="São João de Meriti" label="São João de Meriti"/>
<link wikidata="Q16949381" start="41428" end="41453" title="CR Vasco da Gama Basquete" label="CR Vasco da Gama Basquete"/>
<link wikidata="Q386939" start="41467" end="41485" title="Campeonato Brasileiro de Basquete" label="Brazilian Champion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781378" start="41501" end="41524" title="Liga Sudamericana" label="South-American Champion"/>
<link wikidata="Q155223" start="41542" end="41545" title="National Basketball Association" label="NBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q357438" start="41553" end="41557" title="Nenê" label="Nenê"/>
<link wikidata="Q159729" start="41638" end="41655" title="San Antonio Spurs" label="San Antonio Spurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2343772" start="41673" end="41701" title="McDonald&amp;#x27;s Championship" label="McDonald&amp;#x27;s Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q65170522" start="41903" end="41927" title="CR Vasco da Gama (women&amp;#x27;s football)" label="women&amp;#x27;s soccer team"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42040" end="42063" title="Copa Libertadores de Futebol de Areia" label="South-American Champion"/>
<link wikidata="Q65170522" start="42213" end="42237" title="CR Vasco da Gama (women)" label="CR Vasco da Gama (women)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16949381" start="42240" end="42269" title="CR Vasco da Gama (basketball)" label="CR Vasco da Gama (basketball)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5014000" start="42272" end="42303" title="CR Vasco da Gama (beach soccer)" label="CR Vasco da Gama (beach soccer)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="187326" wikidata="Q3034218" url="?curid=187326" title="Mutual Broadcasting System">
<text>The Mutual Broadcasting System (commonly referred to simply as Mutual; sometimes referred to as MBS, Mutual Radio or the Mutual Radio Network) was an American commercial radio network in operation from 1934 to 1999. In the golden age of U.S. radio drama, Mutual was best known as the original network home of &quot;The Lone Ranger&quot; and &quot;The Adventures of Superman&quot; and as the long-time radio residence of &quot;The Shadow&quot;. For many years, it was a national broadcaster for Major League Baseball (including the All-Star Game and World Series), the National Football League, and Notre Dame Fighting Irish football. From the 1930s until the network&#x27;s dissolution in 1999, Mutual ran a respected news service along with a variety of lauded news and commentary programs. In the 1970s, Mutual pioneered the nationwide late night call-in talk radio program, introducing the country to Larry King and later, Jim Bohannon.

In the 1970s, acting in much the same style as rival ABC Radio had splitting their network in 1968, Mutual launched four sister radio networks: Mutual Black Network (MBN) (initially launched as &quot;Mutual Reports Network&quot; (MRN)), which still exists today as American Urban Radio Networks (AURN); Mutual Cadena Hispánica (MCH, or in English, &quot;Mutual Spanish Network&quot;, MSN, abandoned in 1973); regional outlet Mutual Southwest Network (MSWN, retired in 1983); and Mutual Progressive Network (MPN; later re-branded &quot;Mutual Lifestyle Radio&quot; (MLR) in 1980, then retired in 1983).

Of the six national networks of American radio&#x27;s classic era, Mutual had for decades the largest number of affiliates but the least certain financial position (though it didn&#x27;t prevent Mutual from expanding into television broadcasting after World War II, as NBC, CBS and ABC did, but it meant Mutual&#x27;s attempt was short-lived at 11 months). For the first 18 years of its existence, Mutual was owned and operated as a cooperative (a system similar to that of today&#x27;s National Public Radio), setting the network apart from its corporate-owned competitors. Mutual&#x27;s member stations shared their own original programming, transmission and promotion expenses, and advertising revenues. From December 30, 1936, when it debuted in the West, the Mutual Broadcasting System had affiliates from coast to coast. Its business structure would change after General Tire assumed majority ownership in 1952 through a series of regional and individual station acquisitions.

Once General Tire sold the network in 1957 to a syndicate led by Dr. Armand Hammer, Mutual&#x27;s ownership was largely disconnected from the stations it served, leading to a more conventional, top-down model of program production and distribution. Due to the multiple sales of the network that followed, Mutual was once described in &quot;Broadcasting&quot; magazine as &quot;often traded&quot;. After a group that involved Hal Roach Studios purchased Mutual from Hammer&#x27;s group, the new executive team was charged with accepting money to use Mutual as a vehicle for foreign propaganda on behalf of Rafael Trujillo&#x27;s dictatorship in the Third Dominican Republic, while the network suffered significant financial losses and affiliate defections. Concurrently filing for Chapter 11 bankruptcy and selling twice in the span of four months for purposes of raising enough money to remain operational, the network&#x27;s reputation was severely damaged but soon rebounded under its succeeding owner, 3M Company. Sold to private interests in 1966 and again to Amway in 1977, Mutual purchased two radio stations in New York and Chicago in the 1980s, only to sell them after Amway&#x27;s interest in broadcasting began to fade. Radio syndicator Westwood One acquired Mutual in 1985 and NBC Radio in 1987, consolidating the networks operations. Throughout the 1990s, Mutual was gradually assimilated into Westwood One&#x27;s operations. The Mutual name was finally retired in April, 1999.

==History==
===1934–1935: The launch of Mutual===
Attempts at establishing cooperatively owned radio networks had been made since the 1920s. In 1929, a group of four radio stations in the major markets of New York City, Chicago, Cincinnati, and Detroit organized into a loose confederation known as the Quality Network. Five years later (in 1934), a similar or identical group of stations founded the Mutual Broadcasting System. Mutual&#x27;s original participating stations were WOR in Newark, New Jersey, just outside New York (owned by the Bamberger Broadcasting Service, a division of R.H. Macy and Company; in 1949, WOR-TV would begin broadcasting and Bamberger would be renamed General Teleradio, due to General Tire &amp; Rubber&#x27;s increased investment in the TV station), WGN in Chicago (owned by WGN Inc., a subsidiary of the &quot;Chicago Tribune&quot;), WXYZ in Detroit (owned by Kunsky-Trendle Broadcasting), and WLW in Cincinnati (owned by the Crosley Radio Company). The network was organized on September 29, 1934, with the members contracting for telephone-line transmission facilities and agreeing to collectively enter into contracts with advertisers for their networked shows. WOR and WGN, based in the two largest markets and providing the bulk of the programming, were the acknowledged leaders of the group. On October 29, 1934, Mutual Broadcasting System, Inc. was incorporated, with Bamberger and WGN Inc. each holding 50 percent of the stock—five each of the ten total shares.

The three national radio networks already in operation—the Columbia Broadcasting System and the National Broadcasting Company&#x27;s Red and Blue—were corporately controlled; programming was produced by the network (or by advertising agencies of program sponsors that purchased airtime on the network) and distributed to affiliates, most of which were independently owned. The Mutual Broadcasting System, on the other hand, operated as a true cooperative enterprise, with members creating and sharing programming. The majority of the early programming, from WOR and WGN, consisted of musical features and inexpensive dramatic serials. WOR had &quot;The Witch&#x27;s Tale&quot;, a horror anthology series whose &quot;hunner-an&#x27;-thirteen-year-old&quot; narrator invited listeners to &quot;douse all [the] lights. Now draw up to the fire an&#x27; gaze into the embers ...&quot;gaaaaze into &#x27;em deep!&quot;... an&#x27; soon ye&#x27;ll be across the seas, in th&#x27; jungle land of Africa ... hear that chantin&#x27; and them savage drums?&quot; WGN contributed the popular comedy series &quot;Lum and Abner&quot;. Detroit&#x27;s WXYZ provided &quot;The Lone Ranger&quot;, which had debuted in 1933 and was already in demand. It is often claimed that Mutual was launched primarily as a vehicle for the Western serial, but &quot;Lum and Abner&quot; was no less popular at the time. What WLW brought was sheer power; billing itself as &quot;The Nation&#x27;s Station,&quot; in May 1934 it had begun night broadcasting at a massive 500,000 watts, ten times the clear-channel standard.

On May 24, 1935, the network aired its inaugural live event—the first-ever night baseball game, between the Cincinnati Reds and the Philadelphia Phillies. In September, WXYZ dropped out to join NBC Blue, though contractual obligations kept &quot;The Lone Ranger&quot; on Mutual, airing three times a week, through spring 1942. The hole in the Detroit market was immediately filled by CKLW in Windsor, Ontario, just across the river. In October, the network began a decades-long run as broadcaster of baseball&#x27;s World Series, with airtime responsibilities shared between WGN&#x27;s Bob Elson and Quin Ryan and WLW&#x27;s Red Barber (NBC and CBS also carried the series that year; the Fall Classic would air on all three networks through 1938). Mutual broadcast its first Notre Dame football game that autumn as well, beginning another relationship that would last for decades. As an income-generating business, the Mutual network was a modest endeavor at the start: in the first eleven months of 1935, the cooperative garnered $1.1 million in advertising, compared to NBC&#x27;s $28.3 million and CBS&#x27;s $15.8 million.

===Late 1930s: National expansion===
In the fall of 1936, Mutual lost another of its founding members when WLW departed. The network, however, was in the midst of a major expansion: the first outside group of stations to sign on with Mutual was John Shepard&#x27;s Colonial Network with its Boston flagship station, WAAB, and thirteen affiliates around New England. There was good reason for this affiliation: Shepard had been involved with the founding of Mutual, and served on its board of directors. Cleveland&#x27;s WGAR also became an affiliate, albeit a dual one, as they also held a primary NBC Blue hookup. WGAR was joined by five other Midwestern stations: KWK in St. Louis, Mo.; KSO in Des Moines, Iowa; WMT in Cedar Rapids, Iowa; KOIL in Omaha, Neb.; and KFOR in Lincoln, Neb. The big prize came in December, when the Don Lee Network, the leading regional web on the West Coast, left CBS to become a central participant in Mutual. Don Lee brought its four owned-and-operated stations—KHJ in Los Angeles, KFRC in San Francisco, KGB in San Diego, and KDB in Santa Barbara—along with six California affiliates and, via shortwave hookup, two more in Hawaii. Mutual now had a nationwide presence. During 1936, as well, an offer by Warner Bros. to purchase the network was apparently made and rejected.

In January 1937, ownership of WAAB was consolidated with that of another Boston station controlled by Shepard: WNAC was flagship of the Yankee Network, a circuit of New England radio stations whose membership partially overlapped with that of Colonial. Yankee flagship WNAC had been an affiliate of CBS Radio, changing affiliation to NBC Red later in 1937 when CBS purchased WEEI in that city. The Texas Network soon added twenty-three more stations to the Mutual affiliate roster. WGAR dropped both their Mutual and NBC Blue affiliations on September 26, 1937, to take CBS exclusively; in turn, WJAY (co-owned with WHK by the United Broadcasting Company, part of &quot;The Plain Dealer&quot; business) joined Mutual and changed calls to WCLE. The Mutual affiliation in Cleveland moved again in the fall of 1942 from WCLE to WHK, temporarily displacing Blue programming from the market entirely. By the end of 1938, Mutual had 74 exclusive affiliates; though the two leading radio network companies discouraged dual hookups, Mutual shared another 25 affiliates with NBC and 5 with CBS. The total of 104 affiliates put Mutual not far behind the leaders. Because of the corporate strength behind NBC and CBS, however, and the fact that the lion&#x27;s share of the most powerful stations in the country had already signed with them before Mutual&#x27;s emergence (the exceptional, and soon departed, WLW aside), the cooperative network would be at a permanent disadvantage.

====Programming: &quot;The Shadow&quot; and diverse political voices====

On the programming front, 1936 saw Mutual launch the first network advice show, &quot;The Good Will Hour&quot;, hosted by John J. Anthony and sponsored by physical culture guru Bernarr Macfadden. The program was a new take on &quot;Ask Mister Anthony&quot;, which had aired on a local New York station in 1932, &quot;dedicated to helping the sufferers from an antiquated and outmoded domestic relations code.&quot; Anthony, whose real name was Lester Kroll, brought a wealth of relevant experience to his work—he had once been jailed for failing to make alimony payments. In July 1937 came the premiere of a seven-part adaptation of &quot;Les Misérables&quot;, produced, written, and directed by Orson Welles and featuring many of his Mercury Theatre performers—Mercury&#x27;s first appearance on the air. September 26, 1937, proved a particularly momentous date: that evening, &quot;The Shadow&quot; came to Mutual. The show would become a mainstay of the network for more than a decade and a half and one of the most popular programs in radio history. For the first year of its Mutual run, Welles provided the voice of The Shadow and his newly created alter ego, Lamont Cranston. He played the part anonymously at first. But, as one chronicler put it, &quot;nothing to do with Welles could remain a secret for very long.&quot;

In April 1938, the network picked up &quot;The Green Hornet&quot; from former member WXYZ. Mutual gave the twice-a-week series its first national exposure until November 1939, when it switched to NBC Blue. (The series would return very briefly to Mutual in the fall of 1940). Mutual also provided the national launching pad for Kay Kyser and his &quot;Kollege of Musical Knowledge&quot; radio show. Kyser&#x27;s enormous success at Mutual soon allowed his show to move to NBC and its much larger audience. By May 1939, Mutual was broadcasting the Indianapolis 500. That autumn, Mutual won exclusive broadcast rights to the World Series. As described in a 1943 Supreme Court ruling upholding the regulatory power of the Federal Communications Commission, Mutual &quot;offered this program of outstanding national interest to stations throughout the country, including NBC and CBS affiliates in communities having no other stations. CBS and NBC immediately invoked the &#x27;exclusive affiliation&#x27; clauses of their agreements with these stations, and as a result, thousands of people in many sections of the country were unable to hear the broadcasts of the games.&quot; This was the first instance of &quot;abuses&quot; committed by the two major broadcast companies given in the ruling.

Mutual also began building a reputation as a strong news service, rivaling the industry leaders in quality, if not budget. The broadcasts of WOR reporter Gabriel Heatter from the Lindbergh kidnapping &quot;trial of the century&quot; in 1935, heard over Mutual, were highly regarded; Heatter soon had his own regularly scheduled newscast, which aired nationally five nights a week. In 1936, also via WOR, Mutual began broadcasting the reports of news commentator Raymond Gram Swing, who became one of the country&#x27;s leading voices on foreign affairs. In November 1937, conservative commentator Fulton Lewis Jr., heard five nights weekly from Mutual affiliate WOL, became the first national news personality to broadcast out of Washington, D.C.; he would remain with the network until his death almost three decades later. In 1938, Mutual started rebroadcasting news reports from the BBC and English-language newscasts from the European mainland. The network also began employing its own reporters in Europe as the continent headed toward crisis, including John Steele, Waverley Root, Arthur Mann, and Victor Lusinchi. Among these was Sigrid Schultz, the first accomplished female foreign correspondent to appear on American news radio.

===1940s: Becoming a radio network outside the &quot;Big Three&quot;===
According to scholar Cornelia B. Rose, at the beginning of 1940, Mutual&#x27;s corporate structure expanded its inclusivity:

Until January, 1940, six groups bore the expense of the network operation in varying degree: stations WGN and WOR owned all the stock of the corporation and guaranteed to make up any deficit; the Colonial Network in New England, the Don Lee System on the Pacific Coast, and the group of stations owned by the Cleveland &quot;Plain Dealer&quot;, participated in responsibility for running expenses. A new contract effective February 1, 1940, provides for contributing membership by all the above group[s] plus station CKLW in Detroit-Windsor. These groups now agree to underwrite expenses and become stockholders in the network... An operating board for the network is representatives from each of these groups, together with additional representation appointed by other affiliated stations.
The new cooperative structure was also joined by the owners of WKRC in Cincinnati, which had replaced Mutual cofounder WLW in that market. The Mutual corporation now had 100 shares, apportioned as follows:
In 1941, WOR&#x27;s official city of license was changed to New York. Within two years, the Colonial Network&#x27;s affiliate roster and shares in Mutual had been fully absorbed into the Yankee Network by John Shepard III; WNAC was the sole flagship, WAAB having been moved to Worcester, in central Massachusetts, to avoid duopoly restrictions. With WBZ taking over the slot as the NBC Red affiliate in Boston, WNAC switched to Mutual. In January 1943, the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) approved the sale of the Yankee Network—with WNAC, its three other owned-and-operated stations, its contracts with 17 additional affiliates, and its Mutual shares—to the Ohio-based General Tire and Rubber Company.

By 1940, Mutual was already on par with the industry leaders in terms of affiliate roster size. Still, because Mutual affiliates were mostly in small markets or lesser stations in large ones, the network lagged way behind in advertising revenue—NBC took in eleven times as much as Mutual that year. In 1941, the FCC, calling for NBC to divest one of its two networks, observed that the company &quot;has utilized the Blue to forestall competition with the Red ... Mutual is excluded from, or only lamely admitted to, many important markets.&quot; On January 10, 1942, Mutual filed a $10.275 million suit against NBC and its parent company, RCA, alleging a conspiracy &quot;hindering and restricting Mutual freely and fairly to compete in the transmission in interstate commerce of nationwide network programs.&quot; The FCC&#x27;s Supreme Court victory in 1943 led to the sale of the Blue Network and Mutual dropping its lawsuit.

These developments appear to have been of more symbolic than practical value to Mutual—the transfer of the NBC Blue stations to the new American Broadcasting Company did little to help Mutual&#x27;s competitive position. In 1945, it reached 384 affiliates, and by December 1948, Mutual Broadcasting was heard on more than 500 stations in the United States. But this growth did not reflect any ability on Mutual&#x27;s part to attract leading stations from the corporate-controlled networks. Rather, the FCC had eased its technical standards for local stations, facilitating the establishment of new outlets in small markets. Between 1945 and 1952, the number of AM stations rose from around 940 to more than 2,350. It was these new, relatively weak stations that Mutual kept picking up. Though by now it had many more affiliates than any other U.S. radio network, for the most part they remained &quot;less desirable in frequency, power, and coverage,&quot; as the Supreme Court had put it. For instance, in the postwar era, CBS and NBC covered all of North Carolina, each with only four stations. Mutual needed fourteen affiliates to deliver comparable statewide coverage.
====Mutual&#x27;s involvement in television====
Late in the 1940s, there was a brief exploration into the idea of launching a Mutual-branded television network, serious enough to prompt talks with Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer as a potential source of programming talent. Plans for the proposed Mutual-branded network advanced far enough that, at the annual meeting of Mutual stockholders in April 1950, network president Frank White made an official announcement of the planned creation of a limited five-station Mutual network (Boston-WNAC, New York City-WOR, Washington, D.C.-WOIC, Chicago-WGN, and Los Angeles-KHJ). At that same time Mutual radio station KQV in Pittsburgh, which was engaged in an ultimately unsuccessful attempt to get a television license, was reportedly hoping for their station to be a Mutual television affiliate. &quot;Mutual Television Network&quot; ended up being the decided-on branding for the Mutual-branded network. However, the 5-station Mutual network failed in short time (operating for only 11 months), and Mutual became the only radio network outside the &quot;Big Three&quot; U.S. radio networks, even with a short-lived trial in TV, not to be long-term connected to (and eventually lose its dominance to) a television network. While the Mutual TV network was short-lived, this did not mean the group did not have an influence over commercial television&#x27;s early development. Several Mutual radio affiliates launched their own television stations that would often be affiliated with the television networks of ABC, NBC, CBS or DuMont.

The cooperative also held the rights to a number of valuable radio properties that made the transition to the new medium possible, including two of the era&#x27;s most popular variations on what would later become known as the tabloid talk show and &quot;reality&quot; programming: the crabby gabfest &quot;Leave It to the Girls&quot; and, in particular, &quot;Queen for a Day,&quot; which both started on Mutual radio in 1945. Referred to by some as a &quot;misery show,&quot; &quot;Queen for a Day&quot; &quot;awarded prizes to women who could come up with the most heart-stabbing stories told by the sick and the downtrodden ... On one show, a mother of nine requested a washing machine to replace one that broke when it fell on her husband and disabled him—and who, by the way, also needed heart surgery.&quot; In May 1947, a simulcast version began airing on the Don Lee system&#x27;s experimental TV station in Los Angeles, W6XAO (later KTSL). It was a smash hit, and by the turn of the decade, TV stations all along the coast were broadcasting it to high ratings. In the 1950s, Mutual would stare down NBC for four years as the mighty network sought to take control of the show.
====Programming: World War II and &quot;Superman&quot;====

Offscreen, Mutual remained an enterprising broadcaster. In 1940, a program featuring Cedric Foster joined Mutual&#x27;s respected schedule of news and opinion shows. Foster&#x27;s claim to fame was as the first daytime commentator to be heard nationally on a daily basis. The network aired that year&#x27;s NFL Championship Game on December 8, the first national broadcast of the annual event. Over the following half-decade, Mutual&#x27;s war coverage held its own with that of the wealthier networks, featuring field correspondents such as Henry Shapiro and Piet Van T Veer and commentators such as Cecil Brown, formerly of CBS. At 2:26 p.m. Eastern time, on Sunday, December 7, 1941, Mutual flagship station WOR interrupted a football game broadcast with a news flash reporting the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor. It was the first public announcement of the attack heard on the U.S. mainland. The first bombs had dropped 63 minutes earlier. In May 1945, Sigrid Schultz reported from one of the last Nazi concentration camps to be discovered, Ravensbrück. The following month, &quot;Meet the Press&quot; premiered with Martha Rountree as moderator. For a year and a half in the late 1940s, William Shirer came over from CBS to do current events commentary after his famous falling out with Edward Murrow. In 1948, Mutual&#x27;s four-part series &quot;To Secure These Rights&quot;, dramatizing the findings of President Truman&#x27;s Committee on Civil Rights, outraged many politicians and the network&#x27;s own affiliates in the segregated South.

In the field of entertainment, Mutual built on the incomparable success of &quot;The Shadow&quot;. WGN&#x27;s &quot;Chicago Theater of the Air&quot;, featuring hour-long opera and musical theater productions before a live audience, was broadcast for the first time in May 1940. By 1943, the weekly show was being recorded in front of houses 4,000 strong, gathered to see performances featuring a full orchestra and chorus. &quot;Chicago Theater of the Air&quot; would run on Mutual through March 1955. Mutual provided an early national outlet for the influential, iconoclastic satirist Henry Morgan, whose show &quot;Here&#x27;s Morgan&quot; began its network run in October 1940. Though &quot;The Lone Ranger&quot; moved over to NBC Blue in May 1942, within a few months Mutual had another reliable, and no less famous, action hero. &quot;The Adventures of Superman&quot;, picked up from WOR, would run on the network from August 1942 to June 1949. In April 1943, Mutual launched what would turn into one of its longest-lasting shows. Debuting as &quot;The Return of Nick Carter&quot; and later retitled &quot;Nick Carter, Master Detective&quot;, it would be a network staple through September 1955. From May 1943 through May 1946, Mutual aired &quot;The New Adventures of Sherlock Holmes&quot; starring Basil Rathbone and Nigel Bruce, reprising their roles from the Universal film series. An earlier incarnation of the show had run briefly on the network in 1936; a less starry version would return to Mutual from September 1947 through June 1949. &quot;The Mysterious Traveler&quot;, a proto–&quot;Twilight Zone&quot; anthology series, aired every week on Mutual from December 1943 until September 1952.

In February 1946, Mutual introduced a quiz show, &quot;Twenty Questions&quot;, that would run for more than seven years. In October, the detective series &quot;Let George Do It&quot;, starring Bob Bailey, launched as a Mutual/Don Lee presentation; it would also run into the mid-1950s. For two years, starting in 1946 as well, Steve Allen got his first network exposure on the Mutual/Don Lee morning show &quot;Smile Time&quot;, out of Los Angeles&#x27;s KHJ. In February 1947, the religiously oriented &quot;Family Theater&quot; premiered; with frequent appearances by major Hollywood stars, the series aired on Mutual for ten and a half years. That March, Kate Smith, a major star on CBS since 1931, moved over to Mutual. During most of her initial run at the network, which lasted until September 1951, she had two distinct weekday shows, each 15 minutes long: &quot;Kate Smith Speaks&quot;, at noon, and &quot;Kate Smith Sings&quot;, later in the hour. The network gave an outlet to radio dramatist Wyllis Cooper and his highly regarded suspense anthology &quot;Quiet, Please&quot;, which ran on Mutual from June 1947 to September 1948. It also aired actor Alan Ladd&#x27;s similarly lauded drama about a crime-solving mystery novelist, &quot;Box 13&quot;, which ran for precisely a year. Mayfair Productions, Ladd&#x27;s own business, produced its 52 episodes, which began airing every Sunday on August 22, 1948.

=== 1950s: New ownership ===
==== General Tire asserts control, then sells ====

Toward the end of 1950, the executors of the estate of Thomas S. Lee (the son of Don Lee, who had died in 1934) liquidated the estate&#x27;s broadcasting interests. The Don Lee Broadcasting System and its shares in Mutual were sold to General Tire for $12.3 million (equivalent to $ in ), which already had a sizable stake in Mutual via the Yankee Network. The sale prompted a challenge by Edwin W. Pauley, who led a failed bid for the group, claiming it violated Mutual bylaws stating no group could hold more than 25 percent of network stock. General Tire retained KHJ, KFRC and KGB, divesting the other stations. At the same time, Mutual acquired the television broadcast rights to the World Series and All-Star Game for the next six years. Mutual was likely re-indulging in TV network dreams or was simply taking advantage of a long-standing business relationship; in either case, Mutual sold the broadcast rights to NBC in time for the following season&#x27;s games at an enormous profit.

Early in 1952, General Tire purchased General Teleradio from R.H. Macy and Company. With the deal, General Tire acquired the WOR radio and TV stations and the rights to the General Teleradio brand, under which the company merged its broadcasting interests as a new division (Bamberger had previously sold its TV station in the nation&#x27;s capital, WOIC, to CBS and the &quot;Washington Post&quot;). Most importantly, WOR&#x27;s founding shares in Mutual, when added to the Yankee and Don Lee holdings, gave General Tire majority control of the network. General Tire head Thomas F. O&#x27;Neil, who had already taken over as president of the Don Lee stations, became president of Mutual in an executive shakeup.

While Mutual did not have a television network, it held rights to one of the most profitable shows in the medium: an early adaptation of &quot;Queen for a Day&quot; on General Teleradio/Don Lee&#x27;s KHJ-TV boasted an audience triple that of the city&#x27;s six other television stations combined. It was also the largest U.S. radio network in affiliate numbers, by far—it had around 560, almost three times as many as its most powerful competitors, CBS (194) and NBC (191). Still, the radio industry started to feel effects of major advertisers abandoning radio for television, with commercial rates being cut among all four networks, Mutual included. O&#x27;Neil proposed a barter-style restructuring at a July 1953 affiliates&#x27; conference in Cape Cod, Massachusetts, called &quot;The Cape Cod Plan&quot;: the network would provide five hours of sponsored programming daily and 14 hours of additional programming weekly that affiliates could sell commercial time for. The &quot;Cape Cod Plan&quot; eventually met with resistance from the affiliates, some of which saw it as an attempt by Mutual to make money at their expense; by the time of the next affiliates&#x27; conference in January 1954, O&#x27;Neil called the barter plan &quot;dead&quot;.

In 1955, General Tire expanded its media holdings by acquiring RKO Pictures from Howard Hughes, renaming General Teleradio as RKO Teleradio Pictures. The next year, a Canadian subsidiary of RKO purchased a governing interest in Mutual shareholder, Western Ontario Broadcasting, owner of CKLW in Windsor, Ontario, which served the Detroit market. When the deal closed, two of Western Ontario Broadcasting&#x27;s directors were U.S. citizens. RKO Teleradio Pictures also purchased Washington, D.C. station WGMS-AM-FM in April 1956, with WGMS joining Mutual. Closing the movie studio a year and a half later, the broadcasting division was renamed RKO Teleradio in 1957, and again to RKO General in 1958. The &quot;Mutual Dealer Plan&quot;, another attempt to revamp the network&#x27;s operations containing elements of the barter-style &quot;Cape Cod Plan&quot;, was unveiled to affiliates at an April 1956 conference to favorable reception. The plan, however, could not prevent two remaining minority shareholders in Mutual from leaving: United Broadcasting&#x27;s WHK switched to NBC in July, while founding station WGN became an independent on August 31, 1956, with ABC/&quot;Prairie Farmer&quot;-owned WLS becoming Mutual&#x27;s Chicago affiliate.

By this point, Mutual was foundering. Even with the &quot;Mutual Dealer Plan&quot; and staff cutbacks, the network suffered a loss of $400,000 (equivalent to $ in ) in 1956. In early July 1957, advertisers were notified the network could end operations at the end of the month, one of three options General Tire was considering for Mutual. Another option—spinning off Mutual while retaining the stations that had given it control—was ultimately taken, as a group led by Dr. Armand Hammer bought the network later in the month. Limited sponsorship packages were also introduced, in which an advertiser could back a show for an abbreviated period rather than an entire season, but there was no reversing the trend of television usurping radio. The radio networks were left with the bills for an increasing number of sustaining programs, which had no sponsors. The loss of mainstay advertisers was accompanied by what historian Ronald Garay describes as the &quot;mass desertion of network radio talent, management and technicians for television ... [and] these people were taking with them the programming that had popularized the radio networks.&quot;

==== Turmoil, propaganda allegations, and bankruptcy ====

The network soon changed hands again: in September 1958, it was acquired by the Scranton Lace Company for $2 million (equivalent to $ in ). Scranton was under the control of the F. L. Jacobs Company, whose chairman, Alexander Guterma, envisioned a media empire uniting Mutual with another purchase that year, Hal Roach Studios. Guterma&#x27;s tenure as Mutual president was brief: he resigned on February 13, 1959, amid increasing financial shortfalls, overdue payments to affiliates, unpaid phone bills with AT&amp;T, and an ongoing investigation by the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC). Hal Roach Jr. took over as president, but the SEC labeled him &quot;a Guterma puppet&quot; due to how he assumed Guterma&#x27;s shares and questioned his ability to run the network. A week after resigning, the SEC indicted Guterma on federal securities fraud charges, which led Roach to be removed as president of the film studio, though he retained his position as Mutual president. The SEC also ordered stock trading for the F. L. Jacobs Company suspended.

Scranton was under pressure to sell Mutual. The March 9, 1959, issue of &quot;Broadcasting&quot; magazine stated Mutual had a deficit of $1.05 million (equivalent to $ in ) and was losing up to $100,000 a month. AT&amp;T threatened to cut off Mutual&#x27;s telephone service within 24 hours if all outstanding charges were not paid, which would sever the network from its affiliates. An attempt to sell the network to Max Factor collapsed after the cosmetics manufacturer could not find a way to create a tax advantage from the existing financial losses. When AT&amp;T made another threat to disconnect phone service, network news director Robert F. Hurleigh engineered a last-minute deal with businessman Malcolm Smith, whose transaction to buy the network included $1 million of advertising time and payment of the outstanding AT&amp;T phone bill, which totaled over $400,000. The deal, however, failed to stop KALL in Salt Lake City and its 41-station regional &quot;Intermountain Network&quot; from switching to ABC. The Don Lee Network folded on April 26, with all 20 affiliates switching from Mutual to ABC and ABC purchasing Don Lee&#x27;s remaining programming. Yankee Network lead station WNAC severed ties with Mutual in August to become independent, but Mutual was allowed to affiliate with the other Yankee stations individually.

The troubles with Mutual worsened. While on a press junket to Ciudad Trujillo in May 1959, Hurleigh received confirmation that Dominican Republic dictator Rafael Trujillo secretly provided money to Guterma, Roach and Scranton Corp. vice president Garland Culpepper. Guterma accepted up to $750,000 from Trujillo, and in turn, Mutual newscasts were to have up to 425 minutes of puff pieces favorable to Trujillo&#x27;s regime broadcast per month. One story read by Walter Winchell regarded plans by Hal Roach Studios to film future movies in the country, while another story about Castro allies planning attacks against the Trujillo regime was read by Fulton Lewis Jr.; assorted &quot;news releases&quot; were also sent intended for newscasts but never broadcast. Outraged over the arrangement, Hurleigh went to the U.S. Justice Department, which also received a complaint from a Trujillo lawyer after Guterma failed to give the money back. By September, Guterma was indicted for failing to register as a foreign agent, with Roach and Culpepper as defendants. Guterma, who pleaded no contest to the charge, was sentenced to federal prison for stock fraud, but it was never proven that he actually fulfilled his part of the deal and arranged for slanted coverage. Nonetheless, the incident, combined with the network&#x27;s precarious financial position, led to a reported 130 stations ending their Mutual affiliations.

In the wake of the Trujillo scandal and affiliate defections, Smith sold Mutual to Hurleigh for $1 on July 1, 1959, which was followed by a voluntary Chapter 11 bankruptcy filing. Businessman Albert G. McCarthy took over operations, arranging to settle the network&#x27;s over $3 million in debts (equivalent to $ in ) while seeking an owner interested in running it on an ongoing basis. WOR signed a new contract with Mutual despite previously indicating the station would drop the network, becoming the lone RKO Teleradio station to renew ties as WGMS, KFRC, KHJ and WHBQ joined WNAC in independence. At the same time, WOR started to identify as &quot;WOR-AM-FM, owned by RKO General,&quot; eschewing on-air mentions of Mutual after listeners mistakenly thought WOR was &quot;also&quot; in bankruptcy; concurrently, Mutual changed their station cue to &quot;the Network of Independent Stations&quot;. A three-part reorganization plan resolving all debts was approved in bankruptcy court on December 23, 1959, allowing Mutual to emerge from Chapter 11; a network spokesperson commented, &quot;this means we start out with a clean slate; we are now divorced from any previous managements.&quot;

==== The Korean War and original drama&#x27;s decline ====

Before the Guterma fiasco, the network had maintained its reputation for running a strong and respected news organization. As the conflict on the Korean peninsula began to escalate in mid-1950, Mutual began airing two special nightly reports on the situation, featuring the commentary of Major George Fielding Eliot, military analyst for CBS during World War II. Six correspondents, more than NBC or ABC, were working for Mutual in Korea by August 1950. On occasion, Mutual&#x27;s commentary programs made the news: On March 11, 1954, Fulton Lewis Jr. featured Senator Joseph McCarthy as his guest, two days after the senator&#x27;s ethics had been called into question on the CBS TV show &quot;See It Now&quot;, hosted by Edward R. Murrow. In his radio interview, McCarthy dismissed Murrow as &quot;the extreme left-wing, bleeding-heart element of television.&quot; In 1957, Mutual refused to air an episode of Clarence Manion&#x27;s &quot;Manion Forum&quot; featuring Herbert V. Kohler Sr. due to controversy over the Kohler strikes.

Mutual began the 1950s by entering the realm of adult science fiction with &quot;2000 Plus&quot; on March 15, 1950, almost a month before NBC premiered the similarly themed &quot;Dimension X&quot;. The network picked up adventure series &quot;Challenge of the Yukon&quot; from ABC Radio, which originated at Mutual cofounder WXYZ in 1938 (but after the station left the network). Renamed &quot;Sergeant Preston of the Yukon&quot;, this show launched on Mutual on July 10, 1951. A partnership with Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer at the end of 1951 had the film studio supply up to six hours of programming per week starting in 1952 with &quot;The MGM Theater of the Air&quot; as its centerpiece, but the programs lasted for only one year. Another established drama, Phillips H. Lord&#x27;s &quot;Counterspy&quot;, moved to Mutual in 1953 after a prior run on ABC. The network&#x27;s other new offerings in 1953 were a further sign of the times—transcription reruns of &quot;Coke Time with Eddie Fisher&quot; (utilizing soundtracks from Fisher&#x27;s NBC-TV show) and an audio simulcast of CBS-TV&#x27;s &quot;Perry Como Chesterfield Show&quot;. &quot;The Shadow&quot;″s long run finally ended in December 1954, followed by &quot;Sergeant Preston&quot; in June 1955. &quot;Gang Busters&quot;, another Lord serial that ran on ABC, CBS, and NBC throughout the 1940s and early 1950s, moved to Mutual in October 1955. In November 1957, the final episodes of &quot;Counterspy&quot; and &quot;Gang Busters&quot; aired, ending the network&#x27;s last two remaining half-hour original dramatic shows. Mutual had forsworn the genre and would not broadcast a new dramatic series until 1973 with the short-lived Rod Serling vehicle &quot;The Zero Hour&quot;.

In 1955, the famous comedy team Bob and Ray came over from NBC for a five-day-a-week afternoon show. Kate Smith returned in January 1958 for her final radio series, which ran until August. In June 1958, just a few months before the Scranton takeover, the network had launched a nightly 25-minute newscast, &quot;The World Today&quot;, hosted by Westbrook Van Voorhis, famous as the voice of &quot;The March of Time&quot;. Sports began to occupy an increasing portion of Mutual&#x27;s schedule: the network began regularly airing a Major League Baseball &quot;Game of the Day,&quot; every day except Sunday. This expansion into daily sports programming would run well into the 1960s. While baseball&#x27;s World Series and All-Star Game would go to rival NBC in 1957, Mutual secured national radio rights to Notre Dame Fighting Irish football in 1954. The rights would switch between networks over the following decade before Mutual became the exclusive broadcaster in 1968, which would remain a cornerstone for the rest of the network&#x27;s existence.

=== 1960s–1970s: Narrowed focus ===
==== From 3M to Amway ====
In the spring of 1960, the Minnesota Mining and Manufacturing Company (3M) stepped in, purchasing Mutual for about $1.3 million and restoring much-needed stability to the operation. Despite the late 1950s Guterma scandal, Mutual still had 443 affiliates, easily the most of any network. By this time, as historian Jim Cox describes, both Mutual and ABC &quot;had largely wiped their slates clean of most of their network programming—save news and sporting events and a few long-running features&quot;. This would characterize Mutual&#x27;s essential approach for the next three and a half decades, through a further series of ownership changes.

In July 1966, 3M sold the network to the privately held Mutual Industries, Inc., headed by John P. Fraim and Loren M. Berry, for $3.1 million (equivalent to $ in ); Fraim was vice president of Berry&#x27;s Dayton, Ohio-based telephone directory publishing company. Upon Mutual Industries&#x27;s acquisition of Mutual, it was renamed to &quot;Mutual Broadcasting Corporation&quot;. The following month, after the death of Mutual stalwart Fulton Lewis Jr., his son Fulton Lewis III took over his nightly 7 p.m. slot. Another Ohio businessman, Daniel H. Overmyer, sought a merger with Mutual in 1967 amid plans to start his own TV network. The offer was rebuffed, but three Mutual stockholders joined eleven other investors to buy Overmyer&#x27;s hookup and rename it the United Network. The network and its only offering, &quot;The Las Vegas Show&quot;, folded after only a month on the air.

When ABC Radio &quot;split&quot; into four demographically targeted networks on January 1, 1968, Mutual unsuccessfully sued to block the move. Meanwhile, the network was undergoing some management instability, with frequent changes at the top. For example, Matthew J. Culligan was Mutual&#x27;s president from October 1966 to June 1968. He was replaced by Robert R. Pauley, who came over from the ABC radio division, where he had served as president for nearly seven years. But Pauley only lasted a year, and resigned after clashes with the board over the need for cost-cutting, and other decisions with which he disagreed. His replacement was Victor C. Diehm, owner of several Mutual-affiliated radio stations and active on the Mutual Affiliates Advisory Council.Diehm was succeeded early in 1972 by C. Edward Little, a former executive and owner of Hollywood, Florida, Mutual affiliate WGMA. Little arrived in the position with a commitment to expand Mutual&#x27;s news service and program offerings, conceding that Mutual had long been fourth among the legacy &quot;big four&quot; radio networks. Taking a page from ABC&#x27;s move to split its radio network years earlier, Little launched two additional news services, the Mutual Black Network (MBN) and the Mutual Spanish Network (MSN; Mutual Cadena Hispánica, or MCH), on May 1, 1972. Targeting Black audiences, MBN supplied 100 five-minute-long news and sports reports weekly along with other programming, with MCH featuring similar fare aimed at Spanish-language listeners. By July 1972, Mutual had 550 affiliates, MBN had 55 and MCH had 21. While MCH lasted only six months, by 1974, MBN had grown to 98 affiliates.

Another change in July 1974 was more subtle—Mutual introduced the distinctive two-toned &quot;Mutualert&quot; network cue tones heard at the beginning and end of newscasts and programs, between commercials and during network identification breaks. For the rest of its existence, Mutual would use these cue tones, dubbed &quot;bee-doops&quot; by listeners. The youth-oriented Mutual Progressive News was launched for Top 40 and country outlets and was also made available for non-commercial educational stations in markets without an existing Mutual affiliate. Little later oversaw the 1978 launch of the Mutual Southwest Network, a regional &quot;mininetwork&quot; that handled distribution for the Dallas Cowboys Radio Network and featured Southwest Conference football games. In 1976, 49 percent of MBN ownership was sold to the Sheridan Broadcasting Corporation followed by the remaining 51 percent in 1979, at which point MBN was renamed the Sheridan Broadcasting Network and later merged into National Black Network to create American Urban Radio Networks.

Fraim and Berry initially had control over Mutual Broadcasting Corp., but investor Benjamin D. Gilbert and his wife quietly bought out their stakes as well as those of the other investors, becoming the group&#x27;s principal owners. The Gilberts would attract unwanted attention for themselves over one particular program. In 1974, the Liberty Lobby, a think tank and lobby group that espoused far-right views and antisemitism, purchased airtime for a daily five-minute show, &quot;This Is Liberty Lobby&quot;, which also offered the organization&#x27;s &quot;America First&quot; pamphlet at the end of every episode. While not directly from Mutual, it was made available to the network&#x27;s over 600 stations, with 126 carrying it by July. The Anti-Defamation League alleged the Mutual connection came as the Gilberts personally contributed thousands of dollars to the Liberty Lobby since 1966. After refusing to transmit two specific episodes in November, Mutual cancelled the Liberty Lobby contract at year&#x27;s end.

In the March 21, 1977, issue of &quot;Broadcasting&quot; magazine, publisher John P. McGoff disclosed he had been in talks to purchase Mutual. A bidding war followed between Amway, a multi-level marketing company known for selling home care products, and Columbus, Georgia-based insurer American Family Corp., which dropped out after the asking price approached $20 million (equivalent to $ in ). On September 30, 1977, Amway bought the network. After the purchase, Mutual began to develop what would become the first nationwide commercial broadcast satellite network, leading to the end of decades of reliance on telephone lines for the broadcast industry&#x27;s transmission capacity. This proposal received FCC approval in late 1979. The biggest change to Mutual happened in 1978, when Amway purchased WCFL from the Chicago Federation of Labor for $12 million (equivalent to $ in ); for the first time, the network founded by radio stations directly owned a station of its own, and in one of the country&#x27;s largest markets. Mutual also reached its greatest number of affiliates that year with 950, fewer than ABC—whose multipronged approach had proven very successful—but far in front of NBC and CBS.

==== Rise of the call-in talk show ====

Outside of news and sports, one of the few primary network programs initiated by Mutual during this era rapidly became one of the most successful in its history—the first nationwide, all-night call-in talk radio program, which launched on November 3, 1975, with Herb Jepko as host. Jepko&#x27;s show, which originated from KSL in Salt Lake City in 1964 as &quot;Nitecap&quot;, was fed by Mutual for eight hours beginning at midnight ET, allowing for stations on the West Coast to carry it live. Mutual also signed up 12 high-powered AM stations to ensure coast-to-coast reception. Jepko so determinedly avoided controversial topics on the program that some callers simply talked about the weather where they lived. Fellow broadcaster Hilly Rose said of Jepko, &quot;he is the exact opposite of Joe Pyne and 99% of the successful talk show hosts in America. If (he) were any nicer, he would make Mary Poppins look like a witch.&quot;

In May 1977, Mutual dropped Jepko&#x27;s show, replacing it with the husband-and-wife team of Long John Nebel and Candy Jones from WMCA in New York City, whose program fared little better than Jepko&#x27;s. Nebel and Jones left Mutual by the end of the year and Mutual then hired a virtually unknown local talk show host at WIOD in Miami: Larry King. On January 30, 1978, the &quot;Larry King Show&quot; made its national debut on Mutual. Initially broadcast over 28 stations, by late 1979, King&#x27;s increasingly popular all-night program was being carried by nearly 200 stations. With a nightly audience of around 2 million listeners, the &quot;Larry King Show&quot; continued to attract new affiliates to the network during the early 1980s. King, like Jepko, generally steered clear of contentious topics and gave regular callers to the program pseudonyms or nicknames.

Originally a five-and-a-half hour program, the last half hour was relaunched as &quot;America in The Morning&quot;, a morning news magazine hosted by WCFL alumnus Jim Bohannon, in September 1984. King continued with his Mutual call-in show until 1994, long after his move to television in 1985 as host of &quot;Larry King Live&quot; for CNN. King&#x27;s success soon prompted NBC Radio and ABC Radio to launch NBC Talknet and ABC TalkRadio, respectively, both featuring call-in shows airing into the late-evening and overnight hours. The &quot;Larry King Show&quot; also won a Peabody Award for Mutual in 1982.

Mutual made additional ventures beyond talk programming and newscasts. Along with the network&#x27;s existing sports coverage, Mutual was the national radio broadcaster for &quot;Monday Night Football&quot; from 1970 through 1977. Mutual began nationally distributing &quot;Jamboree USA&quot; from WWVA in Wheeling, West Virginia, on February 23, 1979, marking the first time in years that the network featured a regularly scheduled live music program. &quot;Jamboree USA&quot; also became the first music program on radio to be transmitted by satellite; the new technology now further enabled Mutual to offer additional music programming to affiliates, including anthologies and concerts.

===1980s–1990s: The end of Mutual===

==== Acquisition by Westwood One ====

With their purchase of WCFL still pending, Amway acquired a second station for Mutual with New York City&#x27;s WHN from Storer Broadcasting on February 26, 1979, for $14 million (equivalent to $ in ), at the time the second-highest purchase price for a radio station. Supplanting WMCA as Mutual&#x27;s New York outlet, the deal closed on March 3, 1980. Re-branded &quot;Mutual/CFL&quot;, WCFL was relaunched in August 1979 as the flagship for Mutual Lifestyle Radio, a form of talk radio oriented towards light conversation. &quot;On a Country Road&quot;, a country music show hosted by WHN&#x27;s Lee Arnold, was given national distribution. Also in March 1980, Mutual picked up the &quot;Sears Radio Theater&quot; after CBS Radio dropped it, renaming it &quot;Mutual Radio Theater&quot;. While a number of well-regarded episodes were produced, the series ended on December 19, 1980, and was Mutual&#x27;s final radio drama. The Mutual Southwest Network also closed at the end of 1980; in both cases, &quot;Mutual Radio Theater&quot; and Mutual Southwest suffered from a lack of advertising support.

In 1981, Mutual launched &quot;Dick Clark&#x27;s National Music Survey&quot;, a three-hour-long weekly program combining music and interviews, a show Clark continued to host even after co-founding a competing syndicator, United Stations Radio Networks, earlier in the year. Sports commentaries were added, featuring the likes of Tommy Lasorda and Pat Summerall, along with hourly &quot;Wide Weekend of Sports&quot; sportscasts throughout the weekend; the network also held play-by-play rights to Notre Dame college football, the PGA Tour, the LPGA, the United States Tennis Association and regional rights for four NFL teams.

Mutual&#x27;s satellite network was fully online by 1982, but the new technology allowed for additional networks to emerge, some—including efforts from NBC, ABC, CBS, RKO, Satellite Music Network and Transtar—providing continuous programming to radio stations on a &quot;turnkey&quot; basis. WCFL also failed to meet the network&#x27;s expectations. Chuck Swirsky, hired as an evening sports talk host, later called WCFL &quot;... the lowest rated 50-thousand watts station in American broadcast history. We had blank pages for logs. Zero commercial inventory. Any PSA content our traffic department received, we immediately played on the air that night.&quot; As Mutual celebrated its 50th anniversary, Amway denied rumors of a possible sale, but executive Richard DeVos admitted the company was disappointed with their venture into broadcasting, calling Mutual &quot;a learning experience&quot; and their stewardship of WCFL &quot;not a very good one ... I began to question whether our people really knew how to run a radio station&quot;. Network president John Brian Clements asserted &quot;this network is not for sale&quot;, but the radio stations were: WCFL was sold to Statewide Broadcasting in November 1983 at a $4 million loss and WHN was sold to Doubleday Broadcasting in October 1984 at a $1 million loss. Clements took over as president when Amway&#x27;s board called for the resignation of several executives and followed downsizing due to &quot;softening sales&quot;.

In 1985, Westwood One, a radio production company and syndicator based in Culver City, California, sought to expand its operations. Westwood and Mutual were a good match: the demographics of Mutual affiliates tended to be adult, while most of the stations that bought Westwood&#x27;s music-oriented programming had substantially younger audiences. Mutual had news operations Westwood lacked, and although down from its peak, still commanded 860 affiliates and generated $25 million in revenue, a strong second among the Big Four. In September 1985, Amway sold the network to Westwood One for $39 million (equivalent to $ in ) outside of the satellite services division and uplink facility, which Amway retained. &quot;It&#x27;s a perfect fit,&quot; declared Westwood head Norman J. Pattiz. Referring to the united company&#x27;s ability to give advertisers access to a broad demographic sweep, he called it &quot;a classic case of two plus two equaling five.&quot; On July 20, 1987, the number got even bigger: Westwood One snapped up the NBC Radio Network for $50 million (equivalent to $ in ), pursuing Mutual&#x27;s long-time competitor since a planned sale of the network and NBC&#x27;s radio stations to Westinghouse Broadcasting fell through.

Mutual was now part of a much larger programming service, and its identity was being gradually phased out. In 1987, Mutual&#x27;s longform fare, including Larry King and Toni Grant, were placed in a new service called &quot;Mutual P.M.&quot;, which Westwood One touted as &quot;clon(ing) a new network from the existing network&quot; in hopes of attracting new advertisers. NBC Radio&#x27;s news and engineering staff was combined with Mutual personnel at the Arlington facility in 1989, and by 1992, programming between the two networks began to undergo consolidation, particularly in overnights and weekends. King switched his all-night radio show to a shorter daytime version on February 1, 1993, with the late-night slot going to Jim Bohannon; in addition to hosting &quot;America in The Morning&quot;, Bohannon had been King&#x27;s fill-in host since 1981 and later hosted his own weekend call-in program on Mutual with the same format as King&#x27;s. King&#x27;s daytime show ended in June 1994 and was replaced with a talk show hosted by comedian David Brenner, which lasted for two years. Westwood One began simulcasting the television audio of King&#x27;s nightly CNN talk show, &quot;Larry King Live&quot;, which continued through the end of 2009. Outside of Bohannon&#x27;s show, most Mutual programming was now being heard on smaller market stations, with many affiliates using it as a &quot;backup&quot; to a different primary affiliation; by 1999, Mutual News was down to approximately 300 affiliates.

==== Consolidation, streamlining and dissolution ====
Meanwhile, Westwood One began to be subject to larger mergers and acquisitions. Westwood One purchased competing syndicator Unistar Radio Networks from Infinity Broadcasting in 1994; as part of the deal, Infinity purchased 25 percent of Westwood One, becoming its largest shareholder and effectively taking it over. Westinghouse, which recently bought out CBS and was renamed CBS Corporation shortly thereafter, then acquired Infinity in June 1996 for just shy of $5 billion (equivalent to $ in ). The direct descendants of the three original U.S. radio network companies had merged, with Mutual little more than one of several brand names for programming under the aegis of Westwood One, itself under the control of a major conglomerate. Mutual and NBC Radio newscasters sat back to back in the Westwood One studio, the former main Mutual facility in Crystal City, Virginia, which now also fed CBS Radio News from New York City and CNN Radio feeds—which Westwood One also distributed—from Atlanta; despite newsroom signage still reading &quot;Mutual Broadcasting System&quot; as late as 1998, it was referred to internally as &quot;the Westwood One newsroom&quot;. The newsroom itself closed on August 31, 1998, with Mutual and NBC newscasts originating from the CBS Radio News facilities.

In early 1999, Westwood One announced that it would retire the Mutual name and end newscast production, with CNN Radio, CBS or Fox News Radio offered as replacements to affiliates. The majority of NBC Radio&#x27;s remaining services would also cease outside of morning drive hours. In addition to producing NBC, CBS and Mutual newscasts and distributing CNN content, Westwood One also began distributing Fox News; as a result, the company was marketing five different newscast brands in what one company representative called &quot;wasteful&quot;. A former staffer for Mutual&#x27;s news service described the end of the network: &quot;Official time of Mutual Radio&#x27;s death was Midnight 4/17/99. No tribute, no mention it was the last newscast ... it just died.&quot; The closure of Mutual News resulted in 12 staffers being dismissed from CBS Radio News, which itself underwent a recent series of cutbacks involving on-air talent.

While the dropping of the Mutual name was attributed to mass consolidation, in particular following passage of the 1996 Telecommunications Act, Dick Rosse, a Mutual Broadcasting System correspondent for 36 years until his retirement in 1998, wrote the following for an op-ed in &quot;Broadcasting &amp; Cable&quot;:

The Crystal City facility was closed in March 2001, with Westwood One&#x27;s primary operations transferred to the CBS Broadcast Center in New York City.

== Legacy ==

Westwood One&#x27;s corporate fate proved almost as complicated as the fate of Mutual itself. Spun off by majority owner CBS Corporation (one of two successors to the first Viacom, which acquired the first CBS Corporation in 1999) to The Gores Group in 2007, it was merged into Dial Global—a subsidiary of Oaktree Capital Management&#x27;s Triton Media Group unit—in 2011, ultimately taking that company&#x27;s name. Prior to its 2013 merger into Cumulus Media Networks, Dial Global reverted to using the Westwood One name. Even with all these changes, some current programming both on Westwood One (owned by Cumulus Media) and other syndicators can still trace their lineage directly to Mutual:

Jim Bohannon&#x27;s interview/call-in show, which debuted on Mutual in 1985 (and was a direct descendant of Larry King and Herb Jepko&#x27;s shows), continued until his abrupt retirement on October 14, 2022. Rich Valdés took over hosting duties for the program, which became &quot;Rich Valdés America at Night&quot; in January, 2023. Bohannon missed much of the summer of 2022 for what were initially unexplained reasons but was later revealed to be a diagnosis of terminal stage 4 esophageal cancer, and died after his final show. Bohannon also hosted the morning news magazine &quot;America in the Morning&quot; from its 1984 premiere over Mutual until 2015; &quot;America in the Morning&quot; continues to this day as a Westwood One program under Bohannon&#x27;s successor as host, John Trout.

Since 2004, the current incarnation of &quot;Meet the Press&quot;, first broadcast over Mutual in 1945, has had an audio simulcast over Westwood One. &quot;Country Countdown USA&quot;, founded in 1992 as a Mutual-branded program after the Westwood One purchase, continues to air in its original format but moved to Compass Media Networks in August 2022. Radio broadcasts of Notre Dame Fighting Irish football were eventually re-branded as from Westwood One a few years before the end of the Mutual network itself. At the conclusion of the 2007 football season, Notre Dame ended its relationship with Westwood One, citing financial reasons, and subsequently announced a deal with ISP Sports.

After taking over Westwood One in 2013, Cumulus Media launched a white-label news service, Westwood One News under a content-sharing deal with CNN. Launching on January 1, 2015, as a replacement service among Cumulus&#x27;s radio stations that previously affiliated with ABC News Radio, CBS News Radio and NBC News Radio (the latter having replaced CNN Radio in 2012), it ended operations on August 30, 2020.

Mutual founding stations WOR and WLW are now both owned by iHeartMedia, which operates their own syndication unit, Premiere Networks. Prior to being purchased by iHeartMedia in 2012 (as Clear Channel Communications), WOR operated a syndication service of their own, the WOR Radio Network. The other founding station, WGN, is owned by television broadcaster Nexstar Media Group as the lone radio station in their portfolio. WGN previously syndicated Orion Samuelson farm reports through its Tribune Radio Network, which carried Chicago Cubs broadcasts until the 2014 season.

== Awards and honors ==
The Mutual Broadcasting System has been the recipient of the following Peabody Awards:
*1941 Peabody Award: Outstanding Achievement in Music—Alfred Wallenstein (co-honored with WOR)
*1944 Peabody Award: Outstanding Educational Program—&quot;Human Adventure&quot;
*1946 Peabody Award Honorable Mention: &quot;Meet the Press&quot;
*1950 Peabody Award Honorable Mention: Contribution to International Understanding—&quot;Pursuit of Peace&quot; (co-honored with United Nations Radio)
*1956 Peabody Award: &quot;The Bob and Ray Show&quot; (co-honored with NBC)
*1982 Peabody Award: &quot;The Larry King Show&quot;
*1987 Peabody Award: &quot;Charities That Give and Take&quot;

== See also ==
=== Notable programs ===
Shows heard over the Mutual Broadcasting System during the &quot;Golden Age of Radio&quot; included the following:

*&quot;Abbott Mysteries&quot;, 1945–1947
*&quot;Adventure Parade&quot;, 1946–1949
*&quot;The Adventures of Champion&quot;, 1949
*&quot;The Adventures of Father Brown&quot;, 1945
*&quot;The Adventures of Maisie&quot;, 1952
*&quot;The Adventures of Superman&quot;, 1942–1949
*&quot;The Amazing Nero Wolfe&quot;, 1945
*&quot;A. L. Alexander&#x27;s Mediation Board&quot;, 1943–1952
*&quot;Archie Andrews&quot;, 1944
*&quot;Arch Oboler&#x27;s Plays&quot;, 1945
*&quot;The Black Museum&quot;, 1952
*&quot;Blackstone, the Magic Detective&quot;, 1948–1949
*&quot;Captain Midnight&quot;, 1940–1942; 1945–1949; 1949
*&quot;Charlie Chan&quot;, 1935–1945 (original series); 1947–1948 (reruns)
*&quot;Chick Carter, Boy Detective&quot;, 1943–1945
*&quot;The Cisco Kid&quot;, 1942–1945; 1946 (regional)
*&quot;The Couple Next Door&quot;, 1937
*&quot;The Crime Club&quot;, 1946–1947
*&quot;Crime Does Not Pay&quot;, 1952
*&quot;Dick Tracy&quot;, 1935–1937
*&quot;Family Theater&quot;, 1947–1957
*&quot;Hopalong Cassidy&quot;, 1950
*&quot;Hop Harrigan&quot;, 1946–1948
*&quot;I Love a Mystery&quot;, 1949–1952
*&quot;It Pays to Be Ignorant&quot;, 1942; 1943–1944
*&quot;Johnny Modero, Pier 23&quot;, 1947
*&quot;Land of the Lost&quot;, 1945–1946
*&quot;Mandrake the Magician&quot;, 1940–1942
*&quot;Mark Trail&quot;, 1950–1951
*&quot;Martin Kane, Private Eye&quot;, 1949–1951
*&quot;Red Ryder&quot;, 1942; 1942–1949 (regional)
*&quot;Queen for a Day&quot;, 1945–1947
*&quot;The Saint&quot;, 1949–1950
*&quot;The Lone Ranger&quot;, 1933–1954
*&quot;The Sea Hound&quot;, 1946–1947
*&quot;The Sealed Book&quot;, 1945
*&quot;The Shadow&quot;, 1937–1954
*&quot;Sky King&quot;, 1950–1954
*&quot;Skyroads&quot;, 1939
*&quot;The Two Ton Baker Show&quot;, 1948–1949
*&quot;Vic and Sade&quot;, 1946
*&quot;Voyage of the Scarlet Queen&quot;, 1947–1948
*&quot;The Zane Grey Show&quot;, 1947–1948
=== Notable staff ===

*Jim Bohannon, talk show host
*Tom Cheek, sportscaster
*Raymond Clapper, commentator
*Bud Collyer, actor
*Chuck Connors, actor
*Dizzy Dean, sportscaster
*Gene Elston, sportscaster
*Bob Feller, sportscaster
*Tex Fletcher, singing cowboy
*Eli Gold, sportscaster
*Morton Gould, conductor/arranger/pianist
*Toni Grant, talk-show host
*Ray Heatherton, musical actor
*Gabriel Heatter, commentator
*Skitch Henderson, conductor/arranger/pianist
*Ernest Holmes, religion-show host
*Quincy Howe, commentator
*Wilbur Budd Hulick, comic actor
*Herb Jepko, talk show host
*Candy Jones, talk show host
*Larry King, talk show host
*Fredell Lack, violinist
*Fulton Lewis, commentator
*Fulton Lewis III, commentator
*Tony Marvin, newscaster
*Long John Nebel, talk show host
*Lindsey Nelson, sportscaster
*Van Patrick, sportscaster
*Drew Pearson, https://www.neworleanssaints.com/news/al-wester-original-voice-of-the-new-orleans-saints-passes-at-93-20350936-show host
*Ed Salamon, programming executive
*Cesare Sodero, conductor
*Bill Stern, sportscaster
*Raymond Gram Swing, commentator
*Aloysius Michael Sullivan, announcer
*Phil Tonken, announcer
*Westbrook Van Voorhis, newscaster
*Al Wester, sportscaster
== Notes ==
== References ==
== Bibliography ==
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*Leblebici, Huseyin, Gerald R. Salancik, Anne Copay, and Tom King (1991). &quot;Institutional Change and the Transformation of Interorganizational Fields: An Organizational History of the U.S. Radio Broadcasting Industry,&quot; &quot;Administrative Science Quarterly&quot; (September). ISSN 0001-8392 (available online).
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*


==External links==
*Mutual Broadcasting System — Western States Museum of Broadcasting
*&quot;How Far Should the Government Control Radio?&quot; text of G.I. Roundtable pamphlet with details on Mutual in first section (&quot;Who Is It That Fills The Air With Radio Waves?&quot;), ca. 1945; part of American Historical Association website
*&quot;Reporters&#x27; Roundup&quot; Transcript radio broadcast transcript of group interview with guest U.S. Senator Everett M. Dirksen on weekly Mutual news program, September 16, 1957; part of Everett Dirksen Center website
*Truman Library—Charter Heslep Papers summary introduction to and listing of archive holdings of Mutual broadcaster&#x27;s papers (note that the Collection Description text incorrectly states that Chicago station WLS was an original member of Mutual; while it may have been involved in the predecessor Quality Network, it was not part of Mutual); part of Truman Presidential Museum and Library website

===Listening===
*Gabriel Heatter on the Doolittle Raid audio extract from news report, May 10, 1942; part of Authentic History Center website
*Mutual: Blackout on the West Coast audio extract from news report, December 8, 1941; part of Authentic History Center website
*Spotlight on Golden Age Networks—MBS links to audio samples of classic Mutual shows (note that the &quot;Lone Ranger&quot; sample comes from 1948, after the show had left Mutual); part of Digital Deli Online
*WOR: Interruption of Giants–Dodgers Football Game audio clip of news flash, December 7, 1941; part of Authentic History Center website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3034218" start="4" end="30" title="Mutual Broadcasting System" label="Mutual Broadcasting System"/>
<link wikidata="Q3034218" start="63" end="69" title="Mutual Broadcasting System" label="Mutual"/>
<link wikidata="Q3034218" start="96" end="99" title="Mutual Broadcasting System" label="MBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q3034218" start="101" end="113" title="Mutual Broadcasting System" label="Mutual Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q3034218" start="121" end="141" title="Mutual Broadcasting System" label="Mutual Radio Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061197" start="170" end="183" title="radio network" label="radio network"/>
<link wikidata="Q4353903" start="223" end="253" title="Golden Age of Radio" label="golden age of U.S. radio drama"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="315" end="330" title="Lone Ranger#Original radio series" label="The Lone Ranger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1805503" start="347" end="373" title="The Adventures of Superman (radio series)" label="The Adventures of Superman"/>
<link wikidata="Q967116" start="426" end="436" title="The Shadow" label="The Shadow"/>
<link wikidata="Q17018227" start="494" end="515" title="Major League Baseball on Mutual" label="Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069698" start="531" end="544" title="Major League Baseball All-Star Game" label="All-Star Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q265538" start="549" end="561" title="World Series" label="World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="568" end="592" title="National Football League" label="National Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q16147495" start="598" end="632" title="Notre Dame Fighting Irish football" label="Notre Dame Fighting Irish football"/>
<link wikidata="Q502319" start="857" end="867" title="talk radio" label="talk radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q213430" start="904" end="914" title="Larry King" label="Larry King"/>
<link wikidata="Q13569908" start="926" end="938" title="Jim Bohannon" label="Jim Bohannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2974371" start="994" end="1003" title="Cumulus Media Networks" label="ABC Radio"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1008" end="1039" title="Cumulus Media Networks#ABC Radio Networks" label="splitting their network in 1968"/>
<link wikidata="Q6944155" start="1085" end="1105" title="Mutual Black Network" label="Mutual Black Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q4745326" start="1206" end="1235" title="American Urban Radio Networks" label="American Urban Radio Networks"/>
<link wikidata="Q55641168" start="1244" end="1267" title="Mutual Spanish Network" label="Mutual Cadena Hispánica"/>
<link wikidata="Q16943180" start="1420" end="1446" title="Mutual Lifestyle Radio" label="Mutual Progressive Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416102" start="1656" end="1665" title="Network affiliate" label="affiliate"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="1813" end="1816" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="1818" end="1821" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q169889" start="1826" end="1829" title="American Broadcasting Company" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q4539" start="1977" end="1988" title="cooperative" label="cooperative"/>
<link wikidata="Q671510" start="2031" end="2052" title="National Public Radio" label="National Public Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q369128" start="2413" end="2425" title="General Tire" label="General Tire"/>
<link wikidata="Q363383" start="2597" end="2610" title="Armand Hammer" label="Armand Hammer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4972128" start="2868" end="2880" title="Broadcasting &amp;amp; Cable" label="Broadcasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q3125893" start="2953" end="2970" title="Hal Roach Studios" label="Hal Roach Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q7281" start="3109" end="3119" title="propaganda" label="propaganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q152474" start="3133" end="3148" title="Rafael Trujillo" label="Rafael Trujillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q51547013" start="3176" end="3200" title="Third Dominican Republic" label="Third Dominican Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062835" start="3308" end="3329" title="Chapter 11, Title 11, United States Code" label="Chapter 11 bankruptcy"/>
<link wikidata="Q159433" start="3533" end="3543" title="3M" label="3M Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q481800" start="3592" end="3597" title="Amway" label="Amway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3567563" start="3775" end="3787" title="Westwood One (1976–2011)" label="Westwood One"/>
<link wikidata="Q58037172" start="3816" end="3825" title="NBC Radio Network" label="NBC Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q3564763" start="4499" end="4502" title="WOR (AM)" label="WOR"/>
<link wikidata="Q25395" start="4506" end="4524" title="Newark, New Jersey" label="Newark, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4562" end="4592" title="Bamberger&amp;#x27;s#1929-1959" label="Bamberger Broadcasting Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q629269" start="4608" end="4629" title="Macy&amp;#x27;s" label="R.H. Macy and Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044253" start="4640" end="4646" title="WWOR-TV" label="WOR-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q369128" start="4729" end="4754" title="General Tire" label="General Tire &amp;amp; Rubber"/>
<link wikidata="Q7949870" start="4803" end="4806" title="WGN (AM)" label="WGN"/>
<link wikidata="Q47596" start="4864" end="4879" title="Chicago Tribune" label="Chicago Tribune"/>
<link wikidata="Q2538123" start="4888" end="4892" title="WXYT (AM)" label="WXYZ"/>
<link wikidata="Q1698486" start="4948" end="4951" title="WLW" label="WLW"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="5584" end="5612" title="CBS" label="Columbia Broadcasting System"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="5621" end="5650" title="NBC" label="National Broadcasting Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q58037172" start="5658" end="5661" title="NBC Radio Network" label="Red"/>
<link wikidata="Q3334260" start="5666" end="5670" title="Blue Network" label="Blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q7775269" start="6174" end="6195" title="The Witch&amp;#x27;s Tale" label="The Witch&amp;#x27;s Tale"/>
<link wikidata="Q6702993" start="6625" end="6638" title="Lum and Abner" label="Lum and Abner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588097" start="6681" end="6696" title="The Lone Ranger" label="The Lone Ranger"/>
<link wikidata="Q5130615" start="7089" end="7102" title="clear-channel station" label="clear-channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q826751" start="7222" end="7237" title="Cincinnati Reds" label="Cincinnati Reds"/>
<link wikidata="Q650840" start="7246" end="7267" title="Philadelphia Phillies" label="Philadelphia Phillies"/>
<link wikidata="Q5012433" start="7498" end="7502" title="CKLW" label="CKLW"/>
<link wikidata="Q182625" start="7506" end="7522" title="Windsor, Ontario" label="Windsor, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q4932367" start="7700" end="7709" title="Bob Elson" label="Bob Elson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3422661" start="7739" end="7749" title="Red Barber" label="Red Barber"/>
<link wikidata="Q6257584" start="8487" end="8499" title="John Shepard III" label="John Shepard"/>
<link wikidata="Q5456998" start="8540" end="8556" title="Flagship (radio)" label="flagship station"/>
<link wikidata="Q7956797" start="8558" end="8562" title="WFTQ" label="WAAB"/>
<link wikidata="Q7950244" start="8762" end="8766" title="WHKW" label="WGAR"/>
<link wikidata="Q6341163" start="8908" end="8911" title="KXFN" label="KWK"/>
<link wikidata="Q6341386" start="8931" end="8934" title="KXNO (AM)" label="KSO"/>
<link wikidata="Q7953115" start="8956" end="8959" title="WMT (AM)" label="WMT"/>
<link wikidata="Q6334922" start="8983" end="8987" title="KOIL" label="KOIL"/>
<link wikidata="Q6329177" start="9008" end="9012" title="KFOR (AM)" label="KFOR"/>
<link wikidata="Q48976579" start="9071" end="9086" title="Don Lee Network" label="Don Lee Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q3359017" start="9209" end="9235" title="owned-and-operated station" label="owned-and-operated station"/>
<link wikidata="Q6330167" start="9237" end="9240" title="KHJ (AM)" label="KHJ"/>
<link wikidata="Q6328266" start="9257" end="9261" title="KEAR (AM)" label="KFRC"/>
<link wikidata="Q14682618" start="9280" end="9283" title="KLSD" label="KGB"/>
<link wikidata="Q43081066" start="9302" end="9305" title="KOSJ" label="KDB"/>
<link wikidata="Q368646" start="9369" end="9378" title="shortwave" label="shortwave"/>
<link wikidata="Q126399" start="9479" end="9491" title="Warner Bros." label="Warner Bros."/>
<link wikidata="Q7952895" start="9662" end="9666" title="WBIX" label="WNAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q8048768" start="9687" end="9701" title="Yankee Network" label="Yankee Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q58037172" start="9885" end="9892" title="NBC Red" label="NBC Red"/>
<link wikidata="Q7949131" start="9926" end="9930" title="WEZE" label="WEEI"/>
<link wikidata="Q7950268" start="10147" end="10151" title="WHLO" label="WJAY"/>
<link wikidata="Q2537188" start="10167" end="10170" title="WHK (AM)" label="WHK"/>
<link wikidata="Q286036" start="10221" end="10237" title="The Plain Dealer" label="The Plain Dealer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2997362" start="11253" end="11269" title="physical culture" label="physical culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q4356411" start="11275" end="11292" title="Bernarr Macfadden" label="Bernarr Macfadden"/>
<link wikidata="Q3655415" start="11717" end="11757" title="Les Misérables (radio series)" label="adaptation of &amp;quot;Les Misérables&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q24829" start="11794" end="11806" title="Orson Welles" label="Orson Welles"/>
<link wikidata="Q442909" start="11833" end="11848" title="Mercury Theatre" label="Mercury Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q967116" start="11982" end="11992" title="The Shadow" label="The Shadow"/>
<link wikidata="Q4290509" start="12471" end="12487" title="The Green Hornet (radio series)" label="The Green Hornet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284551" start="12756" end="12765" title="Kay Kyser" label="Kay Kyser"/>
<link wikidata="Q60775841" start="12780" end="12808" title="Kay Kyser&amp;#x27;s Kollege of Musical Knowledge" label="Kollege of Musical Knowledge"/>
<link wikidata="Q8032" start="12975" end="12991" title="Indianapolis 500" label="Indianapolis 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q128831" start="13147" end="13180" title="Federal Communications Commission" label="Federal Communications Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q3093777" start="13875" end="13890" title="Gabriel Heatter" label="Gabriel Heatter"/>
<link wikidata="Q844495" start="13900" end="13920" title="Lindbergh kidnapping" label="Lindbergh kidnapping"/>
<link wikidata="Q7298809" start="14183" end="14201" title="Raymond Gram Swing" label="Raymond Gram Swing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5508444" start="14318" end="14334" title="Fulton Lewis" label="Fulton Lewis Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q7957441" start="14383" end="14386" title="WQOF" label="WOL"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="14607" end="14610" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2552879" start="14793" end="14806" title="Waverley Root" label="Waverley Root"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472967" start="14858" end="14872" title="Sigrid Schultz" label="Sigrid Schultz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7951878" start="16013" end="16017" title="WKRC (AM)" label="WKRC"/>
<link wikidata="Q6257584" start="16361" end="16377" title="John Shepard III" label="John Shepard III"/>
<link wikidata="Q49179" start="16433" end="16442" title="Worcester, Massachusetts" label="Worcester"/>
<link wikidata="Q5315897" start="16479" end="16486" title="duopoly (broadcasting)" label="duopoly"/>
<link wikidata="Q7947580" start="16506" end="16509" title="WBZ (AM)" label="WBZ"/>
<link wikidata="Q128831" start="16613" end="16646" title="Federal Communications Commission" label="Federal Communications Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q369128" start="16834" end="16865" title="General Tire" label="General Tire and Rubber Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q218038" start="17508" end="17511" title="RCA" label="RCA"/>
<link wikidata="Q169889" start="17935" end="17964" title="American Broadcasting Company" label="American Broadcasting Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q179200" start="19170" end="19189" title="Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer" label="Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="19493" end="19499" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q17516934" start="19500" end="19504" title="WNAC-TV (Boston)" label="WNAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="19506" end="19519" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044253" start="19520" end="19523" title="WWOR-TV" label="WOR"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="19525" end="19541" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q645710" start="19542" end="19546" title="WUSA (TV)" label="WOIC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="19548" end="19555" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q426594" start="19556" end="19559" title="WGN-TV" label="WGN"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="19565" end="19576" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q6326535" start="19577" end="19580" title="KCAL-TV" label="KHJ"/>
<link wikidata="Q6336417" start="19622" end="19625" title="KQV" label="KQV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342" start="19629" end="19639" title="Pittsburgh" label="Pittsburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="20521" end="20524" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262316" start="20533" end="20539" title="DuMont Network" label="DuMont"/>
<link wikidata="Q3546572" start="20769" end="20786" title="tabloid talk show" label="tabloid talk show"/>
<link wikidata="Q182415" start="20791" end="20822" title="reality television" label="&amp;quot;reality&amp;quot; programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q6510580" start="20849" end="20870" title="Leave It to the Girls" label="Leave It to the Girls"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270570" start="20903" end="20918" title="Queen for a Day" label="Queen for a Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q3191342" start="21485" end="21489" title="KCBS-TV" label="KTSL"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413768" start="22095" end="22116" title="NFL Championship Game, 1940" label="NFL Championship Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q5055977" start="22389" end="22400" title="Cecil Brown (journalist)" label="Cecil Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q52418" start="22573" end="22604" title="Attack on Pearl Harbor" label="Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q328468" start="22791" end="22815" title="Nazi concentration camps" label="Nazi concentration camps"/>
<link wikidata="Q159483" start="22834" end="22845" title="Ravensbrück concentration camp" label="Ravensbrück"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543066" start="22874" end="22888" title="Meet the Press" label="Meet the Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q74594" start="22910" end="22925" title="Martha Rountree" label="Martha Rountree"/>
<link wikidata="Q327287" start="22981" end="22995" title="William Shirer" label="William Shirer"/>
<link wikidata="Q353935" start="23081" end="23094" title="Edward Murrow" label="Edward Murrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q11613" start="23200" end="23216" title="Harry S. Truman" label="President Truman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241141" start="23224" end="23249" title="President&amp;#x27;s Committee on Civil Rights" label="Committee on Civil Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q2652357" start="23322" end="23338" title="segregated South" label="segregated South"/>
<link wikidata="Q5095805" start="23457" end="23483" title="Chicago Theater of the Air" label="Chicago Theater of the Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q973292" start="23927" end="23939" title="Henry Morgan (humorist)" label="Henry Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1805503" start="24181" end="24207" title="The Adventures of Superman (radio)" label="The Adventures of Superman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2471023" start="24395" end="24420" title="Nick Carter (literary character)" label="The Return of Nick Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7753486" start="24593" end="24630" title="The New Adventures of Sherlock Holmes" label="The New Adventures of Sherlock Holmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q336865" start="24646" end="24660" title="Basil Rathbone" label="Basil Rathbone"/>
<link wikidata="Q728050" start="24665" end="24676" title="Nigel Bruce" label="Nigel Bruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q168383" start="24709" end="24718" title="Universal Pictures" label="Universal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7752863" start="24897" end="24920" title="The Mysterious Traveler" label="The Mysterious Traveler"/>
<link wikidata="Q742103" start="24942" end="24955" title="The Twilight Zone (1959 TV series)" label="Twilight Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q302368" start="25104" end="25120" title="Twenty Questions" label="Twenty Questions"/>
<link wikidata="Q5407842" start="25209" end="25225" title="Let George Do It (radio)" label="Let George Do It"/>
<link wikidata="Q553276" start="25376" end="25387" title="Steve Allen" label="Steve Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6330167" start="25504" end="25507" title="KHJ (AM)" label="KHJ"/>
<link wikidata="Q5433265" start="25558" end="25572" title="Family Theater" label="Family Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q297442" start="25707" end="25717" title="Kate Smith" label="Kate Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q8039957" start="26052" end="26065" title="Wyllis Cooper" label="Wyllis Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q7271845" start="26115" end="26128" title="Quiet, Please" label="Quiet, Please"/>
<link wikidata="Q346280" start="26210" end="26219" title="Alan Ladd" label="Alan Ladd"/>
<link wikidata="Q4951486" start="26296" end="26302" title="Box 13" label="Box 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q5346892" start="26939" end="26954" title="Edwin W. Pauley" label="Edwin W. Pauley"/>
<link wikidata="Q166032" start="27921" end="27936" title="Washington Post" label="Washington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q7789469" start="28117" end="28138" title="Thomas F. O&amp;#x27;Neil" label="Thomas F. O&amp;#x27;Neil"/>
<link wikidata="Q6326535" start="28459" end="28465" title="KCAL-TV" label="KHJ-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q484830" start="28935" end="28941" title="barter" label="barter"/>
<link wikidata="Q49152" start="29008" end="29031" title="Cape Cod" label="Cape Cod, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q267282" start="29578" end="29590" title="RKO Pictures" label="RKO Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q189081" start="29596" end="29609" title="Howard Hughes" label="Howard Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5012433" start="29802" end="29806" title="CKLW" label="CKLW"/>
<link wikidata="Q182625" start="29810" end="29826" title="Windsor, Ontario" label="Windsor, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q12439" start="29845" end="29852" title="Detroit" label="Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="29994" end="30010" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q7955872" start="30019" end="30026" title="WWRC" label="WGMS-AM"/>
<link wikidata="Q6464640" start="30027" end="30029" title="WTOP-FM" label="FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750213" start="30195" end="30206" title="RKO General" label="RKO General"/>
<link wikidata="Q7919007" start="30644" end="30655" title="Independent station (North America)" label="independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q18389423" start="30691" end="30705" title="Prairie Farmer" label="Prairie Farmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7952483" start="30718" end="30721" title="WLS (AM)" label="WLS"/>
<link wikidata="Q363383" start="31239" end="31252" title="Armand Hammer" label="Armand Hammer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7649715" start="31579" end="31597" title="sustaining program" label="sustaining program"/>
<link wikidata="Q29018768" start="32192" end="32209" title="Alexander Guterma" label="Alexander Guterma"/>
<link wikidata="Q3125893" start="32285" end="32302" title="Hal Roach Studios" label="Hal Roach Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q35476" start="32485" end="32493" title="AT&amp;amp;T" label="AT&amp;amp;T"/>
<link wikidata="Q953944" start="32531" end="32570" title="U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission" label="U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q3125895" start="32578" end="32591" title="Hal Roach Jr." label="Hal Roach Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q7831917" start="32983" end="32996" title="stock trading" label="stock trading"/>
<link wikidata="Q4972128" start="33116" end="33128" title="Broadcasting &amp;amp; Cable" label="Broadcasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q2354647" start="33456" end="33466" title="Max Factor" label="Max Factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7689400" start="33543" end="33556" title="tax advantage" label="tax advantage"/>
<link wikidata="Q6340497" start="33951" end="33955" title="KWDZ" label="KALL"/>
<link wikidata="Q23337" start="33959" end="33973" title="Salt Lake City" label="Salt Lake City"/>
<link wikidata="Q7955115" start="34236" end="34240" title="WRKO" label="WNAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q5449032" start="34427" end="34439" title="press junket" label="press junket"/>
<link wikidata="Q34820" start="34443" end="34458" title="Ciudad Trujillo" label="Ciudad Trujillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q786" start="34508" end="34526" title="Dominican Republic" label="Dominican Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q152474" start="34536" end="34551" title="Rafael Trujillo" label="Rafael Trujillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7258874" start="34758" end="34769" title="Puffery" label="puff pieces"/>
<link wikidata="Q3097952" start="34845" end="34860" title="Walter Winchell" label="Walter Winchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q11256" start="34961" end="34967" title="Fidel Castro" label="Castro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553390" start="35196" end="35219" title="United States Department of Justice" label="U.S. Justice Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q4201315" start="35385" end="35398" title="foreign agent" label="foreign agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1733896" start="35461" end="35471" title="Nolo contendere" label="no contest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062835" start="35950" end="35971" title="Chapter 11, Title 11, United States Code" label="Chapter 11 bankruptcy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7950087" start="36369" end="36373" title="WHBQ (AM)" label="WHBQ"/>
<link wikidata="Q7949008" start="36461" end="36463" title="WEPN-FM" label="FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892354" start="36772" end="36788" title="United States bankruptcy court" label="bankruptcy court"/>
<link wikidata="Q5539263" start="37350" end="37371" title="George Fielding Eliot" label="George Fielding Eliot"/>
<link wikidata="Q189197" start="37617" end="37640" title="Joseph McCarthy" label="Senator Joseph McCarthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q476389" start="37751" end="37761" title="See It Now" label="See It Now"/>
<link wikidata="Q353935" start="37779" end="37795" title="Edward R. Murrow" label="Edward R. Murrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q27506061" start="37968" end="37983" title="Clarence Manion" label="Clarence Manion"/>
<link wikidata="Q6426045" start="38076" end="38090" title="Kohler strikes" label="Kohler strikes"/>
<link wikidata="Q24925" start="38147" end="38162" title="science fiction" label="science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q4597771" start="38174" end="38183" title="2000 Plus" label="2000 Plus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4355674" start="38272" end="38283" title="Dimension X (radio program)" label="Dimension X"/>
<link wikidata="Q2947979" start="38336" end="38358" title="Challenge of the Yukon" label="Challenge of the Yukon"/>
<link wikidata="Q19881300" start="38724" end="38750" title="The MGM Theater of the Air" label="The MGM Theater of the Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q7185915" start="38847" end="38863" title="Phillips Lord" label="Phillips H. Lord"/>
<link wikidata="Q5177038" start="38877" end="38887" title="Counterspy (radio series)" label="Counterspy"/>
<link wikidata="Q25303773" start="39025" end="39038" title="Electrical transcription" label="transcription"/>
<link wikidata="Q5141707" start="39055" end="39082" title="Coke Time with Eddie Fisher" label="Coke Time with Eddie Fisher"/>
<link wikidata="Q333405" start="39190" end="39200" title="Perry Como" label="Perry Como"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070786" start="39201" end="39213" title="Chesterfield (cigarette)" label="Chesterfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q4353209" start="39353" end="39365" title="Gang Busters" label="Gang Busters"/>
<link wikidata="Q435920" start="39781" end="39792" title="Rod Serling" label="Rod Serling"/>
<link wikidata="Q7776869" start="39807" end="39820" title="The Zero Hour (U.S. radio series)" label="The Zero Hour"/>
<link wikidata="Q4934511" start="39861" end="39872" title="Bob and Ray" label="Bob and Ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q7987185" start="40174" end="40195" title="Westbrook Van Voorhis" label="Westbrook Van Voorhis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2412728" start="40226" end="40243" title="The March of Time" label="The March of Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q16147495" start="40636" end="40670" title="Notre Dame Fighting Irish football" label="Notre Dame Fighting Irish football"/>
<link wikidata="Q159433" start="40973" end="41015" title="3M" label="Minnesota Mining and Manufacturing Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q6680398" start="41701" end="41715" title="Loren M. Berry" label="Loren M. Berry"/>
<link wikidata="Q34739" start="41798" end="41810" title="Dayton, Ohio" label="Dayton, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q220393" start="41817" end="41836" title="telephone directory" label="telephone directory"/>
<link wikidata="Q5508445" start="42055" end="42071" title="Fulton Lewis III" label="Fulton Lewis III"/>
<link wikidata="Q20880443" start="42133" end="42151" title="Daniel H. Overmyer" label="Daniel H. Overmyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7113832" start="42361" end="42375" title="Overmyer Network" label="United Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q7745524" start="42418" end="42436" title="The Las Vegas Show" label="The Las Vegas Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q2974371" start="42488" end="42497" title="Cumulus Media Networks" label="ABC Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q14948752" start="42839" end="42855" title="Robert Pauley" label="Robert R. Pauley"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="43284" end="43300" title="Twenty-One (game show)#Aftermath" label="C. Edward Little"/>
<link wikidata="Q234453" start="43334" end="43352" title="Hollywood, Florida" label="Hollywood, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q7952442" start="43371" end="43375" title="WLQY" label="WGMA"/>
<link wikidata="Q6944155" start="43710" end="43730" title="Mutual Black Network" label="Mutual Black Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q55641168" start="43745" end="43767" title="Mutual Spanish Network" label="Mutual Spanish Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q17145784" start="44634" end="44668" title="non-commercial educational station" label="non-commercial educational station"/>
<link wikidata="Q5211305" start="44858" end="44886" title="Dallas Cowboys Radio Network" label="Dallas Cowboys Radio Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q7571245" start="44900" end="44920" title="Southwest Conference" label="Southwest Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q6971024" start="45157" end="45179" title="National Black Network" label="National Black Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q4745326" start="45190" end="45219" title="American Urban Radio Networks" label="American Urban Radio Networks"/>
<link wikidata="Q6541867" start="45558" end="45571" title="Liberty Lobby" label="Liberty Lobby"/>
<link wikidata="Q155271" start="45575" end="45585" title="think tank" label="think tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q6663608" start="45590" end="45601" title="Lobbying in the United States" label="lobby group"/>
<link wikidata="Q204481" start="45616" end="45625" title="Far-right politics" label="far-right"/>
<link wikidata="Q2853398" start="45636" end="45648" title="Antisemitism in the United States" label="antisemitism"/>
<link wikidata="Q158818" start="45969" end="45991" title="Anti-Defamation League" label="Anti-Defamation League"/>
<link wikidata="Q50354512" start="46324" end="46338" title="John P. McGoff" label="John P. McGoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1499526" start="46392" end="46403" title="Bid price" label="bidding war"/>
<link wikidata="Q481800" start="46421" end="46426" title="Amway" label="Amway"/>
<link wikidata="Q188606" start="46430" end="46451" title="multi-level marketing" label="multi-level marketing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642542" start="46478" end="46487" title="home care" label="home care"/>
<link wikidata="Q239870" start="46502" end="46519" title="Columbus, Georgia" label="Columbus, Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4743730" start="46534" end="46555" title="American Family Insurance" label="American Family Corp."/>
<link wikidata="Q914232" start="46585" end="46597" title="asking price" label="asking price"/>
<link wikidata="Q149918" start="46787" end="46806" title="Communications satellite" label="broadcast satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q3564732" start="47052" end="47056" title="WCFL (AM)" label="WCFL"/>
<link wikidata="Q5095594" start="47066" end="47093" title="Chicago Federation of Labor" label="Chicago Federation of Labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q502319" start="47698" end="47708" title="talk radio" label="talk radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q4160191" start="47759" end="47769" title="Herb Jepko" label="Herb Jepko"/>
<link wikidata="Q127867470" start="47820" end="47823" title="KSL (AM)" label="KSL"/>
<link wikidata="Q23337" start="47827" end="47841" title="Salt Lake City" label="Salt Lake City"/>
<link wikidata="Q941023" start="47930" end="47932" title="Eastern Time Zone" label="ET"/>
<link wikidata="Q12606" start="47963" end="47973" title="West Coast of the United States" label="West Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q15512078" start="48231" end="48241" title="Hilly Rose" label="Hilly Rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q6211901" start="48291" end="48299" title="Joe Pyne" label="Joe Pyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q858705" start="48392" end="48404" title="Mary Poppins (book series)" label="Mary Poppins"/>
<link wikidata="Q6672751" start="48525" end="48540" title="Long John Nebel" label="Long John Nebel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3655230" start="48545" end="48556" title="Candy Jones" label="Candy Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q3564725" start="48562" end="48566" title="WMCA (AM)" label="WMCA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7950823" start="48755" end="48759" title="WIOD" label="WIOD"/>
<link wikidata="Q8652" start="48763" end="48768" title="Miami" label="Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q213430" start="48770" end="48780" title="Larry King" label="Larry King"/>
<link wikidata="Q19880748" start="48813" end="48828" title="Larry King Show" label="Larry King Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q25338374" start="49393" end="49415" title="America in The Morning" label="America in The Morning"/>
<link wikidata="Q13569908" start="49470" end="49482" title="Jim Bohannon" label="Jim Bohannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423559" start="49618" end="49633" title="Larry King Live" label="Larry King Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q48340" start="49644" end="49647" title="CNN" label="CNN"/>
<link wikidata="Q6952795" start="49717" end="49728" title="NBC Talknet" label="NBC Talknet"/>
<link wikidata="Q838121" start="49884" end="49897" title="Peabody Awards" label="Peabody Award"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="50098" end="50119" title="Monday Night Football#MNF on radio" label="Monday Night Football"/>
<link wikidata="Q187185" start="50193" end="50205" title="Wheeling Jamboree" label="Jamboree USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7957505" start="50217" end="50221" title="WWVA (AM)" label="WWVA"/>
<link wikidata="Q838112" start="50225" end="50248" title="Wheeling, West Virginia" label="Wheeling, West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q105420" start="50583" end="50594" title="Anthology" label="anthologies"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="50799" end="50802" title="WEPN (AM)#WHN" label="WHN"/>
<link wikidata="Q6381804" start="50808" end="50827" title="Storer Communications" label="Storer Broadcasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q16943180" start="51131" end="51153" title="Mutual Lifestyle Radio" label="Mutual Lifestyle Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q83440" start="51246" end="51259" title="country music" label="country music"/>
<link wikidata="Q7441793" start="51378" end="51397" title="Sears Radio Theater" label="Sears Radio Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q366563" start="51821" end="51831" title="Dick Clark" label="Dick Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q7893564" start="52011" end="52041" title="United Stations Radio Networks" label="United Stations Radio Networks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071896" start="52119" end="52132" title="Tommy Lasorda" label="Tommy Lasorda"/>
<link wikidata="Q3247792" start="52137" end="52150" title="Pat Summerall" label="Pat Summerall"/>
<link wikidata="Q910409" start="52319" end="52327" title="PGA Tour" label="PGA Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q27650" start="52333" end="52337" title="LPGA" label="LPGA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156323" start="52343" end="52375" title="United States Tennis Association" label="United States Tennis Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q7276885" start="52584" end="52587" title="RKO Radio Network" label="RKO"/>
<link wikidata="Q7426050" start="52589" end="52612" title="Satellite Music Network" label="Satellite Music Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q7835373" start="52617" end="52625" title="Transtar Radio Networks" label="Transtar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3247054" start="52767" end="52780" title="Chuck Swirsky" label="Chuck Swirsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395520" start="53175" end="53188" title="Richard DeVos" label="Richard DeVos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251563" start="53675" end="53697" title="Doubleday (publisher)" label="Doubleday Broadcasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q3567563" start="53911" end="53923" title="Westwood One (1976–2011)" label="Westwood One"/>
<link wikidata="Q493378" start="53976" end="53999" title="Culver City, California" label="Culver City, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q7052684" start="54674" end="54690" title="Norm Pattiz" label="Norman J. Pattiz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988935" start="55111" end="55136" title="Westinghouse Broadcasting" label="Westinghouse Broadcasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q7821263" start="55322" end="55332" title="Toni Grant" label="Toni Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q3017563" start="56206" end="56219" title="David Brenner" label="David Brenner"/>
<link wikidata="Q731112" start="56777" end="56801" title="mergers and acquisitions" label="mergers and acquisitions"/>
<link wikidata="Q7835373" start="56847" end="56869" title="Transtar Radio Networks" label="Unistar Radio Networks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022995" start="56875" end="56896" title="CBS Radio" label="Infinity Broadcasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q632404" start="57099" end="57114" title="Westinghouse Electric Corporation" label="CBS Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3820323" start="57575" end="57597" title="Crystal City, Virginia" label="Crystal City, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2931046" start="57618" end="57632" title="CBS News Radio" label="CBS Radio News"/>
<link wikidata="Q48340" start="57656" end="57665" title="CNN Radio" label="CNN Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q5476834" start="58142" end="58156" title="Fox News Radio" label="Fox News Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259376" start="58276" end="58289" title="morning drive" label="morning drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1309976" start="59009" end="59027" title="Concentration of media ownership" label="mass consolidation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778694" start="59068" end="59095" title="Telecommunications Act of 1996" label="1996 Telecommunications Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q4972128" start="59237" end="59261" title="Broadcasting &amp;amp; Cable" label="Broadcasting &amp;amp; Cable"/>
<link wikidata="Q5009232" start="59385" end="59405" title="CBS Broadcast Center" label="CBS Broadcast Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q950380" start="59560" end="59575" title="CBS Corporation" label="CBS Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3088127" start="59602" end="59618" title="Viacom (1952–2006)" label="the first Viacom"/>
<link wikidata="Q383831" start="59673" end="59688" title="The Gores Group" label="The Gores Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q2008551" start="59745" end="59771" title="Oaktree Capital Management" label="Oaktree Capital Management"/>
<link wikidata="Q7844320" start="59779" end="59797" title="Triton Media Group" label="Triton Media Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q2974371" start="59886" end="59908" title="Cumulus Media Networks" label="Cumulus Media Networks"/>
<link wikidata="Q5270455" start="59944" end="59956" title="Westwood One" label="Westwood One"/>
<link wikidata="Q5194189" start="60048" end="60061" title="Cumulus Media" label="Cumulus Media"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752284" start="60610" end="60617" title="Cancer staging" label="stage 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q372701" start="60618" end="60635" title="esophageal cancer" label="esophageal cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543066" start="60979" end="60993" title="Meet the Press" label="Meet the Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q5013024" start="61090" end="61111" title="Country Countdown USA" label="Country Countdown USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q5156100" start="61249" end="61271" title="Compass Media Networks" label="Compass Media Networks"/>
<link wikidata="Q16147495" start="61308" end="61342" title="Notre Dame Fighting Irish football" label="Notre Dame Fighting Irish football"/>
<link wikidata="Q5972014" start="61613" end="61623" title="ISP Sports" label="ISP Sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888882" start="61691" end="61702" title="White-label product" label="white-label"/>
<link wikidata="Q22079552" start="61717" end="61734" title="Westwood One News" label="Westwood One News"/>
<link wikidata="Q4650210" start="61897" end="61911" title="ABC News Radio" label="ABC News Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q58037172" start="61932" end="61946" title="NBC Radio Network" label="NBC News Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q477993" start="62095" end="62106" title="iHeartMedia" label="iHeartMedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7240379" start="62151" end="62168" title="Premiere Networks" label="Premiere Networks"/>
<link wikidata="Q7953975" start="62306" end="62323" title="WOR Radio Network" label="WOR Radio Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q7020906" start="62393" end="62412" title="Nexstar Media Group" label="Nexstar Media Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q7102800" start="62485" end="62500" title="Orion Samuelson" label="Orion Samuelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5095564" start="62563" end="62586" title="Chicago Cubs Radio Network" label="Chicago Cubs broadcasts"/>
<link wikidata="Q15911957" start="62593" end="62608" title="2014 Chicago Cubs season" label="the 2014 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q838121" start="62706" end="62720" title="Peabody Awards" label="Peabody Awards"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="62723" end="62741" title="List of Peabody Award winners (1940–1949)#1941" label="1941 Peabody Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284004" start="62776" end="62794" title="Alfred Wallenstein" label="Alfred Wallenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q3564763" start="62812" end="62815" title="WOR (AM)" label="WOR"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="62818" end="62836" title="List of Peabody Award winners (1940–1949)#1944" label="1944 Peabody Award"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="62899" end="62935" title="List of Peabody Award winners (1940–1949)#1946" label="1946 Peabody Award Honorable Mention"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543066" start="62943" end="62957" title="Meet the Press" label="Meet the Press"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="62965" end="63001" title="List of Peabody Award winners (1950–1959)#1950" label="1950 Peabody Award Honorable Mention"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191533" start="63093" end="63113" title="United Nations Radio" label="United Nations Radio"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="63116" end="63134" title="List of Peabody Award winners (1950–1959)#1956" label="1956 Peabody Award"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="63192" end="63210" title="List of Peabody Award winners (1980–1989)#1982" label="1982 Peabody Award"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="63245" end="63263" title="List of Peabody Award winners (1980–1989)#1987" label="1987 Peabody Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q4664371" start="63470" end="63486" title="Abbott Mysteries" label="Abbott Mysteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q4686518" start="63511" end="63527" title="Adventure Parade" label="Adventure Parade"/>
<link wikidata="Q17090913" start="63552" end="63578" title="The Adventures of Champion (radio series)" label="The Adventures of Champion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7712531" start="63598" end="63628" title="The Adventures of Father Brown" label="The Adventures of Father Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q7712583" start="63648" end="63672" title="The Adventures of Maisie" label="The Adventures of Maisie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1805503" start="63692" end="63718" title="The Adventures of Superman (radio series)" label="The Adventures of Superman"/>
<link wikidata="Q19866698" start="63743" end="63765" title="The Amazing Nero Wolfe" label="The Amazing Nero Wolfe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4648066" start="63785" end="63823" title="A.L. Alexander&amp;#x27;s Mediation Board" label="A. L. Alexander&amp;#x27;s Mediation Board"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="63848" end="63862" title="Archie Andrews (comics)#Archie on radio" label="Archie Andrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q4785318" start="63882" end="63906" title="Arch Oboler&amp;#x27;s Plays" label="Arch Oboler&amp;#x27;s Plays"/>
<link wikidata="Q7718394" start="63926" end="63942" title="The Black Museum (radio series)" label="The Black Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q4923387" start="63962" end="63993" title="Blackstone, the Magic Detective" label="Blackstone, the Magic Detective"/>
<link wikidata="Q5036734" start="64018" end="64034" title="Captain Midnight" label="Captain Midnight"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="64076" end="64088" title="Charlie Chan#Radio" label="Charlie Chan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="64151" end="64178" title="Nick Carter (literary character)#Radio" label="Chick Carter, Boy Detective"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="64203" end="64216" title="The Cisco Kid#Radio" label="The Cisco Kid"/>
<link wikidata="Q5403237" start="64258" end="64278" title="Ethel and Albert" label="The Couple Next Door"/>
<link wikidata="Q7728060" start="64298" end="64312" title="The Crime Club" label="The Crime Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q5185188" start="64337" end="64355" title="Crime Does Not Pay (radio)" label="Crime Does Not Pay"/>
<link wikidata="Q22907778" start="64375" end="64385" title="Dick Tracy (radio series)" label="Dick Tracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5433265" start="64410" end="64424" title="Family Theater" label="Family Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q64737192" start="64449" end="64465" title="Hopalong Cassidy" label="Hopalong Cassidy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5898918" start="64485" end="64497" title="Hop Harrigan" label="Hop Harrigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5978290" start="64522" end="64538" title="I Love a Mystery" label="I Love a Mystery"/>
<link wikidata="Q6091990" start="64563" end="64585" title="It Pays to Be Ignorant" label="It Pays to Be Ignorant"/>
<link wikidata="Q6267306" start="64616" end="64638" title="Johnny Modero, Pier 23" label="Johnny Modero, Pier 23"/>
<link wikidata="Q6484227" start="64658" end="64674" title="Land of the Lost (radio)" label="Land of the Lost"/>
<link wikidata="Q22683045" start="64699" end="64720" title="Mandrake the Magician (radio)" label="Mandrake the Magician"/>
<link wikidata="Q25001564" start="64745" end="64755" title="Mark Trail (radio)" label="Mark Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q6775851" start="64780" end="64804" title="Martin Kane, Private Eye" label="Martin Kane, Private Eye"/>
<link wikidata="Q22908206" start="64829" end="64838" title="Red Ryder (radio series)" label="Red Ryder"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270570" start="64880" end="64895" title="Queen for a Day" label="Queen for a Day"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="64920" end="64929" title="Simon Templar#The Saint on radio" label="The Saint"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588097" start="64954" end="64969" title="The Lone Ranger" label="The Lone Ranger"/>
<link wikidata="Q7762759" start="64994" end="65007" title="The Sea Hound" label="The Sea Hound"/>
<link wikidata="Q7762813" start="65032" end="65047" title="The Sealed Book" label="The Sealed Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q967116" start="65067" end="65077" title="The Shadow" label="The Shadow"/>
<link wikidata="Q3486425" start="65102" end="65110" title="Sky King" label="Sky King"/>
<link wikidata="Q7537981" start="65135" end="65143" title="Skyroads (comics)" label="Skyroads"/>
<link wikidata="Q37999366" start="65163" end="65185" title="Two Ton Baker" label="The Two Ton Baker Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q7924948" start="65210" end="65222" title="Vic and Sade" label="Vic and Sade"/>
<link wikidata="Q7942420" start="65242" end="65269" title="Voyage of the Scarlet Queen" label="Voyage of the Scarlet Queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q131320556" start="65294" end="65312" title="The Zane Grey Show" label="The Zane Grey Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q13569908" start="65354" end="65366" title="Jim Bohannon" label="Jim Bohannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1646437" start="65384" end="65393" title="Tom Cheek" label="Tom Cheek"/>
<link wikidata="Q20771373" start="65409" end="65424" title="Raymond Clapper" label="Raymond Clapper"/>
<link wikidata="Q2927489" start="65439" end="65450" title="Bud Collyer" label="Bud Collyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q705738" start="65459" end="65472" title="Chuck Connors" label="Chuck Connors"/>
<link wikidata="Q3032684" start="65481" end="65491" title="Dizzy Dean" label="Dizzy Dean"/>
<link wikidata="Q5531196" start="65507" end="65518" title="Gene Elston" label="Gene Elston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206676" start="65534" end="65544" title="Bob Feller" label="Bob Feller"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407521" start="65560" end="65572" title="Tex Fletcher" label="Tex Fletcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q12341515" start="65574" end="65588" title="singing cowboy" label="singing cowboy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5360233" start="65590" end="65598" title="Eli Gold" label="Eli Gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352656" start="65614" end="65626" title="Morton Gould" label="Morton Gould"/>
<link wikidata="Q7821263" start="65656" end="65666" title="Toni Grant" label="Toni Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q7297604" start="65684" end="65698" title="Ray Heatherton" label="Ray Heatherton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3093777" start="65715" end="65730" title="Gabriel Heatter" label="Gabriel Heatter"/>
<link wikidata="Q327138" start="65745" end="65761" title="Skitch Henderson" label="Skitch Henderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356379" start="65791" end="65804" title="Ernest Holmes" label="Ernest Holmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272146" start="65826" end="65837" title="Quincy Howe" label="Quincy Howe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7619651" start="65852" end="65870" title="Stoopnagle and Budd" label="Wilbur Budd Hulick"/>
<link wikidata="Q4160191" start="65885" end="65895" title="Herb Jepko" label="Herb Jepko"/>
<link wikidata="Q3655230" start="65913" end="65924" title="Candy Jones" label="Candy Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q213430" start="65942" end="65952" title="Larry King" label="Larry King"/>
<link wikidata="Q5496949" start="65970" end="65982" title="Fredell Lack" label="Fredell Lack"/>
<link wikidata="Q5508444" start="65995" end="66007" title="Fulton Lewis" label="Fulton Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5508445" start="66022" end="66038" title="Fulton Lewis III" label="Fulton Lewis III"/>
<link wikidata="Q16014121" start="66053" end="66064" title="Tony Marvin" label="Tony Marvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6672751" start="66078" end="66093" title="Long John Nebel" label="Long John Nebel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6552900" start="66111" end="66125" title="Lindsey Nelson" label="Lindsey Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7913583" start="66141" end="66152" title="Van Patrick" label="Van Patrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q5307262" start="66168" end="66180" title="Drew Pearson (journalist)" label="Drew Pearson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5335360" start="66304" end="66314" title="Ed Salamon" label="Ed Salamon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4426737" start="66339" end="66352" title="Cesare Sodero" label="Cesare Sodero"/>
<link wikidata="Q4911006" start="66365" end="66375" title="Bill Stern" label="Bill Stern"/>
<link wikidata="Q7298809" start="66391" end="66409" title="Raymond Gram Swing" label="Raymond Gram Swing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4734706" start="66424" end="66449" title="Aloysius Michael Sullivan" label="Aloysius Michael Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16015008" start="66462" end="66473" title="Phil Tonken" label="Phil Tonken"/>
<link wikidata="Q7987185" start="66486" end="66507" title="Westbrook Van Voorhis" label="Westbrook Van Voorhis"/>
<link wikidata="Q60694626" start="66521" end="66530" title="Al Wester" label="Al Wester"/>
<link wikidata="Q19276927" start="66638" end="66656" title="Gerald R. Salancik" label="Gerald R. Salancik"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="67007" end="67044" title="Western States Museum of Broadcasting" label="Western States Museum of Broadcasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1382002" start="67414" end="67432" title="Everett M. Dirksen" label="Everett M. Dirksen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7952483" start="67736" end="67739" title="WLS (AM)" label="WLS"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="187327" wikidata="Q6375418" url="?curid=187327" title="Kate Ceberano">
<text>Catherine Yvette Ceberano ( or , born 17 November 1966) is an Australian singer and actress who performs in the soul, jazz, and pop genres, as well as in film and musicals such as &quot;Jesus Christ Superstar&quot;. Her single &quot;Bedroom Eyes&quot; received a platinum sales certification in 1989. As of 2023, Ceberano has 11 platinum and 8 gold albums
Ceberano was the artistic director of the Adelaide Cabaret Festival in 2012, 2013, and 2014.

==Early life==
Catherine Yvette Ceberano was born in Melbourne, Australia, to an American father of Filipino descent and an Australian mother. Her father is karate master Tino Ceberano, from Hawaii . Her maternal forebears were some of the earliest settlers and government officials in South Australia, Victoria and Tasmania.

==Career==
===Music===
Ceberano first came to prominence singing back-up vocals with Melbourne, Australia band Models. The band produced a Top 5 album in 1985 called &quot;Out of Mind, Out of Sight&quot;, before Ceberano found fame with her funk band I&#x27;m Talking. I&#x27;m Talking are acknowledged as the band &quot;who pioneered New York-style art pop in Australia during the Jurassic Period of Pub Rock&quot;. The group was managed by Ken West, now known for being a co-founder of the Big Day Out events. The group&#x27;s debut album, &quot;Bear Witness&quot;, included three top ten singles and achieved a platinum sales certification. Ceberano won the Most Popular Female Performer award at the 1986 Countdown Awards.

After the debut album, the group broke up and Ceberano went solo. It was then, in the late 1980s, that she earned a reputation for her soul, jazz and pop repertoire. Radio stations labelled her as having &quot;one of the greatest voices our music industry has ever produced&quot;. Ceberano&#x27;s first solo album was the live recording &quot;Kate Ceberano and her Septet&quot;, released in March 1987. In September 1987, Ceberano represented Australia at the 1987 ABU Popular Song Contest with the song &quot;Time Can&#x27;t Keep Us Apart&quot;, written by Allan Zavod, winning the contest.

In 1988, she collaborated with Wendy Matthews on the album &quot;You&#x27;ve Always Got The Blues&quot;, which was the soundtrack to the ABC Television show &quot;Stringer&quot;. The album peaked at No. 7 on the ARIA charts and earned her a nomination for the ARIA Award for Best Female Artist in 1988.

In 1989, Ceberano released her album &quot;Brave&quot;. The album was the 20th highest-selling album in Australia in 1989 and spawned four singles, including &quot;Bedroom Eyes&quot;, which became the fifth highest-selling single in Australia in 1989 and the highest-selling single by an Australian artist that year. Two tracks, &quot;Young Boys Are My Weakness&quot; and &quot;Obsession&quot;, were recorded with Phil Harding and Ian Curnow at PWL Studios, with Harding recalling, &quot;for us to work with such a great singer was an unusual treat.&quot;

At the 1989 ARIA awards, she won the ARIA Award for Best Female Artist and ARIA Award for Highest Selling Single for &quot;Bedroom Eyes&quot;. At the end of 1990, she received three Mo Awards for Jazz Performer, Female Rock Performer and Contemporary Concert Performer of the Year.

Ceberano contributed &quot;Nature Boy&quot; to &quot;The Crossing&quot; soundtrack, before releasing the albums &quot;Like Now&quot; in 1990 and &quot;Think About It!&quot; in 1991. In 1992, she joined the cast of the Australian national tour of &quot;Jesus Christ Superstar&quot;, taking the role of Mary Magdalene. The album was the highest-selling album in Australia in 1992, certified four times platinum. Three singles were released from the album, including &quot;Everything&#x27;s Alright&quot; (with John Farnham and Jon Stevens), which peaked at No. 6 on the ARIA charts. Ceberano won a Logie Award for Most Popular Music Video in 1993 for &quot;Everything&#x27;s Alright&quot;. &quot;I Don&#x27;t Know How To Love Him&quot; was the second single and won Ceberano another nomination for Best Female Artist in 1993. Ceberano followed this success with a late-night cabaret show on ABC-TV called &quot;Kate Ceberano and Friends&quot; (1993–1994). The album from the program was certified gold and peaked at No. 19 in 1994.

Ceberano travelled to New York and recorded a number of songs which were to appear of an album with the working title of &quot;Globe&quot;. The album was scrapped by label Elektra Records. However, a number of recordings from this session appears on her 1996 album &quot;Blue Box&quot; which also went gold. She was nominated for another Best Female Artist at the ARIA Music Awards of 1995. In 1997 she co-wrote and released &quot;Pash&quot;, a pop song which went platinum. The album &quot;Pash&quot; went to No. 5 on the ARIA charts, was certified gold.

Following the success of Pash, Ceberano released her first greatest hits collection, &quot;True Romantic: The Best of Kate Ceberano&quot;, in 1999. The album included 16 hits from her career to date, along with two new singles: &quot;True Romantic&quot; (co-written with her Pash collaborator Mark Goldenberg) and &quot;I Won&#x27;t Let You Down&quot; (a cover of the Ph.D single from 1980). The greatest hits album was a strong commercial success, peaking in at No. 9 on the ARIA Album Charts, selling double platinum and stayed in the charts for 27 weeks. Ceberano was part of two major Australian tours that year – the John Farnham (&quot;I Can&#x27;t Believe He&#x27;s 50&quot;) tour and her own greatest hits Australian tour (supported by Vika &amp; Linda and Vanessa Amorosi).

In the early 2000s, Ceberano made a further attempt at the US market by relocating to Los Angeles and signing with Chicago Kid Records, which released her single &quot;Yes&quot; in 2002. As Ceberano wrote in her autobiography, she wrote an album titled &quot;The Girl Who Ruled The World&quot;, which was ultimately declined by her Australian record company. Returning to Australia, Ceberano signed with an Australian manager and released her 2003 studio album &quot;The Girl Can Help It&quot;. In 2007, Ceberano saluted the 1980s with her cover album &quot;Nine Lime Avenue&quot;, which was recorded in three weeks while she was on television show &quot;Dancing with the Stars&quot;. The album was a commercial success, peaking at No. 4 and gave Ceberano her first top 5 album since 1989&#x27;s &quot;Brave&quot;. Ceberano toured in late 2007 before recording another cover album, released in 2008, titled &quot;So Much Beauty&quot;, which peaked at No. 9 in Australia.

Ceberano released three albums in 2009: the first is a collaborative jazz album that was recorded with Mark Isham, titled &quot;Bittersweet&quot;, which earned Ceberano a nomination at the 2009 ARIA awards; the second, an indie album with Dallas Cosmas, titled &quot;Dallas et Kate&quot;; and in November, Ceberano released her first Christmas album, simply titled &quot;Merry Christmas&quot;, which was certified gold.

In 2010, Ceberano was crowned Queen of Moomba, while Molly Meldrum was crowned King.

Ceberano launched a studio album in August 2013, titled &quot;Kensal Road&quot;, and it was her first album of new material in ten years. The album was preceded by the single release &quot;Magnet&quot; and Ceberano toured nationally in October 2013.

On 6 May 2016, her 3-disc &quot;Anthology&quot; album was released. On 15 April 2018, Ceberano performed at the 2018 Commonwealth Games closing ceremony.

On 17 October 2018, Ceberano confirmed that she will reunite with I&#x27;m Talking, who will return to the stage in 2019 for to support Bryan Ferry&#x27;s Australian tour. &quot;I never, ever thought I&#x27;m Talking would reform and I&#x27;m a very optimistic person. The band split due to external pressures. So this reunion feels really good. Everything&#x27;s amicable, we&#x27;re all getting along. You learn a lot in hindsight. After 30 plus years things take on a treasured hue. You&#x27;re not tired of the songs. They actually sound awesome. We are a time capsule.&quot;

In 2019, Ceberano released &quot;Tryst&quot; with Paul Grabowsky. The album won the ARIA Award for Best Jazz Album at the ARIA Music Awards of 2019.

In February 2021, Ceberano released &quot;Sweet Inspiration&quot;, her 17th studio and 28th career album. It includes ten cover versions and two original tracks.

In May 2023, Ceberano released &quot;My Life is a Symphony&quot; with Melbourne Symphony Orchestra.

===Film and television===
Ceberano made her acting debut in a feature film, playing Jenna in &quot;Dust Off The Wings&quot;, directed by her husband, Lee Rogers.

In 1993, Ceberano hosted her own late-night cabaret-style show on ABC TV called &quot;Kate Ceberano And Friends&quot;.

In 1999, Ceberano starred in the film &quot;&quot;, which was directed by Paul Cox.

In 2005, Ceberano was a judge in the inaugural season of &quot;X Factor Australia&quot;, along with Mark Holden and John Reid, before joining &quot;Dancing with the Stars&quot; in 2007, of which she was crowned champion. Late that year, Ceberano participated in series 2 of &quot;It Takes Two&quot;, where she mentored Australian swimmer Daniel Kowalski. She returned in 2008 for series 3 and mentored Australian Football League (AFL) player Russell Robertson, who would go on to be runner-up.

In January 2008, Ceberano&#x27;s family tree and career was documented in SBS&#x27;s &quot;Who Do You Think You Are?&quot; (series 1/ episode 2).

From January 2011, Ceberano was a presenter on the Nine Network&#x27;s &quot;Getaway&quot; television series, as well as a relief host for Kerri-Anne Kennerley&#x27;s morning program also on the Nine Network. In November 2011, Ceberano was announced as the host of the Nine Network&#x27;s television series &quot;Excess Baggage&quot;.

In late 2019, she was eliminated seventh from The Masked Singer and revealed to be the &#x27;Lion&#x27;.

===Other work===
As the Berlei Curves ambassador, Ceberano launched the debut Berlei Curves Spring Summer 2010 collection and remained in this role in September 2012.

Ceberano was appointed the Victorian Ambassador for the National Breast Cancer Foundation. As the Victorian Ambassador, she helps to raise funds and awareness about breast cancer. Ceberano explained: &quot;I like to be as involved as I possibly can in causes I feel strongly about. Yes, I am a musician, but if I can do more to help others then I will.&quot;

From August to October 2012, she played the part of Bloody Mary in the Bartlett Sher directed revival of the musical &quot;South Pacific&quot; throughout the Australian east coast. The show included Teddy Tahu Rhodes, Lisa McCune, and Eddie Perfect.

Her memoir, &quot;I&#x27;m Talking: My Life, My Words, My Music&quot;, was published by Hachette Australia in 2014. She co-wrote the book with Tom Gilling.

On 3 October 2015, she sang the Australian national anthem before AFL Grand Final at the MCG in Melbourne, Australia.

==Personal life==
In February 1996, Ceberano married Lee Rogers after an almost four-year engagement. They married at Mietta O&#x27;Donnell&#x27;s Queenscliff Hotel on Port Phillip Bay. In 2004, she gave birth to their daughter.

Portraits of Ceberano have twice won the Archibald Packing Room Prize: Peter Robertson&#x27;s in 1994 and Kathrin Longhurst&#x27;s in 2021. Christine O&#x27;Hagan&#x27;s portrait of her was also an Archibald finalist in 2010.

Ceberano is a Scientologist.

==Discography==

*1988 &quot;You&#x27;ve Always Got the Blues&quot; (with Wendy Matthews) 
*1989 &quot;Brave&quot; 
*1990 &quot;Like Now&quot; (as Kate Ceberano &amp; Her Sextet) 
*1991 &quot;Think About It!&quot;
*1996 &quot;Blue Box&quot;
*1998 &quot;Pash&quot;
*1999 &quot;True Romantic&quot;
*2003 &quot;The Girl Can Help It&quot;
*2004 &quot;19 Days in New York&quot; 
*2007 &quot;Nine Lime Avenue&quot; 
*2008 &quot;So Much Beauty&quot;
*2009 &quot;Bittersweet&quot; (with Mark Isham)
*2009 &quot;Dallas et Kate&quot; (with Dallas Cosmos)
*2009 &quot;Merry Christmas&quot;
*2013 &quot;Kensal Road&quot; 
*2015 &quot;Lullaby&quot; (with Nigel MacLean)
*2016 &quot;Anthology&quot;
*2019 &quot;Tryst&quot; (with Paul Grabowsky)
*2020 &quot;The Dangerous Age&quot; (with Steve Kilbey and Sean Sennett)
*2021 &quot;Sweet Inspiration&quot;
*2023 &quot;My Life is a Symphony&quot; (with Melbourne Symphony Orchestra)

==Awards and nominations==
===AIR Awards===
The Australian Independent Record Awards (commonly known informally as AIR Awards) is an annual awards night to recognise, promote and celebrate the success of Australia&#x27;s Independent Music sector.
|-
| 2020
| &quot;Tryst&quot;
| Best Independent Jazz Album or EP
| 
| 2024
| &quot;My Life Is a Symphony&quot;
| Best Independent Pop Album or EP
| 


===APRA Awards===
The APRA Awards are held in Australia and New Zealand by the Australasian Performing Right Association to recognise songwriting skills, sales and airplay performance by its members annually. Ceberano has been nominated for one award.
|-
| 1999
| &quot;Love Is Alive&quot; (Mark Goldenberg and Kate Ceberano)
| Most Performed Australian Work
|-
===ARIA Awards===
The ARIA Music Awards is an annual awards ceremony that recognises excellence, innovation, and achievement across all genres of Australian music.
|-
| 1988
| Rowspan=&quot;2&quot; | Best Female Artist
|-
| rowspan=&quot;3&quot;| 1989
|rowspan=&quot;3&quot;| &quot;You&#x27;ve Always Got the Blues&quot;
|-
| Best Adult Contemporary Album (with Wendy Matthews)
|-
| Best Jazz Album (with Wendy Matthews)
|-
|rowspan=&quot;3&quot;| 1990
|&quot;Bedroom Eyes&quot;
| Highest Selling Single
|-
| rowspan=&quot;2&quot;| &quot;Brave&quot;
| Album of the Year
|-
| Rowspan=&quot;6&quot; | Best Female Artist
|-
| 1991
| &quot;Like Now&quot;
|-
| 1992
| &quot;Think About It!&quot;
|-
| 1993
| &quot;I Don&#x27;t Know How to Love Him&quot;
|-
| 1994
| &quot;You&#x27;ve Got a Friend&quot;
|-
| rowspan=&quot;2&quot;| 1996
|rowspan=&quot;2&quot;| &quot;Change&quot;
|-
| Best Adult Contemporary Album
|-
| 1998
| &quot;Pash&quot;
| Best Female Artist
|-
| 2009
| &quot;Bittersweet&quot;
| Best Jazz Album (with Mark Isham)
|-
| 2019
| &quot;Tryst&quot;
| Best Jazz Album (with Paul Grabowsky)
|-
| 2023
| &quot;My Life Is a Symphony&quot;
| Best Adult Contemporary Album
|-
===Australian Songwriters Hall of Fame===
The Australian Songwriters Hall of Fame was established in 2004 to honour the lifetime achievements of some of Australia&#x27;s greatest songwriters.
| 2014
| herself
| Australian Songwriters Hall of Fame
|}

===Australian Women in Music Awards===
The Australian Women in Music Awards is an annual event that celebrates outstanding women in the Australian Music Industry who have made significant and lasting contributions in their chosen field. They commenced in 2018.
! 
| 2021
| Rowspan=&quot;2&quot; | Kate Ceberano 
| Rowspan=&quot;2&quot; | Lifetime Achievement Award
| 
| 2023
| 
===Countdown Awards===
&quot;Countdown&quot; was an Australian pop music TV series on national broadcaster ABC-TV from 1974 to 1987, it presented music awards from 1979 to 1987. The Countdown Music and Video Awards were succeeded by the ARIA Awards. The 1986 awards ceremony was held on 19 July 1987 at Sydney Opera House, it followed the last regular &quot;Countdown&quot; show.
|-
| 1984
| herself (&quot;Trust Me&quot; by I&#x27;m Talking)
| Best Female Performance in a Video
|-
|rowspan=&quot;2&quot;| 1986
| herself
| Most Popular Female Performer
|-
| herself (&quot;Do You Wanna Be?&quot; by I&#x27;m Talking)
| Best Female Performance in a Video
|-
===Helpmann Awards===
The Helpmann Awards is an awards show, celebrating live entertainment and performing arts in Australia, presented by industry group &quot;Live Performance Australia&quot; since 2001. Note: 2020 and 2021 were cancelled due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
! 
| 2008 || &quot;Nine Lime Avenue&quot; tour || Best Performance in an Australian Contemporary Concert || || |


===Logie Awards===
The Logie Awards (officially the TV Week Logie Awards) is an annual gathering to celebrate Australian television, sponsored and organised by magazine &quot;TV Week&quot;, with the first ceremony in 1959, known then as the TV Week Awards, the awards are presented in 20 categories representing both public and industry voted awards.
| 1993
| &quot;Everything&#x27;s Alright&quot; 
| Most Popular Music Video
|}

===Mo Awards===
The Australian Entertainment Mo Awards (commonly known informally as the Mo Awards), were annual Australian entertainment industry awards. They recognise achievements in live entertainment in Australia from 1975 to 2016. Ceberano won four awards in that time.
 (wins only)
| rowspan=&quot;3&quot;| 1989
| rowspan=&quot;3&quot;| herself
| Contemporary Concert Performer of the Year
|-
| Female Rock Performer of the Year
|-
| Rock Performer of the Year
|-
| rowspan=&quot;1&quot;| 1990
| rowspan=&quot;1&quot;| herself
| Jazz Performer of the Year
|}

===Order of Australia===
In the 2016 Queen&#x27;s Birthday Honours, Ceberano was appointed Member of the Order of Australia for significant service to the performing arts, particularly music, as a singer, songwriter and entertainer, and to charitable organisations.

===World Music Awards===
The World Music Awards is an international award show founded in 1989 under the patronage of Albert II, Prince of Monaco and co-founder/executive producer John Martinotti. The event is based in Monte Carlo. Awards are presented to the world&#x27;s best-selling artists in a number of categories and to the best-selling artists from each major territory.
|-
| 1989
| herself
| Highest Selling Australian Artist
|-
==Film and television==

===Films===
*1986 &quot;Love Della&quot; (short film), Director: Graeme Wood 
*1987 &quot;Australian Made: The Movie&quot;, Director: Richard Lowenstein
*1989 &quot;Arguing the Toss of a Cat&quot; (telemovie), Director: Christine Sammers
*1997 &quot;Dust Off the Wings&quot; (feature film), Director: Lee Rogers
*1999 &quot;&quot; (feature film), Director: Paul Cox
*1999 Opening theatrical sequence for Sydney&#x27;s Fox Studios, Director: Baz Luhrmann

===Television highlights===
*&quot;The X Factor (Australia)&quot; (Channel 10, 2005)
*&quot;Dancing with the Stars&quot; (Channel 7, 2007) — winner of series 6
*&quot;It Takes Two&quot; (Channel 7, 2007–2008) — runner-up of series 3
*&quot;Who Do You Think You Are?&quot; (SBS, Series 1, Episode 2, 2008)
*&quot;Neighbours&quot; (Channel 10, 2010)
*&quot;Getaway&quot; (Channel 9, 2011)
*&quot;The Living Room&quot; (Channel 10, 17 July 2015)
*&quot;The Masked Singer Australia&quot; (Channel 10, 2019) — eliminated seventh

==See also==
* Models
* I&#x27;m Talking

==References==
==External links==
*Yahoo.com, It Takes Two official website
*Tangledmagazine.com, Interview April 2008
*Kate Ceberano at Discogs.com</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6375418" start="0" end="25" title="Kate Ceberano" label="Catherine Yvette Ceberano"/>
<link wikidata="Q242667" start="186" end="208" title="Jesus Christ Superstar" label="Jesus Christ Superstar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4879413" start="233" end="245" title="Bedroom Eyes (song)" label="Bedroom Eyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q241365" start="272" end="291" title="Music recording sales certification" label="sales certification"/>
<link wikidata="Q4681682" start="398" end="423" title="Adelaide Cabaret Festival" label="Adelaide Cabaret Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141" start="503" end="512" title="Melbourne" label="Melbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q7808402" start="621" end="634" title="Tino Ceberano" label="Tino Ceberano"/>
<link wikidata="Q782" start="641" end="647" title="Hawaii" label="Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q4044426" start="888" end="894" title="Models (band)" label="Models"/>
<link wikidata="Q7111559" start="949" end="974" title="Out of Mind, Out of Sight (album)" label="Out of Mind, Out of Sight"/>
<link wikidata="Q12656535" start="1028" end="1044" title="I&amp;#x27;m Talking" label="I&amp;#x27;m Talking"/>
<link wikidata="Q858782" start="1269" end="1280" title="Big Day Out" label="Big Day Out"/>
<link wikidata="Q16243275" start="1325" end="1337" title="Bear Witness" label="Bear Witness"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1486" end="1502" title="Australian pop music awards#1981.E2.80.931986: Countdown Music and Video Awards" label="Countdown Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q17008842" start="1848" end="1876" title="Kate Ceberano and her Septet" label="Kate Ceberano and her Septet"/>
<link wikidata="Q131765195" start="1970" end="1994" title="ABU Popular Song Contest" label="ABU Popular Song Contest"/>
<link wikidata="Q15524937" start="2129" end="2143" title="Wendy Matthews" label="Wendy Matthews"/>
<link wikidata="Q17060351" start="2163" end="2195" title="You&amp;#x27;ve Always Got The Blues" label="You&amp;#x27;ve Always Got The Blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q966055" start="2235" end="2249" title="ABC Television (Australian TV network)" label="ABC Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q275029" start="2310" end="2321" title="ARIA charts" label="ARIA charts"/>
<link wikidata="Q4653728" start="2358" end="2391" title="ARIA Award for Best Female Artist" label="ARIA Award for Best Female Artist"/>
<link wikidata="Q4653734" start="2395" end="2399" title="ARIA Music Awards of 1988" label="1988"/>
<link wikidata="Q4958340" start="2445" end="2450" title="Brave (Kate Ceberano album)" label="Brave"/>
<link wikidata="Q4879413" start="2566" end="2578" title="Bedroom Eyes (song)" label="Bedroom Eyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q20874935" start="2737" end="2763" title="Young Boys Are My Weakness" label="Young Boys Are My Weakness"/>
<link wikidata="Q7181971" start="2816" end="2828" title="Phil Harding (producer)" label="Phil Harding"/>
<link wikidata="Q836202" start="2847" end="2850" title="Pete Waterman Entertainment" label="PWL"/>
<link wikidata="Q4653732" start="2971" end="2982" title="ARIA Music Awards of 1989" label="ARIA awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q4653728" start="2996" end="3029" title="ARIA Award for Best Female Artist" label="ARIA Award for Best Female Artist"/>
<link wikidata="Q97738352" start="3034" end="3071" title="ARIA Award for Highest Selling Single" label="ARIA Award for Highest Selling Single"/>
<link wikidata="Q6886164" start="3141" end="3149" title="Mo Award" label="Mo Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478079" start="3269" end="3279" title="Nature Boy (song)" label="Nature Boy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7728178" start="3295" end="3307" title="The Crossing (1990 film)" label="The Crossing"/>
<link wikidata="Q18809042" start="3360" end="3368" title="Like Now (album)" label="Like Now"/>
<link wikidata="Q17032178" start="3393" end="3408" title="Think About it (Kate Ceberano album)" label="Think About It!"/>
<link wikidata="Q242667" start="3494" end="3516" title="Jesus Christ Superstar" label="Jesus Christ Superstar"/>
<link wikidata="Q63070" start="3543" end="3557" title="Mary Magdalene" label="Mary Magdalene"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3563" end="3568" title="Jesus Christ Superstar (Original Australian Cast Recording)#Australia Cast (1992 Release)" label="album"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3712" end="3737" title="Everything&amp;#x27;s Alright (Jesus Christ Superstar song)#John Farnham.2C Kate Ceberano .26 Jon Stevens version" label="Everything&amp;#x27;s Alright"/>
<link wikidata="Q22072" start="3750" end="3762" title="John Farnham" label="John Farnham"/>
<link wikidata="Q6271628" start="3767" end="3778" title="Jon Stevens" label="Jon Stevens"/>
<link wikidata="Q275029" start="3810" end="3821" title="ARIA charts" label="ARIA charts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1529487" start="3838" end="3849" title="Logie awards" label="Logie Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q6667574" start="3882" end="3886" title="Logie Awards of 1993" label="1993"/>
<link wikidata="Q5491986" start="3936" end="3969" title="I Don&amp;#x27;t Know How To Love Him" label="I Don&amp;#x27;t Know How To Love Him"/>
<link wikidata="Q4653742" start="4060" end="4064" title="ARIA Music Awards of 1993" label="1993"/>
<link wikidata="Q17008831" start="4151" end="4176" title="Kate Ceberano and Friends" label="Kate Ceberano and Friends"/>
<link wikidata="Q726251" start="4445" end="4460" title="Elektra Records" label="Elektra Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q16244344" start="4544" end="4552" title="Blue Box (Kate Ceberano album)" label="Blue Box"/>
<link wikidata="Q4653743" start="4637" end="4662" title="ARIA Music Awards of 1995" label="ARIA Music Awards of 1995"/>
<link wikidata="Q25206718" start="4704" end="4708" title="Pash (song)" label="Pash"/>
<link wikidata="Q17020704" start="4764" end="4768" title="Pash (Kate Ceberano album)" label="Pash"/>
<link wikidata="Q17036546" start="4921" end="4961" title="True Romantic" label="True Romantic: The Best of Kate Ceberano"/>
<link wikidata="Q7929372" start="5574" end="5590" title="Vika and Linda" label="Vika &amp;amp; Linda"/>
<link wikidata="Q253480" start="5595" end="5610" title="Vanessa Amorosi" label="Vanessa Amorosi"/>
<link wikidata="Q23305908" start="6081" end="6101" title="The Girl Can Help It" label="The Girl Can Help It"/>
<link wikidata="Q16961957" start="6172" end="6188" title="Nine Lime Avenue" label="Nine Lime Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q4958340" start="6416" end="6421" title="Brave (Kate Ceberano album)" label="Brave"/>
<link wikidata="Q7549409" start="6527" end="6541" title="So Much Beauty" label="So Much Beauty"/>
<link wikidata="Q528663" start="6689" end="6699" title="Mark Isham" label="Mark Isham"/>
<link wikidata="Q16244024" start="6714" end="6725" title="Bittersweet (Mark Isham and Kate Ceberano album)" label="Bittersweet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4653764" start="6775" end="6791" title="ARIA Music Awards of 2009" label="2009 ARIA awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q42201" start="6808" end="6813" title="Independent music" label="indie"/>
<link wikidata="Q27818163" start="6853" end="6867" title="Dallas et Kate" label="Dallas et Kate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1443316" start="6920" end="6935" title="Christmas music" label="Christmas album"/>
<link wikidata="Q16951617" start="6957" end="6972" title="Merry Christmas (Kate Ceberano album)" label="Merry Christmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6907391" start="7046" end="7052" title="Moomba Festival" label="Moomba"/>
<link wikidata="Q6896637" start="7060" end="7073" title="Molly Meldrum" label="Molly Meldrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q17008930" start="7155" end="7166" title="Kensal Road" label="Kensal Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q25096157" start="7376" end="7385" title="Anthology (Kate Ceberano album)" label="Anthology"/>
<link wikidata="Q55389748" start="7456" end="7496" title="2018 Commonwealth Games closing ceremony" label="2018 Commonwealth Games closing ceremony"/>
<link wikidata="Q216179" start="7635" end="7646" title="Bryan Ferry" label="Bryan Ferry"/>
<link wikidata="Q65087749" start="8113" end="8118" title="Tryst (album)" label="Tryst"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379286" start="8130" end="8144" title="Paul Grabowsky" label="Paul Grabowsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q55602966" start="8164" end="8194" title="ARIA Award for Best Jazz Album" label="ARIA Award for Best Jazz Album"/>
<link wikidata="Q71701962" start="8202" end="8227" title="ARIA Music Awards of 2019" label="ARIA Music Awards of 2019"/>
<link wikidata="Q105702339" start="8272" end="8289" title="Sweet Inspiration (Kate Ceberano album)" label="Sweet Inspiration"/>
<link wikidata="Q118945726" start="8430" end="8451" title="My Life is a Symphony" label="My Life is a Symphony"/>
<link wikidata="Q966055" start="8723" end="8729" title="ABC Television (Australian TV network)" label="ABC TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q237268" start="8851" end="8859" title="Paul Cox (director)" label="Paul Cox"/>
<link wikidata="Q16956231" start="8925" end="8943" title="The X Factor (Australia season 1)" label="X Factor Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q15525704" start="8962" end="8973" title="Mark Holden" label="Mark Holden"/>
<link wikidata="Q751972" start="8978" end="8987" title="John Reid (music manager)" label="John Reid"/>
<link wikidata="Q3281705" start="9010" end="9032" title="Dancing with the Stars (Australian TV series)" label="Dancing with the Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q5215604" start="9042" end="9046" title="Dancing with the Stars (Australian season 6)" label="2007"/>
<link wikidata="Q6092070" start="9142" end="9154" title="It Takes Two (Australian TV series)" label="It Takes Two"/>
<link wikidata="Q558544" start="9200" end="9215" title="Daniel Kowalski" label="Daniel Kowalski"/>
<link wikidata="Q50783" start="9264" end="9290" title="Australian Football League" label="Australian Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q7381748" start="9304" end="9321" title="Russell Robertson" label="Russell Robertson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6668212" start="9431" end="9434" title="SBS (Australian TV channel)" label="SBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q7997213" start="9448" end="9473" title="Who Do You Think You Are? (Australian TV series)" label="Who Do You Think You Are?"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432195" start="9555" end="9567" title="Nine Network" label="Nine Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419528" start="9817" end="9831" title="Excess Baggage (Australian TV series)" label="Excess Baggage"/>
<link wikidata="Q65053665" start="9886" end="9903" title="The Masked Singer (Australian TV series)" label="The Masked Singer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3307820" start="9970" end="9976" title="Berlei" label="Berlei"/>
<link wikidata="Q4865418" start="10545" end="10558" title="Bartlett Sher" label="Bartlett Sher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1535240" start="10597" end="10610" title="South Pacific (musical)" label="South Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q763619" start="10673" end="10690" title="Teddy Tahu Rhodes" label="Teddy Tahu Rhodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4133103" start="10692" end="10703" title="Lisa McCune" label="Lisa McCune"/>
<link wikidata="Q5336403" start="10709" end="10722" title="Eddie Perfect" label="Eddie Perfect"/>
<link wikidata="Q18161197" start="10948" end="10963" title="2015 AFL Grand Final" label="AFL Grand Final"/>
<link wikidata="Q330136" start="10971" end="10974" title="MCG" label="MCG"/>
<link wikidata="Q6843964" start="11119" end="11140" title="Mietta O&amp;#x27;Donnell" label="Mietta O&amp;#x27;Donnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3359425" start="11148" end="11165" title="Queenscliff, Victoria" label="Queenscliff Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324526" start="11169" end="11185" title="Port Phillip Bay" label="Port Phillip Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q425596" start="11272" end="11300" title="Archibald Prize" label="Archibald Packing Room Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q131036" start="11472" end="11485" title="Scientologist" label="Scientologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q17060351" start="11517" end="11549" title="You&amp;#x27;ve Always Got the Blues" label="You&amp;#x27;ve Always Got the Blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q15524937" start="11562" end="11576" title="Wendy Matthews" label="Wendy Matthews"/>
<link wikidata="Q4958340" start="11591" end="11596" title="Brave (Kate Ceberano album)" label="Brave"/>
<link wikidata="Q18809042" start="11616" end="11624" title="Like Now (album)" label="Like Now"/>
<link wikidata="Q17032178" start="11680" end="11695" title="Think About It!" label="Think About It!"/>
<link wikidata="Q16244344" start="11714" end="11722" title="Blue Box (Kate Ceberano album)" label="Blue Box"/>
<link wikidata="Q17020704" start="11741" end="11745" title="Pash (Kate Ceberano album)" label="Pash"/>
<link wikidata="Q17036546" start="11764" end="11777" title="True Romantic" label="True Romantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q23305908" start="11796" end="11816" title="The Girl Can Help It" label="The Girl Can Help It"/>
<link wikidata="Q19869842" start="11835" end="11854" title="19 Days in New York" label="19 Days in New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q16961957" start="11874" end="11890" title="Nine Lime Avenue" label="Nine Lime Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q7549409" start="11910" end="11924" title="So Much Beauty" label="So Much Beauty"/>
<link wikidata="Q16244024" start="11943" end="11954" title="Bittersweet (Mark Isham and Kate Ceberano album)" label="Bittersweet"/>
<link wikidata="Q528663" start="11967" end="11977" title="Mark Isham" label="Mark Isham"/>
<link wikidata="Q27818163" start="11991" end="12005" title="Dallas et Kate" label="Dallas et Kate"/>
<link wikidata="Q16951617" start="12045" end="12060" title="Merry Christmas (Kate Ceberano album)" label="Merry Christmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q17008930" start="12079" end="12090" title="Kensal Road" label="Kensal Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q28429743" start="12110" end="12117" title="Lullaby (Kate Ceberano and Nigel MacLean album)" label="Lullaby"/>
<link wikidata="Q25096157" start="12157" end="12166" title="Anthology (Kate Ceberano album)" label="Anthology"/>
<link wikidata="Q65087749" start="12185" end="12190" title="Tryst (album)" label="Tryst"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379286" start="12203" end="12217" title="Paul Grabowsky" label="Paul Grabowsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q85806922" start="12231" end="12248" title="The Dangerous Age (album)" label="The Dangerous Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q205834" start="12261" end="12273" title="Steve Kilbey" label="Steve Kilbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q105702339" start="12304" end="12321" title="Sweet Inspiration (Kate Ceberano album)" label="Sweet Inspiration"/>
<link wikidata="Q118945726" start="12340" end="12361" title="My Life is a Symphony" label="My Life is a Symphony"/>
<link wikidata="Q667360" start="12374" end="12402" title="Melbourne Symphony Orchestra" label="Melbourne Symphony Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q104843280" start="12520" end="12530" title="AIR Awards" label="AIR Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q104849704" start="12657" end="12661" title="AIR Awards of 2020" label="2020"/>
<link wikidata="Q124666167" start="12723" end="12727" title="AIR Awards of 2024" label="2024"/>
<link wikidata="Q4653396" start="12826" end="12837" title="APRA Awards (Australia)" label="APRA Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q64399020" start="12883" end="12924" title="Australasian Performing Right Association" label="Australasian Performing Right Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q55602964" start="13061" end="13065" title="APRA Music Awards of 1999" label="1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q1862932" start="13169" end="13180" title="ARIA Music Awards" label="ARIA Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1862932" start="13188" end="13205" title="ARIA Music Awards" label="ARIA Music Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q3114644" start="13312" end="13328" title="Australian music" label="Australian music"/>
<link wikidata="Q4653734" start="13335" end="13339" title="ARIA Music Awards of 1988" label="1988"/>
<link wikidata="Q4653732" start="13413" end="13417" title="ARIA Music Awards of 1989" label="1989"/>
<link wikidata="Q17060351" start="13448" end="13480" title="You&amp;#x27;ve Always Got the Blues" label="You&amp;#x27;ve Always Got the Blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q15524937" start="13528" end="13542" title="Wendy Matthews" label="Wendy Matthews"/>
<link wikidata="Q15524937" start="13571" end="13585" title="Wendy Matthews" label="Wendy Matthews"/>
<link wikidata="Q4653735" start="13614" end="13618" title="ARIA Music Awards of 1990" label="1990"/>
<link wikidata="Q4653737" start="13789" end="13793" title="ARIA Music Awards of 1991" label="1991"/>
<link wikidata="Q4653738" start="13822" end="13826" title="ARIA Music Awards of 1992" label="1992"/>
<link wikidata="Q4653742" start="13862" end="13866" title="ARIA Music Awards of 1993" label="1993"/>
<link wikidata="Q4653744" start="13920" end="13924" title="ARIA Music Awards of 1994" label="1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q4653745" start="13992" end="13996" title="ARIA Music Awards of 1996" label="1996"/>
<link wikidata="Q4653747" start="14080" end="14084" title="ARIA Music Awards of 1998" label="1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q25206718" start="14093" end="14097" title="Pash (song)" label="Pash"/>
<link wikidata="Q4653764" start="14130" end="14134" title="ARIA Music Awards of 2009" label="2009"/>
<link wikidata="Q528663" start="14185" end="14195" title="Mark Isham" label="Mark Isham"/>
<link wikidata="Q71701962" start="14202" end="14206" title="ARIA Music Awards of 2019" label="2019"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379286" start="14251" end="14265" title="Paul Grabowsky" label="Paul Grabowsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q122865217" start="14272" end="14276" title="2023 ARIA Music Awards" label="2023"/>
<link wikidata="Q104857312" start="14394" end="14429" title="Australian Songwriters Hall of Fame" label="Australian Songwriters Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q86124920" start="14642" end="14674" title="Australian Women in Music Awards" label="Australian Women in Music Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q3114644" start="14735" end="14760" title="Music of Australia" label="Australian Music Industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q106994406" start="14865" end="14869" title="2021 Australian Women in Music Awards" label="2021"/>
<link wikidata="Q121076309" start="14969" end="14973" title="2023 Australian Women in Music Awards" label="2023"/>
<link wikidata="Q5176829" start="15006" end="15015" title="Countdown (Australian TV series)" label="Countdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q966055" start="15084" end="15090" title="ABC Television (Australian TV network)" label="ABC-TV"/>
<link wikidata="" start="15159" end="15191" title="Australian pop music awards#1981–1986: Countdown Music and Video Awards" label="Countdown Music and Video Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1862932" start="15214" end="15225" title="ARIA Awards" label="ARIA Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q45178" start="15280" end="15298" title="Sydney Opera House" label="Sydney Opera House"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15362" end="15366" title="Australian pop music awards#1984" label="1984"/>
<link wikidata="Q48970249" start="15384" end="15392" title="Trust Me (I&amp;#x27;m Talking song)" label="Trust Me"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15484" end="15488" title="Australian pop music awards#1986" label="1986"/>
<link wikidata="Q48970285" start="15551" end="15567" title="Do You Wanna Be?" label="Do You Wanna Be?"/>
<link wikidata="Q16842899" start="15661" end="15676" title="Helpmann Awards" label="Helpmann Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="15886" end="15903" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4611172" start="15910" end="15914" title="8th Helpmann Awards" label="2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q1529487" start="16043" end="16055" title="Logie Awards" label="Logie Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q502813" start="16130" end="16151" title="Television in Australia" label="Australian television"/>
<link wikidata="Q7672446" start="16195" end="16202" title="TV Week" label="TV Week"/>
<link wikidata="Q6667574" start="16373" end="16377" title="Logie Awards of 1993" label="1993"/>
<link wikidata="Q6886164" start="16539" end="16548" title="Mo Awards" label="Mo Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q25184490" start="17049" end="17083" title="2016 Queen&amp;#x27;s Birthday Honours (Australia)" label="2016 Queen&amp;#x27;s Birthday Honours"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141149" start="17108" end="17140" title="Order of Australia" label="Member of the Order of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q375990" start="17313" end="17331" title="World Music Awards" label="World Music Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q3910" start="17402" end="17429" title="Albert II, Prince of Monaco" label="Albert II, Prince of Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q45240" start="17503" end="17514" title="Monte Carlo" label="Monte Carlo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3430994" start="17881" end="17899" title="Richard Lowenstein" label="Richard Lowenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q5316988" start="17997" end="18015" title="Dust Off the Wings" label="Dust Off the Wings"/>
<link wikidata="Q237268" start="18104" end="18112" title="Paul Cox (director)" label="Paul Cox"/>
<link wikidata="Q250545" start="18188" end="18200" title="Baz Luhrmann" label="Baz Luhrmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q16956231" start="18237" end="18261" title="The X Factor (Australia season 1)" label="The X Factor (Australia)"/>
<link wikidata="Q767920" start="18269" end="18279" title="Network 10" label="Channel 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q3281705" start="18294" end="18316" title="Dancing with the Stars (Australian TV series)" label="Dancing with the Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q908659" start="18324" end="18333" title="Seven Network" label="Channel 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q6092070" start="18369" end="18381" title="It Takes Two (Australian TV series)" label="It Takes Two"/>
<link wikidata="Q908708" start="18514" end="18524" title="Neighbours (TV series)" label="Neighbours"/>
<link wikidata="Q10847311" start="18557" end="18564" title="Getaway (TV series)" label="Getaway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3988057" start="18596" end="18611" title="The Living Room (TV series)" label="The Living Room"/>
<link wikidata="Q65053665" start="18652" end="18679" title="The Masked Singer (Australian TV series)" label="The Masked Singer Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4044426" start="18742" end="18748" title="Models (band)" label="Models"/>
<link wikidata="Q12656535" start="18751" end="18767" title="I&amp;#x27;m Talking" label="I&amp;#x27;m Talking"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="187328" wikidata="Q198032" url="?curid=187328" title="Esporte Clube Bahia">
<text>Esporte Clube Bahia () is a Brazilian professional football club, based in Salvador, capital city of the Brazilian state of Bahia. The club competes in the Campeonato Baiano, Bahia&#x27;s state league, and the Campeonato Brasileiro Série A, highest division of Brazilian football league system.

Bahia has won the &quot;Brasileirão&quot; title twice: in 1959, where they defeated the Santos&#x27; &quot;Santásticos&quot; with the likes of Gilmar, Mauro Ramos, Mengálvio, Coutinho, Pepe and Pelé in the final, and in 1988 over Internacional. Bahia has appeared in the Copa Libertadores four times, including in 2025, reaching the quarterfinals in 1989, Bahia&#x27;s best-ever performance. After 22 years out of international competition, Bahia returned in 2012 when they qualified for the Copa Sul-Americana, and seven more times, the last in 2021. The club has also won their state title a record 50 times. The club also has four titles in the Copa do Nordeste, in: 2001, 2002, 2017, 2021.

Bahia had played its home games with 66,080 people capacity Estádio Fonte Nova since 1951 but after a section of the stadium collapsed in 2007, the &quot;Tricolor&quot; played at the Estádio de Pituaçu. With the reopening of the Fonte Nova stadium in 2013 as the Arena Fonte Nova, a modern arena built for the 2014 FIFA World Cup, Bahia resumed playing its matches there. The club&#x27;s home uniform consists of white shirts with blue shorts and red socks. It has a fierce long-standing rivalry with Vitória, known as Ba-Vi.

In December 2022, it was announced that City Football Group, a subsidiary of Abu Dhabi United Group, had bought a majority stake of Bahia&#x27;s SAF, after the takeover was approved in a voting session between club members. The acquisition was completed in May 2023, as CFG officially acquired 90% of the club&#x27;s shares.

==History==
===Early years and the first national title===
The Esporte Clube Bahia was founded on the New Year&#x27;s Day of 1931 when players from two clubs decided to merge. The Associação Atlética da Bahia and the Clube Bahiano de Tênis had decided to discontinue their football divisions. A few years later Bahia became the most popular team in the Northeast of Brazil.

In the club&#x27;s first year, Bahia won the Torneio Inicio and Bahia State Championship. The first Bahia president was Waldemar Costa, a doctor. Bahia&#x27;s crest is based on Corinthians&#x27;. Bahia&#x27;s state flag, created by Raimundo Magalhães, was used in place of the São Paulo state flag.

The team was founded with the motto &quot;Nasceu para Vencer&quot; (Born to Win). Bahia won 50 State Championships, 21 more than the Vitória (their rival club), and was the first club to participate in Taça Libertadores da America in 1960.

Between 1959 and 1963, and in 1968, the club represented the state of Bahia in Taça Brasil (the precursor of the Brazilian Championship), winning the title in 1959 and finishing as runner-up in 1961 and 1963.

===The 1980s and the second national title===
The 1980s were the best in Bahia&#x27;s history. Bahia won their second national title in 1988, finishing 5th in 1986 and 4th in 1990.

In 1988, Bahia won its second Brazilian Championship against the Internacional from Porto Alegre Bahia won the first leg in Salvador by 2–1. The second leg ended in an 0–0 tie-in Porto Alegre at the Beira Rio Stadium. After these results, Bahia won the &quot;Brasileirão&quot;, their second national title. The championship gave Bahia the right to play Copa Libertadores for the third time. It was a shock for the southern press because Salvador is in the Northeast and the victory was over the Internacional, a team from southern Brazil, the region that has the highest Human Development Index in the country.

===Dark years===
In 1997, Bahia was relegated to the Série B for the first time in its history after a 0–0 draw against the Juventude at the Fonte Nova stadium. In 1999 Bahia was close to being promoted to the Série A again. Bahia had a very good season but finished in 3rd place, which was not enough to see them promoted.

In 2000, due to bribery scandals involving clubs such as the São Paulo and the Internacional, the team returned to the Brazilian First Division, invited by the Clube dos 13, along with the Fluminense, which was made a scapegoat for the controversy and was nationally victimized by the media (see Copa João Havelange).

In 2002 the bank that had sponsored the team went bankrupt and the Bahia began a descent down the Brazilian football pyramid. After the title of the Northeast Cup in 2001 and 2002, Bahia performed poorly in 2003 and was relegated to the Série B for the second time in the club&#x27;s history. In 2004, the team was close to getting promoted to the Série A again, finishing 4th. In order to be promoted, Bahia would have to win the final match against the Brasiliense, but the referee Paulo César de Oliveira was assigned to that match and many people say he was all but fair on that day. In 2005, the club again competed in the Série B, finishing in 18th place, and was relegated to the Série C for the first time in the club&#x27;s history.

===Fênix tricolor (tricolored phoenix)===
Bahia finished 2007 among the first four teams of the Third Division and was promoted to the Second Division for the 2008 season. The Bahia began strongly, but in the last game of the 3rd stage of the Série C against the already-eliminated Fast Club, Bahia needed a win to advance to the final. The victory came in the last minute of the game with a goal scored by Charles. In the final, the team finished the third division in 2nd place, only losing the title in the final round. This moment is called the &quot;Fênix Tricolor&quot; amongst Bahia fans. The phoenix represents Bahia rising from the ashes.

Despite playing in the Third Division of Brazilian football in 2007, Bahia had the largest average attendance in Brazil: 40,400 people per match. No club in the Third, the Second, or even the First Division was able to match it. However, this is not unusual for Bahia, having also achieved the biggest average attendance in Brazil in 2004 (Second Division), 1988 (First Division), 1986 (First Division), and 1985 (First Division).

===Recent years and CFG takeover===
From 2010 to 2014 Bahia remained in the first division. In 2013, a fan takeover lead the club to pursue more left-wing and socially engaged politics, focusing on racism, LGBTQ rights, the demarcation of indigenous lands and the treatment of female fans in football stadiums. At the same time, they have managed to reduce ticket prices, increase revenues, pay off some of the debt that was crippling the club and improve their results on the pitch.

In 2014 they were relegated to the second division again but came back in 2016. After 22 years out of international competition, Bahia returned in 2012 when they qualified for the Copa Sul-Americana, and seven more times, the last in 2021. In addition, they won the 2012, 2014, 2015 state championship and in 2023 he won his 50th title.

In February 2018 the intense rivalry between Bahia and Esporte Clube Vitória drew international attention when nine players (four from Bahia and five from Vitória) were shown the red card in a State Championship match.

In December 2022, it was announced that City Football Group, a subsidiary of Abu Dhabi United Group, had bought majority stake of Bahia, following a voting session between club members that saw 98.6% of voters accept the takeover. The acquisition was completed in May 2023, as CFG officially acquired 90% of the club&#x27;s shares, with the original administration keeping the remaining 10% of shares, as well as full rights over club heritage items, including shirt colors and the emblem. Bahia became the thirteenth football club to join City Football Group, and the third South American team to ever do so, following Montevideo City Torque and parent club Club Bolívar.

==Symbols==

Bahia&#x27;s colors are blue, red, and white. The blue color pays homage to the Associação Atlética da Bahia; white, to the Clube Baiano de Tênis; and red for the Bahia state flag. The club&#x27;s mascot is called &quot;Super-Homem Tricolor&quot; (Tricolor Superman), created by Ziraldo in 1979 based on the club&#x27;s nickname &quot;Esquadrão de Aço&quot; (&quot;Steel Squad&quot;) and wears a costume very similar to the original Superman&#x27;s costume.

==Stadium==
Bahia played at the Fonte Nova stadium from its inauguration in 1951 until November 2007.
During the game against the Vila Nova (during Bahia&#x27;s promotion campaign) a part of the stadium collapsed. Seven people died and more than 30 were injured.

After that episode, the state government declared that the stadium would be demolished. A new stadium was built on the site for the 2014 FIFA World Cup.

Some notable games at the Fonte Nova:

* Bahia : Internacional 2–1 (Série A – Final – 1988)
* Bahia : Fluminense 2–1 (Série A – Semi-finals – 1988)
* Bahia : Flamengo 4–1 (Série A – 2000)
* Bahia : Sport Recife 3–1 (Northeast Cup – Final – 2001)
* Bahia : Fast Club 1–0 (Série C – 3rd Stage – 2007)

In April, the Bahia was back to the Arena Fonte Nova

==League record==
===National league===
* 40 seasons in the Campeonato Brasileiro Série A
* 10 seasons in the Campeonato Brasileiro Série B
* 2 seasons in the Campeonato Brasileiro Série C

===Regional leagues===


==Honours==

===Official tournaments===
* 
* shared record

===Others tournaments===

====International====
*Friendship Cup (1): 1959
*Copa Renner (1): 1997

====National====
*Torneio Quadrangular de Salvador (7): 1950, 1952, 1953, 1954-I, 1960, 1961-I, 1961-II
*Torneio Octávio Mangabeira (1): 1951
*Torneio Triangular Luis Viana Filho (1): 1971
*Torneio Maria Quitéria (1): 1998

====Regional and Inter-state====
*Zona Norte-Nordeste da Taça Brasil (3): 1959, 1961, 1963
*Torneio dos Campeões do Nordeste (1): 1948

====State====
*Torneio Início da Bahia (9): 1931, 1932, 1934, 1937, 1938, 1951, 1964, 1967, 1979

===Runners-up===
*Campeonato Brasileiro Série A (2): 1961, 1963
*Campeonato Brasileiro Série C (1): 2007
*Torneio Heleno Nunes (1): 1984
*Copa do Nordeste (5): 1997, 1999, 2015, 2018, 2020
*Campeonato Baiano (23): 1941, 1955, 1957, 1963, 1964, 1969, 1972, 1985, 1989, 1992, 1996, 1997, 2000, 2004, 2005, 2007, 2008, 2009, 2010, 2013, 2016, 2017, 2024
*Taça Estado da Bahia (2): 2004, 2006

==Current squad==
===First team===












===Youth team===







===Out on loan===



===Current staff===

==Managers==

* Carlos Volante (1959)
* Paulo Amaral (1967–68)
* Manuel Fleitas Solich (1970–71)
* Sylvio Pirillo (1972)
* Evaristo de Macedo (1973)
* Zezé Moreira (1978–79)
* Aymoré Moreira (1981–82)
* Paulinho (1985), (1987)
* Evaristo de Macedo (1988–89)
* René Simões (1989)
* Candinho (1990–91)
* Gílson Nunes (1992)
* Joel Santana (1994)
* Júlio César Leal (1995)
* Geninho (1997)
* Evaristo de Macedo (1998)
* Joel Santana (1999)
* Evaristo de Macedo (2001)
* Candinho (2002–03)
* Evaristo de Macedo (2003)
* Lula Pereira (Aug 18, 2003 – Oct 27, 2003)
* Edinho (Oct 28, 2003 – Dec 18, 2003)
* Vadão (Jan 11, 2004 – Dec 17, 2004)
* Zetti (April 19, 2005 – June 20, 2005)
* Mauro Fernandes (April 7, 2006 – July 26, 2006)
* Lula Pereira (Oct 16, 2006 – Dec 5, 2006)
* Paulo Comelli (Dec 4, 2007 – June 2, 2008)
* Arturzinho (June 4, 2008 – Feb 2, 2009)
* Ferdinando Teixeira (Oct 4, 2008 – Dec 15, 2008)
* Alexandre Gallo (Dec 16, 2008 – July 7, 2009)
* Paulo Comelli (July 8, 2009 – Aug 1, 2009)
* Sérgio Guedes (Aug 2, 2009 – Sep 28, 2009)
* Paulo Bonamigo (Sep 29, 2009 – Dec 3, 2009)
* Renato Gaúcho (Dec 13, 2009 – Aug 10, 2010)
* Márcio Araújo (Aug 11, 2010 – Dec 2, 2010)
* Rogério Lourenço (Dec 7, 2010 – Feb 7, 2011)
* Vágner Benazzi (Feb 17, 2011 – April 10, 2011)
* Renê Simões (April 14, 2011 – Sep 2, 2011)
* Joel Santana (Sep 4, 2011 – Feb 2, 2012)
* Paulo Roberto Falcão (Feb 7, 2012 – July 20, 2012)
* Caio Júnior (July 21, 2012 – Aug 27, 2012)
* Jorginho (Aug 28, 2012 – April 7, 2013)
* Joel Santana (April 8, 2013 – May 13, 2013)
* Cristóvão Borges (May 17, 2013 – Dec 9, 2013)
* Marquinhos Santos (Dec 12, 2013 – July 28, 2014)
* Gilson Kleina (Aug 13, 2014 – Nov 11, 2014)
* Charles Fabian (2014)
* Sergio Soares (2015)
* Charles Fabian (2015)
* Doriva (2016)
* Guto Ferreira (2016–2017)
* Jorginho (2017)
* Preto Casagrande (2017)
* Paulo César Carpegiani (Oct 2017 - Dec 2017)
* Guto Ferreira (Dec 2017 - Jun 2018)
* Enderson Moreira (Jun 2018 - Mar 2019)
* Roger Machado (Apr 2019 - Sep 2020)
* Mano Menezes (Sep 2020 - Dec 2020)
* Dado Cavalcanti (Dec 2020 - Aug 2021)
* Diego Dabove (Aug 2021 - Oct 2021)
* Guto Ferreira (Oct 2021 - Jun 2022)
* Enderson Moreira (Jun 2022 - Oct 2022 )
* Eduardo Barroca (Oct 2022 - Nov 2022)
* Renato Paiva (Jan 2023 - Sep 2023)
* Rogério Ceni (Sep 2023 - )
==See also==
* Esporte Clube Bahia (women)

==References==
==External links==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q198032" start="0" end="19" title="Esporte Clube Bahia" label="Esporte Clube Bahia"/>
<link wikidata="Q28083137" start="51" end="64" title="Football team" label="football club"/>
<link wikidata="Q36947" start="75" end="83" title="Salvador, Bahia" label="Salvador"/>
<link wikidata="Q5119" start="85" end="97" title="capital city" label="capital city"/>
<link wikidata="Q485258" start="105" end="120" title="States of Brazil" label="Brazilian state"/>
<link wikidata="Q40430" start="124" end="129" title="Bahia" label="Bahia"/>
<link wikidata="Q604925" start="156" end="173" title="Campeonato Baiano" label="Campeonato Baiano"/>
<link wikidata="Q206813" start="210" end="239" title="Campeonato Brasileiro Série A" label="Campeonato Brasileiro Série A"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152339" start="261" end="293" title="Brazilian football league system" label="Brazilian football league system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1989374" start="354" end="358" title="1959 Taça Brasil" label="1959"/>
<link wikidata="Q80955" start="384" end="390" title="Santos FC" label="Santos"/>
<link wikidata="Q257606" start="439" end="445" title="Gilmar" label="Gilmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q463460" start="447" end="458" title="Mauro Ramos" label="Mauro Ramos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2565981" start="460" end="469" title="Mengálvio" label="Mengálvio"/>
<link wikidata="Q612073" start="471" end="479" title="Coutinho (footballer, born 1943)" label="Coutinho"/>
<link wikidata="Q509491" start="481" end="485" title="Pepe (footballer, born 1935)" label="Pepe"/>
<link wikidata="Q12897" start="490" end="494" title="Pelé" label="Pelé"/>
<link wikidata="Q2721282" start="516" end="520" title="1988 Campeonato Brasileiro Série A" label="1988"/>
<link wikidata="Q80845" start="526" end="539" title="Sport Club Internacional" label="Internacional"/>
<link wikidata="Q184795" start="567" end="584" title="Copa Libertadores" label="Copa Libertadores"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130232" start="646" end="650" title="1989 Copa Libertadores" label="1989"/>
<link wikidata="Q60585" start="788" end="806" title="Copa Sul-Americana" label="Copa Sul-Americana"/>
<link wikidata="Q983041" start="944" end="960" title="Copa do Nordeste" label="Copa do Nordeste"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191717" start="1051" end="1069" title="Estádio Fonte Nova" label="Estádio Fonte Nova"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1091" end="1125" title="Estádio Fonte Nova#History" label="a section of the stadium collapsed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1272188" start="1174" end="1192" title="Estádio de Pituaçu" label="Estádio de Pituaçu"/>
<link wikidata="Q6499360" start="1254" end="1270" title="Itaipava Arena Fonte Nova" label="Arena Fonte Nova"/>
<link wikidata="Q79859" start="1301" end="1320" title="2014 FIFA World Cup" label="2014 FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q274465" start="1492" end="1499" title="Esporte Clube Vitória" label="Vitória"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1510" end="1515" title=":pt:Ba-Vi" label="Ba-Vi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2405171" start="1558" end="1577" title="City Football Group" label="City Football Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q16240669" start="1595" end="1617" title="Abu Dhabi United Group" label="Abu Dhabi United Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q118252000" start="1663" end="1666" title="Sociedade Anônima do Futebol" label="SAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q206813" start="3182" end="3204" title="Campeonato Brasileiro Série A" label="Brazilian Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q80845" start="3217" end="3230" title="Sport Club Internacional" label="Internacional"/>
<link wikidata="Q40269" start="3236" end="3248" title="Porto Alegre" label="Porto Alegre"/>
<link wikidata="Q36947" start="3276" end="3284" title="Salvador, Bahia" label="Salvador"/>
<link wikidata="Q40269" start="3331" end="3343" title="Porto Alegre" label="Porto Alegre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050224" start="3351" end="3368" title="Estádio Beira-Rio" label="Beira Rio Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q184795" start="3505" end="3522" title="Copa Libertadores" label="Copa Libertadores"/>
<link wikidata="Q38994" start="3723" end="3746" title="Human Development Index" label="Human Development Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q610175" start="3817" end="3824" title="Campeonato Brasileiro Série B" label="Série B"/>
<link wikidata="Q910453" start="3888" end="3897" title="Esporte Clube Juventude" label="Juventude"/>
<link wikidata="Q206813" start="3974" end="3981" title="Campeonato Brasileiro Série A" label="Série A"/>
<link wikidata="Q38568" start="4150" end="4159" title="São Paulo FC" label="São Paulo"/>
<link wikidata="Q80845" start="4168" end="4181" title="Sport Club Internacional" label="Internacional"/>
<link wikidata="Q206813" start="4208" end="4232" title="Campeonato Brasileiro Série A" label="Brazilian First Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q2300355" start="4249" end="4261" title="Clube dos 13" label="Clube dos 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q80987" start="4278" end="4288" title="Fluminense Football Club" label="Fluminense"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4385" end="4404" title="Clube dos Treze#2000 Copa João Havelange" label="Copa João Havelange"/>
<link wikidata="Q610175" start="4645" end="4652" title="Campeonato Brasileiro Série B" label="Série B"/>
<link wikidata="Q206813" start="4756" end="4763" title="Campeonato Brasileiro Série A" label="Série A"/>
<link wikidata="Q610175" start="5036" end="5043" title="Campeonato Brasileiro Série B" label="Série B"/>
<link wikidata="Q2037826" start="5095" end="5102" title="Campeonato Brasileiro Série C" label="Série C"/>
<link wikidata="Q2037826" start="5394" end="5401" title="Campeonato Brasileiro Série C" label="Série C"/>
<link wikidata="Q164597" start="6377" end="6386" title="Left-wing politics" label="left-wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q60585" start="6897" end="6915" title="Copa Sul-Americana" label="Copa Sul-Americana"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7234" end="7242" title="penalty card#Red card" label="red card"/>
<link wikidata="Q2405171" start="7315" end="7334" title="City Football Group" label="City Football Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q16240669" start="7352" end="7374" title="Abu Dhabi United Group" label="Abu Dhabi United Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q48646" start="7895" end="7917" title="Montevideo City Torque" label="Montevideo City Torque"/>
<link wikidata="Q128024" start="7934" end="7946" title="Club Bolívar" label="Club Bolívar"/>
<link wikidata="Q79015" start="8219" end="8227" title="Superman" label="Superman"/>
<link wikidata="Q205561" start="8241" end="8248" title="Ziraldo" label="Ziraldo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191717" start="8453" end="8471" title="Estádio Fonte Nova" label="Fonte Nova stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q6499360" start="8773" end="8786" title="Arena Fonte Nova" label="A new stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q79859" start="8817" end="8836" title="2014 FIFA World Cup" label="2014 FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q80845" start="8888" end="8901" title="Sport Club Internacional" label="Internacional"/>
<link wikidata="Q206813" start="8907" end="8914" title="Campeonato Brasileiro Série A" label="Série A"/>
<link wikidata="Q80987" start="8941" end="8951" title="Fluminense Football Club" label="Fluminense"/>
<link wikidata="Q206813" start="8957" end="8964" title="Campeonato Brasileiro Série A" label="Série A"/>
<link wikidata="Q17479" start="8997" end="9005" title="Clube de Regatas do Flamengo" label="Flamengo"/>
<link wikidata="Q206813" start="9011" end="9018" title="Campeonato Brasileiro Série A" label="Série A"/>
<link wikidata="Q219098" start="9037" end="9049" title="Sport Club do Recife" label="Sport Recife"/>
<link wikidata="Q983041" start="9055" end="9068" title="Copa Nordeste" label="Northeast Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q3334769" start="9095" end="9104" title="Nacional Fast Clube" label="Fast Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q2037826" start="9110" end="9117" title="Campeonato Brasileiro Série C" label="Série C"/>
<link wikidata="Q6499360" start="9175" end="9191" title="Arena Fonte Nova" label="Arena Fonte Nova"/>
<link wikidata="Q206813" start="9253" end="9282" title="Campeonato Brasileiro Série A" label="Campeonato Brasileiro Série A"/>
<link wikidata="Q610175" start="9303" end="9332" title="Campeonato Brasileiro Série B" label="Campeonato Brasileiro Série B"/>
<link wikidata="Q2037826" start="9352" end="9381" title="Campeonato Brasileiro Série C" label="Campeonato Brasileiro Série C"/>
<link wikidata="" start="9543" end="9554" title=":pt:Copa Internacional Renner" label="Copa Renner"/>
<link wikidata="Q10378624" start="9756" end="9778" title="Torneio Maria Quitéria" label="Torneio Maria Quitéria"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9824" end="9858" title="List of Brazilian North-Northeast football champions (1946-1993)#Zona Norte-Nordeste da Taça Brasil" label="Zona Norte-Nordeste da Taça Brasil"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9882" end="9914" title="List of Brazilian North-Northeast football champions (1946-1993)#Torneio dos Campeões do Nordeste" label="Torneio dos Campeões do Nordeste"/>
<link wikidata="" start="9941" end="9964" title=":pt:Torneio Início da Bahia" label="Torneio Início da Bahia"/>
<link wikidata="Q206813" start="10042" end="10071" title="Campeonato Brasileiro Série A" label="Campeonato Brasileiro Série A"/>
<link wikidata="Q2037826" start="10089" end="10118" title="Campeonato Brasileiro Série C" label="Campeonato Brasileiro Série C"/>
<link wikidata="Q10383386" start="10130" end="10150" title="Torneio Heleno Nunes" label="Torneio Heleno Nunes"/>
<link wikidata="Q983041" start="10162" end="10178" title="Copa do Nordeste" label="Copa do Nordeste"/>
<link wikidata="Q604925" start="10214" end="10231" title="Campeonato Baiano" label="Campeonato Baiano"/>
<link wikidata="Q10260007" start="10376" end="10396" title="Taça Estado da Bahia" label="Taça Estado da Bahia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748286" start="10543" end="10557" title="Carlos Volante" label="Carlos Volante"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370535" start="10567" end="10579" title="Paulo Amaral" label="Paulo Amaral"/>
<link wikidata="Q248585" start="10592" end="10613" title="Manuel Fleitas Solich" label="Manuel Fleitas Solich"/>
<link wikidata="Q2629446" start="10626" end="10640" title="Sylvio Pirillo" label="Sylvio Pirillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q553061" start="10650" end="10668" title="Evaristo de Macedo" label="Evaristo de Macedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2546156" start="10678" end="10690" title="Zezé Moreira" label="Zezé Moreira"/>
<link wikidata="Q794217" start="10703" end="10717" title="Aymoré Moreira" label="Aymoré Moreira"/>
<link wikidata="Q2712962" start="10730" end="10738" title="Paulo Almeida Ribeiro" label="Paulinho"/>
<link wikidata="Q553061" start="10756" end="10774" title="Evaristo de Macedo" label="Evaristo de Macedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2569348" start="10787" end="10798" title="René Simões" label="René Simões"/>
<link wikidata="Q3655220" start="10808" end="10816" title="Candinho" label="Candinho"/>
<link wikidata="Q1970523" start="10829" end="10841" title="Gílson Nunes" label="Gílson Nunes"/>
<link wikidata="Q552929" start="10851" end="10863" title="Joel Santana" label="Joel Santana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1627846" start="10873" end="10889" title="Júlio César Leal" label="Júlio César Leal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373640" start="10899" end="10906" title="Geninho" label="Geninho"/>
<link wikidata="Q553061" start="10916" end="10934" title="Evaristo de Macedo" label="Evaristo de Macedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q552929" start="10944" end="10956" title="Joel Santana" label="Joel Santana"/>
<link wikidata="Q553061" start="10966" end="10984" title="Evaristo de Macedo" label="Evaristo de Macedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3655220" start="10994" end="11002" title="Candinho" label="Candinho"/>
<link wikidata="Q553061" start="11015" end="11033" title="Evaristo de Macedo" label="Evaristo de Macedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q10320930" start="11043" end="11055" title="Lula Pereira" label="Lula Pereira"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284800" start="11088" end="11094" title="Edino Nazareth Filho" label="Edinho"/>
<link wikidata="Q7908397" start="11127" end="11132" title="Vadão" label="Vadão"/>
<link wikidata="Q196897" start="11165" end="11170" title="Zetti" label="Zetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q10327571" start="11206" end="11221" title="Mauro Fernandes" label="Mauro Fernandes"/>
<link wikidata="Q10320930" start="11256" end="11268" title="Lula Pereira" label="Lula Pereira"/>
<link wikidata="Q10346510" start="11300" end="11313" title="Paulo Comelli (footballer)" label="Paulo Comelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q9160500" start="11345" end="11355" title="Arturzinho" label="Arturzinho"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11387" end="11406" title="Ferdinando Teixeira" label="Ferdinando Teixeira"/>
<link wikidata="Q4720844" start="11438" end="11453" title="Alexandre Gallo" label="Alexandre Gallo"/>
<link wikidata="Q10346510" start="11486" end="11499" title="Paulo Comelli (footballer)" label="Paulo Comelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q3804866" start="11531" end="11544" title="Sérgio Guedes" label="Sérgio Guedes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3898218" start="11576" end="11590" title="Paulo Bonamigo" label="Paulo Bonamigo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345763" start="11622" end="11635" title="Renato Gaúcho" label="Renato Gaúcho"/>
<link wikidata="Q10334287" start="11668" end="11681" title="Márcio Araújo (footballer, born 1960)" label="Márcio Araújo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7359591" start="11713" end="11729" title="Rogério Lourenço" label="Rogério Lourenço"/>
<link wikidata="Q7944173" start="11760" end="11774" title="Vágner Benazzi" label="Vágner Benazzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2569348" start="11809" end="11820" title="Renê Simões" label="Renê Simões"/>
<link wikidata="Q552929" start="11854" end="11866" title="Joel Santana" label="Joel Santana"/>
<link wikidata="Q312454" start="11897" end="11917" title="Paulo Roberto Falcão" label="Paulo Roberto Falcão"/>
<link wikidata="Q2085459" start="11950" end="11961" title="Caio Júnior" label="Caio Júnior"/>
<link wikidata="Q6278277" start="11995" end="12003" title="Jorge Luís da Silva" label="Jorginho"/>
<link wikidata="Q552929" start="12037" end="12049" title="Joel Santana" label="Joel Santana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1629089" start="12083" end="12099" title="Cristóvão Borges" label="Cristóvão Borges"/>
<link wikidata="Q4242856" start="12131" end="12148" title="Marquinhos Santos" label="Marquinhos Santos"/>
<link wikidata="Q5562609" start="12182" end="12195" title="Gilson Kleina" label="Gilson Kleina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2351691" start="12228" end="12242" title="Charles Fabian" label="Charles Fabian"/>
<link wikidata="Q955965" start="12252" end="12265" title="Sergio Soares" label="Sergio Soares"/>
<link wikidata="Q2351691" start="12275" end="12289" title="Charles Fabian" label="Charles Fabian"/>
<link wikidata="Q555339" start="12299" end="12305" title="Doriva" label="Doriva"/>
<link wikidata="Q5621833" start="12315" end="12328" title="Guto Ferreira" label="Guto Ferreira"/>
<link wikidata="Q163750" start="12343" end="12351" title="Jorginho (footballer, born 1964)" label="Jorginho"/>
<link wikidata="Q10353737" start="12361" end="12377" title="Preto Casagrande" label="Preto Casagrande"/>
<link wikidata="Q389196" start="12387" end="12409" title="Paulo César Carpegiani" label="Paulo César Carpegiani"/>
<link wikidata="Q5621833" start="12434" end="12447" title="Guto Ferreira" label="Guto Ferreira"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284791" start="12472" end="12488" title="Enderson Moreira" label="Enderson Moreira"/>
<link wikidata="Q197565" start="12513" end="12526" title="Roger Machado Marques" label="Roger Machado"/>
<link wikidata="Q81115" start="12551" end="12563" title="Mano Menezes" label="Mano Menezes"/>
<link wikidata="Q10263686" start="12588" end="12603" title="Dado Cavalcanti" label="Dado Cavalcanti"/>
<link wikidata="Q16303098" start="12628" end="12640" title="Diego Dabove" label="Diego Dabove"/>
<link wikidata="Q5621833" start="12665" end="12678" title="Guto Ferreira" label="Guto Ferreira"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284791" start="12703" end="12719" title="Enderson Moreira" label="Enderson Moreira"/>
<link wikidata="Q63168936" start="12745" end="12760" title="Eduardo Barroca" label="Eduardo Barroca"/>
<link wikidata="Q104524446" start="12785" end="12797" title="Renato Paiva" label="Renato Paiva"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249859" start="12822" end="12834" title="Rogério Ceni" label="Rogério Ceni"/>
<link wikidata="Q131238202" start="12864" end="12891" title="Esporte Clube Bahia (women)" label="Esporte Clube Bahia (women)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="187337" wikidata="Q230885" url="?curid=187337" title="State diagram">
<text>A state diagram is used in computer science and related fields to describe the behavior of systems. State diagrams require that the system is composed of a finite number of states. Sometimes, this is indeed the case, while at other times this is a reasonable abstraction. Many forms of state diagrams exist, which differ slightly and have different semantics.

== Overview ==
State diagrams provide an abstract description of a system&#x27;s behavior. This behavior is analyzed and represented by a series of events that can occur in one or more possible states. Hereby &quot;each diagram usually represents objects of a single class and track the different states of its objects through the system&quot;.

State diagrams can be used to graphically represent finite-state machines (also called finite automata). This was introduced by Claude Shannon and Warren Weaver in their 1949 book &quot;The Mathematical Theory of Communication&quot;. Another source is Taylor Booth in his 1967 book &quot;Sequential Machines and Automata Theory&quot;. Another possible representation is the state-transition table.

== Directed graph ==
A classic form of state diagram for a finite automaton (FA) is a directed graph with the following elements (Q, Σ, Z, δ, q0, F):

*Vertices Q: a finite set of states, normally represented by circles and labeled with unique designator symbols or words written inside them
*Input symbols Σ: a finite collection of input symbols or designators
*Output symbols Z: a finite collection of output symbols or designators

The output function ω represents the mapping of ordered pairs of input symbols and states onto output symbols, denoted mathematically as ω : Σ × Q→ Z.

*Edges δ: represent transitions from one state to another as caused by the input (identified by their symbols drawn on the edges). An edge is usually drawn as an arrow directed from the present state to the next state. This mapping describes the state transition caused by an input. This is written mathematically as δ : Q × Σ → Q, so δ (the transition function) in the definition of the FA is given by both the pair of vertices connected by an edge and the symbol on an edge in a diagram representing this FA. Item δ(q, a) = p in the definition of the FA means that from the state named q under input symbol a, the transition to the state p occurs in this machine. In the diagram representing this FA, this is represented by an edge labeled by a pointing from the vertex labeled by q to the vertex labeled by p.
*Start state q0: (not shown in the examples below). The start state q0 ∈ Q is usually represented by an arrow with no origin pointing to the state. In older texts, the start state is not shown and must be inferred from the text.
*Accepting state(s) F: If used, for example for accepting automata, F ∈ Q is the accepting state. It is usually drawn as a double circle. Sometimes the accept state(s) function as &quot;Final&quot; (halt, trapped) states.

For a deterministic finite automaton (DFA), nondeterministic finite automaton (NFA), generalized nondeterministic finite automaton (GNFA), or Moore machine, the input is denoted on each edge. For a Mealy machine, input and output are signified on each edge, separated with a slash &quot;/&quot;: &quot;1/0&quot; denotes the state change upon encountering the symbol &quot;1&quot; causing the symbol &quot;0&quot; to be output. For a Moore machine the state&#x27;s output is usually written inside the state&#x27;s circle, also separated from the state&#x27;s designator with a slash &quot;/&quot;. There are also variants that combine these two notations.

For example, if a state has a number of outputs (e.g. &quot;a= motor counter-clockwise=1, b= caution light inactive=0&quot;) the diagram should reflect this : e.g. &quot;q5/1,0&quot; designates state q5 with outputs a=1, b=0. This designator will be written inside the state&#x27;s circle.

=== Example: DFA, NFA, GNFA, or Moore machine ===
&quot;S&quot;1 and &quot;S&quot;2 are states and &quot;S&quot;1 is an accepting state or a final state. Each edge is labeled with the input. This example shows an acceptor for binary numbers that contain an even number of zeros.

=== Example: Mealy machine ===
&quot;S&quot;0, &quot;S&quot;1, and &quot;S&quot;2 are states. Each edge is labeled with &quot;&quot;j&quot; / &quot;k&quot;&quot; where &quot;j&quot; is the input and &quot;k&quot; is the output.

== Harel statechart ==

Harel statecharts, invented by computer scientist David Harel, are gaining widespread usage since a variant has become part of the Unified Modeling Language (UML). The diagram type allows the modeling of superstates, orthogonal regions, and activities as part of a state.

Classic state diagrams require the creation of distinct nodes for every valid combination of parameters that define the state. For all but the simplest of systems, this can lead to a very large number of nodes and transitions between nodes (state and transition explosion), which reduces the readability of the state diagram. With Harel statecharts it is possible to model multiple cross-functional state diagrams within the statechart. Each of these cross-functional state machines can transition internally without affecting the other state machines. The current state of each cross-functional state machine defines the state of the system. The Harel statechart is equivalent to a state diagram but improves its readability.

==Alternative semantics==
There are other sets of semantics available to represent state diagrams. For example, there are tools for modeling and designing logic for embedded controllers. These diagrams, like Harel&#x27;s original state machines, support hierarchically nested states, orthogonal regions, state actions, and transition actions.

== State diagrams versus flowcharts ==
Newcomers to the state machine formalism often confuse state diagrams with flowcharts. The figure below shows a comparison of a state diagram with a flowchart. A state machine (panel (a)) performs actions in response to explicit events. In contrast, the flowchart (panel (b)) automatically transitions from node to node upon completion of activities.&lt;ref name=&quot;Practical UML Statecharts in C/C++, Second Edition: Event-Driven Programming for Embedded Systems&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;

Nodes of flowcharts are edges in the induced graph of states.
The reason is that each node in a flowchart represents a program command.
A program command is an action to be executed.
A command is not a state, but when applied to the program&#x27;s state, causes a transition to another state.

In more detail, the source code listing represents a program graph.
Executing the program graph (parsing and interpreting) results in a state graph.
So each program graph induces a state graph.
Conversion of the program graph to its associated state graph is called &quot;unfolding&quot; of the program graph.

The program graph is a sequence of commands.
If no variables exist, then the state consists only of the program counter, which keeps track of program location during execution (what is the next command to be applied).

Before executing a command, the program counter is at some position (state before the command is executed).
Executing the command moves the program counter to the next command.
Since the program counter is the whole state, executing the command changed the state.
Thus, the command itself corresponds to a transition between the two states.

Now consider the full case, when variables exist and are affected by the program commands being executed.
Not only does the program counter change between different program counter locations, but variables might also change values due to the commands executed.
Consequently, even if we revisit some program command (e.g. in a loop), this does not imply the program is in the same state.

In the previous case, the program would be in the same state because the whole state is just the program counter. Thus, if the program counterpoints to the same position (next command) it suffices to specify that we are in the same state.
However, if the state includes variables that change value, we can be at the same program location with different variable values, meaning in a different state in the program&#x27;s state space.
The term &quot;unfolding&quot; originates from this multiplication of locations when producing the state graph from the program graph.

A self transition is a transition where the initial and the final state are the same.

A representative example is a do loop incrementing some counter until it overflows and becomes 0 again.
Although the do loop executes the same increment command iteratively, its state space is not a cycle but a line.
This results from the state being the program location (here cycling) combined with the counter value, which is strictly increasing (until the overflow). Thus, different states are visited in sequence until the overflow occurs.
After the overflow the counter becomes 0 again, so the initial state is revisited in the state space, closing a cycle in the state space (assuming the counter was initialized to 0).

The figure above attempts to show that reversal of roles by aligning the arcs of the state diagrams with the processing stages of the flowchart.

One can compare a flowchart to an assembly line in manufacturing because the flowchart describes the progression of some task from beginning to end (e.g., transforming source code input into object code output by a compiler). A state machine generally has no notion of such a progression. The door state machine example shown above is not in a more advanced stage in the &quot;closed&quot; state than in the &quot;opened&quot; state. Rather, it simply reacts differently to the open/close events. A state in a state machine is an efficient way of specifying a behavior, rather than a stage of processing.

== Other extensions ==
An interesting extension is to allow arcs to flow from any number of states to any number of states. This only makes sense if the system is allowed to be in multiple states at once, which implies that an individual state only describes a condition or other partial aspect of the overall, global state. The resulting formalism is known as a Petri net.

Another extension allows the integration of flowcharts within Harel statecharts. This extension supports the development of software that is both event driven and workflow driven.

== See also ==
* David Harel
* DRAKON
* SCXML an XML language that provides a generic state-machine based execution environment based on Harel statecharts.
* UML state machine
* YAKINDU Statechart Tools is a software for modeling state diagrams (Harel statecharts, Mealy machines, Moore machines), simulation, and source code generation.

== References ==
== External links ==

* Introduction to UML 2 State Machine Diagrams by Scott W. Ambler
* UML 2 State Machine Diagram Guidelines by Scott W. Ambler
*Intelliwizard - UML StateWizard - A discontinued round-trip UML dynamic modeling/development framework and tool that ran in popular IDEs under an open-source license.
*YAKINDU Statechart Tools - an Open-Source-Tool for the specification and development of reactive, event-driven systems with the help of state machines.
* Understanding and Using State Machines MATLAB Tech Talks on State Machines
* FSM: Open Source Finite State Machine Generation in Java by Alexander Sakharov FSM
* scxmlcc An efficient scxml state machine to C++ compiler.
* SMC: An Open Source State Machine Compiler that generates FSM for many languages as C, Python, Lua, Scala, PHP, Java, VB, etc. SMC</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q230885" start="2" end="15" title="State diagram" label="state diagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q21198" start="27" end="43" title="computer science" label="computer science"/>
<link wikidata="Q599031" start="173" end="178" title="state (computer science)" label="state"/>
<link wikidata="Q224055" start="259" end="270" title="abstraction (computer science)" label="abstraction"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="349" end="358" title="Semantics#Computer science" label="semantics"/>
<link wikidata="Q58778" start="428" end="434" title="system" label="system"/>
<link wikidata="Q9332" start="442" end="450" title="behavior" label="behavior"/>
<link wikidata="Q176452" start="759" end="779" title="finite-state machine" label="finite-state machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q92760" start="835" end="849" title="Claude Shannon" label="Claude Shannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q510591" start="854" end="867" title="Warren Weaver" label="Warren Weaver"/>
<link wikidata="Q724029" start="887" end="939" title="A Mathematical Theory of Communication" label="&amp;quot;The Mathematical Theory of Communication&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7689885" start="959" end="971" title="Taylor Booth (mathematician)" label="Taylor Booth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2303083" start="1081" end="1103" title="state-transition table" label="state-transition table"/>
<link wikidata="Q837528" start="1165" end="1181" title="Deterministic finite automaton" label="finite automaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137726" start="1192" end="1206" title="directed graph" label="directed graph"/>
<link wikidata="Q176452" start="2816" end="2831" title="accept state" label="accepting state"/>
<link wikidata="Q837528" start="2964" end="2994" title="deterministic finite automaton" label="deterministic finite automaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q617295" start="3002" end="3035" title="nondeterministic finite automaton" label="nondeterministic finite automaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5532499" start="3043" end="3088" title="generalized nondeterministic finite automaton" label="generalized nondeterministic finite automaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q640119" start="3100" end="3113" title="Moore machine" label="Moore machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126309" start="3156" end="3169" title="Mealy machine" label="Mealy machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q640119" start="3391" end="3404" title="Moore machine" label="Moore machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q640119" start="3938" end="3951" title="Moore machine" label="Moore machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126309" start="4199" end="4212" title="Mealy machine" label="Mealy machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920599" start="4489" end="4500" title="David Harel" label="David Harel"/>
<link wikidata="Q169411" start="4570" end="4595" title="Unified Modeling Language" label="Unified Modeling Language"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4643" end="4654" title="UML state machine#Hierarchically nested states" label="superstates"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4656" end="4674" title="UML state machine#Orthogonal regions" label="orthogonal regions"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4953" end="4983" title="UML state machine#UML extensions to the traditional FSM formalism" label="state and transition explosion"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5878" end="5892" title="UML state machine#Basic UML state diagrams" label="state diagrams"/>
<link wikidata="Q185092" start="5898" end="5907" title="flowchart" label="flowchart"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5951" end="5964" title="UML state machine#Basic UML state diagrams" label="state diagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q724168" start="10267" end="10276" title="Petri net" label="Petri net"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920599" start="10477" end="10488" title="David Harel" label="David Harel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2671999" start="10491" end="10497" title="DRAKON" label="DRAKON"/>
<link wikidata="Q7389358" start="10500" end="10505" title="SCXML" label="SCXML"/>
<link wikidata="Q6431942" start="10618" end="10635" title="UML state machine" label="UML state machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1737995" start="10638" end="10662" title="YAKINDU Statechart Tools" label="YAKINDU Statechart Tools"/>
<link wikidata="Q7435883" start="10888" end="10903" title="Scott W. Ambler" label="Scott W. Ambler"/>
<link wikidata="Q176452" start="11269" end="11283" title="Finite-state machine" label="state machines"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="187341" wikidata="Q11855185" url="?curid=187341" title="Charles Correll">
<text>Charles James Correll (February 2, 1890 – September 26, 1972) was an American radio comedian, actor and writer, known best for his work in the radio series &quot;Amos &#x27;n&#x27; Andy&quot; with Freeman Gosden. Correll voiced the main character Andy Brown, along with various lesser characters.

== Biography ==
=== Life and career ===
Correll was born in Peoria, Illinois. He worked originally as a stenographer and a bricklayer. He met Gosden in Durham, North Carolina while working for the Joe Bren Producing Company.

In 1926, Gosden and Correll, who were both white, had success with their radio program &quot;Sam &#x27;n&#x27; Henry&quot; in which the two actors portray Black characters in Blackface. The show originated on Chicago radio station WGN. 

From 1928 to 1960, Gosden and Correll, broadcast their program &quot;Amos &#x27;n&#x27; Andy&quot; – again portraying Black characters – which quickly became one of the most famous and popular radio series of the 1930s, nationwide. Correll voiced the character &quot;Andy&quot; (Andrew Hogg Brown). To celebrate the show&#x27;s 30th anniversary, the broadcast of March 19, 1958, was done by Correll and Gosden using their real voices and calling each other by their real names; this had never been done for the program before.

During 1961–1962, Gosden and Correll provided the voices for the animated series &quot;Calvin and the Colonel&quot; for American Broadcasting Company-TV.

=== Last years ===
Correll died in 1972 in a Chicago hospital after a heart attack. At the time of his death he was retired and living in Beverly Hills, California, just a few blocks away from his radio partner, Freeman Gosden.

=== Personal life and family ===
Correll&#x27;s first marriage to Marie Janes ended with divorce on May 26, 1937; the couple had been married for ten years and did not have any children. On September 11, 1937, in Glendale, California, he married Alyce McLaughlin, a former dancer; they had six children, Dorothy, Charles, Barbara, John, and Richard. On July 5, 1954, John Correll, his seven-year-old son, died of what seemed to be an accidental poisoning. An autopsy determined the young boy died of an acute kidney infection. A baby girl born to the couple in 1939 died when she was less than a day old.

His son, Charles Correll Jr. became an actor and a director. Another son, Richard Correll also became an actor—remembered best as the character Richard Rickover of &quot;Leave It to Beaver&quot;—and also produced and directed the television situation comedy &quot;Family Matters&quot;.

Correll was a Freemason.

===Political views===
Correll supported Barry Goldwater in the 1964 United States presidential election.

== Legacy ==
The comedy team was named to the Radio Hall of Fame in 1962. In 1969, Correll was memorialized with a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame for his radio work. In 1977, Correll was inducted in the National Association of Broadcasters Hall of Fame along with Gosden.

==References==
==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q11855185" start="0" end="21" title="Charles Correll" label="Charles James Correll"/>
<link wikidata="Q245068" start="84" end="92" title="comedian" label="comedian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2843914" start="162" end="185" title="Amos &amp;#x27;n&amp;#x27; Andy" label="Amos &amp;#x27;n&amp;#x27; Andy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5501008" start="197" end="211" title="Freeman Gosden" label="Freeman Gosden"/>
<link wikidata="Q49229" start="450" end="472" title="Durham, North Carolina" label="Durham, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q49078" start="567" end="572" title="White Americans" label="white"/>
<link wikidata="Q7407044" start="617" end="640" title="Sam &amp;#x27;n&amp;#x27; Henry" label="Sam &amp;#x27;n&amp;#x27; Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="679" end="684" title="African Americans" label="Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q7949870" start="755" end="758" title="WGN (AM)" label="WGN"/>
<link wikidata="Q3651068" start="1377" end="1399" title="Calvin and the Colonel" label="Calvin and the Colonel"/>
<link wikidata="Q169889" start="1410" end="1439" title="American Broadcasting Company" label="American Broadcasting Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q12152" start="1515" end="1527" title="myocardial infarction" label="heart attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q127856" start="1583" end="1608" title="Beverly Hills, California" label="Beverly Hills, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063987" start="2289" end="2308" title="Charles Correll (director)" label="Charles Correll Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q2242673" start="2354" end="2369" title="Richard Correll" label="Richard Correll"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247688" start="2450" end="2468" title="Leave It to Beaver" label="Leave It to Beaver"/>
<link wikidata="Q593838" start="2544" end="2558" title="Family Matters" label="Family Matters"/>
<link wikidata="Q41726" start="2581" end="2590" title="Freemasonry" label="Freemason"/>
<link wikidata="Q319129" start="2633" end="2648" title="Barry Goldwater" label="Barry Goldwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q699646" start="2656" end="2696" title="1964 United States presidential election" label="1964 United States presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q71719" start="2826" end="2848" title="Hollywood Walk of Fame" label="Hollywood Walk of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q6952127" start="2906" end="2955" title="National Association of Broadcasters Hall of Fame" label="National Association of Broadcasters Hall of Fame"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="187342" wikidata="Q5501008" url="?curid=187342" title="Freeman Gosden">
<text>Freeman Fisher &quot;Gozzie&quot; Gosden (May 5, 1899 – December 10, 1982) was an American radio comedian, actor and pioneer in the development of the situation comedy form. He is best known for his work in the radio series &quot;Amos &#x27;n&#x27; Andy&quot;.

==Life and career==
Gosden was born in Richmond, Virginia, the son of Emma L. (Smith) and Walter W. Gosden Sr. While attending school in Richmond, Gozzie worked part-time in Tarrant&#x27;s Drug Store at 1 West Broad Street. During World War I, he served in the U.S. Navy as a wireless operator, which prompted his great interest in the young medium of radio. 

During 1921, Gosden first teamed with Charles Correll to do radio work, presenting comedy acts and hosting variety programs. They had met in Durham, North Carolina, both working for the Joe Bren Producing Company. Their first regular series bagan in 1925 with their WEBH Chicago program &quot;Correll and Gosden, the Life of the Party&quot;. For this program, the two told jokes, sang, and played music (Correll played piano and Gosden ukulele or banjo).

In 1926, Gosden and Correll, who were both White, had success with their radio program &quot;Sam &#x27;n&#x27; Henry&quot; in which the two actors portray black characters in Blackface. The show originated on Chicago radio station WGN. 

From 1928 to 1960, Gosden and Correll, broadcast their program &quot;Amos &#x27;n&#x27; Andy&quot; – again portraying Black characters – which quickly became one of the most famous and popular radio series of the 1930s, nationwide. Gosden voiced the characters &quot;Amos Jones&quot;, &quot;George &#x27;Kingfish&#x27; Stevens&quot;, &quot;Lightning&quot;, &quot;Brother Crawford&quot;, and some dozen other characters. To celebrate the show&#x27;s 30th anniversary, the broadcast of March 19, 1958, was done by Correll and Gosden using their real voices and calling each other by their real names; this had never been done for the program before.

During 1961–1962, Gosden and Correll provided the voices for the animated television series &quot;Calvin and the Colonel&quot; broadcast by American Broadcasting Company-TV.

In 1969, Gosden was honored with a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame for his work in radio. In 1974 Gosden was living in Palm Springs, California and was the best man for Frank Sinatra&#x27;s 1976 wedding to Barbara Marx. In 1977, Gosden was inducted into the National Association of Broadcasters Hall of Fame along with Correll.

==Personal life==

Gosden was the father of four children: Virginia, Craig, Freeman Jr., and Linda.

Gosden was a charter member of the Augusta National Golf Club, joining the club at its inception in 1932. He was a long-term good friend of Clifford Roberts, who, along with famed golfer Bob Jones, co-founded the club. He was a Freemason at Petersburg Lodge No. 15 in Virginia. 

Gosden died from congestive heart failure in Los Angeles, California on December 10, 1982, at the age of 83.

==References==
==External links==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5501008" start="0" end="40" title="Freeman Gosden" label="Freeman Fisher &amp;quot;Gozzie&amp;quot; Gosden"/>
<link wikidata="Q872" start="91" end="96" title="radio" label="radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q245068" start="97" end="105" title="comedian" label="comedian"/>
<link wikidata="Q170238" start="151" end="167" title="situation comedy" label="situation comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2843914" start="230" end="253" title="Amos &amp;#x27;n&amp;#x27; Andy" label="Amos &amp;#x27;n&amp;#x27; Andy"/>
<link wikidata="Q43421" start="301" end="319" title="Richmond, Virginia" label="Richmond, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="493" end="504" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="523" end="532" title="United States Navy" label="U.S. Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11855185" start="661" end="676" title="Charles Correll" label="Charles Correll"/>
<link wikidata="Q49229" start="764" end="786" title="Durham, North Carolina" label="Durham, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="894" end="901" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q5994" start="1042" end="1047" title="piano" label="piano"/>
<link wikidata="Q61285" start="1059" end="1066" title="ukulele" label="ukulele"/>
<link wikidata="Q258896" start="1070" end="1075" title="banjo" label="banjo"/>
<link wikidata="Q49078" start="1122" end="1127" title="White Americans" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q7407044" start="1172" end="1195" title="Sam &amp;#x27;n&amp;#x27; Henry" label="Sam &amp;#x27;n&amp;#x27; Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="1234" end="1239" title="African Americans" label="black"/>
<link wikidata="Q7949870" start="1310" end="1313" title="WGN (AM)" label="WGN"/>
<link wikidata="Q2843914" start="1386" end="1409" title="Amos &amp;#x27;n&amp;#x27; Andy" label="Amos &amp;#x27;n&amp;#x27; Andy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3651068" start="2064" end="2086" title="Calvin and the Colonel" label="Calvin and the Colonel"/>
<link wikidata="Q169889" start="2106" end="2135" title="American Broadcasting Company" label="American Broadcasting Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q71719" start="2188" end="2210" title="Hollywood Walk of Fame" label="Hollywood Walk of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q488004" start="2263" end="2287" title="Palm Springs, California" label="Palm Springs, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q40912" start="2313" end="2326" title="Frank Sinatra" label="Frank Sinatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2883992" start="2350" end="2362" title="Barbara Marx" label="Barbara Marx"/>
<link wikidata="Q6952127" start="2402" end="2451" title="National Association of Broadcasters Hall of Fame" label="National Association of Broadcasters Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q765780" start="2609" end="2635" title="Augusta National Golf Club" label="Augusta National Golf Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q2372014" start="2714" end="2730" title="Clifford Roberts" label="Clifford Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q41726" start="2802" end="2811" title="Freemasonry" label="Freemason"/>
<link wikidata="Q181754" start="2871" end="2895" title="congestive heart failure" label="congestive heart failure"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="2899" end="2922" title="Los Angeles, California" label="Los Angeles, California"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="187344" wikidata="Q649803" url="?curid=187344" title="Oil drop experiment">
<text>The oil drop experiment was performed by Robert A. Millikan and Harvey Fletcher in 1909 to measure the elementary electric charge (the charge of the electron). The experiment took place in the Ryerson Physical Laboratory at the University of Chicago. Millikan received the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1923.

The experiment observed tiny electrically charged droplets of oil located between two parallel metal surfaces, forming the plates of a capacitor. The plates were oriented horizontally, with one plate above the other. A mist of atomized oil drops was introduced through a small hole in the top plate and was ionized by x-rays, making them negatively charged. First, with zero applied electric field, the velocity of a falling droplet was measured. At terminal velocity, the drag force equals the gravitational force. As both forces depend on the radius in different ways, the radius of the droplet, and therefore the mass and gravitational force, could be determined (using the known density of the oil). Next, a voltage inducing an electric field was applied between the plates and adjusted until the drops were suspended in mechanical equilibrium, indicating that the electrical force and the gravitational force were in balance. Using the known electric field, Millikan and Fletcher could determine the charge on the oil droplet. By repeating the experiment for many droplets, they confirmed that the charges were all small integer multiples of a certain base value, which was found to be , about 0.6% difference from the currently accepted value of They proposed that this was the magnitude of the negative charge of a single electron.

==Background==
Starting in 1908, while a professor at the University of Chicago, Millikan, with the significant input of Fletcher, the &quot;able assistance of Mr. J. Yinbong
Lee&quot;, and after improving his setup, published his seminal study in 1913. This remains controversial since papers found after Fletcher&#x27;s death describe events in which Millikan coerced Fletcher into relinquishing authorship as a condition for receiving his PhD. In return, Millikan used his influence in support of Fletcher&#x27;s career at Bell Labs.

Millikan and Fletcher&#x27;s experiment involved measuring the force on oil droplets in a glass chamber sandwiched between two electrodes, one above and one below. With the electrical field calculated, they could measure the droplet&#x27;s charge, the charge on a single electron being (). At the time of Millikan and Fletcher&#x27;s oil drop experiments, the existence of subatomic particles was not universally accepted. Experimenting with cathode rays in 1897, J. J. Thomson had discovered negatively charged &quot;corpuscles&quot;, as he called them, with a mass about 1/1837 that of a hydrogen atom. Similar results had been found by George FitzGerald and Walter Kaufmann. Most of what was then known about electricity and magnetism, however, could be explained on the basis that charge is a continuous variable; in much the same way that many of the properties of light can be explained by treating it as a continuous wave rather than as a stream of photons.

The elementary charge &quot;e&quot; is one of the fundamental physical constants and thus the accuracy of the value is of great importance. In 1923, Millikan won the Nobel Prize in physics, in part because of this experiment.

Thomas Edison, who had previously thought of charge as a continuous variable, became convinced after working with Millikan and Fletcher&#x27;s apparatus. This experiment has since been repeated by generations of physics students, although it is rather expensive and difficult to conduct properly.

From 1995 to 2007, several computer-automated experiments have been conducted at SLAC to search for isolated fractionally charged particles, however, no evidence for fractional charge particles has been found after measuring over 100 million drops.

==Experimental procedure==

===Apparatus===


Millikan&#x27;s and Fletcher&#x27;s apparatus incorporated a parallel pair of horizontal metal plates. By applying a potential difference across the plates, a uniform electric field was created in the space between them. A ring of insulating material was used to hold the plates apart. Four holes were cut into the ring, three for illumination by a bright light, and another to allow viewing through a microscope.

A fine mist of oil droplets was sprayed into a chamber above the plates. The oil was of a type usually used in vacuum apparatus and was chosen because it had an extremely low vapour pressure. Ordinary oils would evaporate under the heat of the light source causing the mass of the oil drop to change over the course of the experiment. Some oil drops became electrically charged through friction with the nozzle as they were sprayed. Alternatively, charging could be brought about by including an ionizing radiation source (such as an X-ray tube). The droplets entered the space between the plates and, because they were charged, could be made to rise and fall by changing the voltage across the plates.

===Method===

Initially the oil drops are allowed to fall between the plates with the electric field turned off. They very quickly reach a terminal velocity because of friction with the air in the chamber. The field is then turned on and, if it is large enough, some of the drops (the charged ones) will start to rise. (This is because the upwards electric force &quot;F&quot;E is greater for them than the downwards gravitational force &quot;F&quot;g, in the same way bits of paper can be picked by a charged rubber rod). A likely looking drop is selected and kept in the middle of the field of view by alternately switching off the voltage until all the other drops have fallen. The experiment is then continued with this one drop.

The drop is allowed to fall and its terminal velocity &quot;v&quot;1 in the absence of an electric field is calculated. The drag force acting on the drop can then be worked out using Stokes&#x27; law:

:formula_1
where &quot;v&quot;1 is the terminal velocity (i.e. velocity in the absence of an electric field) of the falling drop, &quot;η&quot; is the viscosity of the air, and &quot;r&quot; is the radius of the drop.

The weight w is the volume &quot;D&quot; multiplied by the density &quot;ρ&quot; and the acceleration due to gravity g. However, what is needed is the apparent weight. The apparent weight in air is the true weight minus the upthrust (which equals the weight of air displaced by the oil drop). For a perfectly spherical droplet the apparent weight can be written as:

:formula_2

At terminal velocity the oil drop is not accelerating. Therefore, the total force acting on it must be zero and the two forces &quot;F&quot; and formula_3 must cancel one another out (that is, formula_4). This implies
:formula_5

Once &quot;r&quot; is calculated, formula_3 can easily be worked out.

Now the field is turned back on, and the electric force on the drop is
:formula_7
where &quot;q&quot; is the charge on the oil drop and &quot;E&quot; is the electric field between the plates. For parallel plates
:formula_8
where &quot;V&quot; is the potential difference and &quot;d&quot; is the distance between the plates.

One conceivable way to work out &quot;q&quot; would be to adjust &quot;V&quot; until the oil drop remained steady. Then we could equate &quot;F&quot;&quot;E&quot; with formula_3. Also, determining &quot;F&quot;&quot;E&quot; proves difficult because the mass of the oil drop is difficult to determine without reverting to the use of Stokes&#x27; Law. A more practical approach is to turn &quot;V&quot; up slightly so that the oil drop rises with a new terminal velocity &quot;v&quot;2. Then
:formula_10

=== Comparison to modern values ===
Effective from the 2019 revision of the SI, the value of the elementary charge is &quot;defined&quot; to be exactly .
Before that, the most recent (2014) accepted value was , where the (98) indicates the uncertainty of the last two decimal places. In his Nobel lecture, Millikan gave his measurement as , which equals . The difference is less than one percent, but is six times greater than Millikan&#x27;s standard error, so the disagreement is significant.

Using X-ray experiments, Erik Bäcklin in 1928 found a higher value of the elementary charge, or , which is within uncertainty of the exact value. Raymond Thayer Birge, conducting a review of physical constants in 1929, stated &quot;The investigation by Bäcklin constitutes a pioneer piece of work, and it is quite likely, as such, to contain various unsuspected sources of systematic error. If [... it is ...] weighted according to the apparent probable error [...], the weighted average will still be suspiciously high. [...] the writer has finally decided to reject the Bäcklin value, and to use the weighted mean of the remaining two values.&quot; Birge averaged Millikan&#x27;s result and a different, less accurate X-ray experiment that agreed with Millikan&#x27;s result. Successive X-ray experiments continued to give high results, and proposals for the discrepancy were ruled out experimentally. Sten von Friesen measured the value with a new electron diffraction method, and the oil drop experiment was redone. Both gave high numbers. By 1937 it was &quot;quite obvious&quot; that Millikan&#x27;s value could not be maintained any longer, and the established value became or .

==Controversy==
Some controversy was raised by physicist Gerald Holton (1978) who pointed out that Millikan recorded more measurements in his journal than he included in his final results. Holton suggested these data points were omitted from the large set of oil drops measured in his experiments without apparent reason. This claim was disputed by Allan Franklin, a high energy physics experimentalist and philosopher of science at the University of Colorado. Franklin contended that Millikan&#x27;s exclusions of data did not substantively affect his final value of &quot;e&quot;, but did reduce the statistical error around this estimate &quot;e&quot;. This enabled Millikan to claim that he had calculated &quot;e&quot; to better than one half of one percent; in fact, if Millikan had included all of the data he had thrown out, the standard error of the mean would have been within 2%. While this would still have resulted in Millikan having measured &quot;e&quot; better than anyone else at the time, the slightly larger uncertainty might have allowed more disagreement with his results within the physics community. While Franklin left his support for Millikan&#x27;s measurement with the conclusion that concedes that Millikan may have performed &quot;cosmetic surgery&quot; on the data, David Goodstein investigated the original detailed notebooks kept by Millikan, concluding that Millikan plainly states here and in the reports that he included only drops that had undergone a &quot;complete series of observations&quot; and excluded no drops from this group of complete measurements. Reasons for a failure to generate a complete observation include annotations regarding the apparatus setup, oil drop production, and atmospheric effects which invalidated, in Millikan&#x27;s opinion (borne out by the reduced error in this set), a given particular measurement.

==Millikan&#x27;s experiment as an example of psychological effects in scientific methodology==


In a commencement address given at the California Institute of Technology (Caltech) in 1974 (and reprinted in &quot;Surely You&#x27;re Joking, Mr. Feynman!&quot; in 1985 as well as in &quot;The Pleasure of Finding Things Out&quot; in 1999), physicist Richard Feynman noted:

==References==
==Further reading==
* 


==External links==

* Simulation of the oil drop experiment (requires JavaScript)
* Thomsen, Marshall, &quot;Good to the Last Drop&quot;. Millikan Stories as &quot;Canned&quot; Pedagogy. Eastern Michigan University.
* CSR/TSGC Team, &quot;&quot;Quark search experiment&quot;. The University of Texas at Austin.
* The oil drop experiment appears in a list of Science&#x27;s 10 Most Beautiful Experiments , originally published in the New York Times.
* Engeness, T.E., &quot;The Millikan Oil Drop Experiment&quot;&quot;. 25 April 2005.
* Paper by Millikan discussing modifications to his original experiment to improve its accuracy.
* A variation of this experiment has been suggested for the International Space Station.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q649803" start="4" end="23" title="Oil drop experiment" label="oil drop experiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q130975" start="41" end="59" title="Robert Andrews Millikan" label="Robert A. Millikan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2568271" start="64" end="79" title="Harvey Fletcher" label="Harvey Fletcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q2101" start="103" end="129" title="Elementary charge" label="elementary electric charge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2225" start="149" end="157" title="electron" label="electron"/>
<link wikidata="Q101965" start="164" end="174" title="experiment" label="experiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q131252" start="228" end="249" title="University of Chicago" label="University of Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q38104" start="273" end="295" title="Nobel Prize in Physics" label="Nobel Prize in Physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q185789" start="356" end="363" title="droplet" label="droplet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5322" start="441" end="450" title="capacitor" label="capacitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2167111" start="533" end="541" title="atomizer nozzle" label="atomized"/>
<link wikidata="Q190382" start="613" end="620" title="ionization" label="ionized"/>
<link wikidata="Q34777" start="624" end="629" title="x-ray" label="x-ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q46221" start="689" end="703" title="electric field" label="electric field"/>
<link wikidata="Q614981" start="756" end="773" title="terminal velocity" label="terminal velocity"/>
<link wikidata="Q206621" start="779" end="783" title="drag (physics)" label="drag"/>
<link wikidata="Q11412" start="801" end="814" title="gravity" label="gravitational"/>
<link wikidata="Q11423" start="922" end="926" title="mass" label="mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q29539" start="989" end="996" title="density" label="density"/>
<link wikidata="Q25428" start="1018" end="1025" title="voltage" label="voltage"/>
<link wikidata="Q716915" start="1131" end="1153" title="mechanical equilibrium" label="mechanical equilibrium"/>
<link wikidata="Q121594" start="1687" end="1696" title="professor" label="professor"/>
<link wikidata="Q131252" start="1704" end="1725" title="University of Chicago" label="University of Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q177013" start="2557" end="2576" title="subatomic particles" label="subatomic particles"/>
<link wikidata="Q207340" start="2626" end="2637" title="cathode ray" label="cathode ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q47285" start="2648" end="2661" title="J. J. Thomson" label="J. J. Thomson"/>
<link wikidata="Q274116" start="2702" end="2712" title="Plum pudding model" label="corpuscles"/>
<link wikidata="Q6643508" start="2774" end="2787" title="hydrogen atom" label="hydrogen atom"/>
<link wikidata="Q536469" start="2823" end="2840" title="George Francis FitzGerald" label="George FitzGerald"/>
<link wikidata="Q64978" start="2845" end="2860" title="Walter Kaufmann (physicist)" label="Walter Kaufmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q12725" start="2896" end="2907" title="electricity" label="electricity"/>
<link wikidata="Q3294789" start="2912" end="2921" title="magnetism" label="magnetism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9128" start="3054" end="3059" title="light" label="light"/>
<link wikidata="Q3198" start="3140" end="3147" title="photons" label="photons"/>
<link wikidata="Q2101" start="3154" end="3171" title="elementary charge" label="elementary charge"/>
<link wikidata="Q173227" start="3212" end="3229" title="physical constant" label="physical constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q7191" start="3316" end="3327" title="Nobel Prize" label="Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q413" start="3331" end="3338" title="physics" label="physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q8743" start="3377" end="3390" title="Thomas Edison" label="Thomas Edison"/>
<link wikidata="Q915217" start="3756" end="3760" title="SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory" label="SLAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q11475" start="4497" end="4503" title="vacuum" label="vacuum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2661322" start="4561" end="4576" title="vapour pressure" label="vapour pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q174443" start="4920" end="4930" title="X-ray tube" label="X-ray tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q614981" start="5229" end="5246" title="terminal velocity" label="terminal velocity"/>
<link wikidata="Q206621" start="5949" end="5953" title="drag (physics)" label="drag"/>
<link wikidata="Q824561" start="6008" end="6024" title="Stokes&amp;#x27; law" label="Stokes&amp;#x27; law"/>
<link wikidata="Q128709" start="6178" end="6187" title="viscosity" label="viscosity"/>
<link wikidata="Q173817" start="6225" end="6231" title="radius" label="radius"/>
<link wikidata="Q6497624" start="6470" end="6478" title="upthrust" label="upthrust"/>
<link wikidata="Q11376" start="6666" end="6678" title="acceleration" label="accelerating"/>
<link wikidata="Q3076763" start="7810" end="7833" title="2019 revision of the SI" label="2019 revision of the SI"/>
<link wikidata="Q620994" start="8198" end="8212" title="standard error" label="standard error"/>
<link wikidata="Q34777" start="8257" end="8262" title="X-ray" label="X-ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q2012929" start="8397" end="8417" title="Raymond Thayer Birge" label="Raymond Thayer Birge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5744418" start="9155" end="9171" title="Sten von Friesen" label="Sten von Friesen"/>
<link wikidata="Q864822" start="9202" end="9222" title="electron diffraction" label="electron diffraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q935051" start="9495" end="9508" title="Gerald Holton" label="Gerald Holton"/>
<link wikidata="Q22669805" start="9787" end="9801" title="Allan Franklin" label="Allan Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5421173" start="9825" end="9840" title="experimentalist" label="experimentalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891" start="9845" end="9856" title="philosopher" label="philosopher"/>
<link wikidata="Q736674" start="9875" end="9897" title="University of Colorado at Boulder" label="University of Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502698" start="10040" end="10057" title="errors and residuals in statistics" label="statistical error"/>
<link wikidata="Q5234241" start="10734" end="10749" title="David Goodstein" label="David Goodstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152362" start="11415" end="11435" title="commencement address" label="commencement address"/>
<link wikidata="Q161562" start="11449" end="11483" title="California Institute of Technology" label="California Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2743592" start="11526" end="11565" title="Surely You&amp;#x27;re Joking, Mr. Feynman!" label="Surely You&amp;#x27;re Joking, Mr. Feynman!"/>
<link wikidata="Q7757497" start="11600" end="11634" title="The Pleasure of Finding Things Out" label="The Pleasure of Finding Things Out"/>
<link wikidata="Q39246" start="11661" end="11676" title="Richard Feynman" label="Richard Feynman"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="12158" end="12172" title="New York Times" label="New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q25271" start="12416" end="12443" title="International Space Station" label="International Space Station"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="187346" wikidata="Q506832" url="?curid=187346" title="Club Athletico Paranaense">
<text>Club Athletico Paranaense (abbreviated CAP, commonly known as Athletico Paranaense and up to 2019 known as Atlético Paranaense) is a Brazilian football team from the city of Curitiba, capital city of the Brazilian state of Paraná, founded on 26 March 1924. 

The team&#x27;s most important titles have been winning the 2001 Série A, the Copa Sudamericana in 2018 and 2021 making it the only team from Paraná to win international titles. It won the Copa do Brasil in 2019. In the Copa Libertadores, they have finished runner-up twice, in 2005 and 2022. 

They are considered the strongest team in Brazil outside of the Big 12, at times even surpassing them.

==History==

=== Foundation ===
Club Athletico Paranaense traces its roots to the 1912 founding of the International Football Club and the 1914 founding of the América Futebol Clube, two traditional Curitiba clubs. The clubs merged in 26 March 1924 100 years ago to form CAP. The club&#x27;s first match, a friendly one, was played on 6 April, when Athletico Paranaense beat Universal FC 4–2. The following year, Athletico Paranaense won its first title, the Campeonato Paranaense. In 1929 it won its second state title, before adding a third and the club&#x27;s first back to back championship. 

=== 1980s and 1990s: ups and downs ===
In the 1983 Serie A, Athletico had a great season, finishing fourth in the league. However, the club struggled in the 1986 and 1988 seasons, which eventually culminated in the club&#x27;s relegation to the Série B for the first time in history in 1989. In the 1990 season they made the second division finals, losing to Sport Recife due to Sport having a better season record, after a draw on aggregate. Despite the loss, they still earned promotion to the 1991 Série A, where they struggled but ultimately earned their permanence in the top flight for the following season. 

The 1992 season was slightly better, with the club finishing fifteenth in the Serie A. However, the following season was worse, with the club suffering another relegation, their second in four years. In the 1994 Série B, the club was eliminated in the third stage and was not promoted. In the 1995 Série B, Athletico won their first major title in history, the second division title, and was promoted to the 1996 Serie A. Back in the top flight, &quot;Furacão&quot; had a good campaign, finishing fourth in the regular season and qualifying to the quarter finals. 

In 1999, the club inaugurated their new stadium, Arena da Baixada, which was built on the same ground as their old stadium. Also that year, Athletico won a Pre-Libertadores tournament, which was only played in 1999, due to CONMEBOL expanding the tournament from 24 to 32 teams, so Brazil&#x27;s fifth place had to be defined. Athletico beat powerhouses Internacional, Sao Paulo, and then Cruzeiro in the finals to earn their first Libertadores participation in history.

=== 2000–2006: First league title and Continental campaigns ===
In the 2000 Copa Libertadores, the club began their campaign in excellent form, topping their group undefeated, with their only draw coming against Nacional; they also won their first match on 16 February 2000, a 3–0 victory in Peru against Alianza Lima. Expectations were high for the knockout rounds, with Athletico being the #2 seed in the competition behind Colombian champions América de Cali; however, &quot;Furacão&quot; was eliminated by fellow Brazilians Atletico Mineiro in the knockout stage, losing on penalties after a 2–2 draw on aggregate. 

In 2001, Athletico won their first Série A title, beating São Caetano 5–2 on aggregate in the finals. As champions, they gained automatic qualification to the 2002 Copa Libertadores. Expectations were high for the club as champions, and the team was looking to build off of its Libertadores campaign in 2000 where it reached the knockout stages; however, things were worse in the 2002 edition, and the team finished last in their group with only one win, including a heavy 5–0 defeat to America de Cali. 

In 2004, Athletico finished second in the Série A, battling it out with champions Santos until the last matchday. This position qualified the club for the 2005 Copa Libertadores. Their 2005 Libertadores campaign was very different from the first two; the club qualified for the knockout stages as second in its group, behind Colombian champions Independiente Medellín, who Athletico had lost to 4–0 in Curitiba. In the round of 16, Athletico disposed of Paraguayan club Cerro Porteño on away goals, qualifying to the last eight of the competition for the first time in club history. In the quarter-finals, they were faced with Serie A and 2003 Libertadores champions Santos. Athletico won the first leg at home 3–2, then won 2–0 in São Paulo to progress to the semi-finals. In the semi-finals they were faced with Mexican club Chivas Guadalajara, who had eliminated powerhouse Boca Juniors 4–0 on aggregate. Chivas was no match for Athletico, with the Brazilian club winning 3–0 at home, then tying 2–2 on Mexican soil to progress to the final with a 5–2 aggregate score. The finals were played against powerhouse São Paulo, who had numerous international trophies already. The first leg at Arena da Baixada ended in a 1-1 draw. However, the second leg was a completely different story, with Sao Paulo thrashing Athletico 4–0 and denying Athletico their first Copa Libertadores title. 

In the 2005 Serie A, Athletico was able to maintain enough squad depth to have a good performance in the league, finishing sixth and qualifying for their first Copa Sudamericana. Their campaign began with a 4-1 aggregate victory against fellow Paranaense club Paraná. In the following round, they eliminated powerhouse River Plate 3-2 on aggregate, then eliminated Uruguayan club Nacional, 6-2 on aggregate, with a 4-1 victory in the second leg, to reach the semi-finals. The semi-finals, played against Mexican club Pachuca, began with a shock 1-0 victory by the Mexican club on Brazilian soil. The second leg began with Athletico up 1-0 at halftime with a goal by Colombian midfielder David Ferreira to tie the aggregate score; however, Pachuca scored four goals in the second half to win the game 4-1 and eliminate the Brazilians from their first Copa Sudamericana. 

=== 2007–2012: Decline and relegation ===
This elimination had a considerable effect on the club&#x27;s near future; Athletico finished out of the top 10 spots in the league from 2006 to 2009, which included a 6-2 loss on aggregate to Vasco da Gama in the first round of the 2007 Copa Sudamericana, a first round elimination at the hands of Corinthians Alagoano in the 2008 Copa do Brasil, and elimination from the 2008 Copa Sudamericana by Guadalajara. In 2007, the team partnered with Major League Soccer club Dallas. 

In 2010 the club had a good season and finished fifth, but the club suffered relegation in 2011 after a seventeenth placed finish in the league. The fifth placed finish in 2010 had qualified the club for the 2011 Copa Sudamericana, but they were eliminated in the first round by Flamengo. In 2012 the team gained immediate promotion back to the Serie A. In 2010 the club announced a partnership with Vitesse Arnhem in the Netherlands. 

=== 2013–present: New heights, first major titles and continental success ===
For 2013 the team was completely rebuilt and came back into the top flight as a powerful team; the club finished third in the Serie A, qualified for the 2014 Copa Libertadores, and finished runner up to Flamengo in the 2013 Copa do Brasil. 

On 15 February 2015, the club signed Indian winger Romeo Fernandes on loan from Dempo and through this contract he became the first and only Indian footballer to play in a South American top-tier league. Zico, then FC Goa coach played a key role behind this contract.

In 2018, Athletico Paranaense won their first Copa Sudamericana title, defeating Colombian champions Junior in the finals after a penalty shootout.

On 22 May 2019, Athletico won the first leg of the 2019 Recopa Sudamericana against 2018 Libertadores champion River Plate with the only goal of the match being scored by Marco Ruben. In the second leg at Estadio Monumental, River was leading 1–0 until the 90th minute and it looked like the match was heading for a penalty shootout; however, River scored two goals in injury time to win 3–0 and lift the Recopa title 3–1 on aggregate. In September 2019, the club won its first Copa do Brasil title, beating Internacional twice in the final.

In 2021, they won their second Sudamericana title, beating fellow Brazilians Red Bull Bragantino 1–0 in the final. 

In 2022, Athletico Paranaense reached the Copa Libertadores final for the second time in club history, where they were defeated by Flamengo.

== Logos ==
== Supporters ==
A survey taken in 2005 by &quot;Paraná Pesquisas&quot; Institute showed that Athletico Paranaense has the largest number of supporters in Curitiba.

==Team colors and uniform==

Originally in 1924 Athletico used to play using a horizontally striped in red and black shirt, along with white shorts and red and black socks.

In 1989 Athletico&#x27;s administrators wanted to differentiate the team&#x27;s uniform from the other red and black teams in Brazil (mainly Flamengo, Sport Recife and Vitória), so they changed the home shirt to be vertically striped in red and black (the team kept playing with white socks and white shorts). In 1996 Athletico changed the color of the socks and the shorts from white to black. 

In December 2018, Athletico&#x27;s administrators changed the club&#x27;s crest to be four alternating red and black diagonal stripes which decreased in size from top to bottom, resembling a hurricane, echoing the club&#x27;s nickname. The club also changed their name from &#x27;Clube Atlético Paranaense&#x27; to its original name in the Portuguese orthography when it was founded, &#x27;Club Athletico Paranaense&#x27;, which some believe to be a move in order to further differentiate themselves from Atlético Mineiro, another prominent Brazilian club. The club also changed the kits: the home kit, which had been a red and black vertically striped shirt, black shorts and black socks for twenty-two years became a predominantly red shirt, with a black collar, and the four diagonal stripes from the crest enlarged and going across both the front and back of the lower third of the shirt in black. The shorts and socks remain black. The away strip released with this kit was a white shirt with a black collar. In place of the four diagonal stripes were eight thin diagonal lines in the place of the outline of the larger ones seen on the home shirt; these too were black. The shorts and socks were white.

=== Sponsors ===
The team&#x27;s kit sponsor is the international betting brand Betsson starting from the 2022-2023 season. This came after a sponsorship with EstrelaBet was abandoned after only four days.

==Stadium==

The home stadium is the Estádio Joaquim Américo Guimarães, built in 1914 and renovated several times is traditionally known as Arena da Baixada, or Ligga Arena for sponsorship reasons because of the sponsorship by Ligga. Besides hosting important club games, Arena da Baixada also hosted 4 World Cup games in 2014 and other events like the 2017 FIVB Volleyball World League, the UFC 198: Werdum vs. Miocic and many music concerts.
Arena da Baixada is also the only stadium in South America with a retractable roof and was the first to use artificial turf (with FIFA approval). 

==Partnerships==
* Orlando City SC (MLS)– The technical partnership connects City with a club with a training facility and one of Brazil&#x27;s academies.
* All India Football Federation (AIFF) – On 13 November 2014, Paranaense signed a partnership with AIFF, the governing body of Indian football, on a contract lasting till the end of 2015. The idea was presented by Technical director Rob Baan. Its main motive would be to help India for &quot;development of a strong Indian side in the 2017 FIFA U-17 World Cup.
* Cerezo Osaka
* Bali United F.C.

==Current squad==
===First team===













===Youth team===



===Other players under contract===



===Out on loan===




==Personnel==

===Current technical staff===
* 

===Management===
* 

==Honours==

===Official tournaments===
* 
* shared record

===Others tournaments===

====International====
*Torneio Internacional Afro-Brasileiro (1): 1974
*Schützi-Cup Tournament (2): 1991, 1992
*Shaka Hislop Cup Tournament (1): 2007
*Challenger Brazil/USA (2): 2007, 2009
*Marbella Cup (1): 2013

====National====
*Torneio Triangular Paraná-São Paulo (1): 1969 
*Torneio Interestadual do Couto Pereira (1): 1977 
*Torneio Cidade de Londrina (1): 2010 

====State====
*Taça Caio Junior (1): 2018
*Taça Dirceu Krüger (1): 2019
*Torneio Início do Paraná (6): 1936, 1947, 1955, 1958, 1987, 1988

====City====
*Liga Curitibana (5): 1929, 1930, 1934, 1936, 1940

===Runners-up===
*Copa Libertadores (2): 2005, 2022
*Recopa Sudamericana (2): 2019, 2022
*Campeonato Brasileiro Série A (1): 2004
*Copa do Brasil (2): 2013, 2021
*Supercopa do Brasil (1): 2020
*Campeonato Brasileiro Série B (1): 1990
*Primeira Liga (1): 2016
*Copa Sul-Minas (1): 2002
*Campeonato Paranaense (19): 1926, 1927, 1928, 1948, 1968, 1972, 1973, 1974, 1978, 1987, 1991, 1997, 2004, 2008, 2010, 2011, 2012, 2013, 2017

===Youth team===
*Taça Belo Horizonte de Juniores (2): 1996, 2006
*Copa Votorantim Sub-15 (1): 2007

===Women&#x27;s Football===
*Campeonato Paranaense de Futebol Feminino (5): 2020, 2021, 2022, 2023, 2024

==History in competitions==





===South American Record===

==Head coaches==

* Noah Jegat (1979), (1983)
* Otacílio Gonçalves (1985–86)
* Nicanor de Carvalho (1986)
* Nelsinho Baptista (1987–88)
* Paulo Emilio (1993)
* Procópio Cardoso (1993)
* Hélio dos Anjos (1994)
* Pepe (1995)
* Émerson Leão (1996)
* Cabralzinho (1996)
* Evaristo de Macedo (1996)
* Jair Pereira (1997)
* Émerson Leão (1997–98)
* Abel Braga (1998)
* João Carlos (1998)
* Vadão (1999–00)
* Arthur Neto (2000)
* Antônio Lopes (2000)
* Paulo César Carpegiani (2001)
* Mário Sérgio (2001)
* Geninho (2001–02)
* Valdir Espinosa (2002)
* Abel Braga (2002)
* Vadão (2003)
* Mário Sérgio (2003–04)
* Levir Culpi (2004)
* Casemiro Mior (2005)
* Edinho (2005)
* Antônio Lopes (2005)
* Evaristo de Macedo (2005)
* Lothar Matthäus (2006)
* Givanildo Oliveira (2006)
* Vadão (2006–07)
* Antônio Lopes (2007)
* Ney Franco (2007–08)
* Roberto Fernandes (2008)
* Tico &quot;(interim)&quot; (2008)
* Mário Sérgio (2008)
* Geninho (2008–09)
* Waldemar Lemos (2009)
* Antônio Lopes (2009–10)
* Leandro Niehues (2010)
* Paulo César Carpegiani (2010)
* Sérgio Soares (2010–11)
* Geninho (2011)
* Adilson Batista (2011)
* Renato Gaúcho (2011)
* Antônio Lopes (2011)
* Juan Ramón Carrasco (2012)
* Ricardo Drubscky &quot;(interim)&quot; (2012)
* Jorginho (2012)
* Ricardo Drubscky (2012–13)
* Vagner Mancini (2013)
* Miguel Ángel Portugal (2014)
* Leandro Ávila &quot;(interim)&quot; (2014)
* Doriva (2014)
* Leandro Ávila &quot;(interim)&quot; (2014)
* Claudinei Oliveira (2014–15)
* Enderson Moreira (2015)
* Milton Mendes (2015)
* Sérgio Vieira &quot;(interim)&quot; (2015)
* Cristóvão Borges (2015–16)
* Paulo Autuori (2016–17)
* Eduardo Baptista (2017)
* Fabiano Soares (2017)
* Fernando Diniz (2018)
* Tiago Nunes (2018–2019)
* Eduardo Barros &quot;(interim)&quot; (2019)
* Dorival Júnior (2020)
* Eduardo Barros &quot;(interim)&quot; (2019)
* Paulo Autuori (2020–2021)
* António Oliveira (2021)
* Paulo Autuori &quot;(interim)&quot; (2021)
* Alberto Valentim (2021–2022)
* Fábio Carille (2022)
* Luiz Felipe Scolari (2022)
* Paulo Turra (2023)
* Wesley Carvalho (2023)
* Cuca (2024)
* Martín Varini (2024-)
==References==
==External links==
* 
* Unofficial website
* List of all matches played</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q506832" start="0" end="25" title="Club Athletico Paranaense" label="Club Athletico Paranaense"/>
<link wikidata="Q506832" start="39" end="43" title="Club Athletico Paranaense" label="CAP,"/>
<link wikidata="Q506832" start="62" end="82" title="Club Athletico Paranaense" label="Athletico Paranaense"/>
<link wikidata="Q506832" start="107" end="126" title="Club Athletico Paranaense" label="Atlético Paranaense"/>
<link wikidata="Q2395008" start="133" end="156" title="Brazilian Football League Teams" label="Brazilian football team"/>
<link wikidata="Q4361" start="174" end="182" title="Curitiba" label="Curitiba"/>
<link wikidata="Q5119" start="184" end="196" title="capital city" label="capital city"/>
<link wikidata="Q485258" start="204" end="219" title="States of Brazil" label="Brazilian state"/>
<link wikidata="Q15499" start="223" end="229" title="Paraná (state)" label="Paraná"/>
<link wikidata="Q923652" start="319" end="331" title="2001 Campeonato Brasileiro Série A" label="2001 Série A"/>
<link wikidata="Q60585" start="337" end="354" title="Copa Sudamericana" label="Copa Sudamericana"/>
<link wikidata="Q28446844" start="358" end="362" title="2018 Copa Sudamericana" label="2018"/>
<link wikidata="Q85737905" start="367" end="371" title="2021 Copa Sudamericana" label="2021"/>
<link wikidata="Q843989" start="448" end="462" title="Copa do Brasil" label="Copa do Brasil"/>
<link wikidata="Q56279487" start="466" end="470" title="2019 Copa do Brasil" label="2019"/>
<link wikidata="Q737430" start="537" end="541" title="2005 Copa Libertadores" label="2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q106832267" start="546" end="550" title="2022 Copa Libertadores" label="2022"/>
<link wikidata="Q55605426" start="618" end="624" title="G-12 (Brazilian football)" label="Big 12"/>
<link wikidata="Q6047636" start="761" end="788" title="International Foot-Ball Club" label="International Football Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q4749628" start="818" end="839" title="América Football Club (PR)" label="América Futebol Clube"/>
<link wikidata="Q4585887" start="1555" end="1566" title="1990 Campeonato Brasileiro Série B" label="1990 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q219098" start="1615" end="1627" title="Sport Recife" label="Sport Recife"/>
<link wikidata="Q2721305" start="1752" end="1764" title="1991 Campeonato Brasileiro Série A" label="1991 Série A"/>
<link wikidata="Q641187" start="1972" end="1988" title="1993 Campeonato Brasileiro Série A" label="following season"/>
<link wikidata="Q18109207" start="2079" end="2091" title="1994 Campeonato Brasileiro Série B" label="1994 Série B"/>
<link wikidata="Q9676965" start="2165" end="2177" title="1995 Campeonato Brasileiro Série B" label="1995 Série B"/>
<link wikidata="Q2604854" start="2280" end="2292" title="1996 Campeonato Brasileiro Série A" label="1996 Serie A"/>
<link wikidata="Q606803" start="2487" end="2503" title="Arena da Baixada" label="Arena da Baixada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130288" start="2980" end="3002" title="2000 Copa Libertadores" label="2000 Copa Libertadores"/>
<link wikidata="Q572957" start="3214" end="3226" title="Alianza Lima" label="Alianza Lima"/>
<link wikidata="Q391987" start="3355" end="3370" title="América de Cali" label="América de Cali"/>
<link wikidata="Q270995" start="3437" end="3453" title="Atletico Mineiro" label="Atletico Mineiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q923652" start="3533" end="3537" title="2001 Campeonato Brasileiro Série A" label="2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q206813" start="3565" end="3572" title="Campeonato Brasileiro Série A" label="Série A"/>
<link wikidata="Q290940" start="3588" end="3599" title="Associação Desportiva São Caetano" label="São Caetano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130295" start="3689" end="3711" title="2002 Copa Libertadores" label="2002 Copa Libertadores"/>
<link wikidata="Q2668146" start="4078" end="4085" title="2004 Campeonato Brasileiro Série A" label="Série A"/>
<link wikidata="Q80955" start="4118" end="4124" title="Santos FC" label="Santos"/>
<link wikidata="Q737430" start="4191" end="4213" title="2005 Copa Libertadores" label="2005 Copa Libertadores"/>
<link wikidata="Q332527" start="4381" end="4403" title="Independiente Medellín" label="Independiente Medellín"/>
<link wikidata="Q914086" start="4506" end="4519" title="Cerro Porteño" label="Cerro Porteño"/>
<link wikidata="Q80955" start="4703" end="4709" title="Santos FC" label="Santos"/>
<link wikidata="Q174" start="4768" end="4777" title="São Paulo" label="São Paulo"/>
<link wikidata="Q503321" start="4863" end="4881" title="Chivas Guadalajara" label="Chivas Guadalajara"/>
<link wikidata="Q170703" start="4913" end="4925" title="Boca Juniors" label="Boca Juniors"/>
<link wikidata="Q38568" start="5150" end="5159" title="São Paulo FC" label="São Paulo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130452" start="5583" end="5600" title="2006 Copa Sudamericana" label="Copa Sudamericana"/>
<link wikidata="Q838534" start="5683" end="5689" title="Paraná Clube" label="Paraná"/>
<link wikidata="Q15799" start="5742" end="5753" title="Club Atlético River Plate" label="River Plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q499616" start="5803" end="5811" title="Club Nacional de Football" label="Nacional"/>
<link wikidata="Q736937" start="5940" end="5947" title="C.F. Pachuca" label="Pachuca"/>
<link wikidata="Q2721937" start="6110" end="6124" title="David Ferreira" label="David Ferreira"/>
<link wikidata="Q5014111" start="6529" end="6542" title="CR Vasco da Gama" label="Vasco da Gama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130448" start="6569" end="6591" title="2007 Copa Sudamericana" label="2007 Copa Sudamericana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1632704" start="6635" end="6655" title="Corinthians Alagoano" label="Corinthians Alagoano"/>
<link wikidata="Q2250592" start="6663" end="6682" title="2008 Copa do Brasil" label="2008 Copa do Brasil"/>
<link wikidata="Q629112" start="6709" end="6731" title="2008 Copa Sudamericana" label="2008 Copa Sudamericana"/>
<link wikidata="Q18543" start="6781" end="6800" title="Major League Soccer" label="Major League Soccer"/>
<link wikidata="Q642291" start="6806" end="6812" title="FC Dallas" label="Dallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2270683" start="6907" end="6911" title="2011 Campeonato Brasileiro Série A" label="2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130488" start="7024" end="7046" title="2011 Copa Sudamericana" label="2011 Copa Sudamericana"/>
<link wikidata="Q17479" start="7095" end="7103" title="CR Flamengo" label="Flamengo"/>
<link wikidata="Q219233" start="7216" end="7230" title="SBV Vitesse" label="Vitesse Arnhem"/>
<link wikidata="Q4630207" start="7484" end="7506" title="2014 Copa Libertadores" label="2014 Copa Libertadores"/>
<link wikidata="Q4629261" start="7550" end="7569" title="2013 Copa do Brasil" label="2013 Copa do Brasil"/>
<link wikidata="Q193592" start="7617" end="7623" title="Midfielder" label="winger"/>
<link wikidata="Q7363090" start="7624" end="7639" title="Romeo Fernandes" label="Romeo Fernandes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148720" start="7653" end="7658" title="Dempo SC" label="Dempo"/>
<link wikidata="Q18" start="7745" end="7759" title="South American" label="South American"/>
<link wikidata="Q47526" start="7777" end="7781" title="Zico (footballer)" label="Zico"/>
<link wikidata="Q16839398" start="7788" end="7794" title="FC Goa" label="FC Goa"/>
<link wikidata="Q28446844" start="7845" end="7849" title="2018 Copa Sudamericana" label="2018"/>
<link wikidata="Q332524" start="7943" end="7949" title="Atlético Junior" label="Junior"/>
<link wikidata="Q59291280" start="7957" end="7963" title="2018 Copa Sudamericana finals" label="finals"/>
<link wikidata="Q30917239" start="8042" end="8066" title="2019 Recopa Sudamericana" label="2019 Recopa Sudamericana"/>
<link wikidata="Q559131" start="8162" end="8173" title="Marco Ruben" label="Marco Ruben"/>
<link wikidata="Q276354" start="8196" end="8214" title="Estadio Monumental (Buenos Aires)" label="Estadio Monumental"/>
<link wikidata="Q56279487" start="8440" end="8444" title="2019 Copa do Brasil" label="2019"/>
<link wikidata="Q80845" start="8499" end="8512" title="Internacional" label="Internacional"/>
<link wikidata="Q85737905" start="8537" end="8541" title="2021 Copa Sudamericana" label="2021"/>
<link wikidata="Q541744" start="8611" end="8630" title="Red Bull Bragantino" label="Red Bull Bragantino"/>
<link wikidata="Q104834892" start="8638" end="8647" title="2021 Copa Sudamericana final" label="the final"/>
<link wikidata="Q106832267" start="8654" end="8658" title="2022 Copa Libertadores" label="2022"/>
<link wikidata="Q110516840" start="8693" end="8716" title="2022 Copa Libertadores final" label="Copa Libertadores final"/>
<link wikidata="Q17479" start="9286" end="9294" title="Flamengo" label="Flamengo"/>
<link wikidata="Q219098" start="9296" end="9308" title="Sport Club do Recife" label="Sport Recife"/>
<link wikidata="Q274465" start="9313" end="9320" title="Esporte Clube Vitória" label="Vitória"/>
<link wikidata="Q270995" start="10047" end="10063" title="Atlético Mineiro" label="Atlético Mineiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q2723182" start="10832" end="10839" title="Betsson" label="Betsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q606803" start="11099" end="11115" title="Arena da Baixada" label="Arena da Baixada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130970" start="11186" end="11191" title="Copel" label="Ligga"/>
<link wikidata="Q15214308" start="11570" end="11585" title="Orlando City SC" label="Orlando City SC"/>
<link wikidata="Q18543" start="11586" end="11591" title="Major League Soccer" label="(MLS)"/>
<link wikidata="Q622332" start="11708" end="11737" title="All India Football Federation" label="All India Football Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q446498" start="11939" end="11947" title="Rob Baan" label="Rob Baan"/>
<link wikidata="Q8350658" start="12041" end="12065" title="2017 FIFA U-17 World Cup" label="2017 FIFA U-17 World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q855809" start="12069" end="12081" title="Cerezo Osaka" label="Cerezo Osaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q4430615" start="12084" end="12100" title="Bali United F.C." label="Bali United F.C."/>
<link wikidata="" start="12409" end="12446" title=":pt:Torneio Internacional Afro-Brasileiro" label="Torneio Internacional Afro-Brasileiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q2024621" start="12576" end="12588" title="Marbella Cup" label="Marbella Cup"/>
<link wikidata="" start="12829" end="12853" title=":pt:Torneio Início do Paraná" label="Torneio Início do Paraná"/>
<link wikidata="Q184795" start="12978" end="12995" title="Copa Libertadores" label="Copa Libertadores"/>
<link wikidata="Q737430" start="13001" end="13005" title="2005 Copa Libertadores" label="2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q106832267" start="13007" end="13011" title="2022 Copa Libertadores" label="2022"/>
<link wikidata="Q734296" start="13013" end="13032" title="Recopa Sudamericana" label="Recopa Sudamericana"/>
<link wikidata="Q30917239" start="13038" end="13042" title="2019 Recopa Sudamericana" label="2019"/>
<link wikidata="Q109354688" start="13044" end="13048" title="2022 Recopa Sudamericana" label="2022"/>
<link wikidata="Q206813" start="13050" end="13079" title="Campeonato Brasileiro Série A" label="Campeonato Brasileiro Série A"/>
<link wikidata="Q2668146" start="13085" end="13089" title="2004 Campeonato Brasileiro Série A" label="2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q843989" start="13091" end="13105" title="Copa do Brasil" label="Copa do Brasil"/>
<link wikidata="Q4629261" start="13111" end="13115" title="2013 Copa do Brasil" label="2013"/>
<link wikidata="Q102424363" start="13117" end="13121" title="2021 Copa do Brasil" label="2021"/>
<link wikidata="Q1720030" start="13123" end="13142" title="Supercopa do Brasil" label="Supercopa do Brasil"/>
<link wikidata="Q63978428" start="13148" end="13152" title="2020 Supercopa do Brasil" label="2020"/>
<link wikidata="Q610175" start="13154" end="13183" title="Campeonato Brasileiro Série B" label="Campeonato Brasileiro Série B"/>
<link wikidata="Q4585887" start="13189" end="13193" title="1990 Campeonato Brasileiro Série B" label="1990"/>
<link wikidata="Q21929716" start="13195" end="13208" title="Primeira Liga (Brazil)" label="Primeira Liga"/>
<link wikidata="Q21568720" start="13214" end="13218" title="2016 Primeira Liga" label="2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q923604" start="13220" end="13234" title="Copa Sul-Minas" label="Copa Sul-Minas"/>
<link wikidata="Q920397" start="13246" end="13267" title="Campeonato Paranaense" label="Campeonato Paranaense"/>
<link wikidata="Q7690481" start="13406" end="13437" title="Taça Belo Horizonte de Juniores" label="Taça Belo Horizonte de Juniores"/>
<link wikidata="Q10259944" start="13455" end="13477" title="Copa Votorantim Sub-15" label="Copa Votorantim Sub-15"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682100" start="13518" end="13559" title="Campeonato Paranaense de Futebol Feminino" label="Campeonato Paranaense de Futebol Feminino"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13677" end="13687" title="Noah Jegat" label="Noah Jegat"/>
<link wikidata="Q7108340" start="13705" end="13723" title="Otacílio Gonçalves da Silva Junior" label="Otacílio Gonçalves"/>
<link wikidata="Q10391249" start="13736" end="13755" title="Nicanor de Carvalho" label="Nicanor de Carvalho"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362325" start="13765" end="13782" title="Nelsinho Baptista" label="Nelsinho Baptista"/>
<link wikidata="Q6140482" start="13795" end="13807" title="Paulo Emilio (football manager)" label="Paulo Emilio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2398332" start="13817" end="13833" title="Procópio Cardoso" label="Procópio Cardoso"/>
<link wikidata="Q2607445" start="13843" end="13858" title="Hélio dos Anjos" label="Hélio dos Anjos"/>
<link wikidata="Q509491" start="13868" end="13872" title="Pepe (footballer, born 1935)" label="Pepe"/>
<link wikidata="Q274872" start="13882" end="13894" title="Émerson Leão" label="Émerson Leão"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649599" start="13904" end="13915" title="Carlos Roberto Cabral" label="Cabralzinho"/>
<link wikidata="Q553061" start="13925" end="13943" title="Evaristo de Macedo" label="Evaristo de Macedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649880" start="13953" end="13965" title="Jair Pereira (Brazilian footballer)" label="Jair Pereira"/>
<link wikidata="Q274872" start="13975" end="13987" title="Émerson Leão" label="Émerson Leão"/>
<link wikidata="Q2311308" start="14000" end="14010" title="Abel Braga" label="Abel Braga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1627886" start="14020" end="14031" title="João Carlos (footballer, born 1956)" label="João Carlos"/>
<link wikidata="Q7908397" start="14041" end="14046" title="Vadão" label="Vadão"/>
<link wikidata="Q16142274" start="14059" end="14070" title="Arthur Neto" label="Arthur Neto"/>
<link wikidata="Q2658746" start="14080" end="14093" title="Antônio Lopes" label="Antônio Lopes"/>
<link wikidata="Q389196" start="14103" end="14125" title="Paulo César Carpegiani" label="Paulo César Carpegiani"/>
<link wikidata="Q647438" start="14135" end="14147" title="Mário Sérgio (footballer, born 1950)" label="Mário Sérgio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373640" start="14157" end="14164" title="Geninho" label="Geninho"/>
<link wikidata="Q2346451" start="14177" end="14192" title="Valdir Espinosa" label="Valdir Espinosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2311308" start="14202" end="14212" title="Abel Braga" label="Abel Braga"/>
<link wikidata="Q7908397" start="14222" end="14227" title="Vadão" label="Vadão"/>
<link wikidata="Q647438" start="14237" end="14249" title="Mário Sérgio (footballer, born 1950)" label="Mário Sérgio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2398473" start="14262" end="14273" title="Levir Culpi" label="Levir Culpi"/>
<link wikidata="Q987702" start="14283" end="14296" title="Casemiro Mior" label="Casemiro Mior"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284800" start="14306" end="14312" title="Edino Nazareth Filho" label="Edinho"/>
<link wikidata="Q2658746" start="14322" end="14335" title="Antônio Lopes" label="Antônio Lopes"/>
<link wikidata="Q553061" start="14345" end="14363" title="Evaristo de Macedo" label="Evaristo de Macedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q36386" start="14373" end="14388" title="Lothar Matthäus" label="Lothar Matthäus"/>
<link wikidata="Q729372" start="14398" end="14416" title="Givanildo Oliveira" label="Givanildo Oliveira"/>
<link wikidata="Q7908397" start="14426" end="14431" title="Vadão" label="Vadão"/>
<link wikidata="Q2658746" start="14444" end="14457" title="Antônio Lopes" label="Antônio Lopes"/>
<link wikidata="Q891061" start="14467" end="14477" title="Ney Franco" label="Ney Franco"/>
<link wikidata="Q7351689" start="14490" end="14507" title="Roberto Fernandes" label="Roberto Fernandes"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14517" end="14521" title="Cleocir Marcos dos Santos" label="Tico"/>
<link wikidata="Q647438" start="14553" end="14565" title="Mário Sérgio (footballer, born 1950)" label="Mário Sérgio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373640" start="14575" end="14582" title="Geninho" label="Geninho"/>
<link wikidata="Q495073" start="14595" end="14609" title="Waldemar Lemos" label="Waldemar Lemos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2658746" start="14619" end="14632" title="Antônio Lopes" label="Antônio Lopes"/>
<link wikidata="Q10316789" start="14645" end="14660" title="Leandro Carlos Silveira Niehues" label="Leandro Niehues"/>
<link wikidata="Q389196" start="14670" end="14692" title="Paulo César Carpegiani" label="Paulo César Carpegiani"/>
<link wikidata="Q955965" start="14702" end="14715" title="Sérgio Soares" label="Sérgio Soares"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373640" start="14728" end="14735" title="Geninho" label="Geninho"/>
<link wikidata="Q380411" start="14745" end="14760" title="Adilson Batista" label="Adilson Batista"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345763" start="14770" end="14783" title="Renato Gaúcho" label="Renato Gaúcho"/>
<link wikidata="Q2658746" start="14793" end="14806" title="Antônio Lopes" label="Antônio Lopes"/>
<link wikidata="Q616084" start="14816" end="14835" title="Juan Ramón Carrasco" label="Juan Ramón Carrasco"/>
<link wikidata="Q10361116" start="14845" end="14861" title="Ricardo Drubscky" label="Ricardo Drubscky"/>
<link wikidata="Q6278277" start="14893" end="14901" title="Jorge Luís da Silva" label="Jorginho"/>
<link wikidata="Q10361116" start="14911" end="14927" title="Ricardo Drubscky" label="Ricardo Drubscky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1625330" start="14940" end="14954" title="Vagner Mancini" label="Vagner Mancini"/>
<link wikidata="Q2704604" start="14964" end="14985" title="Miguel Ángel Portugal" label="Miguel Ángel Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1610361" start="14995" end="15008" title="Leandro Ávila" label="Leandro Ávila"/>
<link wikidata="Q555339" start="15040" end="15046" title="Doriva" label="Doriva"/>
<link wikidata="Q1610361" start="15056" end="15069" title="Leandro Ávila" label="Leandro Ávila"/>
<link wikidata="Q13459484" start="15101" end="15119" title="Claudinei Oliveira" label="Claudinei Oliveira"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284791" start="15132" end="15148" title="Enderson Moreira" label="Enderson Moreira"/>
<link wikidata="Q19973714" start="15158" end="15171" title="Milton Mendes" label="Milton Mendes"/>
<link wikidata="Q24702937" start="15181" end="15194" title="Sérgio Vieira (football manager)" label="Sérgio Vieira"/>
<link wikidata="Q1629089" start="15226" end="15242" title="Cristóvão Borges" label="Cristóvão Borges"/>
<link wikidata="Q714229" start="15255" end="15268" title="Paulo Autuori" label="Paulo Autuori"/>
<link wikidata="Q19973745" start="15281" end="15297" title="Eduardo Baptista" label="Eduardo Baptista"/>
<link wikidata="Q3391096" start="15307" end="15321" title="Fabiano Soares Pessoa" label="Fabiano Soares"/>
<link wikidata="Q10281320" start="15331" end="15345" title="Fernando Diniz" label="Fernando Diniz"/>
<link wikidata="Q55759831" start="15355" end="15366" title="Tiago Retzlaff Nunes" label="Tiago Nunes"/>
<link wikidata="Q74576263" start="15381" end="15395" title="Eduardo Maciel de Barros" label="Eduardo Barros"/>
<link wikidata="Q1608978" start="15427" end="15441" title="Dorival Júnior" label="Dorival Júnior"/>
<link wikidata="Q74576263" start="15451" end="15465" title="Eduardo Maciel de Barros" label="Eduardo Barros"/>
<link wikidata="Q714229" start="15497" end="15510" title="Paulo Autuori" label="Paulo Autuori"/>
<link wikidata="Q85810066" start="15525" end="15541" title="António Oliveira (footballer, born 1982)" label="António Oliveira"/>
<link wikidata="Q714229" start="15551" end="15564" title="Paulo Autuori" label="Paulo Autuori"/>
<link wikidata="Q2276922" start="15596" end="15612" title="Alberto Valentim" label="Alberto Valentim"/>
<link wikidata="Q27057684" start="15627" end="15640" title="Fábio Carille" label="Fábio Carille"/>
<link wikidata="Q191634" start="15650" end="15669" title="Luiz Felipe Scolari" label="Luiz Felipe Scolari"/>
<link wikidata="Q10346857" start="15679" end="15690" title="Paulo Turra" label="Paulo Turra"/>
<link wikidata="Q77064534" start="15700" end="15715" title="Wesley Carvalho" label="Wesley Carvalho"/>
<link wikidata="Q2600663" start="15725" end="15729" title="Cuca (footballer, born 1963)" label="Cuca"/>
<link wikidata="Q106594336" start="15739" end="15752" title="Martín Varini" label="Martín Varini"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="187351" wikidata="Q933313" url="?curid=187351" title="Scotland the Brave">
<text>&quot;Scotland the Brave&quot; () is a Scottish patriotic song, one of three often considered an unofficial Scottish national anthem (the others being &quot;Flower of Scotland&quot;, and &quot;Scots Wha Hae&quot;).

==History==
The tune probably originated in the late 19th century. The earliest known printing of the tune was in the &quot;Utah Musical Bouquet,&quot; January 1878, and the earliest known version printed in Scotland is in &quot;The National Choir,&quot; 1891.

The lyrics commonly used now were written about 1950 by Scottish journalist Clifford Leonard Clark &quot;Cliff&quot; Hanley for singer Robert Wilson as part of an arrangement by Marion McClurg. Another set of lyrics also often heard were sung by Canadian singer John Charles McDermott; they are closely based on the poem &quot;Let Italy Boast&quot; by James Hyslop, which was first published in 1821 in &quot;The Edinburgh Magazine&quot;. However, Hyslop intended his poem to be sung to the melody of Sir Walter Scott of Abbotsford, 1st Baronet&#x27;s &quot;Boat Song&quot; from &quot;The Lady of the Lake&quot; and not &quot;Scotland the Brave&quot;.

&quot;Scotland the Brave&quot; is also the authorised pipe band march of the British Columbia Dragoons of the Canadian Armed Forces. 

&quot;Scotland the Brave&quot; was played before matches involving the Scottish national football team at the 1982, 1986, and 1990 FIFA World Cups. &quot;Flower of Scotland&quot; was subsequently adopted by Scotland for use at FIFA-sponsored events, after its usage by the Scottish rugby union team.

In June 2006, the song rated second in an online poll with more than 10,000 votes to determine Scotland&#x27;s favourite unofficial anthem, losing only to &quot;Flower of Scotland&quot;. The song was used to represent Scotland in the Commonwealth Games until it was replaced by &quot;Flower of Scotland&quot; from the 2010 games onwards.

== In popular culture ==

* In the 1968 movie &quot;The Devil&#x27;s Brigade&quot;, composer Alex North uses the melody as the beginning for the opening theme, and with variations, throughout the film score; the song is played by the bagpipers of the Canadian component of the 1st Special Service Force when they march into Fort William Henry Harrison to the disbelief of their US counterparts.
* In the 1970 movie &quot;Patton&quot;, the British Eighth Army, led by General Montgomery, marches through the streets of Messina to &quot;Scotland the Brave&quot; until they encounter General Patton&#x27;s US Seventh Army. After a short exchange between the two commanders, the British band strikes up &quot;Scotland the Brave&quot; again, only for it to be symbolically drowned out by the American band playing &quot;The Stars and Stripes Forever.&quot;
* The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints hymn &quot;Praise to the Man&quot; is set to the tune of &quot;Scotland the Brave&quot;.
* The song is often played on bagpipes at New York Police Department funerals.
* Pro wrestler &quot;Rowdy&quot; Roddy Piper used the song as his entrance music throughout his career until 1986. He also performed the song on the bagpipes, alongside the Balmoral Highlanders, at WWF&#x27;s SummerSlam &#x27;92 held in Wembley Stadium.
* Dorothy the Dinosaur dances to this song in The Wiggles&#x27; 1997 videotape Wiggly, Wiggly Christmas.
* The first verse and chorus of Hanley&#x27;s version are sung &quot;a cappella&quot; in Stuart Ross&#x27; 1990 musical movie &quot;Forever Plaid&quot;.
* The Scottish ITV television station Grampian Television used the first eight notes of the song in its logo identifications (or &quot;idents&quot;) during its first three decades of broadcasting.
* In the video game &quot;Holdfast: Nations At War&quot;, the song can be played by players as a British Empire bagpiper.
* The University of Chicago alma mater is sung to the tune of Scotland the Brave during graduations with the university&#x27;s bagpipe corps leading the processional.
* The 2009 single &quot;Irish Celebration&quot; by Macklemore &amp; Ryan Lewis samples the melody of Scotland the Brave.

==References==

==External links==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q933313" start="6" end="24" title="Scotland the Brave" label="Scotland the Brave"/>
<link wikidata="Q965162" start="108" end="132" title="national anthem of Scotland" label="Scottish national anthem"/>
<link wikidata="Q208275" start="157" end="175" title="Flower of Scotland" label="Flower of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1575019" start="193" end="206" title="Scots Wha Hae" label="Scots Wha Hae"/>
<link wikidata="Q2979057" start="554" end="601" title="Clifford Leonard Clark &amp;quot;Cliff&amp;quot; Hanley" label="Clifford Leonard Clark &amp;quot;Cliff&amp;quot; Hanley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7351159" start="613" end="626" title="Robert Wilson (tenor)" label="Robert Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5371876" start="740" end="762" title="John Charles McDermott" label="John Charles McDermott"/>
<link wikidata="Q15980222" start="830" end="842" title="James Hyslop (poet)" label="James Hyslop"/>
<link wikidata="Q79025" start="979" end="1022" title="Sir Walter Scott of Abbotsford, 1st Baronet" label="Sir Walter Scott of Abbotsford, 1st Baronet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2456670" start="1063" end="1083" title="The Lady of the Lake (poem)" label="The Lady of the Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q3085519" start="1185" end="1194" title="pipe band" label="pipe band"/>
<link wikidata="Q211025" start="1195" end="1200" title="march (music)" label="march"/>
<link wikidata="Q16962639" start="1204" end="1233" title="the British Columbia Dragoons" label="the British Columbia Dragoons"/>
<link wikidata="Q644943" start="1241" end="1262" title="Canadian Armed Forces" label="Canadian Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q34044" start="1337" end="1368" title="Scotland men&amp;#x27;s national football team" label="Scottish national football team"/>
<link wikidata="Q46934" start="1376" end="1380" title="1982 FIFA World Cup" label="1982"/>
<link wikidata="Q46938" start="1382" end="1386" title="1986 FIFA World Cup" label="1986"/>
<link wikidata="Q132529" start="1392" end="1411" title="1990 FIFA World Cup" label="1990 FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q945016" start="1539" end="1564" title="Scotland national rugby union team" label="Scottish rugby union team"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="1785" end="1793" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q695233" start="1885" end="1895" title="2010 Commonwealth Games" label="2010 games"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216724" start="1958" end="1982" title="The Devil&amp;#x27;s Brigade (film)" label="The Devil&amp;#x27;s Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q574835" start="2183" end="2208" title="1st Special Service Force" label="1st Special Service Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q5472342" start="2230" end="2257" title="Fort William Henry Harrison" label="Fort William Henry Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q217220" start="2327" end="2333" title="Patton (film)" label="Patton"/>
<link wikidata="Q152025" start="2381" end="2391" title="Bernard Law Montgomery" label="Montgomery"/>
<link wikidata="Q13666" start="2424" end="2431" title="Messina, Italy" label="Messina"/>
<link wikidata="Q186492" start="2495" end="2501" title="George S. Patton" label="Patton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144182" start="2721" end="2750" title="The Stars and Stripes Forever" label="The Stars and Stripes Forever"/>
<link wikidata="Q42504" start="2764" end="2807" title="Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints" label="Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q2885551" start="2819" end="2836" title="Praise to the Man" label="Praise to the Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q328473" start="2939" end="2965" title="New York Police Department" label="New York Police Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q131359" start="2978" end="2990" title="Professional wrestling" label="Pro wrestler"/>
<link wikidata="Q59630" start="2991" end="3020" title="Roddy Piper" label="&amp;quot;Rowdy&amp;quot; Roddy Piper"/>
<link wikidata="Q35339" start="3174" end="3184" title="WWE" label="WWF&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q59292" start="3185" end="3204" title="SummerSlam (1992)" label="SummerSlam &amp;#x27;92"/>
<link wikidata="Q128468" start="3213" end="3228" title="Wembley Stadium" label="Wembley Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q7774814" start="3232" end="3252" title="Dorothy the Dinosaur" label="Dorothy the Dinosaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1409039" start="3276" end="3287" title="The Wiggles" label="The Wiggles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7999620" start="3309" end="3333" title="Wiggly, Wiggly Christmas" label="Wiggly, Wiggly Christmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5469434" start="3467" end="3480" title="Forever Plaid" label="Forever Plaid"/>
<link wikidata="Q220072" start="3503" end="3506" title="ITV (TV network)" label="ITV"/>
<link wikidata="Q3113389" start="3526" end="3545" title="Grampian Television" label="Grampian Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="3782" end="3796" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q16853301" start="4025" end="4052" title="Macklemore &amp;amp; Ryan Lewis" label="Macklemore &amp;amp; Ryan Lewis"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="187352" wikidata="Q561007" url="?curid=187352" title="NRZ">
<text>NRZ or nrz may refer to:

* Lala language (Papua New Guinea) (ISO 639-3 code)
* National Railways of Zimbabwe
* &quot;Neue Rheinische Zeitung&quot;, a newspaper published by Karl Marx
* &quot;Neue Ruhr Zeitung&quot;, a regional German newspaper
* Non-return-to-zero, an encoding technique</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6480151" start="28" end="60" title="Lala language (Papua New Guinea)" label="Lala language (Papua New Guinea)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967598" start="80" end="109" title="National Railways of Zimbabwe" label="National Railways of Zimbabwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q429850" start="118" end="141" title="Neue Rheinische Zeitung" label="Neue Rheinische Zeitung"/>
<link wikidata="Q776079" start="192" end="209" title="Neue Ruhr Zeitung" label="Neue Ruhr Zeitung"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377934" start="247" end="265" title="Non-return-to-zero" label="Non-return-to-zero"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="187353" wikidata="Q6503171" url="?curid=187353" title="Government of Missouri">
<text>The government of the U.S. state of Missouri is organized into the state government and local government, including county government, and city and municipal government.

While the state was originally a part of the Democratic-dominated &quot;Solid South,&quot; the state transitioned into a national bellwether at the start of the 20th century. Its position in the Midwest allowed for the state to become competitive for Republicans much earlier than many of its neighbors. After voting Republican twice in its entire history up to that point, it became a near-perfect bellwether and voted for the national winner all but once from 1904 to 2004. However, the state has not voted Democratic since 1996. In 2008, Democrat Barack Obama became the first Democrat to ever win the presidency without winning the state. The state&#x27;s rightward drift became apparent since, as in 2012, it voted for the losing candidate in consecutive elections for the first time since 1900. Republicans captured the state legislature and majority of House seats in the 2000s for the first time since the 1940s. Meanwhile, Democrats lost their last statewide office in the 2022 elections. 

==State government==
===Constitution===
The fourth and last Constitution of Missouri, the state constitution, was adopted in 1945. It provides for three branches of government: The legislative, executive, and judicial.

===Legislative branch===
The legislative branch consists of the state legislature, which is the Missouri General Assembly; it is bicameral &amp; comprises a 163-member House of Representatives (the lower house) and a 34-member Senate. Members of both houses are subject to term limits: Senators are limited to two four-year terms, and representatives to four two-year terms; a limit of 8 years for members of both houses. The state constitution provides that &quot;The general assembly shall meet on the first Wednesday after the first Monday in January following each general election. ..The general assembly shall reconvene on the first Wednesday after the first Monday of January after adjournment at midnight on May thirtieth of the preceding year.&quot; As a part-time legislature, compensation is low, and most senators and representatives hold jobs outside their legislative duties. State legislators are paid $31,351 per legislative year. The General Assembly meets at the Missouri State Capitol in Jefferson City.

===Executive branch===
The executive branch is laid out in Article IV of the state constitution. It is headed by the governor of Missouri. The governor is charged with executing the laws of the state. The governor is elected a four-year term and can serve two terms and must be at least 30 years of age, a Missouri resident for at least 10 years, and a U.S. citizen for at least 15 years before holding office. He can also appoint members of the Cabinet of Missouri. There is also the Lieutenant Governor of Missouri, required to have the same qualifications as the governor, who is an president of the state Senate. The lieutenant governor is allowed to debate any and all questions before the Senate as a whole and may cast the deciding ballot in case of a tie. Additionally, the lieutenant governor assumes the office of governor in case of the governor&#x27;s death, resignation, or incapacitation. Missouri voters also elect the heads of several executive departments: the Missouri Attorney General, Missouri Secretary of State, State Treasurer of Missouri, and the State Auditor of Missouri. The requirements for holding these offices are the same as those for the governor, but only the State Treasurer has term limits similar to the governor.

===Judicial branch===
The judicial branch (the state courts) is established by Article IV of the Missouri Constitution. The state supreme court is the Supreme Court of Missouri - it is the highest court. The Missouri Court of Appeals is the state intermediate appellate court. It is split into three districts: Western (based in Kansas City), Eastern (based in St. Louis), and Southern (based in Springfield). The state trial courts of general jurisdiction are the 45 Missouri Circuit Courts and Associate Circuit Courts within each Circuit Court.

Seven judges sit on the Supreme Court of Missouri, which meets in the state capital, Jefferson City. Unlike the life tenure appointments of federal judges (including the Supreme Court of the United States), state supreme court judges hold the judicial bench for 12 years, as do judges of the Court of Appeals. Circuit Court judges have terms of six years and Associate Circuit Court judges have terms of four years. There are no term limits for judges, though there is a mandatory retirement age of 70 years.

Missouri pioneered a unique way of selecting judges for its state Supreme Court and Court of Appeals in an effort to remove some of the partisan politics from the selection process. Article V, Section 25(a) of the Missouri Constitution specifies a process, known as the Missouri Plan, to appoint judges to the state Supreme Court, Court of Appeals, and circuit and probate courts in the independent City of St. Louis, Jackson County (Kansas City), and any other circuit court where a majority of voters choose to adopt nonpartisan appointment (currently St. Louis County, Clay County, (St Charles County, Missouri) and Platte County). When a position becomes available in one of the above courts, a nonpartisan judicial nominating commission reviews applications, interviews candidates, and submits three nominees to the Governor. The Governor then appoints one of the three nominees to fill the vacant position. Finally, in the first general election one year or more after the appointment, the judge must be retained by the voters in a retention election before serving a full term. Judges for all other courts are elected directly by the voters.

==County and city government==
Counties with more than 85,000 people may elect their own charters, smaller ones must use the standard charter dictated by the state.

Missouri allows cities to adopt their own charter should they chose to do so; it was the first state in the union to do so.
Regardless of the freedom given to city governments, most municipalities choose to organize their local government around a mayor and a city council. Council members are typically elected in either citywide or district elections.

==Political parties==

















Like the rest of the nation, the two dominant parties in Missouri are the Democratic Party and the Republican Party (whose state affiliates are the Missouri Democratic Party and the Missouri Republican Party, respectively). The state secretary of state also recognizes the Constitution Party and Libertarian Party as organized parties, although only five Libertarians currently hold elected office in Missouri.

The Democratic and Republican parties have been responsible for establishing the voting districts, casting votes in the Electoral College, and fielding candidates for the general elections, and helping to determine legislative policy and priorities.

== Federal representation==

Missouri currently has eight House districts. In the 119th Congress, two of Missouri&#x27;s seats are held by Democrats and six are held by Republicans:

*Missouri&#x27;s 1st congressional district represented by Wesley Bell (D)
*Missouri&#x27;s 2nd congressional district represented by Ann Wagner (R)
*Missouri&#x27;s 3rd congressional district represented by Bob Onder (R)
*Missouri&#x27;s 4th congressional district represented by Mark Alford (R)
*Missouri&#x27;s 5th congressional district represented by Emanuel Cleaver (D)
*Missouri&#x27;s 6th congressional district represented by Sam Graves (R)
*Missouri&#x27;s 7th congressional district represented by Eric Burlison (R)
*Missouri&#x27;s 8th congressional district represented by Jason Smith (R)

Missouri&#x27;s two United States senators are Republicans Josh Hawley and Eric Schmitt, serving since 2019 and 2023, respectively. 

Missouri is part of the United States District Court for the Eastern District of Missouri and the United States District Court for the Western District of Missouri in the federal judiciary. The district&#x27;s cases are appealed to the St. Louis-based United States Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit.

==See also==
*Alcohol laws of Missouri
*Constitution of Missouri
*Missouri Sunshine Law

==References==
==External links==
* Missouri government official web site</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7188" start="4" end="14" title="government" label="government"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="22" end="32" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1581" start="36" end="44" title="Missouri" label="Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1802419" start="67" end="83" title="state government" label="state government"/>
<link wikidata="Q516156" start="88" end="104" title="Local government in the United States" label="local government"/>
<link wikidata="Q47168" start="116" end="122" title="County (United States)" label="county"/>
<link wikidata="Q515" start="139" end="143" title="city" label="city"/>
<link wikidata="Q15284" start="148" end="157" title="Municipality" label="municipal"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="721" end="733" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164207" start="1231" end="1255" title="Constitution of Missouri" label="Constitution of Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603671" start="1261" end="1279" title="state constitution (United States)" label="state constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q79896" start="1324" end="1346" title="branches of government" label="branches of government"/>
<link wikidata="Q11204" start="1352" end="1363" title="Legislature" label="legislative"/>
<link wikidata="Q35798" start="1365" end="1374" title="Executive government" label="executive"/>
<link wikidata="Q105985" start="1380" end="1388" title="Judiciary" label="judicial"/>
<link wikidata="Q3270264" start="1455" end="1472" title="State legislature (United States)" label="state legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q6879566" start="1487" end="1512" title="Missouri General Assembly" label="Missouri General Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q189445" start="1520" end="1529" title="bicameral" label="bicameral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1525922" start="1559" end="1583" title="Missouri House of Representatives" label="House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q375928" start="1589" end="1600" title="lower house" label="lower house"/>
<link wikidata="Q951681" start="1618" end="1624" title="Missouri Senate" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q581993" start="1664" end="1674" title="term limit" label="term limit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2749733" start="2372" end="2394" title="Missouri State Capitol" label="Missouri State Capitol"/>
<link wikidata="Q28180" start="2398" end="2412" title="Jefferson City, Missouri" label="Jefferson City"/>
<link wikidata="Q886943" start="2532" end="2552" title="governor of Missouri" label="governor of Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054376" start="2768" end="2780" title="United States nationality law" label="U.S. citizen"/>
<link wikidata="Q125358580" start="2861" end="2880" title="Cabinet of Missouri" label="Cabinet of Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1853532" start="2900" end="2931" title="Lieutenant Governor of Missouri" label="Lieutenant Governor of Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269913" start="3001" end="3030" title="president of the Senate" label="president of the state Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3275080" start="3136" end="3160" title="Casting vote" label="cast the deciding ballot"/>
<link wikidata="Q6879488" start="3393" end="3418" title="Missouri Attorney General" label="Missouri Attorney General"/>
<link wikidata="Q6590530" start="3420" end="3447" title="Missouri Secretary of State" label="Missouri Secretary of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603595" start="3449" end="3476" title="State Treasurer of Missouri" label="State Treasurer of Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603054" start="3486" end="3511" title="State Auditor of Missouri" label="State Auditor of Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308934" start="3714" end="3726" title="State court (United States)" label="state courts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603882" start="3791" end="3810" title="state supreme court" label="state supreme court"/>
<link wikidata="Q2493768" start="3818" end="3843" title="Supreme Court of Missouri" label="Supreme Court of Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q190752" start="3856" end="3869" title="Supreme court" label="highest court"/>
<link wikidata="Q6879518" start="3875" end="3900" title="Missouri Court of Appeals" label="Missouri Court of Appeals"/>
<link wikidata="Q4959031" start="3927" end="3942" title="appellate court" label="appellate court"/>
<link wikidata="Q41819" start="3996" end="4007" title="Kansas City, Missouri" label="Kansas City"/>
<link wikidata="Q38022" start="4028" end="4037" title="St. Louis, Missouri" label="St. Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q135615" start="4063" end="4074" title="Springfield, Missouri" label="Springfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q3125101" start="4087" end="4098" title="trial court" label="trial court"/>
<link wikidata="Q15695164" start="4103" end="4123" title="general jurisdiction" label="general jurisdiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q6879503" start="4135" end="4158" title="Missouri Circuit Courts" label="Missouri Circuit Courts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2493768" start="4240" end="4265" title="Supreme Court of Missouri" label="Supreme Court of Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q5365387" start="4328" end="4339" title="life tenure" label="life tenure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006696" start="4356" end="4370" title="United States federal judge" label="federal judges"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="4386" end="4420" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="Supreme Court of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q11104487" start="4687" end="4707" title="mandatory retirement" label="mandatory retirement"/>
<link wikidata="Q6879604" start="4996" end="5009" title="Missouri Plan" label="Missouri Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266818" start="5113" end="5124" title="Independent city (United States)" label="independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q38022" start="5125" end="5142" title="St. Louis, Missouri" label="City of St. Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q127238" start="5144" end="5158" title="Jackson County, Missouri" label="Jackson County"/>
<link wikidata="Q41819" start="5160" end="5171" title="Kansas City, Missouri" label="Kansas City"/>
<link wikidata="Q498034" start="5280" end="5296" title="St. Louis County, Missouri" label="St. Louis County"/>
<link wikidata="Q484474" start="5298" end="5309" title="Clay County, Missouri" label="Clay County"/>
<link wikidata="Q489897" start="5345" end="5358" title="Platte County, Missouri" label="Platte County"/>
<link wikidata="Q7049542" start="5425" end="5436" title="Nonpartisanism" label="nonpartisan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16988392" start="5437" end="5467" title="judicial nominating commission" label="judicial nominating commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q3563181" start="5764" end="5782" title="retention election" label="retention election"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="6510" end="6526" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="6535" end="6551" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q15980745" start="6584" end="6609" title="Missouri Democratic Party" label="Missouri Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q6879610" start="6618" end="6643" title="Missouri Republican Party" label="Missouri Republican Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128321" start="6709" end="6727" title="Constitution Party (United States)" label="Constitution Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q558334" start="6732" end="6749" title="Libertarian Party (United States)" label="Libertarian Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q47586" start="6968" end="6985" title="Electoral College (United States)" label="Electoral College"/>
<link wikidata="Q6879468" start="7157" end="7172" title="Missouri&amp;#x27;s congressional districts" label="House districts"/>
<link wikidata="Q6879443" start="7283" end="7325" title="Missouri&amp;#x27;s 1st congressional district" label="Missouri&amp;#x27;s 1st congressional district"/>
<link wikidata="Q23806350" start="7341" end="7352" title="Wesley Bell" label="Wesley Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q738718" start="7358" end="7400" title="Missouri&amp;#x27;s 2nd congressional district" label="Missouri&amp;#x27;s 2nd congressional district"/>
<link wikidata="Q3917251" start="7416" end="7426" title="Ann Wagner" label="Ann Wagner"/>
<link wikidata="Q6879451" start="7432" end="7474" title="Missouri&amp;#x27;s 3rd congressional district" label="Missouri&amp;#x27;s 3rd congressional district"/>
<link wikidata="Q27064117" start="7490" end="7499" title="Bob Onder" label="Bob Onder"/>
<link wikidata="Q6879453" start="7505" end="7547" title="Missouri&amp;#x27;s 4th congressional district" label="Missouri&amp;#x27;s 4th congressional district"/>
<link wikidata="Q115137637" start="7563" end="7574" title="Mark Alford (politician)" label="Mark Alford"/>
<link wikidata="Q6879455" start="7580" end="7622" title="Missouri&amp;#x27;s 5th congressional district" label="Missouri&amp;#x27;s 5th congressional district"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334654" start="7638" end="7653" title="Emanuel Cleaver" label="Emanuel Cleaver"/>
<link wikidata="Q6879458" start="7659" end="7701" title="Missouri&amp;#x27;s 6th congressional district" label="Missouri&amp;#x27;s 6th congressional district"/>
<link wikidata="Q465638" start="7717" end="7727" title="Sam Graves" label="Sam Graves"/>
<link wikidata="Q6879456" start="7733" end="7775" title="Missouri&amp;#x27;s 7th congressional district" label="Missouri&amp;#x27;s 7th congressional district"/>
<link wikidata="Q5386212" start="7791" end="7804" title="Eric Burlison" label="Eric Burlison"/>
<link wikidata="Q6879459" start="7810" end="7852" title="Missouri&amp;#x27;s 8th congressional district" label="Missouri&amp;#x27;s 8th congressional district"/>
<link wikidata="Q6163589" start="7868" end="7879" title="Jason Smith (American politician)" label="Jason Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q23020745" start="7944" end="7955" title="Josh Hawley" label="Josh Hawley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5387455" start="7960" end="7972" title="Eric Schmitt" label="Eric Schmitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5420320" start="8043" end="8108" title="United States District Court for the Eastern District of Missouri" label="United States District Court for the Eastern District of Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889850" start="8117" end="8182" title="United States District Court for the Western District of Missouri" label="United States District Court for the Western District of Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q250433" start="8271" end="8324" title="United States Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit" label="United States Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q4713289" start="8341" end="8365" title="Alcohol laws of Missouri" label="Alcohol laws of Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164207" start="8367" end="8391" title="Constitution of Missouri" label="Constitution of Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q107452059" start="8393" end="8414" title="Missouri Sunshine Law" label="Missouri Sunshine Law"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="187356" wikidata="Q7407044" url="?curid=187356" title="Sam 'n' Henry">
<text>Sam &#x27;n&#x27; Henry was a radio series performed by Freeman Gosden and Charles Correll that aired on Chicago radio station WGN from 1926 through 1928. The ten-minute program is often considered the first situation comedy. Gosden and Correll reworked the premise on a more ambitious scale to create their long-running radio show &quot;Amos &#x27;n&#x27; Andy&quot;.

==Characters and history==

In late 1925, radio performers Gosden and Correll had been approached about doing a show based on Sidney Smith&#x27;s popular comic strip &quot;The Gumps&quot;. Gosden and Corell instead proposed their own radio serial using characters they created themselves. Like &quot;The Gumps&quot;, each show would be amusing in itself but would also feature recurring characters in an ongoing storyline.
Gosden and Correll decided to make their main characters, named Sam Smith and Henry Johnson, Black men who had recently arrived from Alabama during the Great Migration. This reflected the historical circumstances in Chicago during the 1920s, when millions of Southern Black families moved north in search of opportunity and relief from Jim Crow segregation in the South. This influx was met with considerable resistance in Northern communities, including Chicago, leading to numerous forms of marginalization for the new arrivals; one expression of this was the often mocking, stereotypical portrayal of African Americans by White performers, a tradition of which Gosden and Correll became prominent examples.

After overcoming initial problems with finding food, living space and employment, Sam and Henry set up their own moving company, with overbearing Henry as company president and meek, gullible Sam as the one who does all the work. Having been initiated into a colored fraternity called the Jewels of the Crown, they strike up a friendship with the Most Precious Diamond, the high officer of the lodge, who frequently tries to get his hands on the boys&#x27; money.

&quot;Sam &#x27;n&#x27; Henry&quot; premiered on Chicago radio station WGN on January 12, 1926, and immediately found an audience of Midwestern listeners. Correll and Gosden wrote and produced 586 episodes. They provided the voices for all characters.

Gosden and Corell left WGN after the station rejected their novel concept of recording &quot;Sam &#x27;n&#x27; Henry&quot; on phonograph records for distribution to other radio stations. The duo&#x27;s last musical program for WGN was broadcast on January 29, 1928. In March, they brought their characters, now called Amos and Andy, to competing Chicago station WMAQ. WGN retained the rights to the characters and continued &quot;Sam &#x27;n&#x27; Henry&quot; without Correll and Gosden until February 12, 1928. On March 31, some two weeks after &quot;Amos &#x27;n&#x27; Andy&quot; premiered on WMAQ, &quot;Sam &#x27;n&#x27; Henry&quot; returned as a 15- to 30-minute program, in which the title characters mostly functioned as announcers for musical performances. The final episode of &quot;Sam &#x27;n&#x27; Henry&quot; aired on July 14, 1928.

Today, the show is acknowledged as a historically significant production, but one that also effected real harm through the perpetuation of racial stereotypes, minstrelsy, and blackface performance.

==Books==
In 1926, the &quot;Chicago Tribune&quot; published &quot;Sam &#x27;n&#x27; Henry&quot;, containing a selection of 25 of the scripts Correll and Gosden wrote for the first two months of their radio series (judging from the pages of the &quot;Chicago Tribune&quot; quoted in chapter 23, these are from among the 31 episodes broadcast up to February 19, 1926). In the brief introduction, they wrote, &quot;Please stand by while we rise (both of us) and bow fervently to our good and great papa, the &quot;Chicago Tribune&quot;. Oh, oh!&quot; Illustrator Samuel Jay Smith supplied several drawings of the characters. Since the book sold well in the Midwest, the &quot;Tribune&quot; brought out a paperback version in 1930.

==Other media==
From February 6, 1927, to October 2, 1927, each Sunday issue of the &quot;Chicago Daily Tribune&quot; contained the script of an old or recent episode of the show. In 1926 and 1927, Gosden and Correll also recorded some of their &quot;Sam &#x27;n&#x27; Henry&quot; routines for Victor Records (rewritten and shortened to about three minutes), and in the first two months of 1927, they performed as Sam &#x27;n&#x27; Henry in at least three Chicago theaters.

==References==
==Listen to==
*Tom Heathwood interviews broadcast historian Elizabeth McLeod
*&quot;Sam &#x27;n Henry (aka Amos &amp; Andy) 14 Eps&quot;, Old Time Radio, Audio Archive.

==External links==
*Victor discography: Gosden and Correll
*&quot;Sam &#x27;n&#x27; Henry&quot; (1926) scripts</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5501008" start="56" end="70" title="Freeman Gosden" label="Freeman Gosden"/>
<link wikidata="Q11855185" start="75" end="90" title="Charles Correll" label="Charles Correll"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="105" end="112" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q7949870" start="127" end="130" title="WGN (AM)" label="WGN"/>
<link wikidata="Q170238" start="208" end="224" title="situation comedy" label="situation comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2843914" start="338" end="361" title="Amos &amp;#x27;n&amp;#x27; Andy" label="Amos &amp;#x27;n&amp;#x27; Andy"/>
<link wikidata="Q838795" start="524" end="535" title="comic strip" label="comic strip"/>
<link wikidata="Q2411812" start="542" end="551" title="The Gumps" label="The Gumps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506365" start="945" end="960" title="Great Migration (African American)" label="Great Migration"/>
<link wikidata="Q865365" start="1129" end="1149" title="Jim Crow laws" label="Jim Crow segregation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7949870" start="2040" end="2043" title="WGN (AM)" label="WGN"/>
<link wikidata="Q47596" start="3297" end="3312" title="Chicago Tribune" label="Chicago Tribune"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470329" start="4292" end="4306" title="Victor Records" label="Victor Records"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="187358" wikidata="Q107194" url="?curid=187358" title="George Grosz">
<text>George Grosz (; ; born Georg Ehrenfried Groß; July 26, 1893 – July 6, 1959) was a German artist known especially for his caricatural drawings and paintings of Berlin life in the 1920s. He was a prominent member of the Berlin Dada and New Objectivity groups during the Weimar Republic. He emigrated to the United States in 1933, and became a naturalized citizen in 1938. Abandoning the style and subject matter of his earlier work, he exhibited regularly and taught for many years at the Art Students League of New York. In 1959 he returned to Berlin, where he died shortly afterwards.

==Early life and education==
Grosz was born Georg Ehrenfried Groß in Berlin, Germany, the third child of a pub owner. His parents were devoutly Lutheran. Grosz grew up in the Pomeranian town of Stolp (now Słupsk, Poland). After his father&#x27;s death in 1900, he moved to the Wedding district of Berlin with his mother and sisters. At the urging of his cousin, the young Grosz began attending a weekly drawing class taught by a local painter named Grot. Grosz developed his skills further by drawing meticulous copies of the drinking scenes of Eduard von Grützner, and by drawing imaginary battle scenes. He was expelled from school in 1908 for insubordination.

From 1909 to 1911, he studied at the Dresden Academy of Fine Arts, where his teachers were Richard Müller, Robert Sterl, Raphael Wehle, and Osmar Schindler. His first published drawing was in the satirical magazine &quot;Ulk&quot; in 1910. From 1912 until 1917 he studied at the Berlin College of Arts and Crafts under Emil Orlik. He began painting in oils in 1912.

In November 1914 Grosz volunteered for military service, in the hope that by thus preempting conscription he would avoid being sent to the front. He was given a discharge after hospitalization for sinusitis in 1915. In 1916 he changed the spelling of his name to &quot;de-Germanise&quot; and internationalise his name – thus Georg became &quot;George&quot; (an English spelling), while in his surname he replaced the German &quot;ß&quot; with its phonetic equivalent &quot;sz&quot;. He did this as a protest against German nationalism and out of a romantic enthusiasm for America – a legacy of his early reading of the books of James Fenimore Cooper, Bret Harte and Karl May – that he retained for the rest of his life. His artist friend and collaborator Helmut Herzfeld likewise changed his name to John Heartfield at the same time.

In January 1917 Grosz was drafted for service, but in May he was discharged as permanently unfit.

==Political engagement, 1918 to 1920==
Following the November Revolution in the last months of 1918, Grosz joined the Spartacist League, which was renamed the Communist Party of Germany (KPD) in December 1918. He was arrested during the Spartakus uprising in January 1919, but escaped using fake identification documents. In 1920 he married Eva Peters.

In the same year he published a collection of his drawings, titled &quot;Gott mit uns&quot; (&quot;God with us&quot;), a satire on German society. Grosz was accused of insulting the army, which resulted in a 300 German Mark fine and the confiscation of the plates used to print the album. He also organised and exhibited at the First International Dada Fair.

==Trip to Russia, 1922/1923==
In 1922 Grosz traveled to Russia with the Danish writer Martin Andersen Nexø. Upon their arrival in Murmansk they were briefly arrested as spies; after their credentials were approved, they were allowed to continue their journey. He met with several Bolshevik leaders such as Grigory Zinoviev, Karl Radek, and Vladimir Lenin. He went with Arthur Holitscher to meet Anatoly Lunacharsky with whom he discussed Proletkult. He rejected the concept of &quot;proletarian culture&quot;, arguing that the term proletarian meant uneducated and uncultured. He regarded artistic talent as a &quot;gift of the muses&quot;, which a person may be lucky enough to be born with. There he also met the Constructivist artist Vladimir Tatlin.

Grosz&#x27;s six-month stay in the Soviet Union left him unimpressed by what he had seen. He ended his membership in the KPD in 1923, although his political positions were little changed.

==Later activities in Germany==
According to Grosz&#x27;s son Martin Grosz, during the 1920s Nazi officers visited Grosz&#x27;s studio looking for him, but because he was wearing a working man&#x27;s apron Grosz was able to pass himself off as a handyman and avoid being taken into custody. His work was also part of the painting event in the art competition at the 1928 Summer Olympics.

On December 10, 1928 he and his publisher Wieland Herzfelde were prosecuted and fined under charges of blasphemy and sacrilege for publishing two anticlerical drawings in his portfolio Hintergrund (Background). One depicted prisoners under assault from a minister who vomits grenades and weapons onto them, and another featured a crucified Christ wearing a World War I gas mask and combat boots.

According to historian David Nash, Grosz &quot;publicly stated that he was neither Christian nor pacifist, but was actively motivated by an inner need to create these pictures&quot;. He and his publisher appealed twice, and were finally acquitted in 1929 by the Reichsgericht in Berlin. &quot;The judge decided that it was not an offense to religion, but actually was an attack on militarism. The implication is that, from Grosz’s point of view, religion was being used as essentially an opiate of the masses to encourage soldiers to die for the state. &#x27;Shut up and obey,&#x27; was the rubric associated with this,&quot; according to art critic Camille Paglia.

In 1942 &quot;Time&quot; magazine identified Grosz as a pacifist.

==Emigration to the U.S.==
Bitterly anti-Nazi, Grosz left Germany shortly before Hitler came to power. In June 1932, he accepted an invitation to teach the summer semester at the Art Students League of New York. In October 1932, Grosz returned to Germany, but on January 12, 1933, he and his family emigrated to the United States. Their ship docked in New York on Jan. 23, 1933, a week before Hitler came to power in Berlin. Grosz became a naturalized citizen of the U.S. in 1938, and made his home in Bayside, New York. In the 1930s he taught at the Art Students League, where one of his students was Romare Bearden, who was influenced by his style of collage. Grosz taught at the Art Students League until 1955. His other students included Joseph Glasco and Robert Cenedella, whom he mentored from 1957 to 1959.

In America, Grosz determined to make a clean break with his past, and changed his style and subject matter. He continued to exhibit regularly, and in 1946 he published his autobiography, &quot;Ein kleines Ja und ein großes Nein&quot;, first translated as &quot;A Little Yes and a Big No&quot;. From 1947 to 1959, George Grosz lived in Huntington, New York, where he taught painting at the Huntington Township Art League. It is said by Huntington locals that he used what was to become his most famous painting, &quot;Eclipse of the Sun&quot;, to pay for a car repair bill, in his relative penury. The painting was later acquired by house painter Tom Constantine to settle a debt of $104.00.
In the 1950s he opened a private art school at his home and also worked as Artist in Residence at the Des Moines Art Center. Grosz was elected into the National Academy of Design as an Associate Academician in 1950. In 1954 he was elected to the American Academy of Arts and Letters.

==Personal life and death==
On May 26, 1920, Grosz married Eva Louise Peter, with whom he had two sons, Peter Grosz (1926–2006), a historian of early German aviation, and Marty Grosz (born 1930), a jazz guitarist.

Grosz resolved to return to Berlin, and relocated there in May 1959.
He died there on July 6, 1959, from the effects of falling down a flight of stairs after a night of drinking.

==Work==
Although Grosz made his first oil paintings in 1912 while still a student,
his earliest oils that can be identified date from 1916.
By 1914, Grosz worked in a style influenced by Expressionism and Futurism, as well as by popular illustration, graffiti, and children&#x27;s drawings. Sharply outlined forms are often treated as if transparent. &quot;The City&quot; (1916–17) was the first of his many paintings of the modern urban scene. Other examples include the apocalyptic &quot;Explosion&quot; (1917), &quot;Metropolis&quot; (1917), and &quot;The Funeral&quot;, a 1918 painting depicting a mad funeral procession. He settled in Berlin in 1918 and was a founder of the Berlin Dada movement, using his satirical drawings to attack bourgeois supporters of the Weimar Republic.

His drawings, usually in pen and ink which he sometimes developed further with watercolor, frequently included images of Berlin and the Weimar Republic in the 1920s. Corpulent businessmen, wounded soldiers, prostitutes, sex crimes and orgies were his great subjects (for example, see Fit for Active Service). His draftsmanship was excellent although the works for which he is best known adopt a deliberately crude form of caricature in the style of &quot;Jugend&quot;. His &quot;oeuvre&quot; includes a few absurdist works, such as &quot;Remember Uncle August the Unhappy Inventor&quot; which has buttons sewn on it, and also includes a number of erotic artworks.

After his emigration to the USA in 1933, Grosz &quot;sharply rejected [his] previous work, and caricature in general.&quot; In place of his earlier corrosive vision of the city, he now painted conventional nudes and many landscape watercolors. More acerbic works, such as &quot;Cain, or Hitler in Hell&quot; (1944), were the exception. In his autobiography, he wrote: &quot;A great deal that had become frozen within me in Germany melted here in America and I rediscovered my old yearning for painting. I carefully and deliberately destroyed a part of my past.&quot; Although a softening of his style had been apparent since the late 1920s, Grosz&#x27;s work assumed a more sentimental tone in America, a change generally seen as a decline. His late work never achieved the critical success of his Berlin years.

In 1968, the Heckscher Museum of Art in Huntington purchased the painting &quot;Eclipse of the Sun&quot; for $15,000.00, raising the money by public subscription. As it portrays the warmongering of arms manufacturers, this painting became a destination of protesters of the Vietnam War in Heckscher Park (where the museum is sited) in the late 1960s and early 70s.

In 2006, the Heckscher proposed selling &quot;Eclipse of the Sun&quot; at its then-current appraisal of approximately $19,000,000.00 to pay for repairs and renovations to the building. There was such public outcry that the museum decided not to sell, and announced plans to create a dedicated space for display of the painting in the renovated museum.

==Legacy and estate==
Grosz&#x27;s art influenced other New Objectivity artists such as Heinrich Maria Davringhausen, Anton Räderscheidt, and Georg Scholz. In the United States, the artists influenced by his work included the social realists Ben Shahn and William Gropper.

In 1960, Grosz was the subject of the Oscar-nominated short film &quot;George Grosz&#x27; Interregnum&quot;. He is fictionalized as &quot;Fritz Falke&quot; in Arthur R.G. Solmssen&#x27;s novel &quot;A Princess in Berlin&quot; (1980). In 2002, actor Kevin McKidd portrayed Grosz in a supporting role as an eager artist seeking exposure in &quot;Max&quot;, regarding Adolf Hitler&#x27;s youth.

The Grosz estate filed a lawsuit in 1995 against the Manhattan art dealer Serge Sabarsky, arguing that Sabarsky had deprived the estate of appropriate compensation for the sale of hundreds of Grosz works he had acquired. In the suit, filed in New York Supreme Court in Manhattan, the Grosz estate claims that Sabarsky secretly acquired 440 Grosz works for himself, primarily drawings and watercolors produced in Germany in the 1910s and 20s. The lawsuit was settled in summer in 2006.

In 2003 the Grosz family initiated a legal battle against the Museum of Modern Art in New York City, asking that three paintings be returned. According to documents, the paintings were sold to the Nazis after Grosz fled the country in 1933. The museum never settled the claim, arguing that a three-year statute of limitations in bringing such a claim had expired. It is well documented that the Nazis stole thousands of paintings during World War II and many heirs of German painters continue to fight museums in order to reclaim such works.

In 2015, Ralph Jentsch – the managing director of the Grosz estate since 1994 – co-founded a Berlin-based nonprofit organization dedicated to the artist. In 2022, the Little Grosz Museum (&quot;Kleines Grosz Museum&quot;) opened in Berlin&#x27;s Schöneberg district. Housed in a midcentury former gas station that was converted to a living space in 2008, the museum is funded by private donors and also houses a café and shop.

==Quotes==
* &quot;My Drawings expressed my despair, hate and disillusionment, I drew drunkards; puking men; men with clenched fists cursing at the moon. ... I drew a man, face filled with fright, washing blood from his hands ... I drew lonely little men fleeing madly through empty streets. I drew a cross-section of tenement house: through one window could be seen a man attacking his wife; through another, two people making love; from a third hung a suicide with body covered by swarming flies. I drew soldiers without noses; war cripples with crustacean-like steel arms; two medical soldiers putting a violent infantryman into a strait-jacket made of a horse blanket ... I drew a skeleton dressed as a recruit being examined for military duty. I also wrote poetry.&quot; — George Grosz

==See also==
* &quot;Jedermann sein eigner Fussball&quot;, an artists&#x27; book by George Grosz and John Heartfield
* Assoziation revolutionärer bildender Künstler, an association of German artists
* List of German painters

==References==
==Bibliography==
* Bergius, Hanne. &quot;Das Lachen Dadas. Die Berliner Dadaisten und ihre Aktionen&quot;. Gießen: Anabas-Verlag, 1989. 
* Bergius, H. &quot;Montage und Metamechanik. Dada Berlin – Ästhetik von Polaritäten&quot; (mit Rekonstruktion der Ersten Internationalen Dada-Messe und Dada-Chronologie) Berlin: Gebr. Mann Verlag 2000. 
* Bergius, H. &quot;Dada Triumphs! Dada Berlin, 1917–1923. Artistry of Polarities. Montages – Metamechanics – Manifestations&quot;. Translated by Brigitte Pichon. Vol. V. of the ten editions of Crisis and the Arts. The History of Dada, ed. by Stephen Foster, New Haven, Conn. u. a., Thomson/ Gale 2003. 
* Grosz, George (1946). &quot;A Little Yes and a Big No&quot;. New York: The Dial Press.
* Kranzfelder, Ivo (2005). &quot;George Grosz&quot;. Cologne: Taschen. 
* Michalski, Sergiusz (1994). &quot;New Objectivity&quot;. Cologne: Taschen. 
* Sabarsky, Serge, editor (1985). &quot;George Grosz: The Berlin Years&quot;. New York: Rizzoli. 
* Schmied, Wieland (1978). &quot;Neue Sachlichkeit and German Realism of the Twenties&quot;. London: Arts Council of Great Britain. 
* Vogel, Carol (7 October 2006) &quot;Peter M. Grosz, 80, Authority on Early German Aircraft, Dies&quot; (obituary, Grosz&#x27;s son), &quot;The New York Times&quot;
* Walker, B., Zieve, K., &amp; Brooklyn Museum. (1988). &quot;Prints of the German expressionists and their circle: Collection of the Brooklyn Museum&quot;. New York: Brooklyn Museum. 

==External links==
* 
* A collection of Grosz&#x27;s paintings ABC Gallery
* Ten Dreams Galleries
* Mario Vargas Llosa on George Grosz in &quot;TATE ETC.&quot; magazine Spring 2007
* Das Kleine Grosz Museum, Berlin</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q107194" start="0" end="12" title="George Grosz" label="George Grosz"/>
<link wikidata="Q107194" start="23" end="44" title="George Grosz" label="Georg Ehrenfried Groß"/>
<link wikidata="Q482919" start="121" end="132" title="caricature" label="caricatural"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="159" end="165" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6034" start="225" end="229" title="Dada" label="Dada"/>
<link wikidata="Q160218" start="234" end="249" title="New Objectivity" label="New Objectivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q41304" start="268" end="283" title="Weimar Republic" label="Weimar Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q705737" start="487" end="518" title="Art Students League of New York" label="Art Students League of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="730" end="738" title="Lutheranism" label="Lutheran"/>
<link wikidata="Q262269" start="761" end="771" title="Farther Pomerania" label="Pomeranian"/>
<link wikidata="Q105048" start="780" end="785" title="Stolp" label="Stolp"/>
<link wikidata="Q105048" start="791" end="797" title="Słupsk" label="Słupsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="799" end="805" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q675187" start="863" end="870" title="Wedding (Berlin)" label="Wedding"/>
<link wikidata="Q71509" start="1131" end="1150" title="Eduard von Grützner" label="Eduard von Grützner"/>
<link wikidata="Q464752" start="1287" end="1315" title="Dresden Academy of Fine Arts" label="Dresden Academy of Fine Arts"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1341" end="1355" title="Richard Müller (artist)" label="Richard Müller"/>
<link wikidata="Q319032" start="1357" end="1369" title="Robert Sterl" label="Robert Sterl"/>
<link wikidata="Q2034362" start="1390" end="1405" title="Osmar Schindler" label="Osmar Schindler"/>
<link wikidata="Q882130" start="1471" end="1474" title="Ulk" label="Ulk"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1529" end="1562" title="Berlin College of Arts and Crafts" label="Berlin College of Arts and Crafts"/>
<link wikidata="Q379150" start="1569" end="1579" title="Emil Orlik" label="Emil Orlik"/>
<link wikidata="Q183344" start="1814" end="1823" title="sinusitis" label="sinusitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q44687" start="2047" end="2048" title="ß" label="ß"/>
<link wikidata="Q167856" start="2245" end="2266" title="James Fenimore Cooper" label="James Fenimore Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q301983" start="2268" end="2278" title="Bret Harte" label="Bret Harte"/>
<link wikidata="Q22714" start="2283" end="2291" title="Karl May" label="Karl May"/>
<link wikidata="Q168671" start="2417" end="2432" title="John Heartfield" label="John Heartfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q170306" start="2604" end="2623" title="German Revolution of 1918–1919" label="November Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q156607" start="2669" end="2686" title="Spartacist League" label="Spartacist League"/>
<link wikidata="Q153401" start="2710" end="2736" title="Communist Party of Germany" label="Communist Party of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q313329" start="2788" end="2806" title="Spartakus uprising" label="Spartakus uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q641033" start="2978" end="2990" title="Gott mit uns" label="Gott mit uns"/>
<link wikidata="Q157608" start="3087" end="3091" title="Reichswehr" label="army"/>
<link wikidata="Q16068" start="3117" end="3128" title="Deutsche Mark" label="German Mark"/>
<link wikidata="Q42417140" start="3233" end="3262" title="First International Dada Fair" label="First International Dada Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q168569" start="3351" end="3371" title="Martin Andersen Nexø" label="Martin Andersen Nexø"/>
<link wikidata="Q1763" start="3395" end="3403" title="Murmansk" label="Murmansk"/>
<link wikidata="Q83372" start="3545" end="3554" title="Bolshevik" label="Bolshevik"/>
<link wikidata="Q207459" start="3571" end="3587" title="Grigory Zinoviev" label="Grigory Zinoviev"/>
<link wikidata="Q84266" start="3589" end="3599" title="Karl Radek" label="Karl Radek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394" start="3605" end="3619" title="Vladimir Lenin" label="Vladimir Lenin"/>
<link wikidata="Q214623" start="3634" end="3651" title="Arthur Holitscher" label="Arthur Holitscher"/>
<link wikidata="Q18809" start="3660" end="3679" title="Anatoly Lunacharsky" label="Anatoly Lunacharsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q924798" start="3703" end="3713" title="Proletkult" label="Proletkult"/>
<link wikidata="Q310320" start="4002" end="4017" title="Vladimir Tatlin" label="Vladimir Tatlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1663507" start="4271" end="4283" title="Marty Grosz" label="Martin Grosz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7320" start="4302" end="4306" title="Nazi party" label="Nazi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4530" end="4544" title="Art competitions at the 1928 Summer Olympics#Painting" label="painting event"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192089" start="4552" end="4567" title="Art competitions at the 1928 Summer Olympics" label="art competition"/>
<link wikidata="Q8138" start="4575" end="4595" title="1928 Summer Olympics" label="1928 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2568679" start="4640" end="4657" title="Wieland Herzfelde" label="Wieland Herzfelde"/>
<link wikidata="Q200481" start="4701" end="4710" title="blasphemy" label="blasphemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q180362" start="4715" end="4724" title="sacrilege" label="sacrilege"/>
<link wikidata="Q478004" start="4744" end="4756" title="anticlerical" label="anticlerical"/>
<link wikidata="Q58848" start="5092" end="5100" title="pacifist" label="pacifist"/>
<link wikidata="Q255463" start="5645" end="5659" title="Camille Paglia" label="Camille Paglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="5676" end="5680" title="Time (magazine)" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="5810" end="5816" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q705737" start="5908" end="5939" title="Art Students League of New York" label="Art Students League of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q841440" start="6169" end="6188" title="naturalized citizen" label="naturalized citizen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2892339" start="6231" end="6248" title="Bayside, New York" label="Bayside, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q705737" start="6280" end="6299" title="Art Students League of New York" label="Art Students League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1291679" start="6331" end="6345" title="Romare Bearden" label="Romare Bearden"/>
<link wikidata="Q170593" start="6382" end="6389" title="collage" label="collage"/>
<link wikidata="Q6283474" start="6471" end="6484" title="Joseph Glasco" label="Joseph Glasco"/>
<link wikidata="Q18390655" start="6489" end="6505" title="Robert Cenedella" label="Robert Cenedella"/>
<link wikidata="Q4657885" start="6805" end="6830" title="A Little Yes and a Big No" label="A Little Yes and a Big No"/>
<link wikidata="Q999123" start="6879" end="6899" title="Huntington, New York" label="Huntington, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q108517416" start="7055" end="7085" title="Eclipse of the Sun (Grosz)" label="&amp;quot;Eclipse of the Sun&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5263501" start="7337" end="7358" title="Des Moines Art Center" label="Des Moines Art Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q502218" start="7387" end="7413" title="National Academy of Design" label="National Academy of Design"/>
<link wikidata="Q463281" start="7481" end="7517" title="American Academy of Arts and Letters" label="American Academy of Arts and Letters"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7624" end="7635" title="Peter Grosz (historian)" label="Peter Grosz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1663507" start="7691" end="7702" title="Marty Grosz" label="Marty Grosz"/>
<link wikidata="Q80113" start="8103" end="8116" title="Expressionism" label="Expressionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q131221" start="8121" end="8129" title="Futurism" label="Futurism"/>
<link wikidata="Q17514" start="8167" end="8175" title="graffiti" label="graffiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q21711769" start="8430" end="8452" title="Metropolis (Grosz)" label="&amp;quot;Metropolis&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7735459" start="8465" end="8488" title="The Funeral (Grosz)" label="&amp;quot;The Funeral&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q6034" start="8603" end="8607" title="Dada" label="Dada"/>
<link wikidata="Q41304" start="8685" end="8700" title="Weimar Republic" label="Weimar Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5455396" start="8987" end="9009" title="Fit for Active Service" label="Fit for Active Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q703339" start="9158" end="9164" title="Jugend (magazine)" label="Jugend"/>
<link wikidata="Q191163" start="9589" end="9598" title="landscape art" label="landscape"/>
<link wikidata="Q108749505" start="9646" end="9669" title="Cain, or Hitler in Hell" label="Cain, or Hitler in Hell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5696477" start="10194" end="10217" title="Heckscher Museum of Art" label="Heckscher Museum of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="10455" end="10466" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q160218" start="10956" end="10971" title="New Objectivity" label="New Objectivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q50658" start="10988" end="11016" title="Heinrich Maria Davringhausen" label="Heinrich Maria Davringhausen"/>
<link wikidata="Q74051" start="11018" end="11036" title="Anton Räderscheidt" label="Anton Räderscheidt"/>
<link wikidata="Q536216" start="11042" end="11054" title="Georg Scholz" label="Georg Scholz"/>
<link wikidata="Q695239" start="11142" end="11151" title="Ben Shahn" label="Ben Shahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q972080" start="11156" end="11171" title="William Gropper" label="William Gropper"/>
<link wikidata="Q5539946" start="11245" end="11275" title="George Grosz&amp;#x27; Interregnum" label="George Grosz&amp;#x27; Interregnum"/>
<link wikidata="Q711558" start="11333" end="11353" title="Arthur R.G. Solmssen" label="Arthur R.G. Solmssen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4659030" start="11373" end="11393" title="A Princess in Berlin" label="A Princess in Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q312133" start="11423" end="11435" title="Kevin McKidd" label="Kevin McKidd"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475581" start="11512" end="11527" title="Max (2002 film)" label="&amp;quot;Max&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="11539" end="11551" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q2272486" start="11641" end="11655" title="Serge Sabarsky" label="Serge Sabarsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q3001111" start="11810" end="11832" title="New York Supreme Court" label="New York Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q188740" start="12115" end="12135" title="Museum of Modern Art" label="Museum of Modern Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q1899048" start="12356" end="12378" title="statute of limitations" label="statute of limitations"/>
<link wikidata="Q313189" start="12842" end="12852" title="Schöneberg" label="Schöneberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q830875" start="13837" end="13867" title="Jedermann sein eigner Fussball" label="Jedermann sein eigner Fussball"/>
<link wikidata="Q744842" start="13935" end="13980" title="Association of Revolutionary Visual Artists" label="Assoziation revolutionärer bildender Künstler"/>
<link wikidata="Q16192219" start="14017" end="14040" title="List of German painters" label="List of German painters"/>
<link wikidata="Q367205" start="14853" end="14860" title="Taschen" label="Taschen"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="15313" end="15331" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="187359" wikidata="Q329981" url="?curid=187359" title="Campfire">
<text>A campfire is a fire at a campsite that provides light and warmth, and heat for cooking. It can also serve as a beacon, and an insect and predator deterrent. Established campgrounds often provide a stone or steel fire ring for safety. Campfires are a popular feature of camping. At summer camps, the word campfire often refers to an event (ceremony, get together, etc.) at which there is a fire. Some camps refer to the fire itself as a campfire.

==History==

===First campfire===
A new analysis of burned antelope bones from caves in Swartkrans, South Africa, confirms that &quot;Australopithecus robustus&quot; and/or &quot;Homo erectus&quot; built campfires roughly 1.6 million years ago. Nearby evidence within Wonderwerk Cave, at the edge of the Kalahari Desert, has been called the oldest known controlled fire. Microscopic analysis of plant ash and charred bone fragments suggests that materials in the cave were not heated above about . This is consistent with preliminary findings that the fires burned grasses, brush, and leaves. Such fuel would not produce hotter flames. The data suggests humans were cooking prey by campfire as far back as the first appearance of &quot;Homo erectus&quot; 1.9 million years ago.

==Safety==

===Finding a site===

Ideally, campfires should be made in a fire ring. If a fire ring is not available, a temporary fire site may be constructed. Bare rock or unvegetated ground is ideal for a fire site. Alternatively, turf may be cut away to form a bare area and carefully replaced after the fire has cooled to minimize damage. Another way is to cover the ground with sand, or other soil mostly free of flammable organic material, to a depth of a few inches. A ring of rocks is sometimes constructed around a fire. Fire rings, however, do not fully protect material on the ground from catching fire. Flying embers are still a threat, and the fire ring may become hot enough to ignite material in contact with it, or the heat the water to a vapor thereby cracking the rocks.

===Safety measures===
Campfires can spark wildfires. As such, it is important for the fire builder to take multiple safety precautions, including: 
* Avoiding building campfires under hanging branches or over steep slopes, and clear a ten-foot diameter circle around the fire of all flammable debris.
* Having enough water nearby and a shovel to smother an out-of-control fire with dirt.
* Minimizing the size of the fire to prevent problems from occurring.
* Never leaving a campfire unattended.
* When extinguishing a campfire, using plenty of water or dirt, then stirring the mixture and add more water, then check that there are no burning embers left whatsoever.
* Never bury hot coals, as they can continue to burn and cause root fires or wildfires. Be aware of roots if digging a hole for your fire.
* Making sure the fire pit is large enough for the campfire and there are no combustibles near the campfire, and avoiding the construction of the campfire on a windy day.

==Types of fuel==
There are three types of material involved in building a fire without manufactured fuels or modern conveniences such as lighters:
# &quot;Tinder&quot; lights easily and is used to start an enduring campfire. It is anything that can be lit with a spark and is usually classified as being thinner than your little finger. The tinder of choice before matches and lighters was amadou next to flint and steel. A few decent natural tinders are cotton, birch bark, cedar bark, and fatwood, where available; followed by dead, dry pine needles or grass; a more comprehensive list is given in the article on tinder. Though not natural steel wool make excellent tinder and can be started with steel and flint, or a 9 volt battery without difficulty.
# &quot;&quot; wood is an arbitrary classification including anything bigger than tinder but smaller than fuel wood. In fact, there are gradations of kindling, from sticks thinner than a finger to those as thick as a wrist. A quantity of kindling sufficient to fill a hat may be enough, but more is better. A faggot is a related term indicating a bundle of small branches used to feed a small fire or continue developing a bigger fire out of a small one.
# &quot;Fuel wood&quot; can be different types of timber. Timber ranges from small logs two or three inches (76 mm) across to larger logs that can burn for hours. It is typically difficult to gather without a hatchet or other cutting tool. In heavily used campsites, fuel wood can be hard to find, so it may have to purchased at a nearby store or be brought from home. However, untreated wood should not be transported due to the probability that invasive species of bugs will be transported with it. Heat-treated wood such as kiln-dried lumber is safe to transport. In the United States, areas that allow camping, like state parks and national parks, often let campers collect firewood lying on the ground. Some parks do not do this for various reasons, e.g. if they have erosion problems from campgrounds near dunes. Parks almost always forbid cutting living trees, and may also prohibit collecting dead parts of standing trees.

In most realistic cases nowadays, non-natural additions to the fuels mentioned above will be used. Often, charcoal lighters like hexamine fuel tablets or ethyl alcohol will be used to start the fire, as well as various types of scrap paper. With the proliferation of packaged food, it is quite likely that plastics will be incinerated as well, a practice that not only produces toxic fumes but will also leave polluted ashes behind because of incomplete combustion at too-low open fire temperatures.

==Construction styles==

There are a variety of designs to choose from in building a campfire. A functional design is important in the early stages of a fire. Most of them make no mention of fuelwood—in most designs, fuelwood is never placed on a fire until the kindling is burning strongly.

===Teepee===

The tipi (or teepee) fire-build takes some patience to construct. First, the tinder is piled up in a compact heap. The smaller kindling is arranged around it, like the poles of a tipi. For added strength, it may be possible to lash some of the sticks together. A tripod lashing is quite difficult to execute with small sticks, so a clove hitch should suffice. (Synthetic rope should be avoided since it produces pollutants when it burns.) Then the larger kindling is arranged above the smaller kindling, taking care not to collapse the tipi. A separate tipi as a shell around the first one may work better. Tipi fires are excellent for producing heat to keep people warm. The gases from the bottom quickly come to the top as you add more sticks.

One downside to a Tipi fire is that when it burns, the logs become unstable and can fall over. This is especially concerning with a large fire.

===Log cabin===
A log cabin fire-build likewise begins with a tinder pile. The kindling is then stacked around it, as in the construction of a log cabin. The first two kindling sticks are laid parallel to each other, on opposite sides of the tinder pile. The second pair is laid on top of the first, at right angles to it, and also on opposite sides of the tinder. More kindling is added in the same manner. The smallest kindling is placed over the top of the assembly. Of all the fire-builds, the log cabin is the least vulnerable to premature collapse, but it is also inefficient because it makes the worst use of convection to ignite progressively larger pieces of fuel. However, these qualities make the log cabin an ideal cooking fire as it burns for a long period of time and can support cookware.

A variation on the log cabin starts with two pieces of fuelwood with a pile of tinder between them, and small kindling laid over the tops of the logs, above the tinder. The tinder is lit, and the kindling is allowed to catch fire. When it is burning briskly, it is broken and pushed down into the consumed tinder, and the larger kindling is placed over the top of the logs. When that is burning well, it is also pushed down. Eventually, a pile of kindling burns between two pieces of fuelwood, and soon the logs catch fire from it.

Another variation is called the funeral pyre method because it is used for building funeral pyres. Its main difference from the standard log cabin is that it starts with thin pieces and moves up to thick pieces. If built on a large scale, this type of fire-build collapses in a controlled manner without restricting the airflow.

===Hybrid===

A hybrid fire combines the elements of both the tipi and the log cabin creating an easily lit yet stable fire structure. The hybrid is made by first erecting a small tipi and then proceeding to construct a log cabin around it. This fire structure combines benefits of both fire types: the tipi allows the fire to ignite easily and the log cabin sustains the fire for a long time.

===Cross-fire===
A cross-fire is built by positioning two pieces of wood with the tinder in between. Once the fire is burning well, additional pieces of wood are placed on top in layers that alternate directions. This type of fire creates coals suitable for cooking.

===Lean-to===
A lean-to fire-build starts with the same pile of tinder as the tipi fire-build. Then, a long, thick piece of kindling is driven into the ground at an angle, so that it overhangs the tinder pile. The smaller pieces of kindling are leaned against the big stick so that the tinder is enclosed between them.

In an alternative method, a large piece of fuelwood or log can be placed on the ground next to the tinder pile. Then kindling is placed with one end propped up by the larger piece of fuelwood, and the other resting on the ground so that the kindling is leaning over the tinder pile. This method is useful in very high winds, as the piece of fuel wood acts as a windbreak.

===Rakovalkea===

The traditional Finnish &quot;rakovalkea&quot; (), or &quot;nying&quot; in Scandinavian languages, also called by English terms long log fire or gap fire, is constructed by placing one long and thick piece of fuelwood (log) atop another, parallel, and bolstering them in place with four sturdy posts driven into the ground. Traditionally, whole un-split tree trunks provide the fuelwood. Kindling and tinder are placed between the logs in sufficient quantity (while avoiding the very ends) to raise the upper log and allow ventilation. The tinder is always lit at the center so the bolstering posts near the ends do not burn prematurely.

The rakovalkea has two significant features. First, it burns slowly but steadily when lit; it does not require arduous maintenance, but burns for a very long time. A well constructed rakovalkea of two thick logs of two meters in length can warm two lean-to shelters for a whole sleeping shift. The construction causes the logs themselves to protect the fire from the wind. Thus, exposure to smoke is unlikely for the sleepers; nevertheless someone should always watch in case of an emergency. Second, it can be easily scaled to larger sizes (for a feast) limited only by the length of available tree trunks. The arrangement is also useful as beacon fire, i.e. a temporary light signal for ships far in the sea.

===Swedish torch===

The Swedish torch (&quot;Schwedenfackel&quot; or &quot;Schwedenfeuer&quot;) is also known by other names, including Swedish (log) candle, and Swedish log stove.

This fire is unique because it uses only one piece of fairly-sized wood as its fuel. The log is either partially cut (though some variants involve completely splitting it) and then set upright. Ideally, the log should be cut evenly and placed on a level surface for stability. Tinder and kindling are added to the preformed chamber created by the initial cuts. Eventually, the fire becomes self-feeding. The flat, circular top provides a surface for placing a kettle or pan for cooking, boiling liquids, and more. In some instances, the elevated position of the fire can serve as a better beacon than a typical ground-based campfire.

===Keyhole fire===
A keyhole fire is made in a keyhole-shaped fire ring, and is used in cooking. The large round area is used to build a fire to create coals. As coals develop, they are scraped into the rectangular area used for cooking.

===Top lighter===
A &quot;top lighter&quot; fire is built similar to a log cabin or pyre, but instead of the tinder and kindling being placed inside the cabin, it is placed in a tipi on top. The small tipi is lighted on top, and the coals eventually fall down into the log cabin. Outdoor youth organizations often build these fires for &quot;council fires&quot; or ceremonial fires. They burn predictably, and with some practice a builder can estimate how long they will last. They also do not throw off much heat, which isn&#x27;t needed for a ceremonial fire. The fire burns from the top down, with the layer of hot coals and burning stubs igniting the next layer down.

Another variation to the top lighter, log cabin, or pyre is known by several names, most notably the pyramid, self-feeding, and upside-down [method]. The reasoning for this method are twofold. First, the layers of fuelwood take in the heat from the initial tinder/kindling, therefore, it is not lost to the surrounding ground. In effect, the fire is &quot;off the ground&quot;, and burns its way down through its course. And secondly, this fire type requires minimal labor, thereby making it ideal as a fire of choice before bedding down for the evening without having to get up periodically to add fuelwood and/or stoke the fire to keep it going. Start by adding the largest fuelwood in a parallel &quot;layer&quot;, then continue to add increasingly smaller and smaller fuelwood layers perpendicularly to the last layer. Once enough wood is piled, there should be a decent &quot;platform&quot; to make the tipi [tinder/kindling] to initiate the fire.

===Dakota smokeless pit fire===
A Dakota smokeless pit fire is a tactical fire used by the United States military as the flame produces a low light signature, reduced smoke, and is easier to ignite under strong wind conditions. Two small holes are dug in the ground: one vertical for the firewood and the other slanted to the bottom of the first hole to provide a draft of air for nearly complete combustion. Optional are flat stones to partially cover the first hole and provide support for cookery, and a tree over the pits to disperse the smoke.

===Star Fire===
A Star Fire, or Indian Fire, is the fire design often depicted as the campfire of the old West. Someone lays six or so logs out like the spokes of a wheel (star-shaped). They start the fire at the &quot;hub,&quot; and push each log towards the center as the flames consume the ends.

==Ignition==

Once the fire is built, the tinder is lighted, using one of several methods
* smoking black powder produced by friction between a stick, or bow drill, or pump drill and a hole or crack on dry wood,
* a magnifying glass focusing sunlight,
* smoking material produced by a fire piston,
* smoking black powder produced by a bamboo fire saw
* smoking material produced by a fire roll (small amount of cotton mixed with ash or iron rust, rolled vigorously between two flat stones or planks, until it starts smoking),
* smoking material produced by a piece of flint or ferro-rod struck against steel over amadou or other initial tinder, or 
* an ignition device, such as a match or a lighter.

A reasonably skilful fire-builder using reasonably good material only needs one match. The tinder burns brightly, but reduced to glowing embers within half a minute. If the kindling does not catch fire, the fire-builder must gather more tinder, determine what went wrong and try to fix it.

One of five problems can prevent a fire from lighting properly: wet wood, wet weather, too little tinder, too much wind, or a lack of oxygen. Rain will douse a fire, but a combination of wind and fog also has a stifling effect. Metal fire rings generally do a good job of keeping out wind, but some of them are so high as to impede the circulation of oxygen in a small fire. To make matters worse, these tall fire rings also make it very difficult to blow on the fire properly.

A small, enclosed fire that has slowed down may require vigorous blowing to get it going again, but excess blowing can extinguish a fire. Most large fires easily create their own circulation, even in unfavourable conditions, but the variant log-cabin fire-build suffers from a chronic lack of air so long as the initial structure is maintained.

Once large kindling is burning, all kindling is placed in the fire, then the fuel wood is placed on top of it (unless, as in the rakovalkea fire-build, it is already there).

==Activities==
Campfires have been used for cooking since time immemorial. Possibly the simplest method of cooking over a campfire and one of the most common is to roast food on long skewers that can be held above red glowing embers, or on the side near the flames (not over flames in order to avoid soot contamination and burnt food). This is a popular technique for cooking hot dogs or toasting marshmallows for making s&#x27;mores. This type of cooking over the fire typically consists of comfort foods that are easy to prepare. There is also no clean up involved unlike an actual kitchen. Another technique is to use pie irons—small iron molds with long handles. Campers put slices of bread with some kind of filling into the molds and put them over hot coals to cook. Campers sometimes use elaborate grills, cast iron pots, and fire irons to cook. Often, however, they use portable stoves for cooking instead of campfires.

Other practical, though not commonly needed, applications for campfires include drying wet clothing, alleviating hypothermia, and distress signaling. Most campfires, though, are exclusively for recreation, often as a venue for conversation, storytelling, or song. Another traditional campfire activity involves impaling marshmallows on sticks or uncoiled wire coat hangers, and roasting them over the fire. Roasted marshmallows may also be used for &quot;s&#x27;more&quot;s.

==Dangers==

Beside the danger of people receiving burns from the fire or embers, campfires may spread into a larger fire. A campfire may burn out of control in two basic ways: on the ground or in the trees. Dead leaves or pine needles on the ground may ignite from direct contact with burning wood, or from thermal radiation. If a root, particularly a dead one, is exposed to fire, it may smoulder underground and ignite the parent tree long after the original fire is doused and the campers have left the area. Alternatively, airborne embers (or their smaller kin, sparks) may ignite dead material in overhanging branches. This latter threat is less likely, but a fire in a branch is extremely difficult to put out without firefighting equipment, and may spread more quickly than a ground fire.

Embers may simply fall off logs and float away in the air, or exploding pockets of sap may eject them at high speed. With these dangers in mind, some places prohibit all open fires, particularly at times prone to wildfires.

Many public camping areas prohibit campfires. Public areas with large tracts of woodland usually have signs that indicate the fire danger level, which usually depends on recent rain and the amount of deadfall or dry debris. Even in safer times, it is common to require registration and permits to build a campfire. Such areas are often kept under observation by rangers, who will dispatch someone to investigate any unidentified plume of smoke.

==Extinguishing the fire==
Leaving a fire unattended can be dangerous. Any number of accidents might occur in the absence of people, leading to property damage, personal injury or possibly a wildfire. Ash is a good insulator, so embers left overnight only lose a fraction of their heat. It is often possible to restart the new day&#x27;s fire using the embers.

To properly cool a fire, water is splashed on all embers, including places that are not glowing red. Splashing the water is both more effective and efficient in extinguishing the fire. The water boils violently and carries ash in the air with it, dirtying anything nearby but not posing a safety hazard. Water is continuously poured until the hissing stops, then the ashes are stirred to ensure that water reaches the entire fire, and more water is added if necessary. When the fire is fully extinguished, the ashes are cool to the touch.

If water is scarce, sand is used to deprive the fire of oxygen. Sand works well, but is less effective than water at absorbing heat. Once the fire is covered thoroughly with sand, water is then added over the fire.

When winter or &quot;snow&quot; camping with an inch or more of snow on the ground, neither of the above protocols are necessary—simply douse visible flames before leaving. In lightly used wilderness areas, the area around the campfire is cleaned up to make it look untouched after the fire is extinguished.

Campfire ashes are sometimes used in ceremonies like the Scouting campfire ash ceremony.

==Gallery==
==See also==

* Camping
* Campfire story
* Colored fire
* Fire pan
* Outdoor cooking
* Repeat after me song

==References==
==External links==
* Archived at Ghostarchive and the Wayback Machine: </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q329981" start="2" end="10" title="Campfire" label="campfire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3196" start="16" end="20" title="fire" label="fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q832778" start="26" end="34" title="campsite" label="campsite"/>
<link wikidata="Q9128" start="49" end="54" title="light" label="light"/>
<link wikidata="Q7321258" start="112" end="118" title="beacon" label="beacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390" start="127" end="133" title="insect" label="insect"/>
<link wikidata="Q170430" start="138" end="146" title="predator" label="predator"/>
<link wikidata="Q832778" start="170" end="180" title="campground" label="campground"/>
<link wikidata="Q187317" start="213" end="222" title="fire ring" label="fire ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q455550" start="270" end="277" title="camping" label="camping"/>
<link wikidata="Q25894" start="507" end="515" title="antelope" label="antelope"/>
<link wikidata="Q35509" start="527" end="532" title="caves" label="caves"/>
<link wikidata="Q1887011" start="536" end="546" title="Swartkrans" label="Swartkrans"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="548" end="560" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q310529" start="582" end="607" title="Australopithecus robustus" label="Australopithecus robustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q101362" start="627" end="639" title="Homo erectus" label="Homo erectus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2543042" start="716" end="731" title="Wonderwerk Cave" label="Wonderwerk Cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q47700" start="752" end="767" title="Kalahari Desert" label="Kalahari Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q34679" start="1609" end="1613" title="sand" label="sand"/>
<link wikidata="Q174211" start="1654" end="1661" title="organic compound" label="organic"/>
<link wikidata="Q169950" start="2761" end="2769" title="wildfire" label="wildfire"/>
<link wikidata="Q42501" start="3096" end="3100" title="fuel" label="fuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q20459" start="3133" end="3140" title="lighter" label="lighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q143518" start="3151" end="3157" title="Tinder" label="Tinder"/>
<link wikidata="Q911679" start="3259" end="3264" title="spark (fire)" label="spark"/>
<link wikidata="Q37507" start="3361" end="3368" title="matches" label="matches"/>
<link wikidata="Q4739090" start="3386" end="3392" title="amadou" label="amadou"/>
<link wikidata="Q83087" start="3401" end="3406" title="flint" label="flint"/>
<link wikidata="Q11427" start="3411" end="3416" title="steel" label="steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q253671" start="3459" end="3469" title="birch bark" label="birch bark"/>
<link wikidata="Q128550" start="3471" end="3476" title="Cedrus" label="cedar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741042" start="3487" end="3494" title="fatwood" label="fatwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q12024" start="3535" end="3539" title="pine" label="pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q43238" start="3551" end="3556" title="Poaceae" label="grass"/>
<link wikidata="Q143518" start="3611" end="3617" title="tinder" label="tinder"/>
<link wikidata="Q925477" start="3638" end="3648" title="steel wool" label="steel wool"/>
<link wikidata="Q5429414" start="4061" end="4067" title="Faggot (unit)" label="faggot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370714" start="4257" end="4263" title="timber" label="timber"/>
<link wikidata="Q672890" start="4416" end="4423" title="hatchet" label="hatchet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761072" start="4827" end="4837" title="state park" label="state park"/>
<link wikidata="Q46169" start="4843" end="4856" title="national park" label="national park"/>
<link wikidata="Q25391" start="5019" end="5023" title="dune" label="dune"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366738" start="5268" end="5288" title="hexamine fuel tablet" label="hexamine fuel tablet"/>
<link wikidata="Q153" start="5293" end="5306" title="ethyl alcohol" label="ethyl alcohol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145647" start="5367" end="5378" title="scrap paper" label="scrap paper"/>
<link wikidata="Q13030962" start="5406" end="5419" title="packaged food" label="packaged food"/>
<link wikidata="Q11474" start="5445" end="5452" title="plastic" label="plastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q274160" start="5517" end="5522" title="toxic" label="toxic"/>
<link wikidata="Q130768" start="5523" end="5528" title="smoke" label="fumes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7202090" start="5549" end="5557" title="plastic pollution" label="polluted"/>
<link wikidata="Q3480332" start="5558" end="5561" title="Wood ash" label="ash"/>
<link wikidata="Q133235" start="5582" end="5603" title="incomplete combustion" label="incomplete combustion"/>
<link wikidata="Q134932" start="6126" end="6130" title="tipi" label="tipi"/>
<link wikidata="Q16032761" start="6210" end="6224" title="tripod lashing" label="tripod lashing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121375" start="6279" end="6290" title="clove hitch" label="clove hitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q19829510" start="6359" end="6368" title="pollutant" label="pollutant"/>
<link wikidata="Q695207" start="6982" end="6991" title="log cabin" label="log cabin"/>
<link wikidata="Q160329" start="7455" end="7465" title="convection" label="convection"/>
<link wikidata="Q736132" start="8269" end="8273" title="pyre" label="pyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q33" start="9897" end="9904" title="Finland" label="Finnish"/>
<link wikidata="Q106085" start="9956" end="9978" title="Scandinavian languages" label="Scandinavian languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q7321258" start="11162" end="11168" title="beacon" label="beacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2254670" start="11257" end="11270" title="Swedish torch" label="Swedish torch"/>
<link wikidata="Q82580" start="14891" end="14899" title="friction" label="friction"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115364" start="14920" end="14929" title="bow drill" label="bow drill"/>
<link wikidata="Q105122904" start="14934" end="14944" title="pump drill" label="pump drill"/>
<link wikidata="Q166849" start="14982" end="14998" title="magnifying glass" label="magnifying glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q193788" start="15008" end="15016" title="sunlight" label="sunlight"/>
<link wikidata="Q83087" start="15334" end="15339" title="flint" label="flint"/>
<link wikidata="Q759260" start="15343" end="15352" title="Ferrocerium" label="ferro-rod"/>
<link wikidata="Q11427" start="15368" end="15373" title="steel" label="steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4739090" start="15379" end="15385" title="amadou" label="amadou"/>
<link wikidata="Q133235" start="15420" end="15435" title="Combustion" label="ignition device"/>
<link wikidata="Q37507" start="15447" end="15452" title="match" label="match"/>
<link wikidata="Q20459" start="15458" end="15465" title="lighter" label="lighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q8094" start="15946" end="15950" title="wind" label="wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q37477" start="15955" end="15958" title="fog" label="fog"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920305" start="16774" end="16810" title="Campfire cooking" label="Campfires have been used for cooking"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635276" start="16817" end="16832" title="time immemorial" label="time immemorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q616204" start="17637" end="17651" title="portable stove" label="portable stove"/>
<link wikidata="Q11460" start="17779" end="17787" title="clothing" label="clothing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036696" start="17801" end="17812" title="hypothermia" label="hypothermia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2355426" start="17818" end="17833" title="distress signal" label="distress signal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318295" start="17929" end="17934" title="Narrative" label="story"/>
<link wikidata="Q272198" start="18008" end="18019" title="marshmallow" label="marshmallow"/>
<link wikidata="Q815240" start="18048" end="18060" title="Clothes hanger" label="coat hangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2339814" start="18143" end="18154" title="s&amp;#x27;more" label="s&amp;#x27;more"/>
<link wikidata="Q10884" start="18365" end="18369" title="tree" label="tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q33971" start="18377" end="18383" title="leaf" label="leaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q12024" start="18387" end="18398" title="pine needle" label="pine needle"/>
<link wikidata="Q287" start="18458" end="18462" title="wood" label="wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q192593" start="18472" end="18489" title="thermal radiation" label="thermal radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q177257" start="18701" end="18706" title="ember" label="ember"/>
<link wikidata="Q177257" start="18731" end="18737" title="Ember" label="sparks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2923673" start="18779" end="18785" title="branch" label="branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q76626" start="19045" end="19048" title="sap" label="sap"/>
<link wikidata="Q169950" start="19175" end="19183" title="wildfire" label="wildfire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241565" start="19267" end="19275" title="woodland" label="woodland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479935" start="19549" end="19556" title="park ranger" label="rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q918306" start="19848" end="19857" title="Thermal insulation" label="insulator"/>
<link wikidata="Q911871" start="20940" end="20950" title="wilderness" label="wilderness"/>
<link wikidata="Q97279852" start="21117" end="21147" title="Campfire ash ceremony" label="Scouting campfire ash ceremony"/>
<link wikidata="Q455550" start="21178" end="21185" title="Camping" label="Camping"/>
<link wikidata="Q100400647" start="21188" end="21202" title="Campfire story" label="Campfire story"/>
<link wikidata="Q3073309" start="21205" end="21217" title="Colored fire" label="Colored fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451637" start="21220" end="21228" title="Fire pan" label="Fire pan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920305" start="21231" end="21246" title="Outdoor cooking" label="Outdoor cooking"/>
<link wikidata="Q7313949" start="21249" end="21269" title="Repeat after me song" label="Repeat after me song"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="187360" wikidata="Q691463" url="?curid=187360" title="Magnetic susceptibility">
<text>In electromagnetism, the magnetic susceptibility (; denoted , chi) is a measure of how much a material will become magnetized in an applied magnetic field. It is the ratio of magnetization (magnetic moment per unit volume) to the applied magnetic field intensity . This allows a simple classification, into two categories, of most materials&#x27; responses to an applied magnetic field: an alignment with the magnetic field, , called paramagnetism, or an alignment against the field, , called diamagnetism.

Magnetic susceptibility indicates whether a material is attracted into or repelled out of a magnetic field. Paramagnetic materials align with the applied field and are attracted to regions of greater magnetic field. Diamagnetic materials are anti-aligned and are pushed away, toward regions of lower magnetic fields. On top of the applied field, the magnetization of the material adds its own magnetic field, causing the field lines to concentrate in paramagnetism, or be excluded in diamagnetism. Quantitative measures of the magnetic susceptibility also provide insights into the structure of materials, providing insight into bonding and energy levels. Furthermore, it is widely used in geology for paleomagnetic studies and structural geology.

The magnetizability of materials comes from the atomic-level magnetic properties of the particles of which they are made. Usually, this is dominated by the magnetic moments of electrons. Electrons are present in all materials, but without any external magnetic field, the magnetic moments of the electrons are usually either paired up or random so that the overall magnetism is zero (the exception to this usual case is ferromagnetism). The fundamental reasons why the magnetic moments of the electrons line up or do not are very complex and cannot be explained by classical physics. However, a useful simplification is to measure the magnetic susceptibility of a material and apply the macroscopic form of Maxwell&#x27;s equations. This allows classical physics to make useful predictions while avoiding the underlying quantum mechanical details.

==Definition==
=== Volume susceptibility ===
Magnetic susceptibility is a dimensionless proportionality constant that indicates the degree of magnetization of a material in response to an applied magnetic field. A related term is magnetizability, the proportion between magnetic moment and magnetic flux density. A closely related parameter is the permeability, which expresses the total magnetization of material and volume.

The &quot;volume magnetic susceptibility&quot;, represented by the symbol (often simply , sometimes  – magnetic, to distinguish from the electric susceptibility), is defined in the International System of Units – in other systems there may be additional constants – by the following relationship:
formula_1
were
: is the magnetization of the material (the magnetic dipole moment per unit volume), with unit amperes per meter, and
: is the magnetic field strength, also with the unit amperes per meter.

 is therefore a dimensionless quantity.

Using SI units, the magnetic induction is related to by the relationship
formula_2
where is the vacuum permeability (see table of physical constants), and is the relative permeability of the material. Thus the &quot;volume magnetic susceptibility&quot; and the magnetic permeability are related by the following formula:
formula_3

Sometimes an auxiliary quantity called &quot;intensity of magnetization&quot; (also referred to as &quot;magnetic polarisation&quot; ) and with unit teslas, is defined as
formula_4

This allows an alternative description of all magnetization phenomena in terms of the quantities and , as opposed to the commonly used and .

=== Molar susceptibility and mass susceptibility ===
There are two other measures of susceptibility, the &quot;molar magnetic susceptibility&quot; () with unit m3/mol, and the &quot;mass magnetic susceptibility&quot; () with unit m3/kg that are defined below, where is the density with unit kg/m3 and is molar mass with unit kg/mol:
formula_5

=== In CGS units ===
The definitions above are according to the International System of Quantities (ISQ) upon which the SI is based. However, many tables of magnetic susceptibility give the values of the corresponding quantities of the CGS system (more specifically CGS-EMU, short for electromagnetic units, or Gaussian-CGS; both are the same in this context). The quantities characterizing the permeability of free space for each system have different defining equations:
formula_6

The respective CGS susceptibilities are multiplied by 4 to give the corresponding ISQ quantities (often referred to as SI quantities) with the same units:
formula_7
formula_8
formula_9

For example, the CGS volume magnetic susceptibility of water at 20 °C is , which is using the SI convention, both quantities being dimensionless. Whereas for most electromagnetic quantities, which system of quantities it belongs to can be disambiguated by incompatibility of their units, this is not true for the susceptibility quantities.

In physics it is common to see CGS mass susceptibility with unit cm3/g or emu/g⋅Oe−1, and the CGS molar susceptibility with unit cm3/mol or emu/mol⋅Oe−1.

==Paramagnetism and diamagnetism==
If is positive, a material can be paramagnetic. In this case, the magnetic field in the material is strengthened by the induced magnetization. Alternatively, if is negative, the material is diamagnetic. In this case, the magnetic field in the material is weakened by the induced magnetization. Generally, nonmagnetic materials are said to be para- or diamagnetic because they do not possess permanent magnetization without external magnetic field. Ferromagnetic, ferrimagnetic, or antiferromagnetic materials possess permanent magnetization even without external magnetic field and do not have a well defined zero-field susceptibility.

==Experimental measurement==
Volume magnetic susceptibility is measured by the force change felt upon a substance when a magnetic field gradient is applied. Early measurements are made using the Gouy balance where a sample is hung between the poles of an electromagnet. The change in weight when the electromagnet is turned on is proportional to the susceptibility. Today, high-end measurement systems use a superconductive magnet. An alternative is to measure the force change on a strong compact magnet upon insertion of the sample. This system, widely used today, is called the Evans balance. For liquid samples, the susceptibility can be measured from the dependence of the NMR frequency of the sample on its shape or orientation.

Another method using NMR techniques measures the magnetic field distortion around a sample immersed in water inside an MR scanner. This method is highly accurate for diamagnetic materials with susceptibilities similar to water.

==Tensor susceptibility==
The magnetic susceptibility of most crystals is not a scalar quantity. Magnetic response is dependent upon the orientation of the sample and can occur in directions other than that of the applied field . In these cases, volume susceptibility is defined as a tensor:
formula_10
where and refer to the directions (e.g., of the and Cartesian coordinates) of the applied field and magnetization, respectively. The tensor is thus degree 2 (second order), dimension (3,3) describing the component of magnetization in the th direction from the external field applied in the th direction.

==Differential susceptibility==
In ferromagnetic crystals, the relationship between and is not linear. To accommodate this, a more general definition of &quot;differential susceptibility&quot; is used:
formula_11
where is a tensor derived from partial derivatives of components of with respect to components of . When the coercivity of the material parallel to an applied field is the smaller of the two, the differential susceptibility is a function of the applied field and self interactions, such as the magnetic anisotropy. When the material is not saturated, the effect will be nonlinear and dependent upon the domain wall configuration of the material.

Several experimental techniques allow for the measurement of the electronic properties of a material. An important effect in metals under strong magnetic fields, is the oscillation of the differential susceptibility as function of . This behaviour is known as the De Haas–Van Alphen effect and relates the period of the susceptibility with the Fermi surface of the material.

An analogue non-linear relation between magnetization and magnetic field happens for antiferromagnetic materials.

==In the frequency domain==
When the magnetic susceptibility is measured in response to an AC magnetic field (i.e. a magnetic field that varies sinusoidally), this is called &quot;AC susceptibility&quot;. AC susceptibility (and the closely related &quot;AC permeability&quot;) are complex number quantities, and various phenomena, such as resonance, can be seen in AC susceptibility that cannot occur in constant-field (DC) susceptibility. In particular, when an AC field is applied perpendicular to the detection direction (called the &quot;transverse susceptibility&quot; regardless of the frequency), the effect has a peak at the ferromagnetic resonance frequency of the material with a given static applied field. Currently, this effect is called the &quot;microwave permeability&quot; or &quot;network ferromagnetic resonance&quot; in the literature. These results are sensitive to the domain wall configuration of the material and eddy currents.

In terms of ferromagnetic resonance, the effect of an AC-field applied along the direction of the magnetization is called &quot;parallel pumping&quot;.

==Table of examples==

==Sources of published data==
The CRC Handbook of Chemistry and Physics has one of the few published magnetic susceptibility tables. The data are listed as CGS quantities. The molar susceptibility of several elements and compounds are listed in the CRC.

== Application in the geosciences ==
In Earth science, magnetism is a useful parameter to describe and analyze rocks. Additionally, the anisotropy of magnetic susceptibility (AMS) within a sample determines parameters as directions of paleocurrents, maturity of paleosol, flow direction of magma injection, tectonic strain, etc. It is a non-destructive tool which quantifies the average alignment and orientation of magnetic particles within a sample.

==See also==

* Curie&#x27;s law
* Electric susceptibility
* Iron
* Magnetic flux density
* Magnetochemistry
* Magnetometer
* Maxwell&#x27;s equations
* Paleomagnetism
* Permeability (electromagnetism)
* Quantitative susceptibility mapping
* Susceptibility weighted imaging
== References ==
==External links==
*Linear Response Functions in Eva Pavarini, Erik Koch, Dieter Vollhardt, and Alexander Lichtenstein (eds.): DMFT at 25: Infinite Dimensions, Verlag des Forschungszentrum Jülich, 2014 </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q11406" start="3" end="19" title="electromagnetism" label="electromagnetism"/>
<link wikidata="Q691463" start="25" end="48" title="Magnetic susceptibility" label="magnetic susceptibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q14425" start="62" end="65" title="Chi (letter)" label="chi"/>
<link wikidata="Q11408" start="140" end="154" title="magnetic field" label="magnetic field"/>
<link wikidata="Q856711" start="175" end="188" title="magnetization" label="magnetization"/>
<link wikidata="Q242657" start="190" end="205" title="magnetic moment" label="magnetic moment"/>
<link wikidata="Q39297" start="215" end="221" title="volume" label="volume"/>
<link wikidata="Q11408" start="238" end="262" title="magnetic field intensity" label="magnetic field intensity"/>
<link wikidata="Q188479" start="434" end="447" title="paramagnetism" label="paramagnetism"/>
<link wikidata="Q201048" start="493" end="505" title="diamagnetism" label="diamagnetism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810738" start="929" end="939" title="field line" label="field line"/>
<link wikidata="Q44424" start="1137" end="1144" title="Chemical bond" label="bonding"/>
<link wikidata="Q669532" start="1149" end="1161" title="energy level" label="energy level"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069" start="1198" end="1205" title="geology" label="geology"/>
<link wikidata="Q853422" start="1210" end="1223" title="paleomagnetic" label="paleomagnetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q334823" start="1236" end="1254" title="structural geology" label="structural geology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2225" start="1433" end="1441" title="electron" label="electron"/>
<link wikidata="Q184207" start="1677" end="1691" title="ferromagnetism" label="ferromagnetism"/>
<link wikidata="Q81745" start="1822" end="1839" title="classical physics" label="classical physics"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1944" end="1988" title="Maxwell&amp;#x27;s equations#Macroscopic formulation" label="macroscopic form of Maxwell&amp;#x27;s equations"/>
<link wikidata="Q944" start="2077" end="2095" title="quantum mechanical" label="quantum mechanical"/>
<link wikidata="Q242657" start="2376" end="2391" title="magnetic moment" label="magnetic moment"/>
<link wikidata="Q11408" start="2396" end="2417" title="magnetic field" label="magnetic flux density"/>
<link wikidata="Q28352" start="2454" end="2466" title="Permeability (electromagnetism)" label="permeability"/>
<link wikidata="Q598305" start="2670" end="2693" title="electric susceptibility" label="electric susceptibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q12457" start="2714" end="2743" title="International System of Units" label="International System of Units"/>
<link wikidata="Q856711" start="2854" end="2867" title="magnetization" label="magnetization"/>
<link wikidata="Q242657" start="2889" end="2911" title="magnetic dipole moment" label="magnetic dipole moment"/>
<link wikidata="Q25272" start="2940" end="2946" title="ampere" label="ampere"/>
<link wikidata="Q126818" start="3052" end="3074" title="dimensionless quantity" label="dimensionless quantity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1228244" start="3083" end="3091" title="SI electromagnetism units" label="SI units"/>
<link wikidata="Q11408" start="3097" end="3115" title="magnetic field" label="magnetic induction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515261" start="3173" end="3192" title="vacuum permeability" label="vacuum permeability"/>
<link wikidata="Q173227" start="3207" end="3224" title="physical constant" label="physical constant"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3239" end="3260" title="Permeability (electromagnetism)#Relative permeability and magnetic susceptibility" label="relative permeability"/>
<link wikidata="Q28352" start="3338" end="3359" title="magnetic permeability" label="magnetic permeability"/>
<link wikidata="Q163343" start="3558" end="3564" title="tesla (unit)" label="teslas"/>
<link wikidata="Q29539" start="4006" end="4013" title="density" label="density"/>
<link wikidata="Q145623" start="4037" end="4047" title="molar mass" label="molar mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q16203461" start="4141" end="4175" title="International System of Quantities" label="International System of Quantities"/>
<link wikidata="Q12457" start="4197" end="4199" title="International System of Units" label="SI"/>
<link wikidata="Q26240" start="4313" end="4316" title="Centimetre–gram–second system of units" label="CGS"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4343" end="4350" title="Centimetre–gram–second system of units#Electromagnetic units (EMU)" label="CGS-EMU"/>
<link wikidata="Q3234036" start="4388" end="4400" title="Gaussian units" label="Gaussian-CGS"/>
<link wikidata="Q12457" start="4841" end="4843" title="International System of Units" label="SI"/>
<link wikidata="Q188479" start="5312" end="5324" title="paramagnetic" label="paramagnetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q201048" start="5468" end="5479" title="diamagnetic" label="diamagnetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q184207" start="5726" end="5739" title="Ferromagnetic" label="Ferromagnetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q217121" start="5741" end="5754" title="ferrimagnetism" label="ferrimagnetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q575224" start="5759" end="5776" title="antiferromagnetic" label="antiferromagnetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2403093" start="6110" end="6122" title="Gouy balance" label="Gouy balance"/>
<link wikidata="Q124131" start="6323" end="6338" title="superconductive" label="superconductive"/>
<link wikidata="Q5415970" start="6496" end="6509" title="Evans balance" label="Evans balance"/>
<link wikidata="Q209402" start="6593" end="6596" title="nuclear magnetic resonance" label="NMR"/>
<link wikidata="Q43533" start="6942" end="6949" title="crystal" label="crystal"/>
<link wikidata="Q188524" start="7164" end="7170" title="tensor" label="tensor"/>
<link wikidata="Q62912" start="7235" end="7256" title="Cartesian coordinates" label="Cartesian coordinates"/>
<link wikidata="Q184207" start="7523" end="7536" title="ferromagnetic" label="ferromagnetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q186475" start="7732" end="7750" title="partial derivative" label="partial derivative"/>
<link wikidata="Q432635" start="7810" end="7820" title="coercivity" label="coercivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q918398" start="7995" end="8014" title="magnetic anisotropy" label="magnetic anisotropy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630994" start="8041" end="8050" title="Saturation (magnetic)" label="saturated"/>
<link wikidata="Q2591394" start="8104" end="8115" title="Domain wall (magnetism)" label="domain wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q249399" start="8412" end="8437" title="De Haas–Van Alphen effect" label="De Haas–Van Alphen effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406417" start="8492" end="8505" title="Fermi surface" label="Fermi surface"/>
<link wikidata="Q85776755" start="8536" end="8555" title="linear relation" label="non-linear relation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8609" end="8636" title="antiferromagnetism#antiferromagnetic materials" label="antiferromagnetic materials"/>
<link wikidata="Q124164" start="8730" end="8732" title="Alternating current" label="AC"/>
<link wikidata="Q207527" start="8783" end="8795" title="Sine wave" label="sinusoidally"/>
<link wikidata="Q11567" start="8920" end="8934" title="complex number" label="complex number"/>
<link wikidata="Q159241" start="9059" end="9061" title="Direct current" label="DC"/>
<link wikidata="Q909519" start="9272" end="9295" title="ferromagnetic resonance" label="ferromagnetic resonance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2591394" start="9530" end="9541" title="Domain wall (magnetism)" label="domain wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q208598" start="9576" end="9589" title="eddy currents" label="eddy currents"/>
<link wikidata="Q904273" start="9802" end="9839" title="CRC Handbook of Chemistry and Physics" label="CRC Handbook of Chemistry and Physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q8008" start="10063" end="10076" title="Earth science" label="Earth science"/>
<link wikidata="Q466686" start="10159" end="10169" title="anisotropy" label="anisotropy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7127148" start="10258" end="10270" title="paleocurrent" label="paleocurrent"/>
<link wikidata="Q2048517" start="10285" end="10293" title="paleosol" label="paleosol"/>
<link wikidata="Q42278" start="10313" end="10318" title="magma" label="magma"/>
<link wikidata="Q193343" start="10330" end="10338" title="Tectonics" label="tectonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144564" start="10492" end="10508" title="Curie&amp;#x27;s law" label="Curie&amp;#x27;s law"/>
<link wikidata="Q598305" start="10511" end="10534" title="Electric susceptibility" label="Electric susceptibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q677" start="10537" end="10541" title="Iron" label="Iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q11408" start="10544" end="10565" title="Magnetic flux density" label="Magnetic flux density"/>
<link wikidata="Q906226" start="10568" end="10584" title="Magnetochemistry" label="Magnetochemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q333921" start="10587" end="10599" title="Magnetometer" label="Magnetometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q51501" start="10602" end="10626" title="Maxwell&amp;#x27;s equations" label="Maxwell&amp;#x27;s equations"/>
<link wikidata="Q853422" start="10629" end="10643" title="Paleomagnetism" label="Paleomagnetism"/>
<link wikidata="Q28352" start="10646" end="10677" title="Permeability (electromagnetism)" label="Permeability (electromagnetism)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7268943" start="10680" end="10715" title="Quantitative susceptibility mapping" label="Quantitative susceptibility mapping"/>
<link wikidata="Q15282184" start="10718" end="10749" title="Susceptibility weighted imaging" label="Susceptibility weighted imaging"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="187376" wikidata="Q1561866" url="?curid=187376" title="The Goldbergs (broadcast series)">
<text>The Goldbergs is a comedy-drama broadcast from 1929 to 1946 on American radio, and from 1949 to 1956 on American television. It was adapted into a 1948 play, &quot;Me and Molly&quot;; a 1950 film &quot;The Goldbergs&quot;, and a 1973 Broadway musical, &quot;Molly&quot;. It also briefly spun off a comic strip from June 8, 1944, to December 21, 1945, with art by Irwin Hasen, a comic book artist who worked on various DC Comics titles and would later do the &quot;Dondi&quot; comic strip.

==Radio==

The program was devised by writer-actress Gertrude Berg in 1928 and sold to the NBC radio network the following year. It was a domestic comedy featuring the home life of a Jewish family, supposedly located at 1038 East Tremont Avenue in the Bronx. In addition to writing the scripts and directing each episode, Berg starred as bighearted, lovingly meddlesome, and somewhat stereotypical Jewish matriarch Molly Goldberg. The show began as a portrait of Jewish tenement life before later evoking such growing pains as moving into a more suburban setting and struggling with assimilation while sustaining their roots.

&quot;The Goldbergs&quot; began as a weekly 15-minute program called The Rise of the Goldbergs on November 20, 1929, going daily in 1931. The series moved to CBS in 1936 with the title shortened to &quot;The Goldbergs&quot;. Like other 15-minute comedies of the day, such as &quot;Amos &#x27;n&#x27; Andy&quot;, &quot;Lum and Abner&quot;, &quot;Easy Aces&quot;, &quot;Vic and Sade&quot; and &quot;Myrt and Marge&quot;, &quot;The Goldbergs&quot; was a serial with running storylines. Berg&#x27;s usual introduction (in character as Molly, hollering); &quot;&quot;yoo&quot;-hoo! Is &quot;anybody&quot;...?&quot; became a catchphrase. In the 1940s, this was followed by Bud Collyer announcing; &quot;here she is, folks: that&#x27;s Molly Goldberg, a woman with a place in every heart and a finger in every pie&quot;.

When Gertrude Berg missed a couple of weeks due to illness, stations carrying the popular show were flooded with get-well mail. At the height of the show&#x27;s popularity, &quot;Life&quot; wrote: &quot;for millions of Americans, listening to &quot;The Goldbergs&quot;... has been a happy ritual akin to slipping on a pair of comfortable old shoes that never seem to wear out&quot;.

Radio historians Frank Buxton and Bill Owen, in &quot;The Big Broadcast 1920–1950&quot;, noted the series (which they considered a soap opera as much as a comedy) &quot;differed from most of the other &#x27;soaps&#x27; in that its leading characters lived through relatively normal situations. Even though it was the story of a poor Jewish family in the Bronx, New York, it had identification for a wide segment of listeners&quot;. Of the 15-minute serial comedies, only &quot;Amos &#x27;n&#x27; Andy&quot; enjoyed a longer radio life than &quot;The Goldbergs&quot;.

The role of husband Jake Goldberg was originally played by Himan Brown and later, James R. Waters. When Waters died suddenly in 1945, Berg resisted recasting the role. Instead, she simply had Molly refer to Jake, occasionally setting up dialogue in which his reply was not heard when she spoke to him.

==Behind the scenes==
Berg was not averse to incorporating serious real-world issues which affected Jewish families. One 1939 episode addressed Kristallnacht and Nazi Germany (including a rock through the family window as the Goldbergs had their Passover Seder); other World War II-era episodes alluded to friends or family members trying to escape the Holocaust. But these were sporadic deviations from the show&#x27;s main theme of family, neighborhood and the balance between old world values and new world assimilation. Molly demonstrates to the audience the strong matriarch she is by constantly helping others with their dilemmas and proving to be the hero time and time again.

&quot;The Goldbergs&quot; was so popular that performing stars in other arts sought to appear on it. Berg cast Metropolitan Opera star Jan Peerce almost annually to sing on Yom Kippur and Passover. Another famous singer of the day, Ernestine Schumann-Heink, asked Berg personally to appear, and Berg wrote her into three episodes. Regina Resnik (an international soprano, later mezzo who had an international career, including the Met Opera) starred in a TV episode. The radio cast included Roslyn Silber and Alfred Ryder as children Rosalie and Sammy, Menasha Skulnik as Uncle David, Arnold Stang as Seymour Fingerhood, Garson Kanin as Eli Edwards, and Zina Provendie as Sylvia Allison, among others.

===Moves into stage and television===
In 1948, Berg wrote and staged &quot;Me and Molly&quot;, a Broadway version of the show. A year later, she brought &quot;The Goldbergs&quot; to a national audience on television.

==Television==

The television version ran on CBS Television from 1949 to 1951 and co-starred Philip Loeb as Jake Goldberg. He and Gertrude Berg reprised their roles in a 1950 film of the same name. The show almost did not get to the small screen at all: CBS executives were uncertain that the show would work on television as well as it did on radio. Berg prevailed, however, and picked up General Foods (Sanka coffee) as its sponsor. Berg, who continued to write every episode, insisted that no studio audience be used and made sure everyday events formed the base for the stories; she was once quoted as saying she avoided &quot;anything that will bother people ... unions, fund raising, Zionism, socialism, intergroup relations. ... I keep things average. I don&#x27;t want to lose friends.&quot; Berg&#x27;s hard work and determination paid off. In 1950, she won the first Best Actress Emmy Award for her role as Molly on &quot;The Goldbergs&quot;.

&quot;The Goldbergs&quot; was destined to spend almost a decade on television—but not without disruptions. In 1950, Philip Loeb was blacklisted and pressure was placed on Berg (who owned the television version as she had the radio original) to fire him. When she refused, General Foods cancelled their sponsorship, and CBS dropped it from their schedule by June 1951.

Eight months later, however, NBC—the show&#x27;s original broadcasting home—picked up the series for the 1952–53 season, but informed Gertrude Berg that if she persisted in allowing Philip Loeb to remain with the series, it would never be seen on television again. She finally gave in, and the series reappeared in a twice-weekly, early-evening 15-minute format (with another change in title, to &quot;Molly&quot;, in due course), with Harold Stone and then Robert H. Harris replacing Loeb as Jake, though Berg quietly continued to pay a salary to Loeb. After &quot;The Goldbergs&quot; ended its CBS run, Tom Taylor replaced Larry Robinson in the role of Molly&#x27;s son, Sammy. The rest of the television cast included Eli Mintz as Uncle David, Arlene McQuade as Rosalie and Betty Bendyke as Dora Barnett. On radio, Sammy and Rosalie had grown up and gotten married; on television, the characters were revived as teenagers. During this time, Gertrude Berg and Arlene McQuade appeared as their characters of Molly and Rosalie, respectively, when they guested on NBC-TV&#x27;s &quot;Buick-Berle Show&quot; starring Milton Berle.

In 1954, the show reverted to a weekly half-hour, moving to the DuMont network for a run from April to October. The series was originally intended to run for six months on DuMont, but, due to financial difficulties, the network was unable to fulfill the $5 million contract, despite Nielsen ratings estimated at ten million viewers. The DuMont shows were aired live.

A final version, aired in syndication, was filmed in 1955 and aired on local stations until 1956. This version moved the Goldbergs from the Bronx to the New York suburb of Haverville. In a way this mirrored the real life journey of many Jewish families from the Bronx to the suburbs and other parts of New York during this period. However, this was considered the death knell of the show, as it was felt that the Goldbergs were only the Goldbergs in the Bronx. Also in 1955, Philip Loeb, beset by depression and unable to find other work, committed suicide. In 1957, Gertrude Berg made her last two appearances as Molly Goldberg: first on an episode of the NBC-TV variety series &quot;Washington Square&quot; with Ray Bolger, and then on a Kate Smith special that aired on ABC-TV.

==Aftermath==
Gertrude Berg returned to television six years later in a situation comedy, &quot;Mrs. G. Goes to College&quot;, playing Sarah Green, a Molly Goldberg-like character. Despite being retitled &quot;The Gertrude Berg Show&quot; in mid-year, the program was cancelled after one season. &quot;The Goldbergs&quot; is available to collectors and fans in a large number of surviving radio episodes and some surviving television episodes, many of which have lapsed into the public domain. Aviva Kempner&#x27;s documentary &quot;Yoo-Hoo, Mrs. Goldberg&quot; (2009) deals with the show, and to an extent, Gertrude Berg&#x27;s personal life.

Most of the DuMont episodes survive at the UCLA Film and Television Archive, while the 39 filmed episodes survive intact.

Since 2009, the series can be seen on the JLTV cable network.

==Home media==
In March 2010, Shout! Factory released &quot;The Goldbergs: The Ultimate Goldbergs&quot; on DVD via their retail website. The release includes all 71 extant episodes of the television series. Episodes are also available to stream on their ShoutFactoryTV service.

The UCLA Film and Television Archive digitally restored all of the episodes, as well as provided 12 radio episodes for the DVD release and the pilot for the short lived series &quot;Mrs. G Goes To College&quot; (1961). The box set is available from UCLA. The UCLA archive also holds 130 transcription discs of the radio series, which it has released on YouTube.

==See also==
*List of radio soaps
*&quot;Yoo-Hoo, Mrs. Goldberg&quot;
*List of programs broadcast by the DuMont Television Network
*List of surviving DuMont Television Network broadcasts

==References==
==Listen to==
*Internet Archive: &quot;The Goldbergs&quot;
*Webcast on Gertrude Berg, The Paley Center for Media, &quot;From The Goldbergs to 2005: The Evolution of the Family Sitcom&quot; (November 16, 2005)
*Free OTR: &quot;The Goldbergs&quot; (59 episodes)

==External links==

*Museum of Broadcast Communications: &quot;The Goldbergs&quot;
*The Remarkable Gertrude Berg: &quot;The Goldbergs&quot;
*&quot;Yoo-Hoo, Mrs. Goldberg&quot;: documentary film on Gertrude Berg and &quot;The Goldbergs&quot;
*UCLA Film &amp; Television Archive Goldberg page
*DuMont historical website
*&quot;The Goldbergs&quot; (television program) at IMDB
*&quot;The Goldbergs&quot; (1950 feature film) at IMDB
*Presenting the Goldbergs In Living Portraits (page 19)-Radio Television Mirror-August 1941</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="63" end="71" title="United States" label="American"/>
<link wikidata="Q872" start="72" end="77" title="radio" label="radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q6803043" start="164" end="176" title="Me and Molly" label="Me and Molly"/>
<link wikidata="Q48672562" start="202" end="215" title="The Goldbergs (film)" label="The Goldbergs"/>
<link wikidata="Q6896509" start="258" end="263" title="Molly (musical)" label="Molly"/>
<link wikidata="Q371325" start="363" end="374" title="Irwin Hasen" label="Irwin Hasen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5295561" start="464" end="469" title="Dondi" label="Dondi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268652" start="543" end="556" title="Gertrude Berg" label="Gertrude Berg"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="581" end="584" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q40831" start="637" end="643" title="comedy" label="comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="673" end="676" title="Jew" label="Jew"/>
<link wikidata="Q18426" start="738" end="747" title="the Bronx" label="the Bronx"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="1275" end="1278" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q2843914" start="1398" end="1421" title="Amos &amp;#x27;n&amp;#x27; Andy" label="Amos &amp;#x27;n&amp;#x27; Andy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6702993" start="1435" end="1448" title="Lum and Abner" label="Lum and Abner"/>
<link wikidata="Q5331093" start="1462" end="1471" title="Easy Aces" label="Easy Aces"/>
<link wikidata="Q7924948" start="1485" end="1497" title="Vic and Sade" label="Vic and Sade"/>
<link wikidata="Q2708515" start="1736" end="1747" title="catchphrase" label="catchphrase"/>
<link wikidata="Q2927489" start="1784" end="1795" title="Bud Collyer" label="Bud Collyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q463198" start="2111" end="2115" title="Life (magazine)" label="Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q5765075" start="2943" end="2954" title="Himan Brown" label="Himan Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q36756" start="3331" end="3344" title="Kristallnacht" label="Kristallnacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="3349" end="3361" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q121393" start="3433" end="3441" title="Passover" label="Passover"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="3456" end="3468" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763" start="3540" end="3549" title="The Holocaust" label="Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q10583424" start="3983" end="4001" title="Metropolitan Opera" label="Metropolitan Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q980151" start="4007" end="4017" title="Jan Peerce" label="Jan Peerce"/>
<link wikidata="Q132994" start="4045" end="4055" title="Yom Kippur" label="Yom Kippur"/>
<link wikidata="Q121393" start="4060" end="4068" title="Passover" label="Passover"/>
<link wikidata="Q79035" start="4104" end="4128" title="Ernestine Schumann-Heink" label="Ernestine Schumann-Heink"/>
<link wikidata="Q4723383" start="4381" end="4393" title="Alfred Ryder" label="Alfred Ryder"/>
<link wikidata="Q6816491" start="4425" end="4440" title="Menasha Skulnik" label="Menasha Skulnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q2348194" start="4457" end="4469" title="Arnold Stang" label="Arnold Stang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377923" start="4493" end="4505" title="Garson Kanin" label="Garson Kanin"/>
<link wikidata="Q235065" start="4672" end="4680" title="Broadway theatre" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="4839" end="4853" title="CBS" label="CBS Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q7183985" start="4887" end="4898" title="Philip Loeb" label="Philip Loeb"/>
<link wikidata="Q48672562" start="4964" end="4990" title="The Goldbergs (film)" label="1950 film of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q4272111" start="5184" end="5197" title="General Foods" label="General Foods"/>
<link wikidata="Q99744576" start="5199" end="5204" title="Sanka" label="Sanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q7628266" start="5290" end="5305" title="studio audience" label="studio audience"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044427" start="5684" end="5694" title="Primetime Emmy Award" label="Emmy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q16864771" start="5880" end="5891" title="Hollywood blacklist" label="blacklisted"/>
<link wikidata="Q4272111" start="6020" end="6033" title="General Foods" label="General Foods"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="6146" end="6149" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585876" start="6553" end="6565" title="Harold J. Stone" label="Harold Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1305109" start="6575" end="6591" title="Robert H. Harris" label="Robert H. Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q5360298" start="6838" end="6847" title="Eli Mintz" label="Eli Mintz"/>
<link wikidata="Q16564872" start="6864" end="6878" title="Arlene McQuade" label="Arlene McQuade"/>
<link wikidata="Q7707302" start="7200" end="7216" title="Buick-Berle Show" label="Buick-Berle Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q558933" start="7232" end="7244" title="Milton Berle" label="Milton Berle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262316" start="7311" end="7317" title="DuMont Television Network" label="DuMont"/>
<link wikidata="Q699413" start="7530" end="7545" title="Nielsen ratings" label="Nielsen ratings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572845" start="7641" end="7652" title="broadcast syndication" label="syndication"/>
<link wikidata="Q111947823" start="8300" end="8317" title="Washington Square (TV series)" label="Washington Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q240886" start="8329" end="8339" title="Ray Bolger" label="Ray Bolger"/>
<link wikidata="Q297442" start="8355" end="8365" title="Kate Smith" label="Kate Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q169889" start="8388" end="8394" title="American Broadcasting Company" label="ABC-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q12062139" start="8493" end="8516" title="Mrs. G. Goes to College" label="Mrs. G. Goes to College"/>
<link wikidata="Q4829041" start="8891" end="8904" title="Aviva Kempner" label="Aviva Kempner"/>
<link wikidata="Q8055120" start="8930" end="8952" title="Yoo-Hoo, Mrs. Goldberg" label="Yoo-Hoo, Mrs. Goldberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q7864025" start="9085" end="9117" title="UCLA Film and Television Archive" label="UCLA Film and Television Archive"/>
<link wikidata="Q2782765" start="9207" end="9211" title="Jewish Life Television" label="JLTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q7502767" start="9258" end="9272" title="Shout! Factory" label="Shout! Factory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7864025" start="9511" end="9543" title="UCLA Film and Television Archive" label="UCLA Film and Television Archive"/>
<link wikidata="Q25303773" start="9794" end="9812" title="transcription disc" label="transcription disc"/>
<link wikidata="Q866" start="9860" end="9867" title="YouTube" label="YouTube"/>
<link wikidata="Q6635776" start="9884" end="9903" title="List of radio soaps" label="List of radio soaps"/>
<link wikidata="Q8055120" start="9911" end="9933" title="Yoo-Hoo, Mrs. Goldberg" label="Yoo-Hoo, Mrs. Goldberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q6635407" start="9941" end="10000" title="List of programs broadcast by the DuMont Television Network" label="List of programs broadcast by the DuMont Television Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q13644780" start="10002" end="10056" title="List of surviving DuMont Television Network broadcasts" label="List of surviving DuMont Television Network broadcasts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7127465" start="10159" end="10185" title="The Paley Center for Media" label="The Paley Center for Media"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="187377" wikidata="Q474200" url="?curid=187377" title="Shipbuilding">
<text>Shipbuilding is the construction of ships and other floating vessels. In modern times, it normally takes place in a specialized facility known as a shipyard. Shipbuilders, also called shipwrights, follow a specialized occupation that traces its roots to before recorded history.

Until recently, with the development of complex non-maritime technologies, a ship has often represented the most advanced structure that the society building it could produce. Some key industrial advances were developed to support shipbuilding, for instance the sawing of timbers by mechanical saws propelled by windmills in Dutch shipyards during the first half of the 17th century. The design process saw the early adoption of the logarithm (invented in 1615) to generate the curves used to produce the shape of a hull, especially when scaling up these curves accurately in the mould loft.

Shipbuilding and ship repairs, both commercial and military, are referred to as naval engineering. The construction of boats is a similar activity called boat building.

The dismantling of ships is called ship breaking.

The earliest evidence of maritime transport by modern humans is the settlement of Australia between 50,000 and 60,000 years ago. This almost certainly involved rafts, possibly equipped with some sort of sail. Much of the development beyond that raft technology occurred in the &quot;nursery&quot; areas of the Mediterranean and in Maritime Southeast Asia. Favoured by warmer waters and a number of inter-visible islands, boats (and, later, ships) with water-tight hulls (unlike the &quot;flow through&quot; structure of a raft) could be developed. The ships of ancient Egypt were built by joining the hull planks together, edge to edge, with tenons set in mortices cut in the mating edges. A similar technique, but with the tenons being pinned in position by dowels, was used in the Mediterranean for most of classical antiquity. Both these variants are &quot;shell first&quot; techniques, where any reinforcing frames are inserted after assembly of the planking has defined the hull shape. Carvel construction then took over in the Mediterranean. Northern Europe used clinker construction, but with some flush-planked ship-building in, for instance, the bottom planking of cogs. The north-European and Mediterranean traditions merged in the late 15th century, with carvel construction being adopted in the North and the centre-line mounted rudder replacing the quarter rudder of the Mediterranean. These changes broadly coincided with improvements in sailing rigs, with the three masted ship becoming common, with square sails on the fore and main masts, and a fore and aft sail on the mizzen.

Ship-building then saw a steady improvement in design techniques and introduction of new materials. Iron was used for more than fastenings (nails and bolts) as structural components such as iron knees were introduced, with examples existing in the mid-18th century and from the mid-19th century onwards. This was partly led by the shortage of &quot;compass timber&quot;, the naturally curved timber that meant that shapes could be cut without weaknesses caused by cuts across the grain of the timber. Ultimately, whole ships were made of iron and, later, steel.

==History==

===Pre-history===
The earliest known depictions (including paintings and models) of shallow-water sailing boats is from the 6th to 5th millennium BC of the Ubaid period of Mesopotamia. They were made from bundled reeds coated in bitumen and had bipod masts. They sailed in shallow coastal waters of the Persian Gulf.

===4th millennium BC===
====Ancient Egypt====
Evidence from Ancient Egypt shows that the early Egyptians knew how to assemble planks of wood into a ship hull as early as 3100 BC. Egyptian pottery as old as 4000 BC shows designs of early fluvial boats or other means for navigation. The Archaeological Institute of America reports that some of the oldest ships yet unearthed are known as the Abydos boats. These are a group of 14 ships discovered in Abydos that were constructed of wooden planks which were &quot;sewn&quot; together. Discovered by Egyptologist David O&#x27;Connor of New York University, woven straps were found to have been used to lash the planks together, and reeds or grass stuffed between the planks helped to seal the seams. Because the ships are all buried together and near a mortuary belonging to Pharaoh Khasekhemwy, originally they were all thought to have belonged to him, but one of the 14 ships dates to 3000 BC, and the associated pottery jars buried with the vessels also suggest earlier dating. The ship dating to 3000 BC was about 75 feet (23 m) long and is now thought to perhaps have belonged to an earlier pharaoh. According to professor O&#x27;Connor, the 5,000-year-old ship may have even belonged to Pharaoh Aha.

====Austronesia====
The Austronesian expansion, which began with migration from Taiwan to the island of Luzon in the Philippines, spread across Island Southeast Asia. Then, between 1500 BC and 1500 AD they settled uninhabited islands of the Pacific, and also sailed westward to Madagascar. This is associated with distinctive maritime technology: lashed lug construction techniques (both in outrigger canoes and in large planked sailing vessels), various types of outrigger and twin-hulled canoes and a range of sailing rigs that included the crab claw sail. The origins of this technology is difficult to date, relying largely on linguistics (studying the words for parts of boats), the written comments of people from other cultures, including the observations of European explorers at the time of first contact and the later more systematic ethnographic observations of the types of craft in use. There is only a small body of archaeological evidence available. Since Island Southeast Asia contained effective maritime transport between its very large number of islands long before Austronesian seafaring, it is argued that Austronesians adopted an existing maritime technology from the existing inhabitants of this region.
Austronesian ships varied from simple canoes to large multihull ships. The simplest form of all ancestral Austronesian boats had five parts. The bottom part consists of a single piece of hollowed-out log. At the sides were two planks, and two horseshoe-shaped wood pieces formed the prow and stern. These were fitted tightly together edge-to-edge with dowels inserted into holes in between, and then lashed to each other with ropes (made from rattan or fiber) wrapped around protruding lugs on the planks. This characteristic and ancient Austronesian boatbuilding practice is known as the &quot;lashed-lug&quot; technique. They were commonly caulked with pastes made from various plants as well as tapa bark and fibres which would expand when wet, further tightening joints and making the hull watertight. They formed the shell of the boat, which was then reinforced by horizontal ribs. Shipwrecks of Austronesian ships can be identified from this construction as well as the absence of metal nails. Austronesian ships traditionally had no central rudders but were instead steered using an oar on one side.
Austronesians traditionally made their sails from woven mats of the resilient and salt-resistant pandanus leaves. These sails allowed Austronesians to embark on long-distance voyaging.

The ancient Champa of Vietnam also uniquely developed basket-hulled boats whose hulls were composed of woven and resin-caulked bamboo, either entirely or in conjunction with plank strakes. They range from small coracles (the &quot;o thúng&quot;) to large ocean-going trading ships like the &quot;ghe mành&quot;.

===3rd millennium BC===
====Ancient Egypt====
Early Egyptians also knew how to assemble planks of wood with treenails to fasten them together, using pitch for caulking the seams. The &quot;Khufu ship&quot;, a 43.6-meter vessel sealed into a pit in the Giza pyramid complex at the foot of the Great Pyramid of Giza in the Fourth Dynasty around 2500 BC, is a full-size surviving example which may have fulfilled the symbolic function of a solar barque. Early Egyptians also knew how to fasten the planks of this ship together with mortise and tenon joints.

====Indus Valley====
The oldest known tidal dock in the world was built around 2500 BC during the Harappan civilisation at Lothal near the present day Mangrol harbour on the Gujarat coast in India. Other ports were probably at Balakot and Dwarka. However, it is probable that many small-scale ports, and not massive ports, were used for the Harappan maritime trade. Ships from the harbour at these ancient port cities established trade with Mesopotamia. Shipbuilding and boatmaking may have been prosperous industries in ancient India. Native labourers may have manufactured the flotilla of boats used by Alexander the Great to navigate across the Hydaspes and even the Indus, under Nearchos. The Indians also exported teak for shipbuilding to ancient Persia. Other references to Indian timber used for shipbuilding is noted in the works of Ibn Jubayr.

===2nd millennium BC===
====Mediterranean====
The ships of Ancient Egypt&#x27;s Eighteenth Dynasty were typically about 25 meters (80 ft) in length and had a single mast, sometimes consisting of two poles lashed together at the top making an &quot;A&quot; shape. They mounted a single square sail on a yard, with an additional spar along the bottom of the sail. These ships could also be oar propelled. The ocean- and sea-going ships of Ancient Egypt were constructed with cedar wood, most likely hailing from Lebanon.

The ships of Phoenicia seem to have been of a similar design.

===1st millennium BC===
====Austronesia====
Austronesians established the Austronesian maritime trade network at around 1000 to 600 BC, linking Southeast Asia with East Asia, South Asia, the Middle East, and later East Africa. The route later became part of the Spice trade network and the Maritime Silk Road.

====China====
The naval history of China stems back to the Spring and Autumn period (722 BC–481 BC) of the ancient Chinese Zhou dynasty. The Chinese built large rectangular barges known as &quot;castle ships&quot;, which were essentially floating fortresses complete with multiple decks with guarded ramparts. However, the Chinese vessels during this era were essentially fluvial (riverine). True ocean-going Chinese fleets did not appear until the 10th century Song dynasty.

====Mediterranean====
There is considerable knowledge regarding shipbuilding and seafaring in the ancient Mediterranean.

===1st millennium AD===
====Austronesia====

Large multi-masted seafaring ships of Southeast Asian Austronesians first started appearing in Chinese records during the Han dynasty as the &quot;k&#x27;un-lun po&quot; or &quot;kunlun bo&quot; (&quot;ship of the &quot;k&#x27;un-lun&quot; [dark-skinned southern people]&quot;). These ships used two types of sail of their invention, the junk sail and tanja sail. Large ships are about 50–60 metres (164–197 ft) long, had tall freeboard, each carrying provisions enough for a year, and could carry 200–1000 people. The Chinese recorded that these Southeast Asian ships were hired for passage to South Asia by Chinese Buddhist pilgrims and travelers, because they did not build seaworthy ships of their own until around the 8–9th century AD.
Austronesians (especially from western Island Southeast Asia) were trading in the Indian Ocean as far as Africa during this period. By around 50 to 500 AD, a group of Austronesians, believed to be from the southeastern coasts of Borneo (possibly a mixed group related to the modern Ma&#x27;anyan, Banjar, and/or the Dayak people) crossed the Indian Ocean and colonized Madagascar. This resulted in the introduction of outrigger canoe technology to non-Austronesian cultures in the East African coast.

====China====
The ancient Chinese also built fluvial ramming vessels as in the Greco-Roman tradition of the trireme, although oar-steered ships in China lost favor very early on since it was in the 1st century China that the stern-mounted rudder was first developed. This was dually met with the introduction of the Han dynasty junk ship design in the same century. The Chinese were using square sails during the Han dynasty and adopted the Austronesian junk sail later in the 12th century. Iconographic remains show that Chinese ships before the 12th century used square sails, and the junk rig of Chinese ships is believed to be developed from tilted sails.

Southern Chinese junks were based on keeled and multi-planked Austronesian ship known as &quot;po&quot; by the Chinese, from the Old Javanese &quot;parahu&quot;,&quot;&quot; Javanese &quot;prau&quot;, or Malay &quot;perahu&quot; – large ship. Southern Chinese junks showed characteristics of Austronesian ships that they are made using timbers of tropical origin, with keeled, V-shaped hull. This is different from northern Chinese junks, which are developed from flat-bottomed riverine boats. The northern Chinese junks were primarily built of pine or fir wood, had flat bottoms with no keel, water-tight bulkheads with no frames, transom (squared) stern and stem, and have their planks fastened with iron nails or clamps.

It was unknown when the Chinese people started adopting Southeast Asian (Austronesian) shipbuilding techniques. They may have been started as early as the 8th century, but the development was gradual and the true ocean-going Chinese junks did not appear suddenly. The word &quot;po&quot; survived in Chinese long after, referring to the large ocean-going junks.

====Mediterranean====
In September 2011, archeological investigations done at the site of Portus in Rome revealed inscriptions in a shipyard constructed during the reign of Trajan (98–117) that indicated the existence of a shipbuilders guild.

===Early 2nd millennium AD===
====Austronesia====

Roughly at this time is the last migration wave of the Austronesian expansion, when the Polynesian islands spread over vast distances across the Pacific Ocean were being colonized by the (Austronesian) Polynesians from Island Melanesia using double-hulled voyaging catamarans. At its furthest extent, there is a possibility that they may have reached the Americas. After the 11th century, a new type of ship called djong or jong was recorded in Java and Bali. This type of ship was built using wooden dowels and treenails, unlike the &quot;kunlun bo&quot; which used vegetal fibres for lashings.

The empire of Majapahit used jong, built in northern Java, for transporting troops overseas. The jongs were transport ships which could carry 100–2000 tons of cargo and 50–1000 people, 28.99–88.56 meter in length. The exact number of jong fielded by Majapahit is unknown, but the largest number of jong deployed in an expedition is about 400 jongs, when Majapahit attacked Pasai, in 1350.

====Europe====

Until recently, Viking longships were seen as marking an advance on traditional clinker-built hulls where leather thongs were used to join plank boards. This consensus has recently been challenged. Haywood has argued that earlier Frankish and Anglo-Saxon nautical practice was much more accomplished than had been thought and has described the distribution of clinker &quot;vs.&quot; carvel construction in Western Europe (see map ). An insight into shipbuilding in the North Sea/Baltic areas of the early medieval period was found at Sutton Hoo, England, where a ship was buried with a chieftain. The ship was long and wide. Upward from the keel, the hull was made by overlapping nine strakes on either side with rivets fastening the oaken planks together. It could hold upwards of thirty men.

Sometime around the 12th century, northern European ships began to be built with a straight sternpost, enabling the mounting of a rudder, which was much more durable than a steering oar held over the side. Development in the Middle Ages favored &quot;round ships&quot;, with a broad beam and heavily curved at both ends. Another important ship type was the galley, which was constructed with both sails and oars.

The first extant treatise on shipbuilding was written by Michael of Rhodes, a man who began his career as an oarsman on a Venetian galley in 1401 and worked his way up into officer positions. He wrote and illustrated a book that contains a treatise on shipbuilding, a treatise on mathematics, much material on astrology, and other materials. His treatise on shipbuilding treats three kinds of galleys and two kinds of round ships.

====China====

Shipbuilders in the Ming dynasty (1368~1644) were not the same as the shipbuilders in other Chinese dynasties, due to hundreds of years of accumulated experiences and rapid changes in the Ming dynasty. Shipbuilders in the Ming dynasty primarily worked for the government, under command of the Ministry of Public Works.

During the early years of the Ming dynasty, the Ming government maintained an open policy towards sailing. Between 1405 and 1433, the government conducted seven diplomatic Ming treasure voyages to over thirty countries in Southeast Asia, India, the Middle East and Eastern Africa. The voyages were initiated by the Yongle Emperor, and led by the Admiral Zheng He. Six voyages were conducted under the Yongle Emperor&#x27;s reign, the last of which returned to China in 1422. After the Yongle Emperor&#x27;s death in 1424, his successor the Hongxi Emperor ordered the suspension of the voyages. The seventh and final voyage began in 1430, sent by the Xuande Emperor. Although the Hongxi and Xuande Emperors did not emphasize sailing as much as the Yongle Emperor, they were not against it. This led to a high degree of commercialization and an increase in trade. Large numbers of ships were built to meet the demand.

The Ming voyages were large in size, numbering as many as 300 ships and 28,000 men. The shipbuilders were brought from different places in China to the shipyard in Nanjing, including Zhejiang, Jiangxi, Fujian, and Huguang (now the provinces of Hubei and Hunan). One of the most famous shipyards was Long Jiang Shipyard (:zh:龙江船厂), located in Nanjing near the Treasure Shipyard where the ocean-going ships were built. The shipbuilders could build 24 models of ships of varying sizes.
Several types of ships were built for the voyages, including &quot;Shachuan&quot; (沙船), &quot;Fuchuan&quot; (福船) and &quot;Baochuan&quot; (treasure ship) (宝船). Zheng He&#x27;s treasure ships were regarded as &quot;Shachuan&quot; types, mainly because they were made in the treasure shipyard in Nanjing. &quot;Shachuan&quot;, or &#x27;sand-ships&#x27;, are ships used primarily for inland transport. However, in recent years, some researchers agree that the treasure ships were more of the &quot;Fuchuan&quot; type. It is said in vol. 176 of &quot;San Guo Bei Meng Hui Bian&quot; (三朝北盟汇编) that ships made in Fujian are the best ones. Therefore, the best shipbuilders and laborers were brought from these places to support Zheng He&#x27;s expedition.

The shipyard was under the command of Ministry of Public Works. The shipbuilders had no control over their lives. The builders, commoner&#x27;s doctors, cooks and errands had lowest social status. The shipbuilders were forced to move away from their hometown to the shipyards. There were two major ways to enter the shipbuilder occupation: family tradition, or apprenticeship. If a shipbuilder entered the occupation due to family tradition, the shipbuilder learned the techniques of shipbuilding from his family and is very likely to earn a higher status in the shipyard. Additionally, the shipbuilder had access to business networking that could help to find clients. If a shipbuilder entered the occupation through an apprenticeship, the shipbuilder was likely a farmer before he was hired as a shipbuilder, or he was previously an experienced shipbuilder.

Many shipbuilders working in the shipyard were forced into the occupation. The ships built for Zheng He&#x27;s voyages needed to be waterproof, solid, safe, and have ample room to carry large amounts of trading goods. Therefore, due to the highly commercialized society that was being encouraged by the expeditions, trades, and government policies, the shipbuilders needed to acquire the skills to build ships that fulfil these requirements.

Shipbuilding was not the sole industry utilising Chinese lumber at that time; the new capital was being built in Beijing from approximately 1407 onwards, which required huge amounts of high-quality wood. These two ambitious projects commissioned by Emperor Yongle would have had enormous environmental and economic effects, even if the ships were half the dimensions given in the &quot;History of Ming&quot;. Considerable pressure would also have been placed on the infrastructure required to transport the trees from their point of origin to the shipyards.

Shipbuilders were usually divided into different groups and had separate jobs. Some were responsible for fixing old ships; some were responsible for making the keel and some were responsible for building the helm.

* It was the keel that determined the shape and the structure of the hull of &quot;Fuchuan&quot; Ships. The keel is the middle of the bottom of the hull, constructed by connecting three sections; stern keel, main keel and poop keel. The hull spreads in the arc towards both sides forming the keel.
* The helm was the device that controls direction when sailing. It was a critical invention in shipbuilding technique in ancient China and was only used by the Chinese for a fairly long time. With a developing recognition of its function, the shape and configuration of the helm was continually improved by shipbuilders. The shipbuilders not only needed to build the ship according to design, but needed to acquire the skills to improve the ships.

After 1477, the Ming government reversed its open maritime policies, enacting a series of isolationist policies in response to piracy. The policies, called &quot;Haijin&quot; (sea ban), lasted until the end of the Ming dynasty in 1644. During this period, Chinese navigation technology did not make any progress and even declined in some aspect.

====Indian Ocean====
In the Islamic world, shipbuilding thrived at Basra and Alexandria. The dhow, felucca, baghlah, and the sambuk became symbols of successful maritime trade around the Indian Ocean from the ports of East Africa to Southeast Asia and the ports of Sindh and Hind (India) during the Abbasid period.

===Early modern===
====Bengal====
Mughal Empire had a large shipbuilding industry, which was largely centred in the Bengal Subah. Economic historian Indrajit Ray estimates shipbuilding output of Bengal during the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries at 223,250 tons annually, compared with 23,061 tons produced in nineteen colonies in North America from 1769 to 1771. He also assesses ship repairing as very advanced in Bengal.

====West Africa====
Documents from 1506, for example, refer to watercraft on the Sierra Leone river carrying 120 men. Others refer to Guinea coast peoples using war canoes of varying sizes – some 70 feet in length, 7–8 feet broad, with sharp pointed ends, rowing benches on the side, and quarterdecks or forecastles build of reeds. The watercraft included miscellaneous facilities, such as cooking hearths, and storage spaces for the crew&#x27;s sleeping mats.

From the 17th century, some kingdoms added brass or iron cannons to their vessels. By the 18th century, however, the use of swivel cannons on war canoes accelerated. The city-state of Lagos, for instance, deployed war canoes armed with swivel cannons.

====Europe====
With the development of the carrack, the west moved into a new era of ship construction by building the first regular oceangoing vessels. In a relatively short time, these ships grew to an unprecedented size, complexity, and cost.

Shipyards became large industrial complexes, and the ships built were financed by consortia of investors. These considerations led to the documentation of design and construction practices in what had previously been a secretive trade run by master shipwrights and ultimately led to the field of naval architecture, in which professional designers and draftsmen played an increasingly important role. Even so, construction techniques changed only very gradually. The ships of the Napoleonic Wars were still built more or less to the same basic plan as those of the Spanish Armada of two centuries earlier, although there had been numerous subtle improvements in ship design and construction throughout this period. For instance, the introduction of tumblehome, adjustments to the shapes of sails and hulls, the introduction of the wheel, the introduction of hardened copper fastenings below the waterline, the introduction of copper sheathing as a deterrent to shipworm and fouling, etc.

===Industrial Revolution===

Initially copying wooden construction traditions with a frame over which the hull was fastened, Isambard Kingdom Brunel&#x27;s of 1843 was the first radical new design, being built entirely of wrought iron. Despite her success, and the great savings in cost and space provided by the iron hull, compared to a copper-sheathed counterpart, there remained problems with fouling due to the adherence of weeds and barnacles. As a result, composite construction remained the dominant approach where fast ships were required, with wooden timbers laid over an iron frame (&quot;Cutty Sark&quot; is a famous example). Later &quot;Great Britain&quot;″s iron hull was sheathed in wood to enable it to carry a copper-based sheathing. Brunel&#x27;s represented the next great development in shipbuilding. Built-in association with John Scott Russell, it used longitudinal s for strength, inner and outer hulls, and bulkheads to form multiple watertight compartments. Steel also supplanted wrought iron when it became readily available in the latter half of the 19th century, providing great savings when compared with iron in cost and weight. Wood continued to be favored for the decks.

During World War II, the need for cargo ships was so great that construction time for Liberty ships went from initially eight months or longer, down to weeks or even days. They employed production line and prefabrication techniques such as those used in shipyards today. The total number of dry-cargo ships built in the United States in a 15-year period just before the war was a grand total of two. During the war, thousands of Liberty ships and Victory ships were built, many of them in shipyards that did not exist before the war. And, they were built by a workforce consisting largely of women and other inexperienced workers who had never seen a ship before (or even the ocean).

== Worldwide shipbuilding industry ==

After World War II, shipbuilding (which encompasses the shipyards, the marine equipment manufacturers, and many related service and knowledge providers) grew as an important and strategic industry in a number of countries around the world. This importance stems from:
* The large number of skilled workers required directly by the shipyard, along with supporting industries such as steel mills, railroads and engine manufacturers; and
* A nation&#x27;s need to manufacture and repair its own navy and vessels that support its primary industries

Historically, the industry has suffered from the absence of global rules and a tendency towards (state-supported) over-investment due to the fact that shipyards offer a wide range of technologies, employ a significant number of workers, and generate income as the shipbuilding market is global.

Japan used shipbuilding in the 1950s and 1960s to rebuild its industrial structure; South Korea started to make shipbuilding a strategic industry in the 1970s, and China is now in the process of repeating these models with large state-supported investments in this industry. Conversely, Croatia is privatising its shipbuilding industry.

As a result, the world shipbuilding market suffers from over-capacities, depressed prices (although the industry experienced a price increase in the period 2003–2005 due to strong demand for new ships which was in excess of actual cost increases), low profit margins, trade distortions and widespread subsidisation. All efforts to address the problems in the OECD have so far failed, with the 1994 international shipbuilding agreement never entering into force and the 2003–2005 round of negotiations being paused in September 2005 after no agreement was possible. After numerous efforts to restart the negotiations these were formally terminated in December 2010. The OECD&#x27;s Council Working Party on Shipbuilding (WP6) will continue its efforts to identify and progressively reduce factors that distort the shipbuilding market.

Where state subsidies have been removed and domestic industrial policies do not provide support in high labor cost countries, shipbuilding has gone into decline. The British shipbuilding industry is a prime example of this with its industries suffering badly from the 1960s. In the early 1970s British yards still had the capacity to build all types and sizes of merchant ships but today they have been reduced to a small number specialising in defence contracts, luxury yachts and repair work. Decline has also occurred in other European countries, although to some extent this has reduced by protective measures and industrial support policies. In the US, the Jones Act (which places restrictions on the ships that can be used for moving domestic cargoes) has meant that merchant shipbuilding has continued, albeit at a reduced rate, but such protection has failed to penalise shipbuilding inefficiencies. The consequence of this is that contract prices are far higher than those of any other country building oceangoing ships.

===Present day shipbuilding===
Beyond the 2000s, the three East Asian manufacturing powerhouses, China, South Korea and Japan, have dominated world shipbuilding by completed gross tonnage. China State Shipbuilding Corporation, China Shipbuilding Industry Corporation, Hyundai Heavy Industries, Samsung Heavy Industries, Daewoo Shipbuilding &amp; Marine Engineering and Imabari Shipbuilding supply most of the global market for large container, bulk carrier, tanker and Ro-ro ships. During the early 2020s, Chinese shipbuilders saw an increase in orders as operators demand greener fleets. , China’s shipbuilding output, newly received orders and orders-on-hand accounted for 50%, 67%, and 55% of the global market share, respectively, with double-digital growth of all three indexes compared to the previous year. 

When referring to the ship type, then China, South Korea and Japan are the producing countries of the carrier ships as mentioned above. While Italy, France, Finland, Germany, United Kingdom and other European countries are the makers of cruise ships (the most), icebreakers, crane vessel and so on.

The market share of European ship builders began to decline in the 1960s as they lost work to Japan in the same way Japan most recently lost their work to South Korea and China. Over the four years from 2007, the total number of employees in the European shipbuilding industry declined from 150,000 to 115,000. In 2022, some key shipbuilders in Europe are Fincantieri, Damen Group, Navantia, Naval Group and BAE Systems.

Shipbuilding output of the United States also underwent a similar change. The US is ranked the 10th largest shipbuilder worldwide. The top companies that build large naval vessels, such as aircraft carriers and cruisers, include Huntington Ingalls, Bollinger and General Dynamics. In the small to medium military vessels category, key shipbuilders include Vigor Industrial, and VT Halter Marine. As the US Navy is shifting to a new fleet architecture that is more widely distributed, unmanned surface vehicles (USVs) development is rapidly propelled to higher priority. Key strategic Program of Record includes prototyping and construction of up to 9 MUSVs, for which a sole contract was awarded to L3Harris Technologies, who partnered with Swiftships to build the MUSVs.

In 2018, the US Defense Department initiated Overlord Program, and developed USV Prototypes 1 (NOMAD) and 2 (RANGER). Both of them took part in multiple fleet level exercises and demonstrations, traveled in autonomous mode, and tested numerous payloads. Nomam, formerly known as Riley Claire, is a converted offshore patrol vessel, which was built by Swiftships. The objective of the Ghost Fleet Overlord program is to convert large, commercial vessels to autonomous systems.

, China builds nearly 75% of new vessels on order and has the capacity to build more ships in one month than the United States builds in a year. 

===Modern shipbuilding manufacturing techniques===

Modern shipbuilding makes considerable use of prefabricated sections. Entire multi-deck segments of the hull or superstructure will be built elsewhere in the yard, transported to the building dock or slipway, then lifted into place. This is known as &quot;block construction&quot;. The most modern shipyards pre-install equipment, pipes, electrical cables, and any other components within the blocks, to minimize the effort needed to assemble or install components deep within the hull once it is welded together.

Ship design work, also called naval architecture, may be conducted using a ship model basin. Previously, loftsmen at the mould lofts of shipyards were responsible for taking the dimensions, and details from drawings and plans and translating this information into templates, battens, ordinates, cutting sketches, profiles, margins and other data. However, since the early 1970s computer-aided design became normal for the shipbuilding design and lofting process.

Modern ships, since roughly 1940, have been produced almost exclusively of welded steel. Early welded steel ships used steels with inadequate fracture toughness, which resulted in some ships suffering catastrophic brittle fracture structural cracks (see problems of the Liberty ship). Since roughly 1950, specialized steels such as ABS Steels with good properties for ship construction have been used. Although it is commonly accepted that modern steel has eliminated brittle fracture in ships, some controversy still exists. Brittle fracture of modern vessels continues to occur from time to time because grade A and grade B steel of unknown toughness or fracture appearance transition temperature (FATT) in ships&#x27; side shells can be less than adequate for all ambient conditions.

As modern shipbuilding panels on a panel line become lighter and thinner, the laser hybrid welding technique is utilized. The laser hybrid blend focuses a higher energy beam on the material to be joined, allowing it to keyhole with a much higher depth to width ratio than comparative traditional welding techniques. Typically a MIG process trails the keyhole providing filler material for the weld joint. This allows for very high penetration without excessive heat input from decreased weld metal deposited leading to less distortion and welding at higher travel speeds.

===Ship repair industry===

All ships need repair work at some point in their working lives. A part of these jobs must be carried out under the supervision of the classification society.

A lot of maintenance is carried out while at sea or in port by ship&#x27;s crew.
However, a large number of repair and maintenance works can only be carried out while the ship is out of commercial operation, in a ship repair yard.

Prior to undergoing repairs, a tanker must dock at a deballasting station for completing the tank cleaning operations and pumping ashore its slops (dirty cleaning water and hydrocarbon residues).

==See also==
* Ancient shipbuilding techniques
* Boat building
* List of shipbuilders and shipyards
* List of the largest shipbuilding companies
* List of Russian marine engineers
* Ships of ancient Rome
* 

==References==
=== Notes ===
* 


==External links==
* Shipbuilding Picture Dictionary
* U.S. Shipbuildingextensive information about the U.S. shipbuilding industry, including over 500 pages of U.S. shipyard construction records
* Shipbuilding News
* Bataviawerf – the Historic Dutch East Indiaman Ship YardShipyard of the historic ships Batavia and Zeven Provincien in the Netherlands, since 1985 here have been great ships reconstructed using old construction methods.
* Photos of the reconstruction of the Dutch East Indiaman Batavia Photo web site about the reconstruction of the &quot;Batavia&quot; on the shipyard Batavia werf, a 16th-century East Indiaman in the Netherlands. The site is constantly expanding with more historic images as in 2010 the shipyard celebrates its 25th year.
* Modern shipbuilding and the men engaged in it, David Pollock (London: E. &amp; F. N. Spon, 1884).</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q474200" start="0" end="12" title="Shipbuilding" label="Shipbuilding"/>
<link wikidata="Q3875186" start="20" end="32" title="construction" label="construction"/>
<link wikidata="Q11446" start="36" end="40" title="ship" label="ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229765" start="52" end="68" title="Watercraft" label="floating vessels"/>
<link wikidata="Q190928" start="148" end="156" title="shipyard" label="shipyard"/>
<link wikidata="Q474200" start="158" end="170" title="Shipbuilding" label="Shipbuilders"/>
<link wikidata="Q474200" start="184" end="195" title="Shipbuilding" label="shipwrights"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145106" start="261" end="277" title="recorded history" label="recorded history"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="563" end="578" title="Saw#Mechanically powered saws" label="mechanical saws"/>
<link wikidata="Q38720" start="592" end="600" title="windmill" label="windmill"/>
<link wikidata="Q11197" start="713" end="722" title="logarithm" label="logarithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q6750281" start="796" end="800" title="hull (watercraft)" label="hull"/>
<link wikidata="Q6666696" start="866" end="870" title="Lofting" label="loft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136352" start="953" end="970" title="naval architecture" label="naval engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q35872" start="992" end="996" title="boat" label="boat"/>
<link wikidata="Q893164" start="1027" end="1040" title="boat building" label="boat building"/>
<link wikidata="Q336332" start="1078" end="1091" title="ship breaking" label="ship breaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q5" start="1141" end="1154" title="human" label="modern humans"/>
<link wikidata="Q3960" start="1176" end="1185" title="Australia (continent)" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q200433" start="1254" end="1258" title="raft" label="raft"/>
<link wikidata="Q25999" start="1297" end="1301" title="sail" label="sail"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="1404" end="1417" title="Mediterranean" label="Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919361" start="1425" end="1448" title="Maritime Southeast Asia" label="Maritime Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11768" start="1655" end="1668" title="ancient Egypt" label="ancient Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q486761" start="1903" end="1922" title="classical antiquity" label="classical antiquity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2910702" start="2085" end="2104" title="Carvel (boat building)" label="Carvel construction"/>
<link wikidata="Q27479" start="2142" end="2157" title="Northern Europe" label="Northern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q338401" start="2163" end="2183" title="clinker (boat building)" label="clinker construction"/>
<link wikidata="Q164057" start="2268" end="2271" title="cog (ship)" label="cog"/>
<link wikidata="Q677" start="2790" end="2794" title="Iron" label="Iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002016" start="2818" end="2828" title="fastener" label="fastenings"/>
<link wikidata="Q37077" start="2830" end="2834" title="nail (fastener)" label="nail"/>
<link wikidata="Q125183448" start="2840" end="2844" title="bolt (fastener)" label="bolt"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2885" end="2890" title="Glossary of nautical terms (A–L)#knee" label="knees"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370714" start="3082" end="3088" title="Lumber" label="timber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423948" start="3170" end="3175" title="wood grain" label="grain"/>
<link wikidata="Q11427" start="3245" end="3250" title="steel" label="steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075310" start="3364" end="3376" title="sailing boat" label="sailing boat"/>
<link wikidata="Q245156" start="3422" end="3434" title="Ubaid period" label="Ubaid period"/>
<link wikidata="Q11767" start="3438" end="3449" title="Mesopotamia" label="Mesopotamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2734060" start="3479" end="3483" title="Reed (plant)" label="reed"/>
<link wikidata="Q167510" start="3495" end="3502" title="bitumen" label="bitumen"/>
<link wikidata="Q34675" start="3569" end="3581" title="Persian Gulf" label="Persian Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q11768" start="3644" end="3657" title="Ancient Egypt" label="Ancient Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061510" start="3679" end="3688" title="Egyptians" label="Egyptians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355652" start="3710" end="3724" title="Plank (wood)" label="planks of wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q6750281" start="3732" end="3741" title="hull (ship)" label="ship hull"/>
<link wikidata="Q632218" start="3870" end="3905" title="Archaeological Institute of America" label="Archaeological Institute of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q4670724" start="3975" end="3987" title="Ancient Egyptian Boats (First Dynasty) – Abydos" label="Abydos boats"/>
<link wikidata="Q192268" start="4033" end="4039" title="Abydos, Egypt" label="Abydos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355652" start="4065" end="4077" title="Plank (wood)" label="wooden plank"/>
<link wikidata="Q5238131" start="4144" end="4163" title="David O&amp;#x27;Connor (Egyptologist)" label="David O&amp;#x27;Connor"/>
<link wikidata="Q49210" start="4167" end="4186" title="New York University" label="New York University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3217573" start="4194" end="4199" title="strap" label="strap"/>
<link wikidata="Q158808" start="4263" end="4268" title="Cyperus papyrus" label="reeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q294266" start="4406" end="4425" title="Khasekhemwy" label="Pharaoh Khasekhemwy"/>
<link wikidata="Q106771" start="4824" end="4835" title="Hor-Aha" label="Pharaoh Aha"/>
<link wikidata="Q861225" start="4862" end="4884" title="Austronesian expansion" label="Austronesian expansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q216839" start="4918" end="4924" title="Taiwanese indigenous peoples" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q125384" start="4942" end="4947" title="Luzon" label="Luzon"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="4955" end="4966" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919361" start="4982" end="5003" title="Island Southeast Asia" label="Island Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q85775905" start="5185" end="5219" title="lashed-lug boat" label="lashed lug construction techniques"/>
<link wikidata="Q639140" start="5302" end="5311" title="outrigger boat" label="outrigger"/>
<link wikidata="Q190403" start="5316" end="5327" title="catamaran" label="twin-hulled"/>
<link wikidata="Q363699" start="5381" end="5395" title="crab claw sail" label="crab claw sail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642862" start="6119" end="6128" title="multihull" label="multihull"/>
<link wikidata="Q301897" start="6348" end="6352" title="prow" label="prow"/>
<link wikidata="Q273062" start="6357" end="6362" title="stern" label="stern"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365730" start="6417" end="6422" title="dowel" label="dowel"/>
<link wikidata="Q323021" start="6508" end="6514" title="rattan" label="rattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q85775905" start="6660" end="6670" title="lashed-lug" label="lashed-lug"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411795" start="6707" end="6712" title="caulk" label="caulk"/>
<link wikidata="Q389185" start="6763" end="6772" title="Paper mulberry" label="tapa bark"/>
<link wikidata="Q471914" start="7269" end="7277" title="pandanus" label="pandanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q216786" start="7370" end="7376" title="Champa" label="Champa"/>
<link wikidata="Q881" start="7380" end="7387" title="Vietnam" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q145205" start="7471" end="7476" title="resin" label="resin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411795" start="7477" end="7482" title="caulk" label="caulk"/>
<link wikidata="Q3560865" start="7538" end="7544" title="strake" label="strake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131847" start="7569" end="7576" title="coracle" label="coracle"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7589" end="7596" title="o thúng" label="o thúng"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7654" end="7662" title="ghe mành" label="ghe mành"/>
<link wikidata="Q7837705" start="7779" end="7787" title="treenail" label="treenail"/>
<link wikidata="Q840692" start="7820" end="7825" title="Pitch (resin)" label="pitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411795" start="7830" end="7838" title="caulking" label="caulking"/>
<link wikidata="Q1711677" start="7860" end="7870" title="Khufu ship" label="Khufu ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q12508" start="7923" end="7943" title="Giza pyramid complex" label="Giza pyramid complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q37200" start="7963" end="7984" title="Great Pyramid of Giza" label="Great Pyramid of Giza"/>
<link wikidata="Q211001" start="7992" end="8006" title="Fourth dynasty of Egypt" label="Fourth Dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q636041" start="8108" end="8120" title="solar barque" label="solar barque"/>
<link wikidata="Q147314" start="8200" end="8217" title="mortise and tenon" label="mortise and tenon"/>
<link wikidata="Q42534" start="8325" end="8346" title="Harappan civilisation" label="Harappan civilisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q9443" start="8350" end="8356" title="Lothal" label="Lothal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061" start="8401" end="8408" title="Gujarat" label="Gujarat"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="8418" end="8423" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q3428696" start="8454" end="8461" title="Balakot" label="Balakot"/>
<link wikidata="Q817247" start="8466" end="8472" title="Dwarka" label="Dwarka"/>
<link wikidata="Q11767" start="8668" end="8679" title="Mesopotamia" label="Mesopotamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8409" start="8832" end="8851" title="Alexander the Great" label="Alexander the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q214874" start="8875" end="8883" title="Hydaspes" label="Hydaspes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7348" start="8897" end="8902" title="Indus" label="Indus"/>
<link wikidata="Q320132" start="8910" end="8918" title="Nearchos" label="Nearchos"/>
<link wikidata="Q156938" start="8946" end="8950" title="teak" label="teak"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="8979" end="8985" title="Persia" label="Persia"/>
<link wikidata="Q367319" start="9068" end="9078" title="Ibn Jubayr" label="Ibn Jubayr"/>
<link wikidata="Q146055" start="9161" end="9179" title="Eighteenth Dynasty" label="Eighteenth Dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q331744" start="9246" end="9250" title="mast (sailing)" label="mast"/>
<link wikidata="Q25999" start="9373" end="9377" title="sail" label="sail"/>
<link wikidata="Q663616" start="9383" end="9387" title="Yard (sailing)" label="yard"/>
<link wikidata="Q5429522" start="9408" end="9412" title="spar (sailing)" label="spar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003749" start="9469" end="9472" title="oar" label="oar"/>
<link wikidata="Q41642" start="9614" end="9623" title="Phoenicia" label="Phoenicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q405155" start="9738" end="9773" title="Austronesian maritime trade network" label="Austronesian maritime trade network"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778604" start="9926" end="9937" title="Spice trade" label="Spice trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q11149509" start="9954" end="9972" title="Maritime Silk Road" label="Maritime Silk Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q6647151" start="9993" end="10015" title="naval history of China" label="naval history of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q185047" start="10034" end="10058" title="Spring and Autumn period" label="Spring and Autumn period"/>
<link wikidata="Q35216" start="10098" end="10110" title="Zhou dynasty" label="Zhou dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q57346" start="10275" end="10282" title="Defensive wall" label="rampart"/>
<link wikidata="Q7462" start="10437" end="10449" title="Song dynasty" label="Song dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209" start="10741" end="10752" title="Han dynasty" label="Han dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q12982785" start="10766" end="10782" title="k&amp;#x27;un-lun po" label="k&amp;#x27;un-lun po"/>
<link wikidata="Q6444863" start="10839" end="10852" title="kunlun slave" label="k&amp;#x27;un-lun"/>
<link wikidata="Q55128675" start="10971" end="10981" title="tanja sail" label="tanja sail"/>
<link wikidata="Q516809" start="11046" end="11055" title="Freeboard (nautical)" label="freeboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919361" start="11399" end="11420" title="Island Southeast Asia" label="Island Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239" start="11442" end="11454" title="Indian Ocean" label="Indian Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="11465" end="11471" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q36117" start="11589" end="11595" title="Borneo" label="Borneo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2567621" start="11642" end="11655" title="Ma&amp;#x27;anyan people" label="Ma&amp;#x27;anyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2350149" start="11657" end="11663" title="Banjar people" label="Banjar"/>
<link wikidata="Q847603" start="11676" end="11688" title="Dayak people" label="Dayak people"/>
<link wikidata="Q1019" start="11729" end="11739" title="Madagascar" label="Madagascar"/>
<link wikidata="Q27407" start="11841" end="11852" title="East Africa" label="East Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="11888" end="11895" title="China" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q83858" start="11915" end="11922" title="ramming" label="ramming"/>
<link wikidata="Q937284" start="11941" end="11952" title="Greco-Roman" label="Greco-Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q208420" start="11970" end="11977" title="trireme" label="trireme"/>
<link wikidata="Q273062" start="12087" end="12092" title="stern" label="stern"/>
<link wikidata="Q209760" start="12101" end="12107" title="rudder" label="rudder"/>
<link wikidata="Q205011" start="12190" end="12199" title="Junk (ship)" label="junk ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209" start="12275" end="12286" title="Han dynasty" label="Han dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q301936" start="12449" end="12457" title="junk rig" label="junk rig"/>
<link wikidata="Q55128675" start="12508" end="12520" title="Tanja sail" label="tilted sails"/>
<link wikidata="Q85775905" start="12571" end="12584" title="lashed-lug" label="multi-planked"/>
<link wikidata="Q2037271" start="13701" end="13707" title="Portus" label="Portus"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="13711" end="13715" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q190928" start="13743" end="13751" title="shipyard" label="shipyard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425" start="13784" end="13790" title="Trajan" label="Trajan"/>
<link wikidata="Q939871" start="13847" end="13852" title="guild" label="guild"/>
<link wikidata="Q861225" start="13961" end="13983" title="Austronesian expansion" label="Austronesian expansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q35942" start="13994" end="14003" title="Polynesia" label="Polynesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="14051" end="14064" title="Pacific Ocean" label="Pacific Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042001" start="14108" end="14118" title="Polynesians" label="Polynesian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6083292" start="14125" end="14141" title="Island Melanesia" label="Island Melanesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q190403" start="14171" end="14180" title="catamaran" label="catamaran"/>
<link wikidata="Q828" start="14261" end="14269" title="Americas" label="Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7356566" start="14330" end="14334" title="Jong (ship)" label="jong"/>
<link wikidata="Q49326" start="14517" end="14526" title="Majapahit" label="Majapahit"/>
<link wikidata="Q897611" start="14932" end="14940" title="longship" label="longship"/>
<link wikidata="Q338401" start="14989" end="14996" title="clinker (boat building)" label="clinker"/>
<link wikidata="Q503256" start="15444" end="15454" title="Sutton Hoo" label="Sutton Hoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3560865" start="15595" end="15601" title="strake" label="strake"/>
<link wikidata="Q2401090" start="15797" end="15806" title="sternpost" label="sternpost"/>
<link wikidata="Q3775712" start="15878" end="15890" title="steering oar" label="steering oar"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="15930" end="15941" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q9903" start="16586" end="16598" title="Ming dynasty" label="Ming dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q6635700" start="16859" end="16883" title="Ministry of Works (imperial China)" label="Ministry of Public Works"/>
<link wikidata="Q699127" start="17058" end="17079" title="Ming treasure voyages" label="Ming treasure voyages"/>
<link wikidata="Q9965" start="17201" end="17215" title="Yongle Emperor" label="Yongle Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7333" start="17240" end="17248" title="Zheng He" label="Zheng He"/>
<link wikidata="Q9972" start="17426" end="17440" title="Hongxi Emperor" label="Hongxi Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q9977" start="17536" end="17550" title="Xuande Emperor" label="Xuande Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q16666" start="17967" end="17974" title="Nanjing" label="Nanjing"/>
<link wikidata="Q16967" start="17986" end="17994" title="Zhejiang" label="Zhejiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q57052" start="17996" end="18003" title="Jiangxi" label="Jiangxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q41705" start="18005" end="18011" title="Fujian" label="Fujian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2235155" start="18017" end="18024" title="Huguang" label="Huguang"/>
<link wikidata="Q46862" start="18047" end="18052" title="Hubei" label="Hubei"/>
<link wikidata="Q45761" start="18057" end="18062" title="Hunan" label="Hunan"/>
<link wikidata="" start="18123" end="18131" title=":zh:龙江船厂" label=":zh:龙江船厂"/>
<link wikidata="Q702138" start="18425" end="18438" title="Chinese treasure ship" label="treasure ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q6635700" start="19074" end="19098" title="Ministry of Works (imperial China)" label="Ministry of Public Works"/>
<link wikidata="Q2360816" start="19653" end="19672" title="business networking" label="business networking"/>
<link wikidata="Q28763" start="20726" end="20741" title="History of Ming" label="History of Ming"/>
<link wikidata="Q582062" start="21127" end="21131" title="keel" label="keel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1980202" start="21418" end="21422" title="Ship&amp;#x27;s wheel" label="helm"/>
<link wikidata="Q697605" start="21988" end="21994" title="wokou" label="piracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569008" start="22023" end="22029" title="Haijin" label="Haijin"/>
<link wikidata="Q48195" start="22275" end="22280" title="Basra" label="Basra"/>
<link wikidata="Q87" start="22285" end="22295" title="Alexandria" label="Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q171799" start="22301" end="22305" title="dhow" label="dhow"/>
<link wikidata="Q914260" start="22307" end="22314" title="felucca" label="felucca"/>
<link wikidata="Q799824" start="22316" end="22323" title="baghlah" label="baghlah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126654" start="22333" end="22339" title="sambuk" label="sambuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239" start="22395" end="22407" title="Indian Ocean" label="Indian Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q27407" start="22426" end="22437" title="East Africa" label="East Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="22441" end="22455" title="Southeast Asia" label="Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q37211" start="22473" end="22478" title="Sindh" label="Sindh"/>
<link wikidata="Q3087336" start="22483" end="22487" title="Al-Hind" label="Hind"/>
<link wikidata="Q12536" start="22507" end="22514" title="Abbasid" label="Abbasid"/>
<link wikidata="Q33296" start="22558" end="22571" title="Mughal Empire" label="Mughal Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q4083684" start="22640" end="22652" title="Bengal Subah" label="Bengal Subah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229765" start="23015" end="23025" title="watercraft" label="watercraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044" start="23033" end="23045" title="Sierra Leone" label="Sierra Leone"/>
<link wikidata="Q207887" start="23086" end="23098" title="Guinea coast" label="Guinea coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q10516659" start="23240" end="23251" title="quarterdeck" label="quarterdeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q357447" start="23256" end="23266" title="forecastle" label="forecastle"/>
<link wikidata="Q8673" start="23598" end="23603" title="Lagos" label="Lagos"/>
<link wikidata="Q220635" start="23710" end="23717" title="carrack" label="carrack"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136352" start="24210" end="24228" title="naval architecture" label="naval architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q78994" start="24394" end="24409" title="Napoleonic Wars" label="Napoleonic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q179684" start="24479" end="24493" title="Spanish Armada" label="Spanish Armada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2084112" start="24663" end="24673" title="tumblehome" label="tumblehome"/>
<link wikidata="Q207380" start="25028" end="25051" title="Isambard Kingdom Brunel" label="Isambard Kingdom Brunel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2514392" start="25365" end="25387" title="composite construction" label="composite construction"/>
<link wikidata="Q171255" start="25502" end="25512" title="Cutty Sark" label="Cutty Sark"/>
<link wikidata="Q4330146" start="25630" end="25652" title="Copper sheathing" label="copper-based sheathing"/>
<link wikidata="Q138545" start="25750" end="25768" title="John Scott Russell" label="John Scott Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q12053830" start="25834" end="25843" title="Bulkhead (partition)" label="bulkheads"/>
<link wikidata="Q11427" start="25886" end="25891" title="Steel" label="Steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q860451" start="25908" end="25920" title="wrought iron" label="wrought iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="26114" end="26126" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q593485" start="26193" end="26205" title="Liberty ship" label="Liberty ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1613775" start="26554" end="26567" title="Victory ships" label="Victory ships"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="26837" end="26849" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q55638" start="26951" end="26958" title="Service industry" label="service"/>
<link wikidata="Q830170" start="26963" end="26972" title="Knowledge economy" label="knowledge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391083" start="27121" end="27136" title="skilled workers" label="skilled workers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2069494" start="27213" end="27224" title="steel mills" label="steel mills"/>
<link wikidata="Q44167" start="27240" end="27246" title="engine" label="engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4508" start="27323" end="27327" title="navy" label="navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q268592" start="27365" end="27375" title="Industry (economics)" label="industries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1946268" start="27437" end="27449" title="International trade law" label="global rules"/>
<link wikidata="Q7188" start="27474" end="27479" title="Government" label="state"/>
<link wikidata="Q193219" start="27480" end="27489" title="Subsidy" label="supported"/>
<link wikidata="Q473750" start="27664" end="27670" title="World economy" label="global"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="27673" end="27678" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q884" start="27757" end="27768" title="South Korea" label="South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q193219" start="28858" end="28867" title="Subsidy" label="subsidies"/>
<link wikidata="Q664112" start="28899" end="28918" title="industrial policies" label="industrial policies"/>
<link wikidata="Q869954" start="29508" end="29517" title="Merchant Marine Act of 1920" label="Jones Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q27231" start="29936" end="29945" title="East Asia" label="East Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="29974" end="29979" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q884" start="29981" end="29992" title="South Korea" label="South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="29997" end="30002" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2719498" start="30051" end="30064" title="gross tonnage" label="gross tonnage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073512" start="30066" end="30102" title="China State Shipbuilding Corporation" label="China State Shipbuilding Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073506" start="30104" end="30143" title="China Shipbuilding Industry Corporation" label="China Shipbuilding Industry Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q483231" start="30145" end="30169" title="Hyundai Heavy Industries" label="Hyundai Heavy Industries"/>
<link wikidata="Q489243" start="30171" end="30195" title="Samsung Heavy Industries" label="Samsung Heavy Industries"/>
<link wikidata="Q497860" start="30197" end="30241" title="Daewoo Shipbuilding &amp;amp; Marine Engineering" label="Daewoo Shipbuilding &amp;amp; Marine Engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q8207464" start="30246" end="30266" title="Imabari Shipbuilding" label="Imabari Shipbuilding"/>
<link wikidata="Q17210" start="30310" end="30319" title="container ship" label="container"/>
<link wikidata="Q15276" start="30321" end="30333" title="bulk carrier" label="bulk carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q14970" start="30335" end="30341" title="tanker (ship)" label="tanker"/>
<link wikidata="Q473932" start="30346" end="30351" title="roll-on/roll-off" label="Ro-ro"/>
<link wikidata="Q743030" start="30450" end="30455" title="green technology" label="green"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="30835" end="30840" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="30842" end="30848" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q33" start="30850" end="30857" title="Finland" label="Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="30859" end="30866" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="30868" end="30882" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="30893" end="30899" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q39804" start="30930" end="30942" title="cruise ships" label="cruise ships"/>
<link wikidata="Q14978" start="30955" end="30966" title="icebreakers" label="icebreakers"/>
<link wikidata="Q970092" start="30968" end="30980" title="crane vessel" label="crane vessel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327429" start="31349" end="31360" title="Fincantieri" label="Fincantieri"/>
<link wikidata="Q950580" start="31362" end="31373" title="Damen Group" label="Damen Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q378849" start="31375" end="31383" title="Navantia" label="Navantia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227511" start="31385" end="31396" title="Naval Group" label="Naval Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q739416" start="31401" end="31412" title="BAE Systems" label="BAE Systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="31442" end="31455" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q177597" start="31581" end="31593" title="naval vessel" label="naval vessel"/>
<link wikidata="Q17205" start="31604" end="31620" title="aircraft carrier" label="aircraft carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q104843" start="31626" end="31633" title="cruiser" label="cruiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q7257522" start="31644" end="31662" title="Huntington Ingalls" label="Huntington Ingalls"/>
<link wikidata="Q4939795" start="31664" end="31673" title="Bollinger Shipyards" label="Bollinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q502940" start="31678" end="31694" title="General Dynamics" label="General Dynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7928998" start="31771" end="31787" title="Vigor Industrial" label="Vigor Industrial"/>
<link wikidata="Q29093553" start="31793" end="31809" title="VT Halter Marine" label="VT Halter Marine"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="31818" end="31825" title="US Navy" label="US Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4419860" start="31899" end="31923" title="unmanned surface vehicle" label="unmanned surface vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q16152676" start="31999" end="32016" title="Program of Record" label="Program of Record"/>
<link wikidata="Q65053147" start="32114" end="32122" title="L3Harris" label="L3Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q22672082" start="32156" end="32166" title="Swiftships" label="Swiftships"/>
<link wikidata="Q11209" start="32201" end="32222" title="US Defense Department" label="US Defense Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q107722703" start="32572" end="32592" title="Ghost Fleet Overlord" label="Ghost Fleet Overlord"/>
<link wikidata="Q2086008" start="32910" end="32932" title="Prefabrication" label="prefabricated sections"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370583" start="32976" end="32990" title="Superstructure (ship)" label="superstructure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136352" start="33409" end="33427" title="naval architecture" label="naval architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q511204" start="33454" end="33470" title="ship model basin" label="ship model basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6666696" start="33500" end="33510" title="mould loft" label="mould loft"/>
<link wikidata="Q190928" start="33515" end="33523" title="shipyard" label="shipyard"/>
<link wikidata="Q184793" start="33757" end="33778" title="computer-aided design" label="computer-aided design"/>
<link wikidata="Q131172" start="33918" end="33924" title="welding" label="welded"/>
<link wikidata="Q911969" start="33985" end="34003" title="fracture toughness" label="fracture toughness"/>
<link wikidata="Q5120022" start="34057" end="34073" title="brittle fracture" label="brittle fracture"/>
<link wikidata="Q593485" start="34097" end="34125" title="problems of the Liberty ship" label="problems of the Liberty ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q4650412" start="34175" end="34185" title="ABS Steels" label="ABS Steels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163643" start="35367" end="35389" title="classification society" label="classification society"/>
<link wikidata="Q5155685" start="35836" end="35867" title="Ancient shipbuilding techniques" label="Ancient shipbuilding techniques"/>
<link wikidata="Q893164" start="35870" end="35883" title="Boat building" label="Boat building"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243432" start="35886" end="35920" title="List of shipbuilders and shipyards" label="List of shipbuilders and shipyards"/>
<link wikidata="Q6643093" start="35923" end="35965" title="List of the largest shipbuilding companies" label="List of the largest shipbuilding companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q6596088" start="35968" end="36000" title="List of Russian marine engineers" label="List of Russian marine engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q120962784" start="36003" end="36024" title="Ships of ancient Rome" label="Ships of ancient Rome"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="187380" wikidata="Q743931" url="?curid=187380" title="Laestrygonians">
<text>In Greek mythology, the Laestrygonians or Laestrygones () were a tribe of man-eating giants. They were said to have sprung from Laestrygon, son of Poseidon.

According to Thucydides (6.2.1.) and Polybius (1.2.9) the Laestrygones inhabited southeast Sicily; Pliny the Elder in the &quot;Natural History&quot; (7.2) places them &quot;in the very centre of the earth, in Italy and Sicily&quot;. The name is akin to that of the Lestriconi, a branch of the Corsi people of the northeast coast of Sardinia (now Gallura).

==Mythology==
Odysseus, the main character of Homer&#x27;s &quot;Odyssey&quot;, visited them during his journey back home to Ithaca. The giants ate many of Odysseus&#x27;s men and destroyed eleven of his twelve ships by launching rocks from high cliffs. Odysseus&#x27;s ship was not destroyed because it was hidden in a cove near shore. Everyone on Odysseus&#x27;s ship survived the incident. &quot;His soldiers, with a dozen ships, arrive at &#x27;the rocky stronghold of Lamos: Telepylus, the city of the Laestrygonians&#x27;.&quot;

Lamos is not mentioned again, perhaps being understood as the founder of the city or the name of the island on which the city is situated. In this land, a man who could do without sleep could earn double wages; once as a herdsman of cattle and another as a shepherd, as they worked by night as they did by day. The ships entered a harbor surrounded by steep cliffs, with a single entrance between two headlands. The captains took their ships inside and made them fast close to one another, where it was dead calm.

Odysseus kept his own ship outside the harbor, moored to a rock. He climbed a high rock to reconnoiter, but could see nothing but some smoke rising from the ground. He sent two of his company and an attendant to investigate the inhabitants. The men followed a road and eventually met a young woman on her way to the Fountain of Artakia to fetch some water, who said she was a daughter of Antiphates or Antiphatus, the king, and directed them to his house. However, when they got there they found a gigantic woman, the wife of Antiphates who promptly called her husband, who immediately left the assembly of the people and upon arrival snatched up one of the men, killing and eating him on the spot. The other two men ran away, but Antiphates raised an outcry, so that they were pursued by thousands of Laestrygonians, who are either giants or very large men and women. They threw vast rocks from the cliffs, smashing the ships, and speared the men like fish. Odysseus made his escape with his single ship because it was not trapped in the harbor; the rest of his company was lost. The surviving crew went next to Aeaea, the island of Circe.

According to historian Angelo Paratico the Laestrygonians were the result of a legend originated by the sight by Greek sailors of the Giants of Mont&#x27;e Prama, recently excavated in Sardinia.

Later Greeks believed that the Laestrygonians, as well as the Cyclopes, had once inhabited Sicily.

== Gallery ==
==Notes==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q34726" start="3" end="18" title="Greek mythology" label="Greek mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q743931" start="24" end="38" title="Laestrygonians" label="Laestrygonians"/>
<link wikidata="Q743931" start="42" end="54" title="Laestrygonians" label="Laestrygones"/>
<link wikidata="Q3707571" start="85" end="90" title="giant" label="giant"/>
<link wikidata="Q65118729" start="128" end="138" title="Laestrygon (mythology)" label="Laestrygon"/>
<link wikidata="Q41127" start="147" end="155" title="Poseidon" label="Poseidon"/>
<link wikidata="Q41683" start="171" end="181" title="Thucydides" label="Thucydides"/>
<link wikidata="Q131169" start="195" end="203" title="Polybius" label="Polybius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="249" end="255" title="Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q82778" start="257" end="272" title="Pliny the Elder" label="Pliny the Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q442" start="286" end="301" title="Natural History (Pliny)" label="Natural History"/>
<link wikidata="Q607289" start="452" end="464" title="Corsi people" label="Corsi people"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462" start="491" end="499" title="Sardinia" label="Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q962651" start="505" end="512" title="Gallura" label="Gallura"/>
<link wikidata="Q47231" start="530" end="538" title="Odysseus" label="Odysseus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691" start="562" end="567" title="Homer" label="Homer"/>
<link wikidata="Q35160" start="581" end="588" title="Odyssey" label="Odyssey"/>
<link wikidata="Q12060492" start="641" end="647" title="Homer&amp;#x27;s Ithaca" label="Ithaca"/>
<link wikidata="Q111950165" start="660" end="691" title="Cannibalism in literature" label="ate many of Odysseus&amp;#x27;s men"/>
<link wikidata="Q106610093" start="989" end="994" title="Lamus (mythology)" label="Lamos"/>
<link wikidata="Q3562104" start="996" end="1005" title="Telepylos" label="Telepylus"/>
<link wikidata="Q830" start="1285" end="1291" title="cattle" label="cattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q81710" start="1309" end="1317" title="shepherd" label="shepherd"/>
<link wikidata="Q25473753" start="1955" end="1965" title="Antiphates" label="Antiphates"/>
<link wikidata="Q403366" start="2680" end="2685" title="Aeaea" label="Aeaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q187602" start="2701" end="2706" title="Circe" label="Circe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1817134" start="2843" end="2870" title="Giants of Mont&amp;#x27;e Prama" label="Giants of Mont&amp;#x27;e Prama"/>
<link wikidata="Q128430" start="2967" end="2975" title="Cyclopes" label="Cyclopes"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="187381" wikidata="Q183171" url="?curid=187381" title="Toga">
<text>The toga (, ), a distinctive garment of Ancient Rome, was a roughly semicircular cloth, between in length, draped over the shoulders and around the body. It was usually woven from white wool, and was worn over a tunic. In Roman historical tradition, it is said to have been the favored dress of Romulus, Rome&#x27;s founder; it was also thought to have originally been worn by both sexes, and by the citizen-military. As Roman women gradually adopted the stola, the toga was recognized as formal wear for male Roman citizens. Women found guilty of adultery and women engaged in prostitution might have provided the main exceptions to this rule.

The type of toga worn reflected a citizen&#x27;s rank in the civil hierarchy. Various laws and customs restricted its use to citizens, who were required to wear it for public festivals and civic duties.

From its probable beginnings as a simple, practical work-garment, the toga became more voluminous, complex, and costly, increasingly unsuited to anything but formal and ceremonial use. It was and is considered ancient Rome&#x27;s &quot;national costume&quot;; as such, it had great symbolic value; however even among Romans, it was hard to put on, uncomfortable and challenging to wear correctly, and never truly popular. When circumstances allowed, those otherwise entitled or obliged to wear it opted for more comfortable, casual garments. It gradually fell out of use, firstly among citizens of the lower class, then those of the middle class. Eventually, it was worn only by the highest classes for ceremonial occasions.

== Varieties ==

The toga was an approximately semi-circular woollen cloth, usually white, worn draped over the left shoulder and around the body: the word &quot;toga&quot; probably derives from &quot;tegere&quot;, to cover. It was considered formal wear and was generally reserved for citizens. The Romans considered it unique to themselves, thus their poetic description by Virgil and Martial as the &quot;gens togata&quot; (&#x27;toga-wearing race&#x27;). There were many kinds of toga, each reserved by custom to a particular usage or social class.
* &quot;&quot; (&quot;toga of manhood&quot;) also known as &quot;toga alba&quot; or &quot;toga pura&quot;: A plain white toga, worn on formal occasions by adult male commoners, and by senators not having a curule magistracy. It represented adult male citizenship and its attendant rights, freedoms and responsibilities; traditionally given at a father&#x27;s discretion to his son during the feast of Liberalia, to mark the onset of puberty and legal &quot;coming of age&quot;, at around 14-17 years of age.
* &quot;Toga praetexta&quot;: a white toga with a broad purple stripe on its border, worn over a tunic with two broad, vertical purple stripes. It was formal costume for:
**Curule magistrates in their official functions, and traditionally, the Kings of Rome.
**Freeborn boys, and some freeborn girls, before they came of age. It marked their protection by law from sexual predation and immoral or immodest influence. A &quot;praetexta&quot; was thought effective against malignant magic, as were a boy&#x27;s bulla and a girl&#x27;s lunula.
**Some priesthoods, including the Pontifices, Tresviri Epulones, the augurs, and the Arval brothers.
* &quot;Toga candida&quot;: &quot;Bright toga&quot;; a toga rubbed with chalk to a dazzling white, worn by candidates (from Latin &quot;candida&quot;, &quot;pure white&quot;) for public office. Thus Persius speaks of a &quot;cretata ambitio&quot;, &quot;chalked ambition&quot;. &quot;Toga candida&quot; is the etymological source of the word &quot;candidate&quot;.
* &quot;Toga pulla&quot;: a &quot;dark toga&quot; was supposed to be worn by mourners at elite funerals. A &quot;toga praetexta&quot; was also acceptable as mourning wear, if turned inside out to conceal its stripe; so was a plain &quot;toga pura&quot;. Wearing a &quot;toga pulla&quot; at the feast that ended mourning was irreligious, ignorant, or plain bad manners. Cicero makes a distinction between the &quot;toga pulla&quot; and an ordinary toga deliberately &quot;dirtied&quot; by its wearer as a legitimate mark of protest or supplication.
* &quot;Toga picta&quot; (&quot;painted toga&quot;): Dyed solid purple, decorated with imagery in gold thread, and worn over a similarly decorated &quot;tunica palmata&quot;; used by generals in their triumphs. During the Empire, it was worn by consuls and emperors. Over time, it became increasingly elaborate, and was combined with elements of the consular &quot;trabea&quot;.
* &quot;Trabea&quot;, associated with citizens of equestrian rank; thus their description as &quot;trabeati&quot; in some contemporary Roman literature. It may have been a shorter form of toga, or a cloak, wrap or sash worn over a toga. It was white with some form of decoration. In the later Imperial era, &quot;trabea&quot; refers to elaborate forms of consular dress. Some later Roman and post-Roman sources describe it as solid purple or red, either identifying or confusing it with the dress worn by the ancient Roman kings (also used to clothe images of the gods) or reflecting changes in the &quot;trabea&quot; itself. More certainly, &quot;equites&quot; wore an angusticlavia, a tunic with narrow, vertical purple stripes, at least one of which would have been visible when worn with a toga or &quot;trabea&quot;, whatever its form.
* &quot;Laena&quot;, a long, heavy cloak worn by Flamen priesthoods, fastened at the shoulder with a brooch. A lost work by Suetonius describes it as a toga made &quot;duplex&quot; (doubled by folding over upon itself).

== As &quot;national dress&quot; ==
The toga&#x27;s most distinguishing feature was its semi-circular shape, which sets it apart from other cloaks of antiquity like the Greek &quot;himation&quot; or &quot;pallium&quot;. To Rothe, the rounded form suggests an origin in the very similar, semi-circular Etruscan &quot;tebenna&quot;. Norma Goldman believes that the earliest forms of all these garments would have been simple, rectangular lengths of cloth that served as both body-wrap and blanket for peasants, shepherds and itinerant herdsmen. Roman historians believed that Rome&#x27;s legendary founder and first king, the erstwhile shepherd Romulus, had worn a toga as his clothing of choice; the purple-bordered &quot;toga praetexta&quot; was supposedly used by Etruscan magistrates, and introduced to Rome by her third king, Tullus Hostilius.

In the wider context of classical Greco-Roman fashion, the Greek &quot;enkyklon&quot; (, &quot;circular [garment]&quot;) was perhaps similar in shape to the Roman toga, but never acquired the same significance as a distinctive mark of citizenship. The 2nd-century diviner Artemidorus Daldianus in his &quot;Oneirocritica&quot; derived the toga&#x27;s form and name from the Greek &quot;tebennos&quot; (τήβεννος), supposedly an Arcadian garment invented by and named after Temenus. Emilio Peruzzi claims that the toga was brought to Italy from Mycenaean Greece, its name based on Mycenaean Greek &quot;te-pa&quot;, referring to a heavy woollen garment or fabric.

=== In civil life ===
Roman society was strongly hierarchical, stratified and competitive. Landowning aristocrats occupied most seats in the senate and held the most senior magistracies. Magistrates were elected by their peers and &quot;the people&quot;; in Roman constitutional theory, they ruled by consent. In practice, they were a mutually competitive oligarchy, reserving the greatest power, wealth and prestige for their class. The commoners who made up the vast majority of the Roman electorate had limited influence on politics, unless barracking or voting &quot;en masse&quot;, or through representation by their tribunes. The Equites (sometimes loosely translated as &quot;knights&quot;) occupied a broadly mobile, mid-position between the lower senatorial and upper commoner class. Despite often extreme disparities of wealth and rank between the citizen classes, the toga identified them as a singular and exclusive civic body. 
Togas were relatively uniform in pattern and style but varied significantly in the quality and quantity of their fabric, and the marks of higher rank or office. The highest-status toga, the solidly purple, gold-embroidered &quot;toga picta&quot; could be worn only at particular ceremonies by the highest-ranking magistrates. Tyrian purple was supposedly reserved for the &quot;toga picta&quot;, the border of the &quot;toga praetexta&quot;, and elements of the priestly dress worn by the inviolate Vestal Virgins. It was colour-fast, extremely expensive and the &quot;most talked-about colour in Greco-Roman antiquity&quot;. Romans categorised it as a blood-red hue, which sanctified its wearer. The purple-bordered &quot;praetexta&quot; worn by freeborn youths acknowledged their vulnerability and sanctity in law. Once a boy came of age (usually at puberty) he adopted the plain white &quot;toga virilis&quot;; this meant that he was free to set up his own household, marry, and vote. Young girls who wore the &quot;praetexta&quot; on formal occasions put it aside at menarche or marriage, and adopted the &quot;stola&quot;. Even the whiteness of the &quot;toga virilis&quot; was subject to class distinction. Senatorial versions were expensively laundered to an exceptional, snowy white; those of lower ranking citizens were a duller shade, more cheaply laundered.

Citizenship carried specific privileges, rights and responsibilities. The &quot;formula togatorum&quot; (&quot;list of toga-wearers&quot;) listed the various military obligations that Rome&#x27;s Italian allies were required to supply to Rome in times of war. &quot;Togati&quot;, &quot;those who wear the toga&quot;, is not precisely equivalent to &quot;Roman citizens&quot;, and may mean more broadly &quot;Romanized&quot;. In Roman territories, the toga was explicitly forbidden to non-citizens; to foreigners, freedmen, and slaves; to Roman exiles; and to men of &quot;infamous&quot; career or shameful reputation; an individual&#x27;s status should be discernable at a glance. A freedman or foreigner might pose as a togate citizen, or a common citizen as an equestrian; such pretenders were sometimes ferreted out in the census. Formal seating arrangements in public theatres and circuses reflected the dominance of Rome&#x27;s togate elect. Senators sat at the very front, &quot;equites&quot; behind them, common citizens behind &quot;equites&quot;; and so on, through the non-togate mass of freedmen, foreigners, and slaves. Imposters were sometimes detected and evicted from the equestrian seats.

Various anecdotes reflect the toga&#x27;s symbolic value. In Livy&#x27;s history of Rome, the patrician hero Lucius Quinctius Cincinnatus, retired from public life and clad (presumably) in tunic or loincloth, is ploughing his field when emissaries of the Senate arrive, and ask him to put on his toga. His wife fetches it and he puts it on. Then he is told that he has been appointed dictator. He promptly heads for Rome. Donning the toga transforms Cincinnatus from rustic, sweaty ploughman – though a gentleman nevertheless, of impeccable stock and reputation – into Rome&#x27;s leading politician, eager to serve his country; a top-quality Roman. Rome&#x27;s abundant public and private statuary reinforced the notion that all Rome&#x27;s great men wore togas, and must always have done so.

=== Work and leisure ===
Traditionalists idealised Rome&#x27;s urban and rustic citizenry as descendants of a hardy, virtuous, toga-clad peasantry, but the toga&#x27;s bulk and complex drapery made it entirely impractical for manual work or physically active leisure. The toga was heavy, &quot;unwieldy, excessively hot, easily stained, and hard to launder&quot;. It was best suited to stately processions, public debate and oratory, sitting in the theatre or circus, and displaying oneself before one&#x27;s peers and inferiors while &quot;ostentatiously doing nothing&quot;.

Every male Roman citizen was entitled to wear some kind of toga – Martial refers to a lesser citizen&#x27;s &quot;small toga&quot; and a poor man&#x27;s &quot;little toga&quot; (both &quot;togula&quot;), but the poorest probably had to make do with a shabby, patched-up toga, if he bothered at all. Conversely, the costly, full-length toga seems to have been a rather awkward mark of distinction when worn by &quot;the wrong sort&quot;. The poet Horace writes &quot;of a rich ex-slave &#x27;parading from end to end of the Sacred Way in a toga three yards long&#x27; to show off his new status and wealth.&quot;

In the early 2nd century AD, the satirist Juvenal claimed that &quot;in a great part of Italy, no-one wears the toga, except in death&quot;; in Martial&#x27;s rural idyll there is &quot;never a lawsuit, the toga is scarce, the mind at ease&quot;. Most citizens who owned a toga would have cherished it as a costly material object, and worn it when they must for special occasions. Family, friendships and alliances, and the gainful pursuit of wealth through business and trade would have been their major preoccupations, not the otium (cultured leisure) claimed as a right by the elite. Rank, reputation and &quot;Romanitas&quot; were paramount, even in death, so almost invariably, a male citizen&#x27;s memorial image showed him clad in his toga. He wore it at his funeral, and it probably served as his shroud.

Despite the overwhelming quantity of Roman togate portraits at every social level, and in every imaginable circumstance, at most times Rome&#x27;s thoroughfares would have been crowded with citizens and non-citizens in a variety of colourful garments, with few togas in evidence. Only a higher-class Roman, a magistrate, would have had lictors to clear his way, and even then, wearing a toga was a challenge. The toga&#x27;s apparent natural simplicity and &quot;elegant, flowing lines&quot; were the result of diligent practice and cultivation; to avoid an embarrassing disarrangement of its folds, its wearer had to walk with measured, stately gait, yet with virile purpose and energy. If he moved too slowly, he might seem aimless, &quot;sluggish of mind&quot; – or, worst of all, &quot;womanly&quot;. Vout (1996) suggests that the toga&#x27;s most challenging qualities as garment fitted the Romans&#x27; view of themselves and their civilization. Like the empire itself, the peace that the toga came to represent had been earned through the extraordinary and unremitting collective efforts of its citizens, who could therefore claim &quot;the time and dignity to dress in such a way&quot;.

== Patronage and &quot;salutationes&quot; ==
Patronage was a cornerstone of Roman politics, business and social relationships. A good patron offered advancement, security, honour, wealth, government contracts and other business opportunities to his client, who might be further down in the social or economic scale, or more rarely, his equal or superior. A good client canvassed political support for his patron, or his patron&#x27;s nominee; he advanced his patron&#x27;s interests using his own business, family and personal connections. Freedmen with an aptitude for business could become extremely wealthy; but to negotiate citizenship for themselves, or more likely their sons, they had to find a patron prepared to commend them. Clients seeking patronage had to attend the patron&#x27;s early-morning formal &quot;salutatio&quot; (&quot;greeting session&quot;), held in the semi-public, grand reception room (&quot;atrium&quot;) of his family house (&quot;domus&quot;). Citizen-clients were expected to wear the toga appropriate to their status, and to wear it correctly and smartly or risk affront to their host.

Martial and his friend Juvenal suffered the system as clients for years, and found the whole business demeaning. A client had to be at his patron&#x27;s beck and call, to perform whatever &quot;togate works&quot; were required; and the patron might even expect to be addressed as &quot;domine&quot; (lord, or master); a citizen-client of the equestrian class, superior to all lesser mortals by virtue of rank and costume, might thus approach the shameful condition of dependent servitude. For a client whose patron was another&#x27;s client, the potential for shame was still worse. Even as a satirical analogy, the equation of togate client and slave would have shocked those who cherished the toga as a symbol of personal dignity and &quot;auctoritas&quot; – a meaning underlined during the Saturnalia festival, when the toga was &quot;very consciously put aside&quot;, in a ritualised, strictly limited inversion of the master-slave relationship.

Patrons were few, and most had to compete with their peers to attract the best, most useful clients. Clients were many, and those of least interest to the patron had to scrabble for notice among the &quot;togate horde&quot; (&quot;turbae togatae&quot;). One in a dirty or patched toga would likely be subject to ridicule; or he might, if sufficiently dogged and persistent, secure a pittance of cash, or perhaps a dinner. When the patron left his house to conduct his business of the day at the law courts, forum or wherever else, escorted (if a magistrate) by his togate lictors, his clients must form his retinue. Each togate client represented a potential vote: to impress his peers and inferiors, and stay ahead in the game, a patron should have as many high-quality clients as possible; or at least, he should seem to. Martial has one patron hire a herd (&quot;grex&quot;) of fake clients in togas, then pawn his ring to pay for his evening meal.

The emperor Marcus Aurelius, rather than wear the &quot;dress to which his rank entitled him&quot; at his own &quot;salutationes&quot;, chose to wear a plain white citizen&#x27;s toga instead; an act of modesty for any patron, unlike Caligula, who wore a triumphal &quot;toga picta&quot; or any other garment he chose, according to whim; or Nero, who caused considerable offence when he received visiting senators while dressed in a tunic embroidered with flowers, topped off with a muslin neckerchief.

== Oratory ==
In oratory, the toga came into its own. Quintilian&#x27;s (circa 95 AD) offers advice on how best to plead cases at Rome&#x27;s law-courts, before the watching multitude&#x27;s informed and critical eye. Effective pleading was a calculated artistic performance, but must seem utterly natural. First impressions counted; the lawyer must present himself as a Roman should: &quot;virile and splendid&quot; in his toga, with statuesque posture and &quot;natural good looks&quot;. He should be well groomed – but not too well; no primping of the hair, jewellery or any other &quot;feminine&quot; perversions of a Roman man&#x27;s proper appearance. Quintilian gives precise instructions on the correct use of the toga – its cut, style, and the arrangements of its folds. Its fabric could be old-style rough wool, or new and smoother if preferred – but definitely not silk. The orator&#x27;s movements should be dignified, and to the point; he should move only as he must, to address a particular person, a particular section of the audience. He should employ to good effect that subtle &quot;language of the hands&quot; for which Roman oratory was famed; no extravagant gestures, no wiggling of the shoulders, no moving &quot;like a dancer&quot;.

To a great extent, the toga itself determined the orator&#x27;s style of delivery: &quot;we should not cover the shoulder and the whole of the throat, otherwise our dress will be unduly narrowed and will lose the impressive effect produced by breadth at the chest. The left arm should only be raised so far as to form a right angle at the elbow, while the edge of the toga should fall in equal lengths on either side.&quot; If, on the other hand, the &quot;toga falls down at the beginning of our speech, or when we have only proceeded but a little way, the failure to replace it is a sign of indifference, or sloth, or sheer ignorance of the way in which clothes should be worn&quot;. By the time he had presented his case, the orator was likely to be hot and sweaty; but even this could be employed to good effect.

== In public morals ==
Roman moralists &quot;placed an ideological premium on the simple and the frugal&quot;. Aulus Gellius claimed that the earliest Romans, famously tough, virile and dignified, had worn togas with no undergarment; not even a skimpy tunic. Towards the end of the Republic, the arch-conservative Cato the Younger favoured the shorter, ancient Republican type of toga; it was dark and &quot;scanty&quot; (&quot;exigua&quot;), and Cato wore it without tunic or shoes; all this would have been recognised as an expression of his moral probity. Die-hard Roman traditionalists deplored an ever-increasing Roman appetite for ostentation, &quot;un-Roman&quot; comfort and luxuries, and sartorial offences such as Celtic trousers, brightly coloured Syrian robes and cloaks. The manly toga itself could signify corruption, if worn too loosely, or worn over a long-sleeved, &quot;effeminate&quot; tunic, or woven too fine and thin, near transparent.

Appian&#x27;s history of Rome finds its strife-torn Late Republic tottering at the edge of chaos; most seem to dress as they like, not as they ought: &quot;For now the Roman people are much mixed with foreigners, there is equal citizenship for freedmen, and slaves dress like their masters. With the exception of the Senators, free citizens and slaves wear the same costume.&quot;

The Augustan Principate brought peace, and declared its intent as the restoration of true Republican order, morality and tradition.
Augustus was determined to bring back &quot;the traditional style&quot; (the toga). He ordered that any theater-goer in dark (or colored or dirty) clothing be sent to the back seats, traditionally reserved for those who had no toga; ordinary or common women, freedmen, low-class foreigners and slaves. He reserved the most honorable seats, front of house, for senators and &quot;equites&quot;; this was how it had always been, before the chaos of the civil wars; or rather, how it was supposed to have been. Infuriated by the sight of a darkly clad throng of men at a public meeting, he sarcastically quoted Virgil at them: &quot;Romanos, rerum dominos, gentemque togatam&quot; (&quot;Romans, lords of the world and the toga-wearing people&quot;), then ordered that in future, the aediles ban anyone not wearing the toga from the Forum and its environs – Rome&#x27;s &quot;civic heart&quot;.

During the reign of Augustus, the &quot;toga rasa&quot; was introduced, an ordinary toga for which the rough fibers were teased from the woven nap, then shaved back to a smoother, more comfortable finish. By Pliny&#x27;s day (circa 70 AD), this was probably standard among the elite. Pliny also describes a glossy, smooth, lightweight but dense fabric woven from poppy-stem fibers and flax, in use from at least the time of the Punic Wars. Although probably appropriate for a &quot;summer toga&quot;, it was criticized for its improper luxuriance.

=== Women ===
Some Romans believed that in earlier times, both genders and all classes had worn the toga. Radicke (2002) claims that this belief goes back to a Late Antique scholiast misreading of earlier Roman writings. Women could also be citizens, but by the mid-to-late Republican era, respectable women were &quot;stolatae&quot; (stola-wearing), expected to embody and display an appropriate set of female virtues: Vout cites &quot;pudicitia&quot; and &quot;fides&quot; as examples. Women&#x27;s adoption of the &quot;stola&quot; may have paralleled the increasing identification of the toga with citizen men, but this seems to have been a far from straightforward process. An equestrian statue, described by Pliny the Elder as &quot;ancient&quot;, showed the early Republican heroine Cloelia on horseback, wearing a toga. The unmarried daughters of respectable, reasonably well-off citizens sometimes wore the &quot;toga praetexta&quot; until puberty or marriage, when they adopted the &quot;stola&quot;, which they wore over a full-length, usually long-sleeved tunic.

Higher-class female prostitutes (&quot;meretrices&quot;) and women divorced for adultery were denied the &quot;stola&quot;. &quot;Meretrices&quot; might have been expected or perhaps compelled, at least in public, to wear the &quot;female toga&quot; (&quot;toga muliebris&quot;). This use of the toga appears unique; all others categorized as &quot;infamous and disreputable&quot; were explicitly forbidden to wear it. In this context, modern sources understand the toga – or perhaps merely the description of particular women as &quot;togata&quot; – as an instrument of inversion and realignment; a respectable (thus &quot;stola&quot;-clad) woman should be demure, sexually passive, modest and obedient, morally impeccable. The archetypical &quot;meretrix&quot; of Roman literature dresses gaudily and provocatively. Edwards (1997) describes her as &quot;antithetical to the Roman male citizen&quot;. An adulterous matron betrayed her family and reputation; and if found guilty, and divorced, the law forbade her remarriage to a Roman citizen. In the public gaze, she was aligned with the &quot;meretrix&quot;. When worn by a woman in this later era, the toga would have been a &quot;blatant display&quot; of her &quot;exclusion from the respectable Roman hierarchy&quot;. However, the view that a convicted adulteress (&quot;moecha damnata&quot;) actually wore a toga in public has been challenged; Radicke believes that the only prostitutes who could be made to wear particular items of clothing were unfree, compelled by their owners or pimps to wear the relatively shorter, &quot;skimpy&quot;, less costly &quot;toga exigua&quot;, which was more revealing, easily opened, and thus convenient to their profession.

== Roman military ==
Until the so-called &quot;Marian reforms&quot; of the Late Republic, the lower ranks of Rome&#x27;s military forces were &quot;farmer-soldiers&quot;, a militia of citizen smallholders conscripted for the duration of hostilities, expected to provide their own arms and armour. Citizens of higher status served in senior military posts as a foundation for their progress to high civil office (see &quot;cursus honorum&quot;). The Romans believed that in Rome&#x27;s earliest days, its military had gone to war in togas, hitching them up and back for action by using what became known as the &quot;Gabine cinch&quot;. In 206 BC, Scipio Africanus was sent 1,200 togas and 12,000 tunics for his operations in North Africa. As part of a peace settlement of 205 BC, two formerly rebellious Spanish tribes provided Roman troops with togas and heavy cloaks. In the Macedonian campaign of 169 BC, the army was sent 6,000 togas and 30,000 tunics. From at least the mid-Republic on, the military reserved their togas for formal leisure and religious festivals; the tunic and sagum (heavy rectangular cloak held on the shoulder with a brooch) were used or preferred for active duty.

Late republican practice and legal reform allowed the creation of standing armies, and opened a military career to any Roman citizen or freedman of good reputation. A soldier who showed the requisite &quot;disciplined ferocity&quot; in battle and was held in esteem by his peers and superiors could be promoted to higher rank: a plebeian could achieve equestrian status. Non-citizens and foreign-born auxiliaries given honourable discharge were usually granted citizenship, land or stipend, the right to wear the toga, and an obligation to the patron who had granted these honours; usually their senior officer. A dishonourable discharge meant &quot;infamia&quot;. Colonies of retired veterans were scattered throughout the Empire. In literary stereotype, civilians are routinely bullied by burly soldiers, inclined to throw their weight around.

Though soldiers were citizens, Cicero typifies the former as &quot;&quot;sagum&quot; wearing&quot; and the latter as &quot;togati&quot;. He employs the phrase &quot;cedant arma togae&quot; (&quot;let arms yield to the toga&quot;), meaning &quot;may peace replace war&quot;, or &quot;may military power yield to civilian power&quot;, in the context of his own uneasy alliance with Pompey. He intended it as metonym, linking his own &quot;power to command&quot; as consul (&quot;imperator togatus&quot;) with Pompey&#x27;s as general (&quot;imperator armatus&quot;); but it was interpreted as a request to step down. Cicero, having lost Pompey&#x27;s ever-wavering support, was driven to exile. In reality, arms rarely yielded to civilian power. During the early Roman Imperial era, members of the Praetorian Guard (the emperor&#x27;s personal guard as &quot;First Citizen&quot;, and a military force under his personal command), concealed their weapons under white, civilian-style togas when on duty in the city, offering the reassuring illusion that they represented a traditional Republican, civilian authority, rather than the military arm of an Imperial autocracy.

== In religion ==

Citizens attending Rome&#x27;s frequent religious festivals and associated games were expected to wear the toga. The &quot;toga praetexta&quot; was the normal garb for most Roman priesthoods, which tended to be the preserve of high status citizens. When offering sacrifice, libation and prayer, and when performing augury, the officiant priest covered his head with a fold of his toga, drawn up from the back: the ritual was thus performed &quot;capite velato&quot; (with covered head). This was believed a distinctively Roman form, in contrast to Etruscan, Greek and other foreign practices. The Etruscans seem to have sacrificed bareheaded (&quot;capite aperto&quot;). In Rome, the so-called (&quot;Greek rite&quot;) was used for deities believed Greek in origin or character; the officiant, even if a Roman citizen, wore Greek-style robes with wreathed or bare head, not the toga. It has been argued that the Roman expression of piety &quot;capite velato&quot; influenced Paul&#x27;s prohibition against Christian men praying with covered heads: &quot;Any man who prays or prophesies with his head covered dishonors his head.&quot;

An officiant who needed free use of both hands to perform ritualas while plowing the sulcus primigenius undertaken at the founding of new coloniescould employ the &quot;Gabine cinch&quot; or &quot;robe&quot; () or &quot;rite&quot; () which tied the toga back. This style, later said to have been part of Etruscan priestly dress, was associated by the Romans with their early wars with nearby Gabii and was thus used during Roman declarations of war.

== Materials ==

The traditional toga was made of wool, which was thought to possess powers to avert misfortune and the evil eye; the &quot;toga praetexta&quot; (used by magistrates, priests and freeborn youths) was always woollen. Wool-working was thought a highly respectable occupation for Roman women. A traditional, high-status mater familias demonstrated her industry and frugality by placing wool-baskets, spindles and looms in the household&#x27;s semi-public reception area, the &quot;atrium&quot;. Augustus was particularly proud that his wife and daughter had set the best possible example to other Roman women by, allegedly, spinning and weaving his clothing.

Hand-woven cloth was slow and costly to produce, and compared to simpler forms of clothing, the toga used an extravagant amount of it. To minimise waste, the smaller, old-style forms of toga may have been woven as a single, seamless, selvedged piece; the later, larger versions may have been made from several pieces sewn together; size seems to have counted for a lot. More cloth signified greater wealth and usually, though not invariably, higher rank. The purple-red border of the &quot;toga praetexta&quot; was woven onto the toga using a process known as &quot;tablet weaving&quot;; such applied borders are a feature of Etruscan dress.

Modern sources broadly agree that if made from a single piece of fabric, the toga of a high status Roman in the late Republic would have required a piece approximately in length; in the Imperial era, around , a third more than its predecessor, and in the late Imperial era around wide and up to in length for the most complex, pleated forms.
=== Features and styles ===
The toga was draped, rather than fastened, around the body, and was held in position by the weight and friction of its fabric. Supposedly, no pins or brooches were employed. The more voluminous and complex the style, the more assistance would have been required to achieve the desired effect. In classical statuary, draped togas consistently show certain features and folds, identified and named in contemporary literature.

The &quot;sinus&quot; (literally, a bay or inlet) appears in the Imperial era as a loose over-fold, slung from beneath the left arm, downwards across the chest, then upwards to the right shoulder. Early examples were slender, but later forms were much fuller; the loop hangs at knee-length, suspended there by draping over the crook of the right arm.

The &quot;umbo&quot; (literally &quot;knob&quot;) was a pouch of the toga&#x27;s fabric pulled out over the &quot;balteus&quot; (the diagonal section of the toga across the chest) in imperial-era forms of the toga. Its added weight and friction would have helped (though not very effectively) secure the toga&#x27;s fabric onto the left shoulder. As the toga developed, the &quot;umbo&quot; grew in size.

The most complex togas appear on high-quality portrait busts and imperial reliefs of the mid-to-late Empire, probably reserved for emperors and the highest civil officials. The so-called &quot;banded&quot; or &quot;stacked&quot; toga (Latinised as &quot;toga contabulata&quot;) appeared in the late 2nd century AD and was distinguished by its broad, smooth, slab-like panels or swathes of pleated material, more or less correspondent with &quot;umbo&quot;, &quot;sinus&quot; and &quot;balteus&quot;, or applied over the same. On statuary, one swathe of fabric rises from low between the legs, and is laid over the left shoulder; another more or less follows the upper edge of the &quot;sinus&quot;; yet another follows the lower edge of a more-or-less vestigial &quot;balteus&quot; then descends to the upper shin. As in other forms, the &quot;sinus&quot; itself is hung over the crook of the right arm. If its full-length representations are accurate, it would have severely constrained its wearer&#x27;s movements. Dressing in a &quot;toga contabulata&quot; would have taken some time, and specialist assistance. When not in use, it required careful storage in some form of press or hanger to keep it in shape. Such inconvenient features of the later toga are confirmed by Tertullian, who preferred the &quot;pallium&quot;. High-status (consular or senatorial) images from the late 4th century show a further ornate variation, known as the &quot;Broad Eastern Toga&quot;; it hung to the mid-calf, was heavily embroidered, and was worn over two &quot;pallium&quot;-style undergarments, one of which had full length sleeves. Its &quot;sinus&quot; was draped over the left arm.

== Decline ==
In the long term, the toga saw both a gradual transformation and decline, punctuated by attempts to retain it as an essential feature of true &quot;Romanitas&quot;. It was never a popular garment; in the late 1st century, Tacitus could disparage the urban plebs as a &quot;vulgus tunicatus&quot; (&quot;tunic-wearing crowd&quot;). Hadrian issued an edict compelling &quot;equites&quot; and senators to wear the toga in public; the edict did not mention commoners. The extension of citizenship, from around 6 million citizens under Augustus to between 40 and 60 million under the &quot;universal citizenship&quot; of Caracalla&#x27;s Constitutio Antoniniana (212 AD), probably further reduced whatever distinctive value the toga still held for commoners, and accelerated its abandonment among their class. Meanwhile, the office-holding aristocracy adopted ever more elaborate, complex, costly and impractical forms of toga.

The toga nevertheless remained the formal costume of the Roman senatorial elite. A law issued by co-emperors Gratian, Valentinian II and Theodosius I in 382 AD (Codex Theodosianus 14.10.1) states that while senators in the city of Rome may wear the paenula in daily life, they must wear the toga when attending their official duties. Failure to do so would result in the senator being stripped of rank and authority, and of the right to enter the Curia Julia. Byzantine Greek art and portraiture show the highest functionaries of court, church and state in magnificently wrought, extravagantly exclusive court dress and priestly robes; some at least are thought to be versions of the Imperial toga. In the West, the kings and aristocrats of new European kingdoms styled their dress after that of late military generals rather than the senatorial order, and the toga thus did not survive the end of centralized Roman governance.

== See also ==

* Clothing in ancient Rome
* Tricivara
* Toga party

== References ==
=== Citations ===
=== Sources ===
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*Radicke, Jan (2022). &quot;Roman Women&#x27;s Dress&quot;, Berlin: De Gruyter. 
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*

== External links ==

*Doctor Toga
*Toga (Nova Roma) – How to make a toga
*William Smith&#x27;s &quot;A Dictionary of Greek and Roman Antiquities&quot; on the toga</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q183171" start="4" end="8" title="Toga" label="toga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="40" end="52" title="Ancient Rome" label="Ancient Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q42329" start="186" end="190" title="wool" label="wool"/>
<link wikidata="Q201714" start="212" end="217" title="tunic" label="tunic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2345364" start="222" end="248" title="Roman historiography" label="Roman historical tradition"/>
<link wikidata="Q2186" start="295" end="302" title="Romulus" label="Romulus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438918" start="421" end="432" title="Women in ancient Rome" label="Roman women"/>
<link wikidata="Q1535312" start="455" end="460" title="stola" label="stola"/>
<link wikidata="Q213810" start="505" end="524" title="Roman citizenship" label="male Roman citizens"/>
<link wikidata="Q234213" start="548" end="556" title="adultery" label="adultery"/>
<link wikidata="Q11774442" start="578" end="590" title="Prostitution in ancient Rome" label="prostitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q162314" start="732" end="748" title="Roman law" label="laws and customs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398" start="1952" end="1958" title="Virgil" label="Virgil"/>
<link wikidata="Q2098" start="1963" end="1970" title="Martial" label="Martial"/>
<link wikidata="Q130614" start="2313" end="2321" title="Roman Senate" label="senators"/>
<link wikidata="Q499146" start="2335" end="2352" title="Imperium" label="curule magistracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q947100" start="2530" end="2539" title="Liberalia" label="Liberalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q499146" start="2810" end="2828" title="Imperium" label="Curule magistrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q55375123" start="2881" end="2894" title="Kings of Rome" label="Kings of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q2614138" start="3146" end="3151" title="Bulla (amulet)" label="bulla"/>
<link wikidata="Q16931543" start="3170" end="3176" title="Lunula (amulet)" label="lunula"/>
<link wikidata="Q13365614" start="3212" end="3222" title="Pontifices" label="Pontifices"/>
<link wikidata="Q541639" start="3224" end="3241" title="Epulones" label="Tresviri Epulones"/>
<link wikidata="Q215909" start="3247" end="3252" title="augur" label="augur"/>
<link wikidata="Q716908" start="3263" end="3277" title="Arval Brethren" label="Arval brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q618536" start="3386" end="3395" title="candidate" label="candidate"/>
<link wikidata="Q20778343" start="3458" end="3471" title="Roman magistrate" label="public office"/>
<link wikidata="Q332785" start="3478" end="3485" title="Persius" label="Persius"/>
<link wikidata="Q750652" start="3721" end="3729" title="Mourning" label="mourners"/>
<link wikidata="Q363013" start="3739" end="3747" title="Roman funerary practices" label="funerals"/>
<link wikidata="Q657438" start="4393" end="4401" title="Roman triumph" label="triumphs"/>
<link wikidata="Q40779" start="4437" end="4444" title="Roman consul" label="consuls"/>
<link wikidata="Q122166" start="4621" end="4636" title="Equites" label="equestrian rank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454482" start="5241" end="5254" title="angusticlavia" label="angusticlavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q585305" start="5461" end="5467" title="Flamen" label="Flamen"/>
<link wikidata="Q10133" start="5536" end="5545" title="Suetonius" label="Suetonius"/>
<link wikidata="Q781731" start="5814" end="5822" title="himation" label="himation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5404909" start="5934" end="5942" title="Etruscan society" label="Etruscan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2186" start="6276" end="6283" title="Romulus" label="Romulus"/>
<link wikidata="Q200859" start="6462" end="6478" title="Tullus Hostilius" label="Tullus Hostilius"/>
<link wikidata="Q937284" start="6515" end="6526" title="Greco-Roman world" label="Greco-Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q110588797" start="6552" end="6560" title="enkyklon" label="enkyklon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043197" start="6745" end="6752" title="divination" label="diviner"/>
<link wikidata="Q445848" start="6753" end="6774" title="Artemidorus Daldianus" label="Artemidorus Daldianus"/>
<link wikidata="Q12898802" start="6908" end="6916" title="Arcadia (region)" label="Arcadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="7013" end="7018" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q181264" start="7024" end="7040" title="Mycenaean Greece" label="Mycenaean Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q668366" start="7060" end="7075" title="Mycenaean Greek" label="Mycenaean Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q130614" start="7285" end="7291" title="Roman senate" label="senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q20778343" start="7317" end="7329" title="Roman magistrate" label="magistracies"/>
<link wikidata="Q104687" start="7582" end="7591" title="Plebeian" label="commoners"/>
<link wikidata="Q11704729" start="7766" end="7774" title="Tribune of the Plebs" label="tribunes"/>
<link wikidata="Q122166" start="7780" end="7787" title="Equestrian order" label="Equites"/>
<link wikidata="Q20778343" start="8398" end="8409" title="Roman magistrate" label="magistrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q5180360" start="8411" end="8424" title="Tyrian purple" label="Tyrian purple"/>
<link wikidata="Q188761" start="8584" end="8598" title="Vestal Virgins" label="Vestal Virgins"/>
<link wikidata="Q492514" start="9156" end="9164" title="menarche" label="menarche"/>
<link wikidata="Q1535312" start="9200" end="9205" title="stola" label="stola"/>
<link wikidata="Q3748388" start="9535" end="9552" title="formula togatorum" label="formula togatorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q733149" start="9651" end="9665" title="socii" label="Italian allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q747008" start="9863" end="9872" title="Romanization (cultural)" label="Romanized"/>
<link wikidata="Q6028761" start="10021" end="10048" title="Infamia" label="&amp;quot;infamous&amp;quot; career"/>
<link wikidata="Q189851" start="10281" end="10287" title="Roman census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2039" start="10722" end="10726" title="Livy" label="Livy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155892" start="10734" end="10749" title="Ab Urbe Condita Libri (Livy)" label="history of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q154668" start="10755" end="10769" title="Patrician (ancient Rome)" label="patrician hero"/>
<link wikidata="Q309637" start="10770" end="10798" title="Lucius Quinctius Cincinnatus" label="Lucius Quinctius Cincinnatus"/>
<link wikidata="Q130614" start="10916" end="10922" title="Roman Senate" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q236885" start="11045" end="11053" title="Roman dictator" label="dictator"/>
<link wikidata="Q2098" start="12100" end="12107" title="Martial" label="Martial"/>
<link wikidata="Q655172" start="12557" end="12567" title="Via Sacra" label="Sacred Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q193800" start="12689" end="12696" title="Juvenal" label="Juvenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751418" start="13176" end="13181" title="otium" label="otium"/>
<link wikidata="Q7362697" start="13261" end="13270" title="Romanitas" label="Romanitas"/>
<link wikidata="Q56881933" start="14703" end="14712" title="Patronage in ancient Rome" label="Patronage"/>
<link wikidata="Q189265" start="15579" end="15585" title="Atrium (architecture)" label="atrium"/>
<link wikidata="Q782970" start="15620" end="15625" title="domus" label="domus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2098" start="15779" end="15786" title="Martial" label="Martial"/>
<link wikidata="Q193800" start="15802" end="15809" title="Juvenal" label="Juvenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q122166" start="16121" end="16137" title="Equites" label="equestrian class"/>
<link wikidata="Q207213" start="16572" end="16582" title="Saturnalia" label="Saturnalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q59671" start="17302" end="17308" title="lictor" label="lictor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430" start="17695" end="17710" title="Marcus Aurelius" label="Marcus Aurelius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1409" start="17917" end="17925" title="Caligula" label="Caligula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413" start="18024" end="18028" title="Nero" label="Nero"/>
<link wikidata="Q193769" start="18241" end="18251" title="Quintilian" label="Quintilian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2963957" start="19288" end="19309" title="chironomia" label="language of the hands"/>
<link wikidata="Q294800" start="20373" end="20386" title="Aulus Gellius" label="Aulus Gellius"/>
<link wikidata="Q193506" start="20576" end="20592" title="Cato the Younger" label="Cato the Younger"/>
<link wikidata="Q487623" start="21207" end="21218" title="Transparency (optics)" label="transparent"/>
<link wikidata="Q190368" start="21221" end="21227" title="Appian" label="Appian"/>
<link wikidata="Q206414" start="21616" end="21626" title="Principate" label="Principate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405" start="21735" end="21743" title="Augustus" label="Augustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398" start="22343" end="22349" title="Virgil" label="Virgil"/>
<link wikidata="Q205757" start="22516" end="22522" title="aedile" label="aedile"/>
<link wikidata="Q82778" start="22836" end="22841" title="Pliny the elder" label="Pliny"/>
<link wikidata="Q48277" start="23240" end="23247" title="genders" label="genders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1535312" start="23512" end="23517" title="stola" label="stola"/>
<link wikidata="Q2117350" start="23614" end="23623" title="pudicitia" label="pudicitia"/>
<link wikidata="Q605139" start="23640" end="23645" title="Fides (deity)" label="fides"/>
<link wikidata="Q659396" start="23859" end="23876" title="equestrian statue" label="equestrian statue"/>
<link wikidata="Q868015" start="23967" end="23974" title="Cloelia" label="Cloelia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1535312" start="24175" end="24180" title="stola" label="stola"/>
<link wikidata="Q36633" start="24273" end="24284" title="prostitutes" label="prostitutes"/>
<link wikidata="Q11774442" start="24292" end="24302" title="Meretrix" label="meretrices"/>
<link wikidata="Q234213" start="24333" end="24341" title="adultery" label="adultery"/>
<link wikidata="Q6028761" start="24596" end="24633" title="Infamia" label="&amp;quot;infamous and disreputable&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128962" start="26019" end="26033" title="Marian reforms" label="Marian reforms"/>
<link wikidata="Q27518" start="26394" end="26408" title="cursus honorum" label="cursus honorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3373229" start="26588" end="26600" title="cinctus Gabinus" label="Gabine cinch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2253" start="26619" end="26635" title="Scipio Africanus" label="Scipio Africanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q304143" start="27056" end="27061" title="sagum" label="sagum"/>
<link wikidata="Q104687" start="27493" end="27501" title="plebeian" label="plebeian"/>
<link wikidata="Q122166" start="27516" end="27526" title="Equestrian order" label="equestrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1626833" start="27583" end="27603" title="Honesta missio" label="honourable discharge"/>
<link wikidata="Q6028761" start="27814" end="27821" title="infamia" label="infamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q125414" start="28391" end="28397" title="Pompey" label="Pompey"/>
<link wikidata="Q499146" start="28488" end="28497" title="Imperium" label="imperator"/>
<link wikidata="Q181733" start="28807" end="28823" title="Praetorian Guard" label="Praetorian Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367629" start="29239" end="29258" title="Roman festivals" label="religious festivals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216498" start="29274" end="29279" title="Ludi" label="games"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333686" start="29473" end="29481" title="libation" label="libation"/>
<link wikidata="Q779777" start="29514" end="29520" title="augury" label="augury"/>
<link wikidata="Q9200" start="30174" end="30178" title="St. Paul" label="Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q1512731" start="30420" end="30438" title="sulcus primigenius" label="sulcus primigenius"/>
<link wikidata="Q756780" start="30473" end="30481" title="Roman colonia" label="colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3373229" start="30498" end="30542" title="cinctus Gabinus" label="&amp;quot;Gabine cinch&amp;quot; or &amp;quot;robe&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q11884379" start="30639" end="30662" title="Etruscan religion" label="Etruscan priestly dress"/>
<link wikidata="Q614510" start="30727" end="30732" title="Gabii" label="Gabii"/>
<link wikidata="Q334516" start="30764" end="30783" title="declarations of war" label="declarations of war"/>
<link wikidata="Q620591" start="30871" end="30897" title="Apotropaic magic" label="powers to avert misfortune"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020115" start="30906" end="30914" title="evil eye" label="evil eye"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364262" start="31119" end="31133" title="mater familias" label="mater familias"/>
<link wikidata="Q189265" start="31280" end="31286" title="Atrium (architecture)" label="atrium"/>
<link wikidata="Q910914" start="32025" end="32039" title="tablet weaving" label="tablet weaving"/>
<link wikidata="Q174929" start="34930" end="34940" title="Tertullian" label="Tertullian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3063290" start="34966" end="34973" title="Pallium (Roman cloak)" label="pallium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2161" start="35569" end="35576" title="Tacitus" label="Tacitus"/>
<link wikidata="Q104687" start="35603" end="35607" title="pleb" label="pleb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427" start="35678" end="35685" title="Hadrian" label="Hadrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1446" start="35963" end="35972" title="Caracalla" label="Caracalla"/>
<link wikidata="Q312584" start="35980" end="36003" title="Constitutio Antoniniana" label="Constitutio Antoniniana"/>
<link wikidata="Q189108" start="36380" end="36387" title="Gratian" label="Gratian"/>
<link wikidata="Q46846" start="36389" end="36403" title="Valentinian II" label="Valentinian II"/>
<link wikidata="Q46696" start="36408" end="36420" title="Theodosius I" label="Theodosius I"/>
<link wikidata="Q4300" start="36432" end="36450" title="Codex Theodosianus" label="Codex Theodosianus"/>
<link wikidata="Q203224" start="36520" end="36527" title="paenula" label="paenula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144514" start="36718" end="36729" title="Curia Julia" label="Curia Julia"/>
<link wikidata="Q211884" start="36731" end="36766" title="Byzantine art" label="Byzantine Greek art and portraiture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2457980" start="37218" end="37242" title="Clothing in ancient Rome" label="Clothing in ancient Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q504779" start="37245" end="37254" title="Tricivara" label="Tricivara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1113775" start="37257" end="37267" title="Toga party" label="Toga party"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="187382" wikidata="Q838162" url="?curid=187382" title="Lappet-faced vulture">
<text>The lappet-faced vulture or Nubian vulture (Torgos tracheliotos) is an Old World vulture belonging to the bird order Accipitriformes, which also includes eagles, kites, buzzards and hawks. It is the only member of the genus Torgos. It is not closely related to the superficially similar New World vultures, and does not share the good sense of smell of some members of that family of birds.

The lappet-faced vulture was formerly considered monotypical, but now is separated into two subspecies. The nominate race lives throughout Africa. The subspecies &quot;T. t. negevensis&quot;, differing considerably in appearance from African vultures (as described below) is endemic to the Arabian Peninsula.

== Name ==
The scientific name is Greek, meaning &quot;Cartilage-eared Vulture&quot;.

==Distribution==
This species is patchily distributed through much of Africa and the Arabian Peninsula, though it is absent from much of the central and western parts of the continent and declining elsewhere in its range. The lappet-faced vulture breeds in Senegal, Mali, Mauritania, Burkina Faso, Niger, Chad, Sudan, Egypt, Ethiopia, Somalia, Kenya, Tanzania, Uganda, Rwanda, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Zambia, Malawi, Mozambique, Eswatini, South Africa, Zimbabwe, Botswana and Namibia. On the Arabian Peninsula, it breeds in Yemen, Oman, the United Arab Emirates and Saudi Arabia. It is also present in Gambia, Guinea, Ivory Coast, Benin, the Central African Republic and Angola, as well as a single vagrant record in Kuwait.

==Habitat==
This vulture prefers to live in dry savannah, thornbush, arid plains, deserts with scattered trees in wadis, open mountain slopes. They are usually found in undisturbed open country with a scattering of trees and apparently prefer areas with minimal grass cover. While foraging, they can wander into denser habitats and even into human inhabited areas, especially if drawn to road kills. They may be found in elevation from sea-level to .

==Description==

The lappet-faced vulture is a very large species, ranking as the longest and largest winged vulture in its range, behind the closely related cinereous vulture, although some co-occurring &quot;Gyps&quot; vultures tend to be heavier on average, especially the Cape vulture and Eurasian griffon. This species measures around in body length, with a wingspan of . Among the standard measurements, the wing chord is , the tail is and the tarsus is . The bill, at up to long and deep, ranks as one of the largest of any accipitrid, although a reported culmen length of is slightly less than the culmen length of the cinereous vulture. Wild vultures of the subspecies &quot;T. t. tracheliotus&quot; range from and in East Africa, average only . On the other hand, captive vultures of the larger &quot;T. t. negevensis&quot; subspecies weighed in males and in females.

Overall, the lappet-faced vulture is blackish above with a strongly contrasting white thigh feathers. The black feathers on the back of African vultures are lined with brown, while Arabian birds are dark brown rather than black above. The underside can range from pure white to buff-brown. Like many vultures, it has a bald head. The head coloration can range from reddish in southern Africa to dull pink in more northern Africa to pink on the back of the head and gray on the front in the Arabian Peninsula. The combination of the colorful head and fleshy folds on the side of it are distinctive. The bald head of the lappet-faced vulture is advantageous, because a feathered head would become spattered with blood and other fluids when feeding, and thus be difficult to keep clean. While flying, lappet-faced vultures have large, broad wings held with the front edges held parallel and slightly pointed, serrated-looking wingtips. Compared to the somewhat similarly marked hooded vulture, it is considerably larger with a more massive bill and can only be confused at a great distance. The &quot;Gyps&quot; vultures are generally much paler, with less white lining the wings and more bulging secondaries. The cinereous vulture (which may overlap in range in the Arabian area) has a similar body shape but is all dark, with no contrasting plumage.

==Behaviour==
===Feeding===

The lappet-faced vulture is a scavenging bird, feeding mostly from animal carcasses, which it finds by sight or by watching other vultures. More so than many African vultures, they often find carrion on their own and start tearing through the skin. They are the most powerful and aggressive of the African vultures, and other vultures will usually cede a carcass to the lappet-faced vulture if it decides to assert itself. This is often beneficial to the less powerful vultures because the Lappet-face can tear through the tough hides and knotty muscles of large mammals that the others cannot penetrate. However hyenas are even more efficient in this regard (if more voracious eaters). However, lappet-faced vultures frequently hang around the edges of the throngs at large carcasses, waiting until the other vultures are done, to feed on remnant skin, tendons, and other coarse tissues that the others will not eat. Big game animals, up to the size of elephants, are preferred as carrion since they provide the most subsistence at a sitting. A full crop can contain up to of meat.

Perhaps more than any other true vulture, lappet-faced vultures have been recorded as regularly feeding on freshly killed smaller mammals, birds, and reptiles. Some of these are probably road-kills or are pirated from eagles or other raptors but they are also believed to occasionally attack live animals, especially young and weak animals, and the nests and young of other birds. Flamingo colonies (including eggs, young and adults), young impalas, and guineafowl have reportedly been predated. They are believed to still hunt from an elevated perch and then drop on their prey, stunning them with the impact and tearing them apart with their substantial bills. Most remains found at nests are from small animals possibly caught alive.
===Life history===
Lappet-faced vultures are generally solitary birds. They do not nest in cohesive colonies as do many smaller vultures, with one tree or area usually only having one to two nests in it, though rarely up to 10 nests have been recorded in one area. The home range of a lappet-faced vulture is usually at least . Groups of up to 25 to 50 Lappet-faces may congregate at large carcasses or watering holes, though typically only from one to as many as seven turn up per carcass.

This species nests in November through July in the north of its range, throughout the year in eastern Africa and May to January in southern Africa. The huge nest, a pile of neatly formed sticks, measures across and deep. The nest is often lined with green leaves, as well as animal hair and skins. Nests are almost always placed in the main fork or top of an &quot;Acacia&quot; tree, though &quot;Balanites&quot; and &quot;Terminalia&quot; trees are sometimes also used, at off the ground. The clutch contains one or two eggs, which are incubated by both parents over the course of 54 to 56 days. The young fledge at 124 to 135 days old, although can be dependent on their parents for up to an age of 1 year or more, sometimes forcing parents to only nest in alternate years. There is a single remarkable record of a lappet-faced vulture pair successfully raising a white-headed vulture. The lappet-faced vulture does not usually breed until it is around six years of age.

==Status==
The lappet-faced vulture&#x27;s world population is believed to have decreased perceptibly, and as of October 2015 their IUCN status was updated to Endangered. They are declining in the Sahel and several parts of their southern, northern and western distribution in Africa. They are apparently currently stable in Arabia but have a small population there and have been extirpated from Israel as a breeding bird. The declines are almost entirely due to human activities, including disturbances from habitat destruction and cultivation, disturbances at the nesting site (to which the species is reportedly quite sensitive) and ingestion of pesticides, which are usually set out for jackals and other small mammalian carnivores. Domestic cattle, who have replaced natural prey over much of the range, are now often sold off, rather than abandoned, due to the proliferation of markets and abattoirs and rarely left to die and be consumed by vultures. Lappet-faced vultures are also sometimes victims of direct persecution, including shooting and the use of strychnine and other poisons. In Namibia, 86 vultures died after eating poisoned cattle carcasses, because the farmers erroneously believed they were killing and eating the cattle. In some cases the poisoning is done by poachers, who fear the presence of vultures will alert authorities to their activities, the illegal killings of protected species. They are considered Vulnerable at the species level, with an estimated world population of under 9,000 individuals.

On 20 June 2019, the carcasses of 468 white-backed vultures, 17 white-headed vultures, 28 hooded vultures, 14 lappet-faced vultures and 10 cape vultures, altogether 537 vultures, besides 2 tawny eagles, were found in northern Botswana. It is suspected that they died after eating the carcasses of 3 elephants that were poisoned by poachers, possibly to avoid detection by the birds, which help rangers to track poaching activity by circling above where there are dead animals.

On 3 April 2022 the Israel Nature and Parks Authority announced the first hatching of a lappet-faced vulture since 1994 

==References==
==Further reading==

==External links==
* BirdLife Species Factsheet
* Lappet-faced vulture – Species text in The Atlas of Southern African Birds
* ARKive – images and movies of the lappet-faced vulture &quot;(Torgos tracheliotos)&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q838162" start="4" end="24" title="Lappet-faced vulture" label="lappet-faced vulture"/>
<link wikidata="Q838162" start="28" end="42" title="Lappet-faced vulture" label="Nubian vulture"/>
<link wikidata="Q446728" start="71" end="88" title="Old World vulture" label="Old World vulture"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113" start="106" end="110" title="bird" label="bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q21736" start="117" end="132" title="Accipitriformes" label="Accipitriformes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092297" start="154" end="159" title="eagle" label="eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q208342" start="162" end="166" title="kite (bird)" label="kite"/>
<link wikidata="Q3251488" start="169" end="176" title="buzzard" label="buzzard"/>
<link wikidata="Q846664" start="182" end="186" title="hawk" label="hawk"/>
<link wikidata="Q184858" start="287" end="304" title="New World vulture" label="New World vulture"/>
<link wikidata="Q35409" start="374" end="380" title="Family (biology)" label="family"/>
<link wikidata="Q310890" start="441" end="450" title="monotypic" label="monotypic"/>
<link wikidata="Q68947" start="484" end="494" title="subspecies" label="subspecies"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="531" end="537" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q31945" start="682" end="699" title="Arabian Peninsula" label="Arabian Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q817" start="1520" end="1526" title="Kuwait" label="Kuwait"/>
<link wikidata="Q42320" start="1573" end="1585" title="Savanna" label="dry savannah"/>
<link wikidata="Q187971" start="1643" end="1647" title="wadi" label="wadi"/>
<link wikidata="Q168677" start="2139" end="2156" title="cinereous vulture" label="cinereous vulture"/>
<link wikidata="Q126630" start="2191" end="2195" title="Gyps" label="Gyps"/>
<link wikidata="Q826525" start="2257" end="2269" title="Cape vulture" label="Cape vulture"/>
<link wikidata="Q177856" start="2274" end="2290" title="Eurasian griffon" label="Eurasian griffon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753079" start="2395" end="2405" title="Wing chord (biology)" label="wing chord"/>
<link wikidata="Q60960" start="2415" end="2419" title="tail" label="tail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059724" start="2431" end="2437" title="Tarsus (skeleton)" label="tarsus"/>
<link wikidata="Q25510" start="2512" end="2522" title="Accipitridae" label="accipitrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q31528" start="2544" end="2550" title="Culmen (bird)" label="culmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q27407" start="2708" end="2719" title="East Africa" label="East Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q940460" start="3410" end="3422" title="Wattle (anatomy)" label="fleshy folds"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873" start="3570" end="3575" title="blood" label="blood"/>
<link wikidata="Q177386" start="3835" end="3849" title="hooded vulture" label="hooded vulture"/>
<link wikidata="Q168677" start="4071" end="4088" title="cinereous vulture" label="cinereous vulture"/>
<link wikidata="Q729" start="4306" end="4312" title="animal" label="animal"/>
<link wikidata="Q123120" start="4369" end="4376" title="vulture" label="vulture"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="4537" end="4543" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q123120" start="4545" end="4552" title="vulture" label="vulture"/>
<link wikidata="Q7377" start="4802" end="4808" title="mammal" label="mammal"/>
<link wikidata="Q42046" start="4852" end="4857" title="hyena" label="hyena"/>
<link wikidata="Q7378" start="5193" end="5201" title="elephant" label="elephant"/>
<link wikidata="Q202994" start="5221" end="5228" title="carrion" label="carrion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324130" start="5510" end="5520" title="Roadkill" label="road-kills"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479109" start="5528" end="5535" title="Kleptoparasitism" label="pirated"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092297" start="5541" end="5546" title="eagle" label="eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3901583" start="5704" end="5712" title="Flamingo" label="Flamingo"/>
<link wikidata="Q132576" start="5764" end="5770" title="impala" label="impala"/>
<link wikidata="Q171953" start="5777" end="5787" title="guineafowl" label="guineafowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q116735899" start="6463" end="6476" title="watering hole" label="watering hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q81666" start="6917" end="6923" title="Acacia" label="Acacia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2534240" start="6949" end="6958" title="Balanites" label="Balanites"/>
<link wikidata="Q1469349" start="6975" end="6985" title="Terminalia (plant)" label="Terminalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q755006" start="7418" end="7438" title="white-headed vulture" label="white-headed vulture"/>
<link wikidata="Q66065" start="7723" end="7728" title="Sahel" label="Sahel"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="7922" end="7928" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q125525" start="8217" end="8223" title="jackal" label="jackal"/>
<link wikidata="Q830" start="8272" end="8278" title="cattle" label="cattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q194406" start="8590" end="8600" title="strychnine" label="strychnine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030" start="8623" end="8630" title="Namibia" label="Namibia"/>
<link wikidata="Q281874" start="9096" end="9116" title="white-backed vulture" label="white-backed vulture"/>
<link wikidata="Q755006" start="9122" end="9142" title="white-headed vulture" label="white-headed vulture"/>
<link wikidata="Q177386" start="9148" end="9162" title="hooded vulture" label="hooded vulture"/>
<link wikidata="Q826525" start="9197" end="9209" title="cape vulture" label="cape vulture"/>
<link wikidata="Q374141" start="9247" end="9258" title="tawny eagle" label="tawny eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q963" start="9284" end="9292" title="Botswana" label="Botswana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408004" start="9552" end="9589" title="Israel Nature and Parks Authority" label="the Israel Nature and Parks Authority"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="187386" wikidata="Q33504" url="?curid=187386" title="Egyptian vulture">
<text>The Egyptian vulture (Neophron percnopterus), also called the white scavenger vulture or pharaoh&#x27;s chicken, is a small Old World vulture in the monotypic genus Neophron. It is widely distributed from the Iberian Peninsula, North Africa, West Asia and India. The contrasting underwing pattern and wedge-shaped tail make it distinctive in flight as it soars in thermals during the warmer parts of the day. Egyptian vultures feed mainly on carrion but are opportunistic and will prey on small mammals, birds, and reptiles. They also feed on the eggs of other birds, breaking larger ones by tossing a large pebble onto them.

The use of tools is rare in birds and apart from the use of a pebble as a hammer, Egyptian vultures also use twigs to roll up wool for use in their nest. Egyptian vultures that breed in the temperate regions migrate south in winter while tropical populations are relatively sedentary. Populations of this species declined in the 20th century and some island populations are endangered by hunting, accidental poisoning, and collision with power lines.

== Taxonomy and systematics ==
The Egyptian vulture was formally described by the Swedish naturalist Carl Linnaeus in 1758 in the tenth edition of his &quot;Systema Naturae&quot; under the binomial name &quot;Vultur percnopterus&quot;. The genus &quot;Neophron&quot; was created by Jules-César Savigny in the first natural history volume of the &quot;Description de l&#x27;Égypte&quot;&#x27; (1809). The genus &quot;Neophron&quot; contains only a single extant species. A few prehistoric species from the Neogene period in North America placed in the genus &quot;Neophrontops&quot; (the name meaning &quot;looks like &quot;Neophron&quot;&quot;) are believed to have been very similar to these vultures in lifestyle, but the genetic relationships are unclear. A fossil species &quot;Neophron lolis&quot; has been described from the late Miocene of Spain. The genus &quot;Neophron&quot; is considered to represent the oldest branch of the vultures which consists of separated (or polyphyletic) clades. Along with its nearest evolutionary relatives, the lammergeier (&quot;Gypaetus barbatus&quot;) and the palm-nut vulture (&quot;Gypohierax angolensis&quot;), they are sometimes placed in a separate subfamily, the Gypaetinae.

===Subspecies===
There are three widely recognised subspecies of the Egyptian vulture, although there is considerable gradation due to movement and intermixing of the populations. The nominate subspecies, &quot;N. p. percnopterus&quot;, with a dark grey bill, has the largest range, occurring in southern Europe, northern Africa, the Middle East, Central Asia, and north-western India. Populations breeding in the temperate zone migrate south during winter.

The Indian subcontinent is the range of subspecies &quot;N. p. ginginianus&quot;, the smallest of the three subspecies, which is identifiable by a pale yellow bill. The subspecies name is derived from Gingee in southern India from where the French explorer Pierre Sonnerat described it as Le Vautour de Gingi and it was given a Latin name by John Latham in his &quot;Index Ornithologicus&quot; (1790).

A small population that is found only in the eastern Canary Islands was found to be genetically distinct and identified as a new subspecies, &quot;N. p. majorensis&quot; in 2002. Known locally as the &quot;guirre&quot; they are genetically more distant from &quot;N. p. percnopterus&quot;, significantly greater even than &quot;N. p. ginginianus&quot; is from &quot;N. p. percnopterus&quot;. Unlike neighbouring populations in Africa and southern Europe, it is non-migratory and consistently larger in size. The subspecies name &quot;majorensis&quot; is derived from &quot;Majorata&quot;, the ancient name for the island of Fuerteventura. The island was named by Spanish conquerors in the 15th century after the &quot;Majos&quot;, the main native Guanche tribe there. One study in 2010 suggested that the species established on the island about 2,500 years ago when the island was first colonized by humans.

Nikolai Zarudny and Härms described a subspecies, &quot;rubripersonatus&quot;, from Baluchistan in 1902. This was described as having a deeper reddish orange skin on the head and a yellow-tipped dark bill. This has rarely been considered a valid subspecies but the intermediate pattern of bill colouration suggests intermixing of subspecies.

===Etymology===
The genus name is derived from Greek mythology. Timandra was the mother of Neophron. Aegypius was a friend of Neophron and about the same age. It upset Neophron to know that his mother Timandra was having a love affair with Aegypius. Seeking revenge, Neophron made advances towards Aegypius&#x27; mother, Bulis. Neophron succeeded and enticed Bulis into entering the dark chamber where his mother and Aegypius were to meet soon. Neophron then distracted his mother, tricking Aegypius into entering the chamber and sleeping with his own mother Bulis. When Bulis discovered the deception she gouged out the eyes of her son Aegypius before killing herself. Aegypius prayed for revenge and Zeus, on hearing the prayer, changed Aegypius and Neophron into vultures. &quot;Percnopterus&quot; is derived from Greek for &quot;black wings&quot;: &quot;περκνός&quot; (&quot;perknos&quot;, meaning &quot;blue-black&quot;) and πτερόν (&quot;pteron&quot;, meaning wing).

== Description ==
The adult&#x27;s plumage is white, with black flight feathers in the wings. Wild birds usually appear soiled with a rusty or brown shade to the white plumage, derived from mud or iron-rich soil. Captive specimens without access to soil have clean white plumage. It has been suggested as a case of cosmetic colouration. The bill is slender and long, and the tip of the upper mandible is hooked. The nostril is an elongated horizontal slit. The neck feathers are long and form a hackle. The wings are pointed, with the third primary being the longest; the tail is wedge shaped. The legs are pink in adults and grey in juveniles. The claws are long and straight, and the third and fourth toes are slightly webbed at the base.

The bill is black in the nominate subspecies but pale or yellowish in adults of the smaller Indian &quot;ginginianus&quot;. Rasmussen and Anderton (2005) suggest that this variation may need further study, particularly due to the intermediate black-tipped bill described in &quot;rubripersonatus&quot;. The facial skin is yellow and unfeathered down to the throat. The sexes are indistinguishable in plumage but breeding males have a deeper orange facial skin colour than females. Females average slightly larger and are about 10–15% heavier than males. Young birds are blackish or chocolate brown with black and white patches. The adult plumage is attained only after about five years.

The adult Egyptian vulture measures from the point of the beak to the extremity of the tail feathers. In the smaller &quot;N. p. ginginianus&quot; males are about long while females are long. The wingspan is about 2.7 times the body length. Birds from Spain weigh about while birds of the Canary Island subspecies &quot;majorensis&quot;, representing a case of island gigantism, are heavier with an average weight of . The Egyptian vulture is one of the smallest true Old World vulture, the only smaller species appears to be the marginally lighter palm-nut vulture (which may be an outlier from other vultures). Additionally, the hooded vulture is only scarcely larger than the Egyptian species.

== Distribution and movements ==

Egyptian vultures are widely distributed across the Old World with their breeding range from southern Europe to northern Africa east to western and southern Asia. They are rare vagrants in Sri Lanka. They occur mainly on the dry plains and lower hills. In the Himalayas, they go up to about in summer. In Armenia, breeding pairs have been found up to 2,300 meters a.s.l.

Most Egyptian vultures in the subtropical zone of Europe migrate south to Africa in winter. Vagrants may occur as far south as in South Africa although they bred in the Transkei region prior to 1923. They nest mainly on rocky cliffs, sometimes adopting ledges on tall buildings in cities and on large trees. Like many other large soaring migrants, they avoid making long crossings over water. Italian birds cross over through Sicily and into Tunisia making short sea crossings by passing through the islands of Marettimo and Pantelleria with rare stops on the island country of Malta. Those that migrate through the Iberian Peninsula cross into Africa over the Strait of Gibraltar while others cross further east through the Levant. In summer, some African birds fly further north into Europe and vagrants have been recorded in England, Ireland, and southern Sweden.

Migrating birds can sometimes cover in a single day until they reach the southern edge of the Sahara, from their summer home. Young birds that have not reached breeding age may overwinter in the grassland and semi-desert regions of the Sahel.

== Fossil record ==
Fossils of the Egyptian vulture found in the Nefud Desert of Saudi Arabia are estimated to date to the Middle Pleistocene about 500,000 years ago.

== Behaviour and ecology ==
The Egyptian vulture is usually seen singly or in pairs, soaring in thermals along with other scavengers and birds of prey, or perched on the ground or atop a building. On the ground, they walk with a waddling gait. 

They feed on a range of food, including mammal faeces (including those of humans), insects in dung, carrion, vegetable matter, and sometimes small animals. It is the only Old World vulture species that regularly feeds on faeces. The carotenoids (primarily lutein) that the vultures absorb from the vegetal matter in the excrement that they ingest results in their bright yellow face colouration.

When it joins other vulture species at a dead animal, it tends to stay on the periphery and waits until the larger species leave. Pairs may also scrounge for food from other vultures, particularly griffons. Recently fledged young will sometimes fly to other nests, competing with young vultures for food, stealing or even soliciting food from the (unrelated) adults bringing food. Wild rabbits (&quot;Oryctolagus cuniculus&quot;) form a significant part of the diet of Spanish vultures. In the Iberian Peninsula, landfills are an important food source, with the vultures more likely to occupy territories close to landfill sites. Studies suggest that they feed on ungulate faeces to obtain carotenoid pigments responsible for their bright yellow and orange facial skin. The ability to assimilate carotenoid pigments may serve as a reliable signal of fitness.

Egyptian vultures are mostly silent but make high-pitched mewing or hissing notes at the nest and screeching noises when squabbling at a carcass. Young birds have been heard making a hissing croak in flight. They also hiss or growl when threatened or angry.Egyptian vultures roost communally on large trees, buildings or on cliffs. Roost sites are usually chosen close to a dump site or other suitable foraging area. In Spain and Morocco, summer roosts are formed mainly by immature birds. The favourite roost trees tended to be large dead pines. The number of adults at the roost increases towards June. It is thought that breeding adults may be able to forage more efficiently by joining the roost and following others to the best feeding areas. Breeding birds that failed to raise young may also join the non-breeding birds at the roost during June. Allopreening has been observed in Canarian Egyptian vultures between mated pairs of individuals as well as pairs of unrelated and same-sex individuals, particularly females.

===Breeding===
The breeding season is in spring. During the beginning of the breeding season, courting pairs soar high together and one or both may make steep spiralling or swooping dives. The birds are monogamous and pair bonds may be maintained for more than one breeding season and the same nest sites may be reused each year. The nest is an untidy platform of twigs lined with rags and placed on a cliff ledge, building, or the fork of a large tree. Old nest platforms of eagles may also be taken over. Nests placed on the ground are rare but have been recorded in subspecies &quot;N. p. ginginianus&quot; and &quot;N. p. majorensis&quot;.
Extra-pair copulation with neighbouring birds has been recorded and may be a reason for adult males to stay close to the female before and during the egg laying period. Females may sometimes associate with two males and all three help in raising the brood. The typical clutch consists of two eggs which are incubated in turns by both parents. The eggs are brick red with the broad end covered more densely with blotches of red, brown, and black. The parents begin incubating soon after the first egg is laid leading to asynchronous hatching. The first egg hatches after about 42 days. The second chick may hatch three to five days later and a longer delay increases the likelihood that it will die of starvation. In cliffs where the nests are located close to each other, young birds have been known to clamber over to neighbouring nests to obtain food. In the Spanish population, young fledge and leave the nest after 90 to 110 days. Fledged birds continue to remain dependent on their parents for at least a month. Once the birds begin to forage on their own, they move away from their parents&#x27; territory; young birds have been found nearly 500 km away from their nest site. One-year-old European birds migrate to Africa and stay there for at least one year. A vulture that fledged in France stayed in Africa for three years before migrating north in spring. After migrating back to their breeding areas, young birds move widely in search of good feeding territories and mates. The full adult plumage is attained in the fourth or fifth year. Egyptian vultures have been known to live for up to 37 years in captivity and at least 21 years in the wild. The probability of survival in the wild varies with age, increasing till the age of 2 and then falling at the age of 5. Older birds have an annual survival probability varying from 0.75 for non-breeders to 0.83 for breeding birds.

===Tool use===
The nominate population, especially in Africa, is known for its use of stones as tools. When a large egg, such as that of an ostrich or bustard, is located, the bird walks up to it with a large pebble held in its bill and tosses the pebble by swinging the neck down over the egg. The operation is repeated until the egg cracks from the blows. They prefer using rounded pebbles to jagged rocks. This behaviour, although believed to have been first reported by Jane Goodall in 1966, was actually already known to Africans and was first reported by J. G. Wood in 1877. However, this has only been reported in Africa and has not been recorded in &quot;N. p. ginginianus&quot;. Tests with both hand-reared and wild birds suggest that the behaviour is innate, not learnt by observing other birds, and elicited once they associate eggs with food and have access to pebbles. Their ability to deal with ostrich eggs is utilized by brown-necked ravens which form groups that wait for the eggs to be broken before collectively mobbing the vultures and engaging in kleptoparasitism. Another case of tool-use described from Bulgaria involves the use of a twig as a tool to roll up and gather strands of wool to use for lining the nest.

==Threats and conservation==
Healthy adults do not have many predators, but human activities pose many threats. Collisions with power lines, hunting, intentional poisoning, lead accumulation from ingesting gunshot in carcasses, and pesticide accumulation take a toll on populations. Young birds at the nest are sometimes taken by golden eagles, eagle owls, and red foxes. Only rarely do adult birds attempt to drive away predators. Young birds that fall off of cliff ledges may be preyed on by mammalian predators such as jackals, foxes and wolves. Like all birds they serve as hosts for ectoparasitic birdlice including &quot;Aegypoecus perspicuus&quot; as well as organisms that live within them such as mycoplasmas.

Egyptian vulture populations have declined in most parts of its range. In Europe and most of the Middle East, populations in 2001 were half of those from 1980. In India, the decline has been rapid with a 35% decrease each year since 1999. In 1967–70, the area around Delhi was estimated to have 12,000–15,000 of these vultures, with an average density of about 5 pairs per 10 km2. The exact cause of the decline is not known, but has been linked with the use of the NSAID Diclofenac, which has been known to cause death in &quot;Gyps&quot; vultures.
In Italy, the number of breeding pairs declined from 30 in 1970 to 9 in the 1990s. Nearly all breeding failures were due to human activities. In Spain, which holds about 50% of the European population suggested causes of decline include poisoning by accumulation of lead, pesticides (especially due to large-scale use in the control of &quot;Schistocerca gregaria&quot; locust swarms), and electrocution. Windfarms may also pose a threat. Poorly designed power transmission lines in east Africa electrocute many wintering vultures. A shortage of carrion resulting from new rules for disposal of dead animals following the outbreak of Bovine Spongiform Encephalitis in parts of Europe during 2000 may have also had an effect on some populations. In Armenia direct persecution for trophy and for local illegal trade of animals as pets has been recorded.

The population of Egyptian vultures in the Canary Islands has been isolated from those in Europe and Africa for a significant period of time leading to genetic differentiation. The vulture population there declined by 30% in the ten years between 1987 and 1998. The Canarian Egyptian vulture was historically common, occurring on the islands of La Gomera, Tenerife, Gran Canaria, Fuerteventura, and Lanzarote. It is now restricted to Fuerteventura and Lanzarote, the two easternmost islands. The total population in 2000 was estimated at 130 individuals, including 25–30 breeding pairs. Island birds also appear to accumulate significant amounts of lead from scavenging on hunted animal carcasses. The long-term effect of this poison at a sub-lethal level is not known, though it is known to alter the mineralization of their bones. 

In order to provide safe and uncontaminated food for nesting birds, attempts have been made to create &quot;vulture restaurants&quot; where carcasses are made available. However, these interventions may also encourage other opportunist predators and scavengers to concentrate at the site and pose a threat to vultures nesting in the vicinity.

Since 2012, conservation efforts have been implemented to protect Egyptian vultures along breeding grounds, migration routes and wintering areas of the eastern European population; these measures include monitoring, nest guarding, supplementary feeding, insulating hazardous electric power lines and removing poison baits and carcasses with trained dogs. Adult annual survival and juvenile monthly survival appear to have increased, leading to a notable rise in population growth.

== In culture ==

The Bible makes a reference to the Egyptian vulture under the Hebrew name of &quot;rachamah&quot;/&quot;racham&quot; which has been translated into English as &quot;gier-eagle&quot;.

In Ancient Egypt, several hieroglyphs include the Egyptian vulture including what is listed as G1 in the Gardiner&#x27;s sign list - . The bird was held sacred to Isis and Mut in ancient Egyptian religion. The use of the vulture as a symbol of royalty in Egyptian culture and their protection by Pharaonic law made the species common on the streets of Egypt and gave rise to the name &quot;pharaoh&#x27;s chicken&quot;. The habit of coprophagy in Egyptian vultures gives them the Spanish names of &quot;churretero&quot; and &quot;moñiguero&quot;, which mean &quot;dung-eater&quot;. British sportsmen in colonial India considered them to be among the ugliest birds, and their habit of feeding on faeces was particularly despised. In British India they were known as &quot;shawks&quot; a contraction of shit-hawk. A southern Indian temple at Thirukalukundram near Chengalpattu was famed for a pair of birds that reputedly visited the temple for &quot;centuries&quot;. These birds were ceremonially fed by the temple priests and arrived before noon to feed on offerings made from rice, wheat, ghee, and sugar. Although normally punctual, the failure of the birds to turn up was attributed to the presence of &quot;sinners&quot; among the onlookers. Legend has it the vultures (or &quot;eagles&quot;) represented eight sages who were punished by Shiva, with two of them leaving in each of a series of epochs.

== Footnotes ==
Cited works
* 
* 
* 
*
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
*
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
*
* 
* 
* 
* 
== External links ==
* BTO BirdFacts – Egyptian Vulture
* Egyptian Vulture species text in The Atlas of Southern African Birds.
* Egyptian Vulture – Global Raptor Information Network 
* Ageing and sexing (PDF; 5.6 MB) by Javier Blasco-Zumeta &amp; Gerd-Michael Heinze
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q33504" start="4" end="20" title="Egyptian vulture" label="Egyptian vulture"/>
<link wikidata="Q33504" start="62" end="85" title="Egyptian vulture" label="white scavenger vulture"/>
<link wikidata="Q33504" start="89" end="111" title="Egyptian vulture" label="pharaoh&amp;#x27;s chicken"/>
<link wikidata="Q446728" start="124" end="141" title="Old World vulture" label="Old World vulture"/>
<link wikidata="Q310890" start="149" end="158" title="monotypic" label="monotypic"/>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="159" end="164" title="genus" label="genus"/>
<link wikidata="Q12837" start="209" end="226" title="Iberian Peninsula" label="Iberian Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q27381" start="228" end="240" title="North Africa" label="North Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q27293" start="242" end="251" title="West Asia" label="West Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="256" end="261" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q752823" start="364" end="372" title="thermals" label="thermals"/>
<link wikidata="Q202994" start="442" end="449" title="carrion" label="carrion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7377" start="495" end="502" title="mammals" label="mammals"/>
<link wikidata="Q10811" start="515" end="523" title="reptiles" label="reptiles"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="631" end="660" title="Tool use by animals#In birds" label="use of tools is rare in birds"/>
<link wikidata="Q167466" start="817" end="834" title="temperate regions" label="temperate regions"/>
<link wikidata="Q42530" start="865" end="873" title="tropical" label="tropical"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349358" start="901" end="910" title="sedentary" label="sedentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361864" start="1135" end="1153" title="Species description" label="formally described"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043" start="1180" end="1193" title="Carl Linnaeus" label="Carl Linnaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4547210" start="1209" end="1222" title="10th edition of Systema Naturae" label="tenth edition"/>
<link wikidata="Q29270" start="1236" end="1251" title="Systema Naturae" label="Systema Naturae"/>
<link wikidata="Q36642" start="1268" end="1281" title="binomial nomenclature" label="binomial name"/>
<link wikidata="Q15042113" start="1288" end="1294" title="Vultur" label="Vultur"/>
<link wikidata="Q637766" start="1361" end="1380" title="Jules-César Savigny" label="Jules-César Savigny"/>
<link wikidata="Q103924" start="1584" end="1591" title="Neogene" label="Neogene"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="1602" end="1615" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q6993651" start="1642" end="1654" title="Neophrontops" label="Neophrontops"/>
<link wikidata="Q126167" start="2130" end="2141" title="lammergeier" label="lammergeier"/>
<link wikidata="Q732523" start="2206" end="2227" title="Palm-nut vulture" label="Gypohierax angolensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q446728" start="2291" end="2301" title="Old World vulture" label="Gypaetinae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524976" start="2964" end="2970" title="Gingee" label="Gingee"/>
<link wikidata="Q507034" start="3020" end="3035" title="Pierre Sonnerat" label="Pierre Sonnerat"/>
<link wikidata="Q334364" start="3105" end="3116" title="John Latham (ornithologist)" label="John Latham"/>
<link wikidata="Q5813" start="3219" end="3233" title="Canary Islands" label="Canary Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q192534" start="3790" end="3803" title="Fuerteventura" label="Fuerteventura"/>
<link wikidata="Q219995" start="3913" end="3926" title="Guanches" label="Guanche tribe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397325" start="4075" end="4090" title="Nikolai Zarudny" label="Nikolai Zarudny"/>
<link wikidata="Q12370292" start="4095" end="4100" title="Mihkel Härms" label="Härms"/>
<link wikidata="Q181103" start="4159" end="4170" title="Baluchistan" label="Baluchistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="4438" end="4448" title="genus name" label="genus name"/>
<link wikidata="Q34726" start="4465" end="4480" title="Greek mythology" label="Greek mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q3291388" start="4482" end="4490" title="Timandra (mythology)" label="Timandra"/>
<link wikidata="Q4687678" start="4509" end="4517" title="Neophron (mythology)" label="Neophron"/>
<link wikidata="Q4687678" start="4519" end="4527" title="Aegypius (mythology)" label="Aegypius"/>
<link wikidata="Q902180" start="4900" end="4908" title="Trickster" label="tricking"/>
<link wikidata="Q34201" start="5120" end="5124" title="Zeus" label="Zeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3303665" start="5427" end="5434" title="plumage" label="plumage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755375" start="5887" end="5893" title="hackle" label="hackle"/>
<link wikidata="Q436696" start="6258" end="6267" title="Pamela C. Rasmussen" label="Rasmussen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417877" start="7183" end="7199" title="island gigantism" label="island gigantism"/>
<link wikidata="Q446728" start="7290" end="7307" title="Old World vulture" label="Old World vulture"/>
<link wikidata="Q732523" start="7371" end="7387" title="palm-nut vulture" label="palm-nut vulture"/>
<link wikidata="Q177386" start="7453" end="7467" title="hooded vulture" label="hooded vulture"/>
<link wikidata="Q174807" start="7606" end="7615" title="Old World" label="Old World"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="7656" end="7662" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="7675" end="7681" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q27293" start="7690" end="7697" title="Western Asia" label="western"/>
<link wikidata="Q771405" start="7702" end="7715" title="South Asia" label="southern Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q854" start="7743" end="7752" title="Sri Lanka" label="Sri Lanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q399" start="7859" end="7866" title="Armenia" label="Armenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q466551" start="8095" end="8103" title="Transkei" label="Transkei"/>
<link wikidata="Q497339" start="8437" end="8446" title="Marettimo" label="Marettimo"/>
<link wikidata="Q481758" start="8451" end="8462" title="Pantelleria" label="Pantelleria"/>
<link wikidata="Q233" start="8504" end="8509" title="Malta" label="Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q12837" start="8542" end="8559" title="Iberian Peninsula" label="Iberian Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q36124" start="8587" end="8606" title="Strait of Gibraltar" label="Strait of Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q81483" start="8651" end="8657" title="Levant" label="Levant"/>
<link wikidata="Q6583" start="8888" end="8894" title="Sahara" label="Sahara"/>
<link wikidata="Q66065" start="9030" end="9035" title="Sahel" label="Sahel"/>
<link wikidata="Q40614" start="9058" end="9064" title="Fossil" label="Fossil"/>
<link wikidata="Q749205" start="9103" end="9115" title="Nefud Desert" label="Nefud Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q492596" start="9161" end="9179" title="Middle Pleistocene" label="Middle Pleistocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q496" start="9499" end="9505" title="Feces" label="faeces"/>
<link wikidata="Q185716" start="9546" end="9550" title="Manure" label="dung"/>
<link wikidata="Q422067" start="9708" end="9714" title="lutein" label="lutein"/>
<link wikidata="Q177856" start="10046" end="10054" title="Griffon vulture" label="griffons"/>
<link wikidata="Q25851" start="10250" end="10271" title="Oryctolagus cuniculus" label="Oryctolagus cuniculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231177" start="10513" end="10521" title="ungulate" label="ungulate"/>
<link wikidata="Q191907" start="10539" end="10549" title="carotenoid" label="carotenoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q249240" start="10680" end="10695" title="Signalling theory" label="reliable signal"/>
<link wikidata="Q202994" start="10846" end="10853" title="carrion" label="carcass"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11129" end="11134" title="Geography of Spain#Regions" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3255408" start="11139" end="11146" title="List of ecoregions in Morocco" label="Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q12024" start="11249" end="11253" title="pine" label="pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q48996240" start="11562" end="11574" title="Preening" label="Allopreening"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11814" end="11829" title="Seasonal breeder#Breeding season" label="breeding season"/>
<link wikidata="Q10968643" start="11831" end="11839" title="Courtship display" label="courting"/>
<link wikidata="Q6901585" start="11940" end="11950" title="Monogamy in animals" label="monogamous"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028500" start="11955" end="11964" title="pair bond" label="pair bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q24962730" start="12381" end="12402" title="Extra-pair copulation" label="Extra-pair copulation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14290" end="14309" title="Subspecies#Nominotypical subspecies and subspecies autonyms" label="nominate population"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109139" start="14350" end="14372" title="Tool use by animals" label="use of stones as tools"/>
<link wikidata="Q2576337" start="14411" end="14418" title="ostrich" label="ostrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q21755" start="14422" end="14429" title="bustard" label="bustard"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14634" end="14662" title="Pebble#Inland" label="prefer using rounded pebbles"/>
<link wikidata="Q184746" start="14745" end="14757" title="Jane Goodall" label="Jane Goodall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2731171" start="14832" end="14842" title="John George Wood" label="J. G. Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q420818" start="15208" end="15226" title="brown-necked raven" label="brown-necked raven"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479109" start="15339" end="15355" title="kleptoparasitism" label="kleptoparasitism"/>
<link wikidata="Q41181" start="15840" end="15852" title="golden eagle" label="golden eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q214293" start="15855" end="15865" title="Eagle-owls" label="eagle owls"/>
<link wikidata="Q8332" start="15871" end="15880" title="red foxes" label="red foxes"/>
<link wikidata="Q125525" start="16032" end="16039" title="jackals" label="jackals"/>
<link wikidata="Q18498" start="16051" end="16057" title="wolves" label="wolves"/>
<link wikidata="Q5334259" start="16098" end="16111" title="Ectoparasitic infestation" label="ectoparasitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3764933" start="16112" end="16120" title="Bird louse" label="birdlice"/>
<link wikidata="Q210975" start="16216" end="16227" title="mycoplasmas" label="mycoplasmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="16327" end="16338" title="Middle East" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353" start="16497" end="16502" title="Delhi" label="Delhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q188724" start="16696" end="16701" title="Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug" label="NSAID"/>
<link wikidata="Q244408" start="16702" end="16712" title="Diclofenac" label="Diclofenac"/>
<link wikidata="Q126630" start="16759" end="16763" title="Gyps" label="Gyps"/>
<link wikidata="Q864231" start="17017" end="17042" title="Bioaccumulation" label="poisoning by accumulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3474070" start="17043" end="17050" title="Animal lead poisoning" label="of lead"/>
<link wikidata="Q281634" start="17122" end="17143" title="Schistocerca gregaria" label="Schistocerca gregaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q154666" start="17414" end="17444" title="Bovine spongiform encephalopathy" label="Bovine Spongiform Encephalitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q105967" start="17978" end="17987" title="La Gomera" label="La Gomera"/>
<link wikidata="Q40846" start="17989" end="17997" title="Tenerife" label="Tenerife"/>
<link wikidata="Q178925" start="17999" end="18011" title="Gran Canaria" label="Gran Canaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q192534" start="18013" end="18026" title="Fuerteventura" label="Fuerteventura"/>
<link wikidata="Q182432" start="18032" end="18041" title="Lanzarote" label="Lanzarote"/>
<link wikidata="Q610457" start="18435" end="18464" title="Mineralization (biology)" label="mineralization of their bones"/>
<link wikidata="Q27468" start="18964" end="18980" title="Eastern Europe" label="eastern European"/>
<link wikidata="Q200928" start="19087" end="19107" title="Electric power transmission" label="electric power lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q11768" start="19499" end="19512" title="Ancient Egypt" label="Ancient Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418022" start="19601" end="19626" title="Gardiner&amp;#x27;s sign list" label="Gardiner&amp;#x27;s sign list"/>
<link wikidata="Q79876" start="19659" end="19663" title="Isis" label="Isis"/>
<link wikidata="Q29409" start="19668" end="19671" title="Mut" label="Mut"/>
<link wikidata="Q447131" start="19675" end="19700" title="ancient Egyptian religion" label="ancient Egyptian religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q145915" start="19730" end="19747" title="Nekhbet" label="symbol of royalty"/>
<link wikidata="Q320011" start="19929" end="19939" title="coprophagy" label="coprophagy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7499150" start="20297" end="20306" title="Shite-hawk" label="shit-hawk"/>
<link wikidata="Q6301484" start="20336" end="20352" title="Thirukazhukundram" label="Thirukalukundram"/>
<link wikidata="Q888769" start="20358" end="20370" title="Chengalpattu" label="Chengalpattu"/>
<link wikidata="Q323225" start="20586" end="20590" title="ghee" label="ghee"/>
<link wikidata="Q11378" start="20838" end="20843" title="Shiva" label="Shiva"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="187387" wikidata="Q17142" url="?curid=187387" title="George I of Greece">
<text>George I (Greek: Γεώργιος Α΄, : &quot;Geórgios I&quot;; 24 December 1845 – 18 March 1913) was King of Greece from 30 March 1863 until his assassination on 18 March 1913.

Originally a Danish prince, George was born in Copenhagen, and seemed destined for a career in the Royal Danish Navy. He was only 17 years old when he was elected king by the Greek National Assembly, which had deposed the unpopular King Otto. His nomination was both suggested and supported by the Great Powers: the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland, the Second French Empire and the Russian Empire. He married Grand Duchess Olga Constantinovna of Russia in 1867, and became the first monarch of a new Greek dynasty. Two of his sisters, Alexandra and Dagmar, married into the British and Russian royal families. Edward VII of the United Kingdom and Alexander III of Russia were his brothers-in-law, and George V of the United Kingdom, Christian X of Denmark, Haakon VII of Norway, and Nicholas II of Russia were his nephews.

George&#x27;s reign of almost 50 years (the longest in modern Greek history) was characterized by territorial gains as Greece established its place in pre–World War I Europe. Britain ceded the Ionian Islands peacefully in 1864, while Thessaly was annexed from the Ottoman Empire after the Russo-Turkish War (1877–1878). Greece was not always successful in its territorial ambitions; it was defeated in the Greco-Turkish War (1897). During the First Balkan War, after Greek troops had captured much of Greek Macedonia, George was assassinated in Thessaloniki.

== Family and early life ==

George was born on 24 December 1845 at his parents&#x27; residence the Yellow Palace, an 18th-century town house at 18 Amaliegade, next to the Amalienborg Palace complex in Copenhagen. He was the second son and third child of Prince Christian of Schleswig-Holstein-Sonderburg-Glücksburg and Princess Louise of Hesse-Kassel. He was baptised with the names &quot;Christian William Ferdinand Adolph George&quot;, and until his accession in Greece, he was known as Prince William, the namesake of both his grandfathers, William, Duke of Schleswig-Holstein-Sonderburg-Glücksburg, and Prince William of Hesse-Kassel.
Although William was of royal blood (his mother and father were both great-grandchildren of Frederick V of Denmark and great-great-grandchildren of George II of Great Britain) his family was relatively obscure and lived a comparatively normal life by royal standards. In 1852, however, his father was designated the heir presumptive to the childless Frederick VII of Denmark, and the following year the family became princes and princesses of Denmark. William&#x27;s siblings were Frederick (who succeeded their father as King of Denmark), Alexandra (who married Edward VII of the United Kingdom), Dagmar (who married Alexander III of Russia), Thyra (who married Ernest Augustus, Crown Prince of Hanover) and Valdemar.

William&#x27;s mother tongue was Danish, with English as a second language. He was also taught French and German. He embarked on a career in the Royal Danish Navy, and enrolled as a naval cadet along with his elder brother Frederick. While Frederick was described as , William was .

== King of the Hellenes ==
Following the expulsion of Otto of Greece in October 1862, the Greek people had rejected Otto&#x27;s brother and designated successor Luitpold, although they still favored a monarchy rather than a republic. Many Greeks, seeking closer ties to the pre-eminent world power, the United Kingdom, rallied around Prince Alfred, Duke of Edinburgh, second son of Queen Victoria and Prince Albert. British prime minister Lord Palmerston believed that the Greeks were , hoping for a gift of the Ionian Islands, which were then a British protectorate. The London Conference of 1832, however, prohibited any of the Great Powers&#x27; ruling families from accepting the crown. Queen Victoria herself was adamantly opposed to the idea. The Greeks nevertheless insisted on holding a plebiscite in which Alfred received over 95% of the 240,000 votes. There were 93 votes for a Republic and six for a Greek national to be chosen as king. King Otto received one vote.

With Prince Alfred&#x27;s exclusion, the search began for an alternative candidate. The French favored Henri d&#x27;Orléans, duc d&#x27;Aumale, while the British proposed Queen Victoria&#x27;s brother-in-law Ernest II, Duke of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha, her nephew Prince Leiningen, and Archduke Maximilian of Austria, among others. Eventually, the Greeks and Great Powers winnowed their choice to Prince William of Denmark, who had received six votes in the plebiscite. Aged only 17, he was elected King of the Hellenes on by the Greek National Assembly under the regnal name of George I. Paradoxically, he ascended a royal throne before his father, who became King of Denmark on 15 November the same year. There were two significant differences between George&#x27;s elevation and that of his predecessor, Otto. First, he was acclaimed unanimously by the Greek Assembly, rather than imposed on the people by foreign powers. Second, he was proclaimed &quot;King of the Hellenes&quot; instead of &quot;King of Greece&quot;, which had been Otto&#x27;s style.

George&#x27;s ceremonial enthronement in Copenhagen on 6 June was attended by a delegation of Greeks led by First Admiral and Prime Minister Konstantinos Kanaris. At the ceremony, it was announced that the British government would cede the Ionian Islands to Greece in honor of the new monarch.

== Early reign ==
The new 17-year-old king toured Saint Petersburg, London and Paris before departing for Greece from the French port of Toulon on 22 October aboard the Greek flagship &quot;Hellas&quot;. He arrived in Athens on , after docking at Piraeus the previous day. He was determined not to make the mistakes of his predecessor, so he quickly learned Greek. The new king was seen frequently and informally in the streets of Athens, where his predecessor had only appeared in pomp. King George found the palace in a state of disarray, after the hasty departure of King Otto, and took to putting it right by mending and updating the 40-year-old building. He also sought to ensure that he was not seen as too influenced by his Danish advisers, ultimately sending his uncle, Prince Julius, back to Denmark with the words, . Another adviser, Count Wilhelm Sponneck, became unpopular for advocating a policy of disarmament and tactlessly questioning the descent of modern Greeks from classical antecedents. Like Julius, he was dispatched back to Denmark.

From May 1864, George undertook a tour of the Peloponnese, through Corinth, Argos, Tripolitsa, Sparta, and Kalamata, where he embarked on the frigate &quot;Hellas&quot;. Proceeding northwards along the coast accompanied by British, French and Russian naval vessels, the &quot;Hellas&quot; reached Corfu on 6 June, for the ceremonial handover of the Ionian Islands by the British High Commissioner, Sir Henry Storks.

Politically, the new king took steps to conclude the protracted constitutional deliberations of the Assembly. On 19 October 1864, he sent the Assembly a demand, countersigned by Konstantinos Kanaris, explaining that he had accepted the crown on the understanding that a new constitution would be finalized, and that if it was not he would feel himself at . It was unclear from the wording whether he meant to return to Denmark or impose a constitution, but as either event was undesirable the Assembly soon came to an agreement.

On 28 November 1864, George took the oath to defend the new constitution, which created a unicameral assembly (&quot;Vouli&quot;) with representatives elected by direct, secret, universal male suffrage, a first in modern Europe. A constitutional monarchy was set up with George deferring to the legitimate authority of the elected officials, although he was aware of the corruption present in elections and the difficulty of ruling a mostly illiterate population. Between 1864 and 1910, there were 21 general elections and 70 different governments.

Internationally, George maintained a strong relationship with his brother-in-law the Prince of Wales, who in 1901 became King Edward VII, and sought his help in defusing the recurring and contentious issue of Crete, an overwhelmingly Greek island that remained under Ottoman Turk control. Since the reign of Otto, the Greek desire to unite Greek lands in one nation had been a sore spot with Great Britain and France, which had embarrassed Otto by occupying the main Greek port of Piraeus to dissuade Greek irredentism during the Crimean War. During the Cretan Revolt (1866–1869), the Prince of Wales unsuccessfully sought the support of the British Foreign Secretary, Lord Derby, to intervene in Crete on behalf of Greece. Ultimately, the Great Powers did not intervene, and the Ottomans put down the rebellion.

== Marriage and children ==
George first met Grand Duchess Olga Constantinovna of Russia in 1863, when she was 12 years old, on a visit to the court of Tsar Alexander II between his election to the Greek throne and his arrival in Athens. They met for a second time in April 1867, when George went to the Russian Empire to visit his sister Dagmar, who had married the Tsar&#x27;s heir, Tsarevich Alexander. While George was privately a Lutheran, the Romanovs were Orthodox Christians like the majority of Greeks, and George thought a marriage with a Russian grand duchess would re-assure his subjects on the question of his future children&#x27;s religion. Olga was just 16 years old when she married George at the Winter Palace in Saint Petersburg on 27 October 1867. After a honeymoon at Tsarskoye Selo, the couple left Russia for Greece on 9 November. Over the next twenty years, they had eight children:

* Constantine (1868–1923), who married Princess Sophia of Prussia and had six children, including three subsequent kings of Greece: George II, Alexander, and Paul;
* George (1869–1957), who married Princess Marie Bonaparte and had two children;
* Alexandra (1870–1891), who married Grand Duke Paul Alexandrovich of Russia and had two children;
* Nicholas (1872–1938), who married Grand Duchess Elena Vladimirovna of Russia and had three children;
* Maria (1876–1940), who married firstly Grand Duke George Mikhailovich of Russia, with whom she had two children, and secondly Admiral Perikles Ioannidis;
* Olga (1880), who died aged seven months;
* Andrew (1882–1944), who married Princess Alice of Battenberg and had five children, including Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh.
* Christopher (1888–1940), who married firstly American widow Nancy Stewart Worthington Leeds and secondly Princess Françoise of Orléans, with whom he had one child.

As a marriage gift, the Tsar gave George a group of islands in the Petalioi Gulf, which the family visited on the royal yacht &quot;Amphitrite&quot;. George later purchased a country estate, Tatoi, north of Athens, and on Corfu he built a summer villa called Mon Repos. George developed Tatoi, building roads and planting grapes for making his own wine, Chateau Décélie. Intent on not letting his subjects know that he missed Denmark, he discreetly maintained a dairy at his palace at Tatoi, which was managed by native Danes and served as a bucolic reminder of his homeland. Queen Olga was far less careful in hiding her nostalgia for her native Russia, often visiting Russian ships at Piraeus two or three times before they weighed anchor. When alone with his wife, George usually conversed in German. Their children were taught English by their nannies, and when talking with his children he therefore spoke mainly English except to his son Andrew who refused to speak anything but Greek.

The King was related by marriage to the British, Russian and Prussian monarchs, maintaining a particularly strong attachment to the Prince and Princess of Wales, who visited Athens in 1869. Their visit occurred despite continued lawlessness which culminated in the kidnap of a party of British and Italian tourists, including Lord and Lady Muncaster. Two female hostages, a child and Lord Muncaster were released, but four of the others were murdered: British diplomat E. H. C. Herbert (the first cousin of Lord Carnarvon), Frederick Vyner (the brother-in-law of Lord Ripon, Lord President of the Council), Italian diplomat Count Boyl di Putifigari, and Mr. Lloyd (an engineer). George&#x27;s relationships with other ruling houses assisted him and his small country but also often put them at the center of national political struggles in Europe.

From 1864 to 1874, Greece had 21 governments, the longest of which lasted a year and a half. In July 1874, Charilaos Trikoupis, a member of the Greek Parliament, wrote an anonymous article in the newspaper &quot;Kairoi&quot; blaming King George and his advisors for the continuing political crisis caused by the lack of stable governments. In the article, he accused the King of acting like an absolute monarch by imposing minority governments on the people. If the King insisted, he argued, that only a politician commanding a majority in the &quot;Vouli&quot; could be appointed prime minister, then politicians would be forced to work together more harmoniously to construct a coalition government. Such a plan, he wrote, would end the political instability and reduce the large number of smaller parties. Trikoupis admitted to writing the article after a man supposed by the authorities to be the author was arrested, whereupon he was taken into custody himself. After a public outcry, he was released and subsequently acquitted of the charge of &quot;undermining the constitutional order&quot;. The following year, the King asked Trikoupis to form a government (without a majority) and then read a speech from the throne declaring that in future the leader of the majority party in parliament would be appointed prime minister.

== Territorial expansion ==

Throughout the 1870s, Greece kept pressure on the Ottoman Empire, seeking territorial expansion into Epirus and Thessaly. The Russo-Turkish War of 1877–1878 provided the first potential alliance for the Greek kingdom. George&#x27;s sister Dagmar was the daughter-in-law of Alexander II of Russia, and she sought to have Greece join the war. The French and British refused to countenance such an act, and Greece remained neutral. At the Congress of Berlin convened in 1878 to determine peace terms for the Russo-Turkish War, Greece staked a claim to Crete, Epirus and Thessaly.

The borders were still not finalized in June 1880 when a proposal very favorable to Greece that included Mount Olympus and Ioannina was offered by the British and French. When the Ottoman Turks strenuously objected, Prime Minister Trikoupis made the mistake of threatening a mobilization of the Hellenic Army. A coincident change of government in France, the resignation of Charles de Freycinet and his replacement with Jules Ferry, led to disputes among the Great Powers and, despite British support for a more pro-Greek settlement, the Turks subsequently granted Greece all of Thessaly but only the part of Epirus around Arta. When the government of Trikoupis fell, the new prime minister, Alexandros Koumoundouros, reluctantly accepted the new boundaries.
While Trikoupis followed a policy of retrenchment within the established borders of the Greek state, having learned a valuable lesson about the vicissitudes of the Great Powers, his main opponents, the Nationalist Party led by Theodoros Deligiannis, sought to inflame the anti-Turkish feelings of the Greeks at every opportunity. The next opportunity arose in 1885 when Bulgarians rose in revolt in Eastern Rumelia and united the province with Bulgaria. Deligiannis rode to victory over Trikoupis in elections that year saying that if the Bulgarians could defy the Treaty of Berlin, so should the Greeks.

Deligiannis mobilized the Hellenic Army, and the British Royal Navy blockaded Greece. The admiral in charge of the blockade was Prince Alfred, Duke of Edinburgh, who had been the first choice of the Greeks to be their king in 1863, and the First Lord of the Admiralty at the time was Lord Ripon, whose brother-in-law had been murdered in Greece 16 years before. This was not the last time that King George discovered that his family ties were not always to his advantage. Deligiannis was forced to demobilize and Trikoupis regained the premiership. Between 1882 and 1897, Trikoupis and Deligiannis alternated the premiership as their fortunes rose and fell.

== National progress ==

George&#x27;s silver jubilee in 1888 was celebrated throughout the Hellenic world, and Athens was decorated with garlands for the anniversary of his accession on 30 October. Visitors included the Crown Prince of Denmark, the Prince and Princess of Wales, the Duke and Duchess of Edinburgh, Grand Dukes Sergei and Paul of Russia, and Djevad Pasha from the Ottoman Empire, who presented the King with two Arabian horses as gifts. Jubilee events in the week of 30 October included balls, galas, parades, a thanksgiving service at the Metropolitan Cathedral of Athens, and a lunch for 500 invited guests in a blue and white tent on the Acropolis.

Greece in the last decades of the 19th century was increasingly prosperous and was developing a sense of its role on the European stage. In 1893, the Corinth Canal was built by a French company cutting the sea journey from the Adriatic Sea to Piraeus by . In 1896, the Olympic Games were revived in Athens, and the Opening Ceremony of the 1896 Summer Olympics was presided over by the King. When Spiridon Louis, a shepherd from just outside Athens, ran into the Panathinaiko Stadium to win the Marathon event, the Crown Prince ran down onto the field to run the last thousand yards beside the Greek gold medalist, while the King stood and applauded.

The popular desire to unite all Greeks within a single territory (&quot;Megali Idea&quot;) was never far below the surface and another revolt against Turkish rule erupted in Crete. In February 1897, King George sent his son, Prince George, to take possession of the island. The Greeks refused an Ottoman offer of an autonomous administration, and Deligiannis mobilized for war. The Great Powers refused to allow the expansion of Greece, and on 25 February 1897 announced that Crete would be under an autonomous administration and ordered the Greek and Ottoman Turk militias to withdraw.
The Turks agreed, but Prime Minister Deligiannis refused and dispatched 1400 troops to Crete under the command of Colonel Timoleon Vassos. While the Great Powers announced a blockade, Greek troops crossed the Macedonian border and Abdul Hamid II declared war. The announcement that Greece was finally at war with the Turks was greeted by delirious displays of patriotism and spontaneous parades in honor of the King in Athens. Volunteers by the thousands streamed north to join the forces under the command of Crown Prince Constantine.The war went badly for the ill-prepared Greeks; the only saving grace was the swiftness with which the Hellenic Army was overrun. By the end of April 1897, the war was lost. The worst consequences of defeat for the Greeks were mitigated by the intervention of the King&#x27;s relations in Britain and Russia; nevertheless, the Greeks were forced to give up Crete to international administration, and agree to minor territorial concessions in favor of the Turks and an indemnity of 4 million Turkish pounds.

The jubilation with which Greeks had hailed their king at the beginning of the war was reversed in defeat. For a time, he considered abdication. It was not until the King faced down an assassination attempt on 27 February 1898 with great bravery that his subjects again held their monarch in high esteem. Returning from a trip to the beach at Phaleron in an open carriage, George and his daughter Maria were shot at by two riflemen. The King tried to shield his daughter; both were unhurt though the coachman and a horse were wounded. The gunmen (an Athens clerk called Karditzis and his assistant) fled into the Hymettus hills but they were spotted and arrested. Both were beheaded at Nauplia.

Later that year, after continued unrest in Crete, which included the murder of the British vice-consul, Prince George of Greece was made the Governor-General of Crete under the suzerainty of the Sultan, after the proposal was put forward by the Great Powers. Greece was effectively in day-to-day control of Crete for the first time in modern history.

== Later reign and assassination ==
The death of Britain&#x27;s Queen Victoria on 22 January 1901 left King George as the second-longest-reigning monarch in Europe, behind only Emperor Franz Joseph I of Austria. His always cordial relations with his brother-in-law, the new King Edward VII, continued to tie Greece to Britain. This was abundantly important in Britain&#x27;s support of King George&#x27;s son Prince George as Governor-General of Crete. Nevertheless, Prince George resigned in 1906 after a leader in the Cretan Assembly, Eleftherios Venizelos, campaigned to have him removed.

As a response to the Young Turk Revolution of 1908, Venizelos&#x27;s power base was further strengthened, and on 8 October 1908 the Cretan Assembly passed a resolution in favor of union despite both the reservations of the Athens government under Georgios Theotokis and the objections of the Great Powers. The muted reaction of the Athens Government to the news from Crete led to an unsettled state of affairs on the mainland.

In August 1909, a group of army officers that had formed a military league, &quot;Stratiotikos Syndesmos&quot;, demanded, among other things, that the royal family be stripped of their military commissions. To save the King the embarrassment of removing his sons from their commissions, they resigned them. The military league attempted a coup d&#x27;état, and the King insisted on supporting the duly elected Hellenic Parliament in response. Eventually, the military league joined forces with Venizelos in calling for a National Assembly to revise the constitution. King George gave way, and new elections to the revising assembly were held in August 1910. After some political maneuvering, Venizelos became prime minister of a minority government. Just a month later, Venizelos called new elections for , at which he won an overwhelming majority after most of the opposition parties declined to take part.

Venizelos and the King were united in their belief that the nation required a strong army to repair the damage of the humiliating defeat of 1897. Crown Prince Constantine was reinstated as Inspector-General of the Army, and later Commander-in-Chief. Under his and Venizelos&#x27;s close supervision the military was retrained and equipped with French and British help, and new ships were ordered for the Hellenic Navy. Meanwhile, through diplomatic means, Venizelos had united the Christian countries of the Balkans in opposition to the ailing Ottoman Empire.

When the Kingdom of Montenegro declared war on Turkey on 8 October 1912, it was joined quickly by Serbia, Bulgaria, and Greece in what is known as the First Balkan War. George was on vacation in Denmark, so he immediately returned to Greece via Vienna, arriving in Athens to be met by a large and enthusiastic crowd on the evening of 9 October. The results of this campaign differed radically from the Greek experience at the hands of the Turks in 1897. The well-trained Greek forces, 200,000 strong, won victory after victory. On 9 November 1912, Greek forces commanded by Crown Prince Constantine rode into Thessaloniki, just a few hours ahead of a Bulgarian division. Three days later King George rode in triumph through the streets of Thessaloniki, the second-largest Greek city, accompanied by the Crown Prince and Venizelos. Less than two weeks before the King&#x27;s death, Greek troops entered the chief Epirus town of Ioannina on 6 March 1913.
As he approached the fiftieth anniversary of his accession, the King made plans to abdicate in favor of his son Constantine immediately after the celebration of his golden jubilee in October 1913. Just as he did in Athens, George went about Thessaloniki without any meaningful protection force. While out on an afternoon walk near the White Tower on 18 March 1913, he was shot at close range in the back by Alexandros Schinas, who was and . George died instantly, the bullet having penetrated his heart. The Greek government denied any political motive for the assassination, saying that Schinas was an alcoholic vagrant. Schinas was tortured in prison and fell to his death from a police station window six weeks later.

The King&#x27;s body was taken to Athens on the &quot;Amphitrite&quot;, escorted by a flotilla of naval vessels. For three days the coffin of the King, draped in the Danish and Greek flags, lay in the Metropolitan Cathedral in Athens before his body was committed to a tomb at his palace in Tatoi.

== Honours and arms ==
=== Honours ===
==== Military appointments ====
* Admiral of the Fleet of the Danish Navy
* Honorary admiral of the British Royal Navy, &quot;31 October 1903&quot;

=== Arms ===
The distinctive Greek flag of blue and white cross was first hoisted during the Greek War of Independence in March 1822. This was later modified so that the shade of blue matched that of the Bavarian coat of arms of the first King of Greece, Otto. The shield is emblazoned with a smaller version of the royal arms of Denmark, including the three lions of the arms of Denmark proper, the two lions of Schleswig, the nettle leaf of Holstein, the horse head of Lauenburg, the two red bars of the House of Oldenburg and the cross of Delmenhorst. The supporters on either side both depicting Heracles are quite similar to the two wild men from the Danish royal arms. Beneath the shield is the motto in Greek, Ἰσχύς μου ἡ αγάπη τοῦ λαοῦ (&quot;The people&#x27;s love is my strength&quot;). Beneath the motto dangles the Grand Cross of the Order of the Redeemer, Greece&#x27;s premier decoration of honor.
== Ancestry ==
== Notes ==
== References ==
== Sources ==
* 
* 
* 

== External links ==

* Vilhelm (Georg I) at the website of the Royal Danish Collection at Amalienborg Palace</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q17142" start="0" end="8" title="George I of Greece" label="George I"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="10" end="15" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q976327" start="30" end="30" title="Romanization" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q2198995" start="94" end="108" title="King of Greece" label="King of Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q124079910" start="134" end="151" title="Assassination of George I of Greece" label="his assassination"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748" start="218" end="228" title="Copenhagen" label="Copenhagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006452" start="270" end="287" title="Royal Danish Navy" label="Royal Danish Navy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="346" end="369" title="Hellenic Parliament#History" label="Greek National Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q77067" start="403" end="412" title="Otto of Greece" label="King Otto"/>
<link wikidata="Q702073" start="469" end="481" title="Great Powers" label="Great Powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q174193" start="487" end="530" title="United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland" label="United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q71092" start="536" end="556" title="Second French Empire" label="Second French Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="565" end="579" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q155178" start="592" end="635" title="Grand Duchess Olga Constantinovna of Russia" label="Grand Duchess Olga Constantinovna of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q155616" start="679" end="696" title="House of Schleswig-Holstein-Sonderburg-Glücksburg" label="new Greek dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q152260" start="718" end="727" title="Alexandra of Denmark" label="Alexandra"/>
<link wikidata="Q153601" start="732" end="738" title="Maria Feodorovna (Dagmar of Denmark)" label="Dagmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q20875" start="793" end="803" title="Edward VII" label="Edward VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q120180" start="830" end="853" title="Alexander III of Russia" label="Alexander III of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q269412" start="884" end="892" title="George V" label="George V"/>
<link wikidata="Q156617" start="916" end="938" title="Christian X of Denmark" label="Christian X of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q154927" start="940" end="960" title="Haakon VII of Norway" label="Haakon VII of Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q40787" start="966" end="987" title="Nicholas II of Russia" label="Nicholas II of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204808" start="1062" end="1082" title="modern Greek history" label="modern Greek history"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="1126" end="1132" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="1162" end="1173" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q170295" start="1200" end="1214" title="Ionian Islands" label="Ionian Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q166919" start="1241" end="1249" title="Thessaly" label="Thessaly"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="1271" end="1285" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q174205" start="1296" end="1325" title="Russo-Turkish War (1877–1878)" label="Russo-Turkish War (1877–1878)"/>
<link wikidata="Q657055" start="1413" end="1437" title="Greco-Turkish War (1897)" label="Greco-Turkish War (1897)"/>
<link wikidata="Q177918" start="1450" end="1466" title="First Balkan War" label="First Balkan War"/>
<link wikidata="Q81734" start="1508" end="1523" title="Greek Macedonia" label="Greek Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q17151" start="1552" end="1564" title="Thessaloniki" label="Thessaloniki"/>
<link wikidata="Q2504988" start="1667" end="1680" title="Yellow Palace, Copenhagen" label="Yellow Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202402" start="1698" end="1708" title="town house" label="town house"/>
<link wikidata="Q3432062" start="1715" end="1725" title="Amaliegade" label="Amaliegade"/>
<link wikidata="Q211053" start="1739" end="1757" title="Amalienborg Palace" label="Amalienborg Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748" start="1769" end="1779" title="Copenhagen" label="Copenhagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q151305" start="1822" end="1882" title="Christian IX of Denmark" label="Prince Christian of Schleswig-Holstein-Sonderburg-Glücksburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q166028" start="1887" end="1918" title="Princess Louise of Hesse-Kassel" label="Princess Louise of Hesse-Kassel"/>
<link wikidata="Q240302" start="2112" end="2169" title="William, Duke of Schleswig-Holstein-Sonderburg-Glücksburg" label="William, Duke of Schleswig-Holstein-Sonderburg-Glücksburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q60709" start="2175" end="2205" title="Prince William of Hesse-Kassel" label="Prince William of Hesse-Kassel"/>
<link wikidata="Q156187" start="2299" end="2321" title="Frederick V of Denmark" label="Frederick V of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q131981" start="2355" end="2381" title="George II of Great Britain" label="George II of Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370385" start="2523" end="2539" title="heir presumptive" label="heir presumptive"/>
<link wikidata="Q94941" start="2557" end="2581" title="Frederick VII of Denmark" label="Frederick VII of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q152756" start="2688" end="2697" title="Frederick VIII of Denmark" label="Frederick"/>
<link wikidata="Q152260" start="2747" end="2756" title="Alexandra of Denmark" label="Alexandra"/>
<link wikidata="Q20875" start="2770" end="2780" title="Edward VII" label="Edward VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q153601" start="2805" end="2811" title="Maria Feodorovna (Dagmar of Denmark)" label="Dagmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q120180" start="2825" end="2848" title="Alexander III of Russia" label="Alexander III of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q217504" start="2851" end="2856" title="Princess Thyra of Denmark" label="Thyra"/>
<link wikidata="Q437001" start="2870" end="2910" title="Ernest Augustus, Crown Prince of Hanover" label="Ernest Augustus, Crown Prince of Hanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q310533" start="2916" end="2924" title="Prince Valdemar of Denmark" label="Valdemar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006452" start="3072" end="3089" title="Royal Danish Navy" label="Royal Danish Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q16674517" start="3252" end="3279" title="expulsion of Otto of Greece" label="expulsion of Otto of Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q77067" start="3327" end="3331" title="Otto of Greece" label="Otto"/>
<link wikidata="Q44785" start="3372" end="3380" title="Luitpold, Prince Regent of Bavaria" label="Luitpold"/>
<link wikidata="Q174193" start="3510" end="3528" title="United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland" label="the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q158143" start="3545" end="3577" title="Prince Alfred, Duke of Edinburgh" label="Prince Alfred, Duke of Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q9439" start="3593" end="3607" title="Queen Victoria" label="Queen Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q152245" start="3612" end="3625" title="Prince Albert of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha" label="Prince Albert"/>
<link wikidata="Q193656" start="3650" end="3665" title="Lord Palmerston" label="Lord Palmerston"/>
<link wikidata="Q170295" start="3723" end="3737" title="Ionian Islands" label="Ionian Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063498" start="3757" end="3777" title="United States of the Ionian Islands" label="British protectorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q625717" start="3783" end="3808" title="London Conference of 1832" label="London Conference of 1832"/>
<link wikidata="Q702073" start="3841" end="3853" title="Great Powers" label="Great Powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586252" start="4004" end="4016" title="1862 Greek head of state referendum" label="a plebiscite"/>
<link wikidata="Q712502" start="4292" end="4331" title="Henri d&amp;#x27;Orléans, duc d&amp;#x27;Aumale" label="Henri d&amp;#x27;Orléans, duc d&amp;#x27;Aumale"/>
<link wikidata="Q213630" start="4397" end="4437" title="Ernest II, Duke of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha" label="Ernest II, Duke of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha"/>
<link wikidata="Q84307" start="4450" end="4466" title="Ernst Leopold, 4th Prince of Leiningen" label="Prince Leiningen"/>
<link wikidata="Q84192" start="4472" end="4502" title="Maximilian I of Mexico" label="Archduke Maximilian of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q365201" start="5385" end="5405" title="Konstantinos Kanaris" label="Konstantinos Kanaris"/>
<link wikidata="Q44160" start="5676" end="5682" title="Toulon" label="Toulon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="5757" end="5763" title="Athens" label="Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q58976" start="5786" end="5793" title="Piraeus" label="Piraeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="5897" end="5902" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q7084890" start="6173" end="6197" title="Old Royal Palace" label="the 40-year-old building"/>
<link wikidata="Q586889" start="6317" end="6330" title="Prince Julius of Schleswig-Holstein-Sonderburg-Glücksburg" label="Prince Julius"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182726" start="6389" end="6405" title="Wilhelm Sponneck" label="Wilhelm Sponneck"/>
<link wikidata="Q78967" start="6642" end="6653" title="Peloponnese" label="Peloponnese"/>
<link wikidata="Q103011" start="6663" end="6670" title="Corinth" label="Corinth"/>
<link wikidata="Q189901" start="6672" end="6677" title="Argos, Peloponnese" label="Argos"/>
<link wikidata="Q193409" start="6679" end="6689" title="Tripolitsa" label="Tripolitsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2308046" start="6691" end="6697" title="Sparta, Laconia" label="Sparta"/>
<link wikidata="Q167895" start="6703" end="6711" title="Kalamata" label="Kalamata"/>
<link wikidata="Q121378" start="6893" end="6898" title="Corfu" label="Corfu"/>
<link wikidata="Q6577026" start="6975" end="6992" title="List of Lord High Commissioners of the Ionian Islands" label="High Commissioner"/>
<link wikidata="Q3132884" start="6998" end="7010" title="Henry Storks" label="Henry Storks"/>
<link wikidata="Q365201" start="7191" end="7211" title="Konstantinos Kanaris" label="Konstantinos Kanaris"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995220" start="7595" end="7615" title="Greek Constitution of 1864" label="the new constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q4895489" start="7721" end="7744" title="universal male suffrage" label="universal male suffrage"/>
<link wikidata="Q41614" start="7774" end="7797" title="constitutional monarchy" label="constitutional monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q20875" start="8219" end="8229" title="Edward VII" label="Edward VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q34374" start="8302" end="8307" title="Crete" label="Crete"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="8360" end="8372" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Turk"/>
<link wikidata="Q58976" start="8574" end="8581" title="Piraeus" label="Piraeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q182274" start="8600" end="8611" title="irredentism" label="irredentism"/>
<link wikidata="Q254106" start="8623" end="8634" title="Crimean War" label="Crimean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2668235" start="8647" end="8672" title="Cretan Revolt (1866–1869)" label="Cretan Revolt (1866–1869)"/>
<link wikidata="Q332789" start="8762" end="8772" title="Edward Stanley, 15th Earl of Derby" label="Lord Derby"/>
<link wikidata="Q155178" start="8952" end="8995" title="Grand Duchess Olga Constantinovna of Russia" label="Grand Duchess Olga Constantinovna of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q83171" start="9059" end="9076" title="Tsar Alexander II" label="Tsar Alexander II"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="9211" end="9225" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q120180" start="9292" end="9311" title="Alexander III of Russia" label="Tsarevich Alexander"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="9342" end="9350" title="Lutheran" label="Lutheran"/>
<link wikidata="Q112707" start="9356" end="9364" title="Romanovs" label="Romanovs"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="9370" end="9389" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="Orthodox Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q182147" start="9621" end="9634" title="Winter Palace" label="Winter Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="9638" end="9654" title="Saint Petersburg" label="Saint Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1621200" start="9696" end="9710" title="Tsarskoye Selo" label="Tsarskoye Selo"/>
<link wikidata="Q152099" start="9817" end="9828" title="Constantine I of Greece" label="Constantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q155822" start="9854" end="9880" title="Princess Sophia of Prussia" label="Princess Sophia of Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q152935" start="9947" end="9956" title="George II of Greece" label="George II"/>
<link wikidata="Q151742" start="9958" end="9967" title="Alexander of Greece" label="Alexander"/>
<link wikidata="Q155394" start="9973" end="9977" title="Paul of Greece" label="Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q170396" start="9981" end="9987" title="Prince George of Greece and Denmark" label="George"/>
<link wikidata="Q115472" start="10013" end="10037" title="Princess Marie Bonaparte" label="Princess Marie Bonaparte"/>
<link wikidata="Q232728" start="10062" end="10071" title="Grand Duchess Alexandra Georgievna of Russia" label="Alexandra"/>
<link wikidata="Q372964" start="10097" end="10136" title="Grand Duke Paul Alexandrovich of Russia" label="Grand Duke Paul Alexandrovich of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q170160" start="10161" end="10169" title="Prince Nicholas of Greece and Denmark" label="Nicholas"/>
<link wikidata="Q232483" start="10195" end="10237" title="Grand Duchess Elena Vladimirovna of Russia" label="Grand Duchess Elena Vladimirovna of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q232732" start="10264" end="10269" title="Princess Maria of Greece and Denmark" label="Maria"/>
<link wikidata="Q524451" start="10303" end="10343" title="Grand Duke George Mikhailovich of Russia (1863–1919)" label="Grand Duke George Mikhailovich of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3066816" start="10398" end="10416" title="Perikles Ioannidis" label="Perikles Ioannidis"/>
<link wikidata="Q156531" start="10463" end="10469" title="Prince Andrew of Greece and Denmark" label="Andrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q116062" start="10495" end="10523" title="Princess Alice of Battenberg" label="Princess Alice of Battenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q80976" start="10557" end="10589" title="Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh" label="Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q447757" start="10593" end="10604" title="Prince Christopher of Greece and Denmark" label="Christopher"/>
<link wikidata="Q447105" start="10653" end="10684" title="Nancy Stewart Worthington Leeds" label="Nancy Stewart Worthington Leeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q577228" start="10698" end="10727" title="Princess Françoise of Orléans (1902–1953)" label="Princess Françoise of Orléans"/>
<link wikidata="Q7171631" start="10825" end="10838" title="Petalioi Gulf" label="Petalioi Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q257617" start="10949" end="10954" title="Tatoi" label="Tatoi"/>
<link wikidata="Q121378" start="10980" end="10985" title="Corfu" label="Corfu"/>
<link wikidata="Q824940" start="11017" end="11026" title="Mon Repos, Corfu" label="Mon Repos"/>
<link wikidata="Q58976" start="11445" end="11452" title="Piraeus" label="Piraeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3186107" start="12077" end="12100" title="Josslyn Pennington, 5th Baron Muncaster" label="Lord and Lady Muncaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q23009870" start="12242" end="12254" title="first cousin" label="first cousin"/>
<link wikidata="Q335845" start="12258" end="12272" title="Henry Herbert, 4th Earl of Carnarvon" label="Lord Carnarvon"/>
<link wikidata="Q333111" start="12314" end="12324" title="George Robinson, 1st Marquess of Ripon" label="Lord Ripon"/>
<link wikidata="Q943379" start="12326" end="12355" title="Lord President of the Council" label="Lord President of the Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q197692" start="12707" end="12726" title="Charilaos Trikoupis" label="Charilaos Trikoupis"/>
<link wikidata="Q184558" start="12994" end="13010" title="Absolute monarchy" label="absolute monarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q114793" start="13023" end="13042" title="minority government" label="minority government"/>
<link wikidata="Q565751" start="14064" end="14070" title="Epirus" label="Epirus"/>
<link wikidata="Q166919" start="14075" end="14083" title="Thessaly" label="Thessaly"/>
<link wikidata="Q174205" start="14089" end="14119" title="Russo-Turkish War (1877–1878)" label="Russo-Turkish War of 1877–1878"/>
<link wikidata="Q153601" start="14202" end="14208" title="Maria Feodorovna (Dagmar of Denmark)" label="Dagmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q83171" start="14236" end="14258" title="Alexander II of Russia" label="Alexander II of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q151423" start="14399" end="14417" title="Congress of Berlin" label="Congress of Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q80344" start="14646" end="14659" title="Mount Olympus" label="Mount Olympus"/>
<link wikidata="Q183199" start="14664" end="14672" title="Ioannina" label="Ioannina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546449" start="14836" end="14849" title="Hellenic Army" label="Hellenic Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q317957" start="14915" end="14935" title="Charles de Freycinet" label="Charles de Freycinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q959708" start="14961" end="14972" title="Jules Ferry" label="Jules Ferry"/>
<link wikidata="Q208573" start="15164" end="15168" title="Arta, Greece" label="Arta"/>
<link wikidata="Q708318" start="15233" end="15257" title="Alexandros Koumoundouros" label="Alexandros Koumoundouros"/>
<link wikidata="Q3366549" start="15502" end="15519" title="Nationalist Party (Greece)" label="Nationalist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q471319" start="15527" end="15548" title="Theodoros Deligiannis" label="Theodoros Deligiannis"/>
<link wikidata="Q459780" start="15699" end="15714" title="Eastern Rumelia" label="Eastern Rumelia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048169" start="15865" end="15881" title="Treaty of Berlin (1878)" label="Treaty of Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546449" start="15932" end="15945" title="Hellenic Army" label="Hellenic Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="15963" end="15973" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q158143" start="16034" end="16066" title="Alfred, Duke of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha" label="Prince Alfred, Duke of Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q21561383" start="16146" end="16173" title="First Lord of the Admiralty" label="First Lord of the Admiralty"/>
<link wikidata="Q333111" start="16190" end="16200" title="George Robinson, 1st Marquess of Ripon" label="Lord Ripon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550874" start="16604" end="16618" title="silver jubilee" label="silver jubilee"/>
<link wikidata="Q152756" start="16786" end="16809" title="Frederick VIII of Denmark" label="Crown Prince of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q20875" start="16815" end="16821" title="Edward VII" label="Prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q152260" start="16826" end="16843" title="Alexandra of Denmark" label="Princess of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q158154" start="16858" end="16878" title="Grand Duchess Maria Alexandrovna of Russia" label="Duchess of Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q248900" start="16892" end="16898" title="Grand Duke Sergei Alexandrovich of Russia" label="Sergei"/>
<link wikidata="Q372964" start="16903" end="16917" title="Grand Duke Paul Alexandrovich of Russia" label="Paul of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q401199" start="16923" end="16935" title="Ahmed Cevad Pasha" label="Djevad Pasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q184138" start="16993" end="17006" title="Arabian horse" label="Arabian horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q981372" start="17121" end="17153" title="Metropolitan Cathedral of Athens" label="Metropolitan Cathedral of Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q131013" start="17222" end="17231" title="Acropolis of Athens" label="Acropolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q182873" start="17384" end="17397" title="Corinth Canal" label="Corinth Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q13924" start="17461" end="17473" title="Adriatic Sea" label="Adriatic Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q58976" start="17477" end="17484" title="Piraeus" label="Piraeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5389" start="17503" end="17516" title="Olympic Games" label="Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q8080" start="17573" end="17593" title="1896 Summer Olympics" label="1896 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q202424" start="17630" end="17644" title="Spiridon Louis" label="Spiridon Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q208811" start="17696" end="17716" title="Panathinaiko Stadium" label="Panathinaiko Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q40244" start="17728" end="17736" title="Marathon" label="Marathon"/>
<link wikidata="Q335081" start="17957" end="17968" title="Megali Idea" label="Megali Idea"/>
<link wikidata="Q170396" start="18110" end="18123" title="Prince George of Greece" label="Prince George"/>
<link wikidata="Q768750" start="18594" end="18609" title="Timoleon Vassos" label="Timoleon Vassos"/>
<link wikidata="Q134817" start="18703" end="18717" title="Abdul Hamid II" label="Abdul Hamid II"/>
<link wikidata="Q657055" start="18727" end="18730" title="Greco-Turkish War (1897)" label="war"/>
<link wikidata="Q534927" start="19858" end="19866" title="Phaleron" label="Phaleron"/>
<link wikidata="Q232732" start="19912" end="19917" title="Princess Maria of Greece and Denmark" label="Maria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1232266" start="20128" end="20136" title="Hymettus" label="Hymettus"/>
<link wikidata="Q202337" start="20201" end="20208" title="Nauplia" label="Nauplia"/>
<link wikidata="Q9439" start="20627" end="20641" title="Queen Victoria" label="Queen Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q51056" start="20748" end="20773" title="Franz Joseph I of Austria" label="Franz Joseph I of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q20875" start="20842" end="20852" title="Edward VII" label="Edward VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q170396" start="20972" end="20985" title="Prince George of Greece and Denmark" label="Prince George"/>
<link wikidata="Q382844" start="20989" end="21014" title="Governor-General of Crete" label="Governor-General of Crete"/>
<link wikidata="Q205545" start="21100" end="21121" title="Eleftherios Venizelos" label="Eleftherios Venizelos"/>
<link wikidata="Q4298662" start="21177" end="21198" title="Young Turk Revolution" label="Young Turk Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q708300" start="21403" end="21421" title="Georgios Theotokis" label="Georgios Theotokis"/>
<link wikidata="Q760023" start="21666" end="21688" title="Stratiotikos Syndesmos" label="Stratiotikos Syndesmos"/>
<link wikidata="Q477089" start="21994" end="22013" title="Hellenic Parliament" label="Hellenic Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q5602014" start="22177" end="22190" title="August 1910 Greek legislative election" label="new elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5602018" start="22371" end="22384" title="November 1910 Greek legislative election" label="new elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q657055" start="22623" end="22637" title="Greco-Turkish War (1897)" label="defeat of 1897"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129369" start="22897" end="22910" title="Hellenic Navy" label="Hellenic Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q386496" start="23063" end="23084" title="Kingdom of Montenegro" label="Kingdom of Montenegro"/>
<link wikidata="Q241748" start="23152" end="23158" title="Kingdom of Serbia" label="Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q147909" start="23160" end="23168" title="Kingdom of Bulgaria" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q177918" start="23205" end="23221" title="First Balkan War" label="First Balkan War"/>
<link wikidata="Q17151" start="23663" end="23675" title="Thessaloniki" label="Thessaloniki"/>
<link wikidata="Q183199" start="23981" end="23989" title="Ioannina" label="Ioannina"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948446" start="24172" end="24186" title="golden jubilee" label="golden jubilee"/>
<link wikidata="Q550576" start="24342" end="24353" title="White Tower of Thessaloniki" label="White Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147447" start="24414" end="24432" title="Alexandros Schinas" label="Alexandros Schinas"/>
<link wikidata="Q60149" start="24895" end="24901" title="Flag of Denmark" label="Danish"/>
<link wikidata="Q129132" start="24906" end="24917" title="Flag of Greece" label="Greek flags"/>
<link wikidata="Q981372" start="24930" end="24952" title="Metropolitan Cathedral of Athens" label="Metropolitan Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q257617" start="25020" end="25025" title="Tatoi" label="Tatoi"/>
<link wikidata="Q842486" start="25101" end="25121" title="Admiral of the Fleet" label="Admiral of the Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006452" start="25129" end="25140" title="Danish Navy" label="Danish Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916006" start="25152" end="25159" title="Admiral (United Kingdom)" label="admiral"/>
<link wikidata="Q182062" start="25309" end="25334" title="Greek War of Independence" label="Greek War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q980" start="25420" end="25427" title="Bavaria" label="Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25532" end="25553" title="Coat of arms of Denmark#Royal coat of arms" label="royal arms of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q871867" start="25629" end="25638" title="Coat of arms of Schleswig" label="Schleswig"/>
<link wikidata="Q111224" start="25659" end="25667" title="Holstein" label="Holstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q3000" start="25687" end="25696" title="Herzogtum Lauenburg" label="Lauenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q155594" start="25722" end="25740" title="House of Oldenburg" label="House of Oldenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q3907" start="25758" end="25769" title="Delmenhorst" label="Delmenhorst"/>
<link wikidata="Q122248" start="25816" end="25824" title="Heracles" label="Heracles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071580" start="25854" end="25862" title="Wild man" label="wild men"/>
<link wikidata="Q42470" start="25917" end="25922" title="motto" label="motto"/>
<link wikidata="Q614661" start="26062" end="26083" title="Order of the Redeemer" label="Order of the Redeemer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26260" end="26283" title="Royal Danish Collection" label="Royal Danish Collection"/>
<link wikidata="Q211053" start="26287" end="26305" title="Amalienborg Palace" label="Amalienborg Palace"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="187388" wikidata="Q205747" url="?curid=187388" title="Stardust (spacecraft)">
<text>Stardust was a 385-kilogram robotic space probe launched by NASA on 7 February 1999. Its primary mission was to collect dust samples from the coma of comet Wild 2, as well as samples of cosmic dust, and return them to Earth for analysis. It was the first sample return mission of its kind. En route to Comet Wild 2, it also flew by and studied the asteroid 5535 Annefrank. The primary mission was successfully completed on 15 January 2006 when the sample return capsule returned to Earth.

A mission extension, codenamed &quot;NExT&quot;, culminated in February 2011 with &quot;Stardust&quot; intercepting Comet Tempel 1, a small Solar System body previously visited by &quot;Deep Impact&quot; in 2005. &quot;Stardust&quot; ceased operations in March 2011.

On 14 August 2014, scientists announced the identification of possible interstellar dust particles from the &quot;Stardust&quot; capsule returned to Earth in 2006.

==Mission background==
===History===
Beginning in the 1980s, scientists began seeking a dedicated mission to study a comet. During the early 1990s, several missions to study Comet Halley became the first successful missions to return close-up data. However, the US cometary mission, Comet Rendezvous Asteroid Flyby, was canceled for budgetary reasons. In the mid-1990s, further support was given to a cheaper, Discovery-class mission that would study Comet Wild 2 in 2004.

&quot;Stardust&quot; was competitively selected in the fall of 1995 as a NASA Discovery Program mission of low-cost with highly focused science goals. Construction of &quot;Stardust&quot; began in 1996, and was subject to the maximum contamination restriction, level 5 planetary protection. However, the risk of interplanetary contamination by alien life was judged low, as particle impacts at over , even into aerogel, were believed to be terminal for any known microorganism.

Comet Wild 2 was selected as the primary target of the mission for the rare chance to observe a long-period comet that has ventured close to the Sun. The comet has since become a short period comet after an event in 1974, where the orbit of Wild 2 was affected by the gravitational pull of Jupiter, moving the orbit inward, closer to the Sun. In planning the mission, it was expected that most of the original material from which the comet formed would still be preserved.

The primary science objectives of the mission included:
*Providing a flyby of a comet of interest (Wild 2) at a sufficiently low velocity (less than 6.5 km/s) such that non-destructive capture of comet dust is possible using an aerogel collector.
*Facilitating the intercept of significant numbers of interstellar dust particles using the same collection medium, also at as low a velocity as possible.
*Returning as many high-resolution images of the comet coma and nucleus as possible, subject to the cost constraints of the mission.

The spacecraft was designed, built and operated by Lockheed Martin Astronautics as a Discovery-class mission in Denver, Colorado. JPL provided mission management for the NASA division for mission operations. The principal investigator of the mission was Dr. Donald Brownlee from the University of Washington.

===Spacecraft design===
The spacecraft bus measured in length, and in width, a design adapted from the SpaceProbe deep space bus developed by Lockheed Martin Astronautics. The bus was primarily constructed with graphite fiber panels with an aluminum honeycomb support structure underneath; the entire spacecraft was covered with polycyanate, Kapton sheeting for further protection. To maintain low costs, the spacecraft incorporated many designs and technologies used in past missions or previously developed for future missions by the Small Spacecraft Technologies Initiative (SSTI). The spacecraft featured five scientific instruments to collect data, including the &quot;Stardust&quot; Sample Collection tray, which was brought back to Earth for analysis.

====Attitude control and propulsion====
The spacecraft was three-axis stabilized with eight 4.41 N hydrazine monopropellant thrusters, and eight 1 N thrusters to maintain attitude control (orientation); necessary minor propulsion maneuvers were performed by these thrusters as well. The spacecraft was launched with 80 kilograms of propellant. Information for spacecraft positioning was provided by a star camera using FSW to determine attitude (Stellar Compass), an inertial measurement unit, and two Sun sensors. The Stellar Compass software was provided by Intelligent Decisions, Inc.

====Communications====
For communicating with the Deep Space Network, the spacecraft transmitted data across the X-band using a parabolic high-gain antenna, medium-gain antenna (MGA) and low-gain antennas (LGA) depending on mission phase, and a 15-watt transponder design originally intended for the &quot;Cassini&quot; spacecraft.

====Power====
The probe was powered by two solar arrays, providing an average of 330 watts of power. The arrays also included Whipple shields to protect the delicate surfaces from the potentially damaging cometary dust while the spacecraft was in the coma of Wild 2. The solar array design was derived primarily from the Small Spacecraft Technology Initiative (SSTI) spacecraft development guidelines. The arrays provided a unique method of switching strings from series to parallel depending on the distance from the Sun. A single nickel–hydrogen () battery was also included to provide the spacecraft with power when the solar arrays received too little sunlight.

====Computer====
The computer on the spacecraft operated using a radiation-hardened RAD6000 32-bit processor card. For storing data when the spacecraft was unable to communicate with Earth, the processor card was able to store 128 megabytes, 20% of which was occupied by the flight system software. The system software is a form of VxWorks, an embedded operating system developed by Wind River Systems.

====Scientific instruments====
====Sample collection====
Comet and interstellar particles are collected in ultra low density aerogel. The tennis racket-sized collector tray contained ninety blocks of aerogel, providing more than 1,000 square centimeters of surface area to capture cometary and interstellar dust grains.

To collect the particles without damaging them, a silicon-based solid with a porous, sponge-like structure is used in which 99.8 percent of the volume is empty space. Aerogel has  the density of glass, another silicon-based solid to which it may be compared. When a particle hits the aerogel, it becomes buried in the material, creating a long track, up to 200 times the length of the grain. The aerogel was packed in an aluminium grid and fitted into a Sample Return Capsule (SRC), which was to be released from the spacecraft as it passed Earth in 2006.

To analyze the aerogel for interstellar dust, one million photographs will be needed to image the entirety of the sampled grains. The images will be distributed to home computer users to aid in the study of the data using a program titled, Stardust@home. In April 2014, NASA reported they had recovered seven particles of interstellar dust from the aerogel.

===&quot;Stardust&quot; microchip===
&quot;Stardust&quot; was launched carrying two sets of identical pairs of square silicon wafers. Each pair featured engravings of well over one million names of people who participated in the public outreach program by filling out internet forms available in late 1997 and mid-1998. One pair of the microchips was positioned on the spacecraft and the other was attached to the sample return capsule.

==Mission profile==
===Launch and trajectory===

&quot;Stardust&quot; was launched at 21:04:15 UTC on 7 February 1999, by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration from Space Launch Complex 17A at the Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida, aboard a Delta II 7426 launch vehicle. The complete burn sequence lasted for 27 minutes bringing the spacecraft into a heliocentric orbit that would bring the spacecraft around the Sun and past Earth for a gravity assist maneuver in 2001, to reach asteroid 5535 Annefrank in 2002 and Comet Wild 2 in 2004 at a low flyby velocity of 6.1 km/s. In 2004, the spacecraft performed a course correction that would allow it to pass by Earth a second time in 2006, to release the Sample Return Capsule for a landing in Utah in the Bonneville Salt Flats.

During the second encounter with Earth, the Sample Return Capsule was released on Jan 15, 2006. Immediately afterwards, &quot;Stardust&quot; was put into a &quot;divert maneuver&quot; to avoid entering the atmosphere alongside the capsule. Under twenty kilograms of propellant remained onboard after the maneuver. On 29 January 2006, the spacecraft was put in hibernation mode with only the solar panels and receiver active, in a 3-year heliocentric orbit that would return it to Earth vicinity on 14 January 2009.

A subsequent mission extension was approved on 3 July 2007, to bring the spacecraft back to full operation for a flyby of Comet Tempel 1 in 2011. The mission extension was the first to revisit a small Solar System body and used the remaining propellant, signaling the end of the useful life for the spacecraft.

===Encounter with Annefrank===

At 04:50:20 UTC on 2 November 2002, &quot;Stardust&quot; encountered asteroid 5535 Annefrank from a distance of . The solar phase angle ranged from 130 degrees to 47 degrees during the period of observations. This encounter was used primarily as an engineering test of the spacecraft and ground operations in preparation for the encounter with Comet Wild 2 in 2003.

===Encounter with Wild 2===
At 19:21:28 UTC, on 2 January 2004, &quot;Stardust&quot; encountered Comet Wild 2 on the sunward side with a relative velocity of 6.1 km/s at a distance of . The original encounter distance was planned to be , but this was changed after a safety review board increased the closest approach distance to minimize the potential for catastrophic dust collisions.

The relative velocity between the comet and the spacecraft was such that the comet actually overtook the spacecraft from behind as they traveled around the Sun. During the encounter, the spacecraft was on the Sunlit side of the nucleus, approaching at a solar phase angle of 70 degrees, reaching a minimum angle of 3 degrees near closest approach and departing at a phase angle of 110 degrees. The AutoNav software was used during the flyby.

During the flyby the spacecraft deployed the Sample Collection plate to collect dust grain samples from the coma, and took detailed pictures of the icy nucleus.

==New Exploration of Tempel 1 (NExT)==
On 19 March 2006, &quot;Stardust&quot; scientists announced that they were considering the possibility of redirecting the spacecraft on a secondary mission to image Comet Tempel 1. The comet was previously the target of the &quot;Deep Impact&quot; mission in 2005, sending an impactor into the surface. The possibility of this extension could be vital for gathering images of the impact crater which &quot;Deep Impact&quot; was unsuccessful in capturing due to dust from the impact obscuring the surface.

On 3 July 2007 the mission extension was approved and renamed &quot;New Exploration of Tempel 1&quot; (NExT). This investigation would provide the first look at the changes to a comet nucleus produced after a close approach to the Sun. NExT also would extend the mapping of Tempel 1, making it the most mapped comet nucleus to date. This mapping would help address the major questions of comet nucleus geology. The flyby mission was expected to consume almost all of the remaining fuel, signaling the end of the operability of the spacecraft. The AutoNav software (for autonomous navigation) would control the spacecraft for the 30 minutes prior to encounter.

The mission objectives included the following:

;Primary objectives
*Extend the current understanding of the processes that affect the surfaces of comet nuclei by documenting the changes that have occurred on Comet Tempel 1 between two successive perihelion passages, or orbits around the Sun.
*Extend the geologic mapping of the nucleus of Tempel 1 to elucidate the extent and nature of layering, and help refine models of the formation and structure of comet nuclei.
*Extend the study of smooth flow deposits, active areas and known exposure of water ice.

;Secondary objectives
*Potentially image and characterize the crater produced by Deep Impact in July 2005, to better understand the structure and mechanical properties of cometary nuclei and elucidate crater formation processes on them.
*Measure the density and mass distribution of dust particles within the coma using the Dust Flux Monitor Instrument.
*Analyze the composition of dust particles within the coma using the Comet and Interstellar Dust Analyzer instrument.

===Encounter with Tempel 1===

At 04:39:10 UTC on 15 February 2011, &quot;Stardust-NExT&quot; encountered Tempel 1 from a distance of . An estimated 72 images were acquired during the encounter. These showed changes in the terrain and revealed portions of the comet never seen by &quot;Deep Impact&quot;. The impact site from &quot;Deep Impact&quot; was also observed, though it was barely visible due to material settling back into the crater.

===End of extended mission===
On 24 March 2011 at approximately 23:00 UTC, &quot;Stardust&quot; conducted a burn to consume its remaining fuel. The spacecraft had little fuel left and scientists hoped the data collected would help in the development of a more accurate system for estimating fuel levels on spacecraft. After the data had been collected, no further antenna aiming was possible and the transmitter was switched off. The spacecraft sent an acknowledgement from approximately away in space.

==Sample return==
On 15 January 2006, at 05:57 UTC, the Sample Return Capsule successfully separated from &quot;Stardust&quot;. The SRC re-entered the Earth&#x27;s atmosphere at 09:57 UTC, with a velocity of , the fastest reentry speed into Earth&#x27;s atmosphere ever achieved by a human-made object. The capsule followed a drastic reentry profile, going from a velocity of Mach 36 to subsonic speed within 110 seconds. Peak deceleration was 34 &quot;g&quot;, encountered 40 seconds into the reentry at an altitude of 55 km over Spring Creek, Nevada. The phenolic-impregnated carbon ablator (PICA) heat shield, produced by Fiber Materials Inc., reached a temperature of more than 2,900 °C during this steep reentry. The capsule then parachuted to the ground, finally landing at 10:12 UTC at the Utah Test and Training Range, near the U.S. Army Dugway Proving Ground. The capsule was then transported by military aircraft from Utah to Ellington Air Force Base in Houston, Texas, then transferred by road in an unannounced convoy to the Planetary Materials Curatorial facility at Johnson Space Center in Houston to begin analysis.

===Sample processing===

The sample container was taken to a clean room with a cleanliness factor 100 times that of a hospital operating room to ensure the interstellar and comet dust was not contaminated. Preliminary estimations suggested at least a million microscopic specks of dust were embedded in the aerogel collector. Ten particles were found to be at least 100 micrometers (0.1 mm) and the largest approximately 1,000 micrometers (1 mm). An estimated 45 interstellar dust impacts were also found on the sample collector, which resided on the back side of the cometary dust collector. Dust grains are being observed and analyzed by a volunteer team through the citizen science project, Stardust@Home.

The combined mass of the harvested sample was approximately 1 mg.

In December 2006, seven papers were published in the scientific journal &quot;Science&quot;, discussing initial details of the sample analysis. Among the findings are: a wide range of organic compounds, including two that contain biologically usable nitrogen; indigenous aliphatic hydrocarbons with longer chain lengths than those observed in the diffuse interstellar medium; abundant amorphous silicates in addition to crystalline silicates such as olivine and pyroxene, proving consistency with the mixing of Solar System and interstellar matter, previously deduced spectroscopically from ground observations; hydrous silicates and carbonate minerals were found to be absent, suggesting a lack of aqueous processing of the cometary dust; limited pure carbon (CHON) was also found in the samples returned; methylamine and ethylamine was found in the aerogel but was not associated with specific particles.

In 2010, Dr. Andrew Westphal announced that Stardust@home volunteer Bruce Hudson found a track (labeled &quot;I1043,1,30&quot;) among the many images of the aerogel that may contain an interstellar dust grain. The program allows for any volunteer discoveries to be recognized and named by the volunteer. Hudson named his discovery &quot;Orion&quot;.

In April 2011, scientists from the University of Arizona discovered evidence for the presence of liquid water in Comet Wild 2. They have found iron and copper sulfide minerals that must have formed in the presence of water. The discovery shatters the existing paradigm that comets never get warm enough to melt their icy bulk. In the spring of 2014, the recovery of particles of interstellar dust from the Discovery program&#x27;s Stardust mission was announced.

The Stardust samples are currently available for everyone to identify after completing the training at Berkeley webpage.

===Spacecraft location===
The return capsule is currently located at the National Air and Space Museum in Washington, D.C. It began exhibition there on 1 October 2008, the 50th anniversary of the establishment of NASA. The return capsule is displayed in sample collection mode, alongside a sample of the aerogel used to collect samples.

==Results==
The comet samples show that the outer regions of the early Solar System were not isolated and were not a refuge where interstellar materials could commonly survive. The data suggest that high-temperature inner Solar System material formed and was subsequently transferred to the Kuiper belt.

;Glycine
In 2009 it was announced by NASA that scientists had identified one of the fundamental chemical building blocks of life in a comet for the first time: glycine, an amino acid, was detected in the material ejected from Comet Wild 2 in 2004 and captured by the &quot;Stardust&quot; probe. Glycine has been detected in meteorites before and there are also observations in interstellar gas clouds, but the &quot;Stardust&quot; find is described as a first in cometary material. Isotope analysis indicates that the Late Heavy Bombardment included cometary impacts after the Earth coalesced but before life evolved. Carl Pilcher, who leads NASA&#x27;s Astrobiology Institute commented that &quot;The discovery of glycine in a comet supports the idea that the fundamental building blocks of life are prevalent in space, and strengthens the argument that life in the universe may be common rather than rare.&quot;

==See also==

*List of missions to comets
*&quot;Genesis&quot;, sample return from the solar wind
*&quot;Hayabusa&quot;, sample return from an asteroid
*List of uncrewed spacecraft by program
*Robotic spacecraft
*Space exploration
*Space probe
*Timeline of artificial satellites and space probes
*Timeline of first orbital launches by country
*Timeline of Solar System exploration

==References==
==External links==

*&quot;Stardust&quot; website at NASA.gov
*&quot;Stardust&quot; website by NASA&#x27;s Jet Propulsion Laboratory
*&quot;Stardust-NExT&quot; website by NASA&#x27;s Jet Propulsion Laboratory
* &quot;Stardust&quot; Mission Archive at the NASA Planetary Data System, Small Bodies Node
* &quot;Stardust-NExT&quot; Mission Archive at the NASA Planetary Data System, Small Bodies Node</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1528166" start="28" end="35" title="robotic spacecraft" label="robotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1528166" start="36" end="47" title="space probe" label="space probe"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="60" end="64" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q259854" start="142" end="146" title="coma (cometary)" label="coma"/>
<link wikidata="Q3559" start="150" end="155" title="comet" label="comet"/>
<link wikidata="Q942359" start="156" end="162" title="81P/Wild" label="Wild 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q193384" start="186" end="197" title="cosmic dust" label="cosmic dust"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093833" start="255" end="276" title="sample return mission" label="sample return mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q3863" start="348" end="356" title="asteroid" label="asteroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q155500" start="357" end="371" title="5535 Annefrank" label="5535 Annefrank"/>
<link wikidata="Q334755" start="612" end="620" title="Tempel 1" label="Tempel 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q193275" start="624" end="647" title="small Solar System body" label="small Solar System body"/>
<link wikidata="Q208231" start="676" end="687" title="Deep Impact (spacecraft)" label="Deep Impact"/>
<link wikidata="Q193384" start="829" end="846" title="interstellar dust" label="interstellar dust"/>
<link wikidata="Q23054" start="1097" end="1109" title="Comet Halley" label="Comet Halley"/>
<link wikidata="Q4473627" start="1206" end="1237" title="Comet Rendezvous Asteroid Flyby" label="Comet Rendezvous Asteroid Flyby"/>
<link wikidata="Q906205" start="1333" end="1348" title="Discovery Program" label="Discovery-class"/>
<link wikidata="Q138113" start="1666" end="1686" title="planetary protection" label="planetary protection"/>
<link wikidata="Q381490" start="1808" end="1815" title="aerogel" label="aerogel"/>
<link wikidata="Q942359" start="1882" end="1888" title="81P/Wild" label="Wild 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q525" start="2021" end="2024" title="Sun" label="Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q319" start="2166" end="2173" title="Jupiter" label="Jupiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7240" start="2937" end="2952" title="Lockheed Martin" label="Lockheed Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7240" start="3338" end="3366" title="Lockheed Martin" label="Lockheed Martin Astronautics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5860" start="3407" end="3421" title="graphite fiber" label="graphite fiber"/>
<link wikidata="Q3192874" start="3538" end="3544" title="Kapton" label="Kapton"/>
<link wikidata="Q83001" start="4015" end="4036" title="three-axis stabilized" label="three-axis stabilized"/>
<link wikidata="Q12438" start="4053" end="4054" title="Newton (unit)" label="N"/>
<link wikidata="Q58447" start="4055" end="4064" title="hydrazine" label="hydrazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q15818248" start="4065" end="4079" title="Monopropellant rocket" label="monopropellant"/>
<link wikidata="Q609089" start="4080" end="4089" title="Spacecraft propulsion" label="thrusters"/>
<link wikidata="Q83001" start="4127" end="4143" title="Spacecraft attitude control" label="attitude control"/>
<link wikidata="Q83001" start="4357" end="4368" title="Spacecraft attitude control" label="star camera"/>
<link wikidata="Q83001" start="4423" end="4448" title="Spacecraft attitude control" label="inertial measurement unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q83001" start="4458" end="4469" title="Spacecraft attitude control" label="Sun sensors"/>
<link wikidata="Q835696" start="4595" end="4613" title="Deep Space Network" label="Deep Space Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190763" start="4658" end="4664" title="X-band" label="X-band"/>
<link wikidata="Q769152" start="4683" end="4700" title="high-gain antenna" label="high-gain antenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q849640" start="4798" end="4809" title="transponder" label="transponder"/>
<link wikidata="Q165585" start="4845" end="4875" title="Cassini–Huygens" label="&amp;quot;Cassini&amp;quot; spacecraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1897785" start="4921" end="4933" title="Photovoltaic system" label="solar arrays"/>
<link wikidata="Q3058798" start="5004" end="5018" title="Whipple shield" label="Whipple shield"/>
<link wikidata="Q900403" start="5410" end="5436" title="nickel–hydrogen battery" label="nickel–hydrogen () battery"/>
<link wikidata="Q3026015" start="5610" end="5628" title="radiation hardening" label="radiation-hardened"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653128" start="5629" end="5636" title="RAD6000" label="RAD6000"/>
<link wikidata="Q57515336" start="5664" end="5676" title="Data storage" label="storing data"/>
<link wikidata="Q79735" start="5776" end="5784" title="megabyte" label="megabyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q757165" start="5877" end="5884" title="VxWorks" label="VxWorks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139923" start="5889" end="5914" title="embedded operating system" label="embedded operating system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1746945" start="5928" end="5946" title="Wind River Systems" label="Wind River Systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q381490" start="6074" end="6081" title="aerogel" label="aerogel"/>
<link wikidata="Q240502" start="6087" end="6100" title="tennis racket" label="tennis racket"/>
<link wikidata="Q844866" start="6230" end="6238" title="comet dust" label="cometary"/>
<link wikidata="Q193384" start="6243" end="6255" title="interstellar dust" label="interstellar"/>
<link wikidata="Q670" start="6320" end="6327" title="silicon" label="silicon"/>
<link wikidata="Q18960" start="6355" end="6361" title="sponge" label="sponge"/>
<link wikidata="Q11469" start="6465" end="6470" title="glass" label="glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q249999" start="6976" end="6987" title="Grid computing" label="distributed"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079101" start="7067" end="7080" title="Stardust@home" label="Stardust@home"/>
<link wikidata="Q267131" start="7312" end="7318" title="Wafer (electronics)" label="wafers"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="7750" end="7795" title="National Aeronautics and Space Administration" label="National Aeronautics and Space Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1034324" start="7801" end="7825" title="Cape Canaveral Air Force Station Space Launch Complex 17" label="Space Launch Complex 17A"/>
<link wikidata="Q334465" start="7833" end="7865" title="Cape Canaveral Air Force Station" label="Cape Canaveral Air Force Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q49538" start="7887" end="7900" title="Delta II" label="Delta II 7426"/>
<link wikidata="Q525" start="8059" end="8062" title="Sun" label="Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q2" start="8072" end="8077" title="Earth" label="Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q223776" start="8084" end="8107" title="gravity assist" label="gravity assist maneuver"/>
<link wikidata="Q155500" start="8135" end="8149" title="5535 Annefrank" label="5535 Annefrank"/>
<link wikidata="Q942359" start="8162" end="8174" title="81P/Wild" label="Comet Wild 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1081023" start="8400" end="8421" title="Bonneville Salt Flats" label="Bonneville Salt Flats"/>
<link wikidata="Q103983" start="8861" end="8873" title="heliocentric" label="heliocentric"/>
<link wikidata="Q334755" start="9062" end="9076" title="Tempel 1" label="Comet Tempel 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q193275" start="9135" end="9158" title="small Solar System body" label="small Solar System body"/>
<link wikidata="Q942359" start="9748" end="9758" title="81P/Wild" label="Comet Wild"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10437" end="10444" title="AutoNav" label="AutoNav"/>
<link wikidata="Q844866" start="10562" end="10580" title="comet dust" label="dust grain samples"/>
<link wikidata="Q259854" start="10590" end="10594" title="Coma (cometary)" label="coma"/>
<link wikidata="Q3559" start="10634" end="10641" title="comet" label="nucleus"/>
<link wikidata="Q334755" start="10848" end="10862" title="Tempel 1" label="Comet Tempel 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q208231" start="10907" end="10930" title="Deep Impact (spacecraft)" label="&amp;quot;Deep Impact&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11736" end="11743" title="AutoNav" label="AutoNav"/>
<link wikidata="Q11376" start="14259" end="14271" title="deceleration" label="deceleration"/>
<link wikidata="Q13400897" start="14285" end="14286" title="standard gravity" label="g"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283301" start="14363" end="14383" title="Spring Creek, Nevada" label="Spring Creek, Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q531716" start="14389" end="14424" title="phenolic-impregnated carbon ablator" label="phenolic-impregnated carbon ablator"/>
<link wikidata="Q279349" start="14432" end="14443" title="heat shield" label="heat shield"/>
<link wikidata="Q2160970" start="14629" end="14657" title="Utah Test and Training Range" label="Utah Test and Training Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q3041043" start="14678" end="14699" title="Dugway Proving Ground" label="Dugway Proving Ground"/>
<link wikidata="Q5365417" start="14768" end="14792" title="Ellington Air Force Base" label="Ellington Air Force Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q16555" start="14796" end="14803" title="Houston" label="Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="14805" end="14810" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q208371" start="14912" end="14932" title="Johnson Space Center" label="Johnson Space Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q794827" start="15025" end="15035" title="clean room" label="clean room"/>
<link wikidata="Q38456" start="15223" end="15234" title="microscopic" label="microscopic"/>
<link wikidata="Q381490" start="15271" end="15278" title="aerogel" label="aerogel"/>
<link wikidata="Q175821" start="15334" end="15344" title="micrometre" label="micrometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q193384" start="15427" end="15444" title="interstellar dust" label="interstellar dust"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093434" start="15633" end="15648" title="citizen science" label="citizen science"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079101" start="15658" end="15671" title="Stardust@Home" label="Stardust@Home"/>
<link wikidata="Q192864" start="15819" end="15826" title="Science (journal)" label="Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q174211" start="15925" end="15942" title="organic compounds" label="organic compounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q627" start="15991" end="15999" title="nitrogen" label="nitrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q192596" start="16012" end="16034" title="aliphatic compound" label="aliphatic hydrocarbons"/>
<link wikidata="Q41872" start="16096" end="16115" title="interstellar medium" label="interstellar medium"/>
<link wikidata="Q7130787" start="16136" end="16144" title="silicate" label="silicate"/>
<link wikidata="Q22693" start="16191" end="16198" title="olivine" label="olivine"/>
<link wikidata="Q192880" start="16203" end="16211" title="pyroxene" label="pyroxene"/>
<link wikidata="Q544" start="16252" end="16264" title="Solar System" label="Solar System"/>
<link wikidata="Q483666" start="16309" end="16322" title="spectroscopic" label="spectroscopic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3648710" start="16502" end="16506" title="CHON" label="CHON"/>
<link wikidata="Q409304" start="16548" end="16559" title="methylamine" label="methylamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q411119" start="16564" end="16574" title="ethylamine" label="ethylamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079101" start="16693" end="16706" title="Stardust@home" label="Stardust@home"/>
<link wikidata="Q503419" start="17035" end="17056" title="University of Arizona" label="University of Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q942359" start="17119" end="17125" title="81P/Wild" label="Wild 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196612" start="17152" end="17166" title="copper sulfide" label="copper sulfide"/>
<link wikidata="Q752669" start="17659" end="17688" title="National Air and Space Museum" label="National Air and Space Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="17692" end="17708" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q544" start="17995" end="18007" title="Solar System" label="Solar System"/>
<link wikidata="Q427" start="18215" end="18226" title="Kuiper belt" label="Kuiper belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="18266" end="18270" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q620730" start="18389" end="18396" title="glycine" label="glycine"/>
<link wikidata="Q591571" start="18747" end="18769" title="Late Heavy Bombardment" label="Late Heavy Bombardment"/>
<link wikidata="Q16000185" start="19159" end="19185" title="List of missions to comets" label="List of missions to comets"/>
<link wikidata="Q74418" start="19187" end="19206" title="Genesis (spacecraft)" label="&amp;quot;Genesis&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q79833" start="19231" end="19241" title="solar wind" label="solar wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q275444" start="19249" end="19257" title="Hayabusa" label="Hayabusa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2892152" start="19297" end="19335" title="List of uncrewed spacecraft by program" label="List of uncrewed spacecraft by program"/>
<link wikidata="Q1528166" start="19337" end="19355" title="Robotic spacecraft" label="Robotic spacecraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q180046" start="19357" end="19374" title="Space exploration" label="Space exploration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1528166" start="19376" end="19387" title="Space probe" label="Space probe"/>
<link wikidata="Q604626" start="19389" end="19439" title="Timeline of artificial satellites and space probes" label="Timeline of artificial satellites and space probes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1039031" start="19441" end="19486" title="Timeline of first orbital launches by country" label="Timeline of first orbital launches by country"/>
<link wikidata="Q2368937" start="19488" end="19524" title="Timeline of Solar System exploration" label="Timeline of Solar System exploration"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="187389" wikidata="Q281874" url="?curid=187389" title="White-backed vulture">
<text>The white-backed vulture (Gyps africanus) is an Old World vulture in the family Accipitridae, which also includes eagles, kites, buzzards and hawks. It is the most common vulture species in the continent of Africa.

==Description==

The white-backed vulture is a typical vulture, with only down feathers on the head and neck, very broad wings and short tail feathers. It has a white neck ruff. The adult&#x27;s whitish back contrasts with the otherwise dark plumage. Juveniles are largely dark. This is a medium-sized vulture; its body mass is , it is long and has a wingspan.

== Distribution and habitat ==
The white-backed vulture occurs from Senegal, Gambia and Mali in the west, throughout the Sahel region to Ethiopia and Somalia in the east, through East Africa into Mozambique, Zimbabwe, Botswana, Namibia and South Africa in the south. It is the most widespread and common vulture in Africa with an estimated range of , but has undergone rapid population declines in recent years.

== Conservation==
The white-backed vulture, like many African vultures, has suffered a rapid decline. When it was first assessed in 1988 it was classified as a Least concern species owing to a large range and population. It was reassessed from a Least Concern to Near Threatened species in the 2007 IUCN Red List after the beginnings of a major decline were noticed. In 2012, more information was available about population trends, and the estimates suggested that within the next three generations the white-backed vulture would decrease by 50%. Consequently it was added to the list of Endangered species. In October 2015, it was further uplisted to Critically Endangered because the decline had reach a magnitude that puts the vulture at an extreme risk of extinction.

The population size of the white-backed vulture has been decreasing significantly within the past few decades. In 1992, the population was estimated at 270,000. Over the past two decades, its population has noticeably decreased. BirdLife international estimated that over the past 40 years, the population of the white-backed vulture has decreased annually by a mean of 4.1%, culminating to an overall decline that lies between 63 and 89%, and such harrowing declines have also been recorded in the populations of its other African relatives. A recent study found that white-backed vultures have a high survival rate. Individual adults have the highest survival rate, while 2 year old birds have the lowest survival rate. Across all ages, the survival rate is estimated to be 90.7%. This means that the deaths of adult vultures will lead to rapid population declines. The loss of adults will cause less reproduction and with younger birds less likely to survive, the population will drop drastically. A major cause of population decrease is the loss of habitat and anthropogenic disturbance. Fires have also caused the destruction of trees used for nesting habitat. Humans also have a large impact. Power lines have caused many vultures to be electrocuted. In Kenya especially, humans are using a toxic pesticide called Furadan, which has led to many vulture deaths. Vultures are also being poisoned by humans, although not intentionally. In order to kill hyenas, lions, and other predators, herders add poisons into their livestock. Vultures ingest the poison upon eating a deceased animal&#x27;s carcass. This poisoning generally occurs outside of protected areas but is a leading factor in the population&#x27;s decline. Habitats are also being disturbed by human land management and direct nesting persecution patterns.

More recent studies have indicated a new plausible factor in the current declination of the vultures. Researches have seen that there has been a rise in toxicity in the liver, kidneys, pectoral region, and internal organs. This toxicity is caused by higher levels of lead, cadmium, zinc, and copper. Although most of these metals level out as either non harmful or normal levels, the lead concentrate in the liver of the vultures (8.56 μg/g wet weight) and in the kidneys (9.31 μg/g wet weight) is higher than the average levels.

Studies have also been performed on the white-backed vulture and some species of Asian vultures within the &quot;Gyps&quot; clade to see the effect of veterinary diclofenac. Regardless of whether the vultures were given an oral or intravenous dose of the substance, the effects was nearly identical and the diclofenac eventually poisoned the subjects. This chemical is one of the greatest contaminants for the general vulture population because of its presence in livestock: easy food for the vultures.

Another study shows that there are heightened levels of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (HPA&#x27;s), which is not as likely a product in the endangerment resultant, but still concerning. HPA&#x27;s, also known as polyaromatic hydrocarbons, are formations of hydrogen atoms surrounding rings of carbon. As common as these compounds are—found in foods, engines/incinerators, fires, combustion—there are many forms, and some carcinogenic. Although there is no direct correlation of the high levels of HPA&#x27;s in the vultures, there is still a plausibility that it can result in a negative outcome for the species.

Another reason for the decline in the number of white-backed vultures is the decrease in the number of their nesting sites, which they construct in trees in savannah areas and which are roughly 1 meter in diameter. There is an inverse relationship between the amount of human activity (farming, ranching, etc.) and the amount of vulture nesting activity in said area, so as the amount of human activity in Africa expands, the number of nesting sites available decreases, putting the vultures at jeopardy.
On the 20th of June 2019, the corpses of 468 white-backed vultures, 17 white-headed vultures, 28 hooded vultures, 14 lappet-faced vultures and 10 cape vultures, altogether 537 vultures, besides 2 tawny eagles, were found in northern Botswana. It is suspected that they died after eating the corpses of 3 elephants that were poisoned by poachers, possibly to avoid detection by the birds, which help rangers to track poaching activity by circling above where there are dead animals. Most of them were new parents, leaving their young orphaned and &quot;ill-equipped&quot; for survival. Vultures are slow breeders, and losing over 400 on a week is a devastating blow for the species.

== Diet and feeding behaviour ==

White-backed vultures are obligate scavengers with a high level of specialization on carrion. Their primary food sources are the carcasses of large, grazing animals found the wooded savannahs where it lives. This includes warthogs, zebras, gazelles, ostriches and even livestock. Their beaks are medium-sized not adapted for tearing through tough skin, so they are limited to eating soft tissues, such as the viscera, using a pulling feeding tactic. 

White-backed vultures circle through the sky in search of freshly dead animals, often following other scavenger birds and mammalian carnivores to find it. &quot;Gyps&quot; vultures are considered social vultures which rely heavily on conspecifics to provide information about the position of food and carcasses. The circling flight pattern of vultures is not a signal to other vultures about food, contrary to popular belief. Such signaling could increase competition around limited resources, so vultures instead rely on both personal and social cues to locate carcasses while balancing the risk of competition through selective use of social information in flight decisions. 

White-backed vultures feed in groups and are often one of the first vulture species to arrive at a carcass. This leads to this species having a high dominance at carcasses in comparison to other vulture species such as white-headed, hooded, and Egyptian vultures. 

After feeding, white-backed vultures often rest with their wings spread and their backs facing the sun, as they have gorged themselves so much they can no longer fly.

== Breeding ==

White-backed vultures nest in trees. They typically choose tall trees along riparian habitats and show strong a preference for &quot;Acacia&quot; species. The nests are large, around 1m in diameter, and are made of large sticks and lined with leaves and grasses. 

A study which monitored 32 African white-backed vulture nests in the Masai Mara National Reserve during the period 2003 to 2007 showed that the mean nesting success was 59%. Another long-term study conducted in Linyanti, Botswana found that there were rapid declines in nesting numbers during a 10 year period. In 2007, there were 73 breeding pairs nesting in the area with a minimum density of 14.9 nests per 100 square kilometers. By 2017, this declined to 22 breeding pairs nesting and 4.49 nests per 100 square kilometers. In addition to a decrease in the number of active nests in the area, breeding success declined from 62% in 2006 to 37% in 2017.

White-backed vultures face threats from habitat degradation and poaching; as such they have been shown to avoid anthropogenically-disturbed areas when selecting nest sites and protection status is also a strong determinant of site selection. 

White-backed vultures have a long breeding cycle. The incubation period is around 8 weeks and the nestling period is about 4–5 months.

== Ecology ==
The tick &quot;Argas theilerae&quot; (also known as &quot;Theiler&#x27;s African White-backed vulture argasid&quot;) is a parasite of the White-backed vulture.

== See also ==

== Footnotes ==
== References ==
* Bamford, et al. Trade-offs between specificity and regional generality in habitat association models: a case study of two species of African vulture. Journal of Applied Ecology, 46: 853–859.
* BirdLife International (2007a): 2006-2007 Red List status changes. Retrieved 2007-AUG-26.
* BirdLife International (2007b): White-backed Vulture - BirdLife Species Factsheet. Retrieved 2007-AUG-26.
* Gill, F &amp; D Donsker (Eds). 2013. IOC World Bird Names (v 3.3) www.worldbirdnames.org Taxonomy of raptors
* Chomba, Chansa (2013) Nesting patterns of raptor; White backed vulture (Gyps africanus) and African fish eagle (Haliaeetus vocifer), in Lochinvar National Park on the kafue flats, Zambia. Open Journal of Ecology, 3.5, 35-330.
* Mebrat, Tekemariam, Ashok, Verma. Communal Roosts of African White backed Gyps africanus and Hooded Vultures Necrosyrtes monachus in Wondo Genet College of Forestry and Natural Resources, Southern Ethiopia. Vulture News, 64, 5-20.
* Monadjem, A., Botha, A. and Murn, C. (2013), Survival of the African white-backed vulture Gyps africanus in north-eastern South Africa. African Journal of Ecology, 51: 87–93. doi: 10.1111/aje.12009
* Munir Virani, Paul Kirui, Ara Monadjem, Simon Thomsett &amp; Mwangi Githiru (2010) Nesting status of African White-backed Vultures Gyps africanus in the Masai Mara National Reserve, Kenya, Ostrich, 81:3, 205–209, DOI: 10.2989/00306525.2010.519894
* Corinne Kendall, Munir Z. Virani, Paul Kirui, Simon Thomsett and Mwangi Githiru. (2012) Mechanisms of Coexistence in Vultures: Understanding the Patterns of Vulture Abundance at Carcasses in Masai Mara National Reserve, Kenya. The Condor 114:3, 523–531. Online publication date: 1-Aug-201214-Sep-2012
* Naidoo V., Wolter K., Cuthbert R., Duncan N. 2009. Veterinary diclofenac threatens Africa&#x27;s endangered vulture species. Regul Toxicol Pharmacol 53:205–208.
* Aas, E., Beyeri, J., Goksoyr, A. (2000) Fixed wavelength fluorescence (FF) of bile as a monitoring tool for polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon exposure in fish: an evaluation of compound specificity, inner filter effect and signal interpretation. Biomarkers 5:9–23
* Agarwal, T., Khillare, P. S., Shridhar, V., Ray, S. (2009) Pattern, sources and toxic potential of PAHs in the agricultural soils of Delhi, India. J Hazard Mater 163:1033–1039
* Albers P. H. (2006) Birds and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons. Avian Poult Biol Rev 17(4):125–140

== External links ==
* African white-backed vulture videos on the Internet Bird Collection
* White-backed vulture - Species text in The Atlas of Southern African Birds.
* Gyps Africanus on Iziko - Museums of Cape Town.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q281874" start="4" end="24" title="White-backed vulture" label="white-backed vulture"/>
<link wikidata="Q446728" start="48" end="65" title="Old World vulture" label="Old World vulture"/>
<link wikidata="Q25510" start="80" end="92" title="Accipitridae" label="Accipitridae"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092297" start="114" end="119" title="eagle" label="eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q208342" start="122" end="126" title="kite (bird)" label="kite"/>
<link wikidata="Q3251488" start="129" end="136" title="buzzard" label="buzzard"/>
<link wikidata="Q846664" start="142" end="146" title="hawk" label="hawk"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="207" end="213" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q66065" start="699" end="704" title="Sahel" label="Sahel"/>
<link wikidata="Q211005" start="1151" end="1164" title="Least concern" label="Least concern"/>
<link wikidata="Q719675" start="1254" end="1269" title="Near Threatened" label="Near Threatened"/>
<link wikidata="Q32059" start="1290" end="1303" title="IUCN Red List" label="IUCN Red List"/>
<link wikidata="Q11394" start="1579" end="1589" title="Endangered" label="Endangered"/>
<link wikidata="Q219127" start="1643" end="1664" title="Critically Endangered" label="Critically Endangered"/>
<link wikidata="Q210108" start="1993" end="2015" title="Birdlife" label="BirdLife international"/>
<link wikidata="Q423136" start="3084" end="3091" title="Carbofuran" label="Furadan"/>
<link wikidata="Q244408" start="4282" end="4292" title="diclofenac" label="diclofenac"/>
<link wikidata="Q407212" start="4680" end="4711" title="polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon" label="polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q755006" start="5817" end="5837" title="white-headed vulture" label="white-headed vulture"/>
<link wikidata="Q177386" start="5843" end="5857" title="hooded vulture" label="hooded vulture"/>
<link wikidata="Q838162" start="5863" end="5883" title="lappet-faced vulture" label="lappet-faced vulture"/>
<link wikidata="Q826525" start="5892" end="5904" title="cape vulture" label="cape vulture"/>
<link wikidata="Q374141" start="5942" end="5953" title="tawny eagle" label="tawny eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q36557" start="6050" end="6058" title="African bush elephant" label="elephant"/>
<link wikidata="Q34577" start="6162" end="6170" title="poaching" label="poaching"/>
<link wikidata="Q10417543" start="9374" end="9389" title="Argas theilerae" label="Argas theilerae"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="187391" wikidata="Q942359" url="?curid=187391" title="81P/Wild">
<text>Comet 81P/Wild, also known as Wild 2 (pronounced &quot;vilt two&quot;) ( ), is a comet with a period of 6.4 years named after Swiss astronomer Paul Wild, who discovered it on January 6, 1978, using a 40-cm Schmidt telescope at Zimmerwald, Switzerland.

For most of its 4.5 billion-year lifetime, Wild 2 probably had a more distant and circular orbit. In September 1974, it passed within one million kilometers of the planet Jupiter, the strong gravitational pull of which perturbed the comet&#x27;s orbit and brought it into the inner Solar System. Its orbital period changed from 43 years to about 6 years, and its perihelion is now about 1.59 astronomical units (AU).

== Nucleus parameters ==
* Dimensions: 
* Density: 
* Mass: 2.3 x 1013 kg (5.1 x 1013 lb)
== Orbit ==
Prior to its encounter with Jupiter in 1974, the comet had an orbital period of around 43 years with an aphelion at around 25 AU and a perihelion of just under 5 AU. The encounter reduced the aphelion and perihelion to its present value of around 5 and 1.5 AU, respectively.
== Exploration ==

NASA&#x27;s Stardust Mission launched a spacecraft, named &quot;Stardust&quot;, on February 7, 1999. It flew by Wild 2 on January 2, 2004, and collected particle samples from the comet&#x27;s coma, which were returned to Earth along with interstellar dust it collected during the journey. Seventy-two close-up shots were taken of Wild 2 by &quot;Stardust&quot;. They revealed a surface riddled with flat-bottomed depressions, with sheer walls and other features that range from very small to up to 2 kilometres across. These features are believed to be caused by impact craters or gas vents. During &quot;Stardust&quot;″s flyby, at least 10 gas vents were active. The comet itself has a diameter of 5 kilometres.

&quot;Stardust&quot;″s &quot;sample return canister&quot; was reported to be in excellent condition when it landed in Utah, on January 15, 2006. A NASA team analyzed the particle capture cells and removed individual grains of comet and interstellar dust, then sent them to about 150 scientists around the globe. NASA is collaborating with The Planetary Society who will run a project called &quot;Stardust@Home&quot;, using volunteers to help locate particles on the Stardust Interstellar Dust Collector (SIDC).

As of 2006, the composition of the dust has contained a wide range of organic compounds, including two that contain biologically usable nitrogen. Indigenous aliphatic hydrocarbons were found with longer chain lengths than those observed in the diffuse interstellar medium. No hydrous silicates or carbonate minerals were detected, which suggests a lack of aqueous processing of Wild 2 dust. Very few pure carbon (CHON) particles were found in the samples returned. A substantial amount of crystalline silicates such as olivine, anorthite and diopside were found, materials only formed at high temperature. This is consistent with previous observations of crystalline silicates both in cometary tails and in circumstellar disks at large distances from the star. Possible explanations for this high temperature material at large distances from Sun were summarised before the &quot;Stardust&quot; sample return mission by van Boekel et al.:

:&quot;Both in the Solar System and in circumstellar disks crystalline silicates are found at large distances from the star. The origin of these silicates is a matter of debate. Although in the hot inner-disk regions crystalline silicates can be produced by means of gas-phase condensation or thermal annealing, the typical grain temperatures in the outer-disk (2–20 au) regions are far below the glass temperature of silicates of approx 1,000 K. The crystals in these regions may have been transported outward through the disk or in an outward-flowing wind. An alternative source of crystalline silicates in the outer disk regions is in situ annealing, for example by shocks or lightning. A third way to produce crystalline silicates is the collisional destruction of large parent bodies in which secondary processing has taken place. We can use the mineralogy of the dust to derive information about the nature of the primary and/or secondary processes the small-grain population has undergone.&quot;

Results from a study reported in the September 19, 2008 issue of the journal &quot;Science&quot; has revealed an oxygen isotope signature in the dust that suggests an unexpected mingling of rocky material between the center and edges of the Solar System. Despite the comet&#x27;s birth in the icy reaches of outer space beyond Pluto, tiny crystals collected from its halo appear to have been forged in the hotter interior, much closer to the Sun.

In April 2011, scientists from the University of Arizona discovered evidence of the presence of liquid water. They found iron and copper sulfide minerals that must have formed in the presence of water. The discovery is in conflict with the existing paradigm that comets never get warm enough to melt their icy bulk. Either collisions or radiogenic heating might have provided the necessary energy source.

On August 14, 2014, scientists announced the collection of possible interstellar dust particles from the &quot;Stardust&quot; spacecraft since returning to Earth in 2006.

== Gallery ==


== See also ==
Wild 2 has a similar name to other objects:
* 116P/Wild
* 1941 Wild ()
* 63P/Wild
* 86P/Wild

== Notes ==
== References ==

== External links ==
* NASA/JPL homepage for Stardust project
* Stardust@Home Volunteer Particle Analysis Project
* 81P/Wild orbit and observations at IAU Minor Planet Center</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q942359" start="6" end="14" title="81P/Wild" label="81P/Wild"/>
<link wikidata="Q942359" start="30" end="36" title="81P/Wild" label="Wild 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q3559" start="81" end="86" title="comet" label="comet"/>
<link wikidata="Q123536" start="143" end="152" title="Paul Wild (Swiss astronomer)" label="Paul Wild"/>
<link wikidata="Q891841" start="206" end="223" title="Schmidt telescope" label="Schmidt telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q688051" start="227" end="237" title="Zimmerwald Observatory" label="Zimmerwald"/>
<link wikidata="Q2261398" start="335" end="349" title="circular orbit" label="circular orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q319" start="424" end="431" title="Jupiter" label="Jupiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q803623" start="472" end="481" title="Perturbation (astronomy)" label="perturbed"/>
<link wikidata="Q4130" start="499" end="504" title="orbit" label="orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q544" start="529" end="547" title="inner Solar System" label="inner Solar System"/>
<link wikidata="Q37640" start="553" end="567" title="orbital period" label="orbital period"/>
<link wikidata="Q83481" start="616" end="626" title="perihelion" label="perihelion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811" start="645" end="662" title="astronomical unit" label="astronomical unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q205747" start="1079" end="1095" title="Stardust Mission" label="Stardust Mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q40218" start="1107" end="1117" title="spacecraft" label="spacecraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q205747" start="1131" end="1139" title="Stardust (spacecraft)" label="Stardust"/>
<link wikidata="Q259854" start="1259" end="1263" title="Coma (cometary)" label="coma"/>
<link wikidata="Q193384" start="1305" end="1322" title="interstellar dust" label="interstellar dust"/>
<link wikidata="Q671782" start="2120" end="2141" title="The Planetary Society" label="The Planetary Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079101" start="2178" end="2191" title="Stardust@Home" label="Stardust@Home"/>
<link wikidata="Q3648710" start="2707" end="2711" title="CHON" label="CHON"/>
<link wikidata="Q22693" start="2813" end="2820" title="olivine" label="olivine"/>
<link wikidata="Q244994" start="2822" end="2831" title="anorthite" label="anorthite"/>
<link wikidata="Q316671" start="2836" end="2844" title="diopside" label="diopside"/>
<link wikidata="Q192864" start="4320" end="4327" title="Science (journal)" label="Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q503419" start="4720" end="4741" title="University of Arizona" label="University of Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196612" start="4815" end="4829" title="copper sulfide" label="copper sulfide"/>
<link wikidata="Q463796" start="5008" end="5018" title="Impact event" label="collisions"/>
<link wikidata="Q11448" start="5022" end="5040" title="Radioactive decay" label="radiogenic heating"/>
<link wikidata="Q193384" start="5159" end="5176" title="interstellar dust" label="interstellar dust"/>
<link wikidata="Q205747" start="5196" end="5227" title="Stardust (spacecraft)" label="&amp;quot;Stardust&amp;quot; spacecraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q4175980" start="5340" end="5349" title="116P/Wild" label="116P/Wild"/>
<link wikidata="Q146226" start="5352" end="5361" title="1941 Wild" label="1941 Wild"/>
<link wikidata="Q4178784" start="5367" end="5375" title="63P/Wild" label="63P/Wild"/>
<link wikidata="Q4178739" start="5378" end="5386" title="86P/Wild" label="86P/Wild"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="187394" wikidata="Q8033436" url="?curid=187394" title="Woodstock II">
<text>Woodstock II may refer to:

*&quot;Woodstock Two,&quot; the second live album from the 1969 festival.
*Woodstock &#x27;89, the lesser-known, though technically correct, Woodstock II. It was spontaneous commemoration of the 20th anniversary of Woodstock, having had fewer attendees and lesser-known acts than Woodstock &#x27;94.
*Woodstock &#x27;94, unofficially named Woodstock II, it was a commemoration of the 25th anniversary of the Woodstock festival.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3569848" start="35" end="48" title="Woodstock Two" label="Woodstock Two"/>
<link wikidata="Q8033400" start="103" end="121" title="Woodstock &amp;#x27;89" label="Woodstock &amp;#x27;89"/>
<link wikidata="Q933410" start="329" end="347" title="Woodstock &amp;#x27;94" label="Woodstock &amp;#x27;94"/>
<link wikidata="Q164815" start="436" end="454" title="Woodstock festival" label="Woodstock festival"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="187395" wikidata="Q1935455" url="?curid=187395" title="Woodstock '99">
<text>Woodstock 1999 (also called Woodstock &#x27;99) was a music festival held from July 22 to July 25, 1999, in Rome, New York, United States. After Woodstock &#x27;94, it was the second large-scale music festival that attempted to emulate the original 1969 Woodstock festival. Like the previous festivals, it was held in upstate New York; the festival site was the former Griffiss Air Force Base in Rome, roughly northwest of the 1969 Woodstock site in Bethel. Approximately 220,000 people attended the festival over the four days.

MTV covered the festival extensively, and live coverage was available on pay-per-view. Westwood One held its radio rights. Excerpts were released on CD and DVD. In Canada, the event was covered by Much; their coverage included interviews with artists and attendees but not the musical performances.

The festival was marred by difficult environmental conditions, overpriced food and water, poor sanitation, sexual harassment and rapes, rioting, looting, vandalism, arson, violence, and several deaths, leading to media attention and controversy that vastly overshadowed coverage of the musical performances. It has been described as &quot;a flashpoint in cultural nadir&quot;, &quot;like a concentration camp&quot;, like being &quot;in another country during military conflict&quot;, like &quot;a scene where zombies are coming over the castle walls&quot;, with the morning after on the fourth day, described as like &quot;Bosnia&quot;.

== Organization ==
Michael Lang, one of the organizers of the original Woodstock festival and Woodstock &#x27;94, agreed to partner with New Jersey concert promoter John Scher for a thirtieth anniversary festival. A third Woodstock festival was considered a risky proposition after a rain squall at Woodstock &#x27;94 (later sardonically dubbed &quot;Mudstock&quot;) led gatecrashers to breach fences and attendees to throw mud at each other and the performers, leading to a large financial loss and negative press coverage. Lang and Scher began organizing plans for the festival in the fall of 1998. Scher quickly began scouting for multiple high-profile acts of the time to draw media and popular attention. Rome mayor Joseph Griffo received Lang&#x27;s proposal for the festival and approved it in an effort to revitalize the area and attract funding, holding a press conference with Hillary Clinton to announce the festival once the venue was secured.

Organizers had planned to hold a European leg of the festival in Wiener Neustadt, Austria, on the weekend prior to the festival in Rome. This version of the festival was ultimately cancelled; Lang stated that more time than available was required in order to be able to hold a safe event.

== Performers ==
Many of the high-profile acts such as Red Hot Chili Peppers, Metallica, DMX, Limp Bizkit, Korn, Alanis Morissette, Bush, Kid Rock, and Creed were popular or rising artists of the era. While no acts that performed at the original Woodstock festival took the stage at Woodstock 1999, two individuals did; John Entwistle of the Who performed a solo set and Mickey Hart (drummer of the Grateful Dead) played with his band Planet Drum. Jeff Beck was scheduled to perform but had to cancel due to a &quot;scheduling conflict&quot;. He had been scheduled to perform at the original Woodstock festival; however, his band the Jeff Beck Group broke up the previous week. Although the Doors rejected an offer to play at the first Woodstock, their guitarist Robby Krieger was a surprise addition to Creed&#x27;s set, performing the Doors&#x27; &quot;Roadhouse Blues&quot; with the group. Only five acts on the bill (Collective Soul, Live, Metallica, Sheryl Crow, and the Red Hot Chili Peppers) had performed at Woodstock &#x27;94. Korn frontman Jonathan Davis recalled that management group the Firm, Inc. rented a Boeing 737 for his band, Limp Bizkit, and Ice Cube to fly all three artists from Southern California to Syracuse for the festival.

===Booking conflicts===
Marilyn Manson and Hole were initially reported to be on the bill but both later withdrew. Manson was suspected to have cancelled due to his dislike for other acts on the bill such as Insane Clown Posse and Limp Bizkit, although he later stated he refused the bill due to his band not being offered a prime time slot. Hole were unable to perform due to conflicting tour dates in addition to personal tensions between Courtney Love and Dave Grohl.

Foo Fighters were initially set to perform, but they withdrew to finish work on the album &quot;There Is Nothing Left to Lose&quot;; and, also not having a replacement for Franz Stahl as Chris Shifflett joined the following month. 

Sugar Ray were slated to appear, but they were forced to cancel two days prior due to lead singer Mark McGrath being too sick to perform.

Al Green was also supposed to appear, flying from Nashville in a small private plane, but he backed out following John F. Kennedy Jr.&#x27;s death in a plane crash.

Several nu metal bands such as Slipknot, Rob Zombie, System of a Down, Powerman 5000, Static-X, and Deftones were each offered slots, but all were obligated to perform the final two remaining dates of that year&#x27;s Ozzfest tour in California that weekend. Deftones declined due to ongoing personal conflicts involving Brian Setzer. Godsmack and Megadeth were the only two bands from that year’s Ozzfest lineup to accept the offer, as both were flown overnight from San Bernardino to Rome for their set on July 25.

Numerous bands from the 1999 Warped Tour were also offered slots, but only Reveille and Sevendust accepted. 

== Facilities ==

The festival was held on the east side of Rome at the former Griffiss Air Force Base, a designated Superfund waste cleanup site. The U.S. Air Force had decommissioned and closed the B-52 base in September 1995, and the area was later redeveloped as Griffiss Business and Technology Park. During this time, the base was largely unused and in poor condition.

The promoters were determined to avoid the gate-crashing that had occurred at previous festivals. Lang and Scher characterized the site as &quot;defensible&quot;, installing a wall of plywood and steel to prevent gate-crashing. Lang later dubbed this the “peace wall” as organizers invited numerous volunteers to paint on sections of the panels. In addition to the wall, approximately 500 New York State Police troopers were initially planned to provide security.

In addition to two main stages, facilities included several alternate stages, a night-time rave hangar, a sports park, and a film festival (sponsored by the Independent Film Channel) held in a former airplane hangar.

== Finances and promotion ==

Woodstock 1999 was conceived and executed as a commercial venture with dozens of corporate sponsors and included the presence of vendor &quot;malls&quot; and modern accoutrements such as ATMs and email stations. Scher hoped to avoid the large losses that Woodstock &#x27;94 had incurred, planning for the 1999 event to turn a profit; this resulted in numerous cost-cutting measures such as the extensive subcontracting of onsite amenities. Advance tickets for the event were priced at $150 (equivalent to $277 in 2024) plus service charges, at the time considered costly for a festival of this type. Tickets purchased at the gate cost $180.

There were about 400,000 attendees. A total of 186,983 tickets were sold according to reports shortly after the festival, &quot;a gross take of $28,864,748&quot; at the time. Ticket sales were advertised as being capped at 250,000, the capacity of the venue. It has been estimated that ticket sales were worth $60 million in revenue, but that number appears to have been based on believing there were 400,000 paid attendees. Ticket sales may have been underreported to avoid extra payouts to the city of Rome and Oneida County:Perhaps the discrepancy stems from the deal between Woodstock 1999 promoters and the Griffiss Local Development Corporation (GLDC). MTV cites that the GLDC, the city of Rome, and Oneida County were expected to receive $1 million to host the festival and an additional $250,000 if ticket sales topped 200,000.

Any tickets sold beyond 200,000 would then result in an additional $5 (per ticket) paid to all parties. While it&#x27;s clear more than 186,983 people attended Woodstock 1999, on paper, only that many tickets had been recorded being sold.

Based on that figure, the promoters wouldn&#x27;t have been required to dish out the extra money it had promised the GLDC.The promoters stated a figure of $38 million in original production costs, not including damages, fees, or emergency costs. Promoters had originally budgeted the festival at $30 million.

Rome itself became a draw for attendees, who patronized its bars, restaurants, and stores, and stayed in its hotels for the concert&#x27;s duration. The Oneida County Convention and Visitors Bureau estimated that festival attendees spent as much as $40 million in Rome over the weekend.

Woodstock 1999 was simulcast on pay-per-view television, with early reports of 500,000 purchases. In addition to documenting the musical performances, MTV&#x27;s pay-per-view coverage included coverage of the site and vox pop interviews with attendees, which some reporters later considered to resemble gonzo journalism. With 500,000 purchases of $59.95 simulcast passes, revenues were estimated at up to $30 million. Five years earlier, Woodstock &#x27;94 had made over $9 million on its pay-per-view sales to 220,000 households. Other revenue came from CD and DVD sales after the festival. &quot;We knew we&#x27;d never make a significant on-site profit,&quot; Scher says. &quot;It&#x27;s all about the after-show marketing. We believe that we have a great event to build upon.&quot;Scher, Lang, and Griffo held press conferences on the morning of each day of the festival, as well as the morning of the day after, in which they repeatedly denied or minimized the poor conditions and violence of the festival.

=== Vendors ===

Vendors paid $500 () to sell at Woodstock during the four-day festival. Many non-licensed vendors attempted to sell on a smaller scale on the paths to and from the concert and camping areas.

== Reception ==
The festival featured a diverse assortment of acts, early reviews for many of which were positive. The Associated Press deemed Korn, Limp Bizkit, Kid Rock, Insane Clown Posse and Rage Against the Machine the &quot;breakout stars&quot; of the festival. Performances by the Offspring, Dave Matthews Band, DMX, Sheryl Crow, and Jamiroquai also received praise. Critical and public attention, however, quickly turned to the poor on-site conditions and the increasingly uncontrolled behavior of the crowd.

=== Notable moments ===
* Kid Rock remarked on the Clinton–Lewinsky scandal: &quot;Monica Lewinsky is a fucking ho, and Bill Clinton is a goddamn pimp!&quot;
* Dave Matthews jokingly addressed the crowd after noticing a large amount of topless women present, claiming &quot;Sometimes there&#x27;s an abundance of things, and sometimes there&#x27;s a lack. Today there&#x27;s an abundance of titties&quot;.
* During the Offspring&#x27;s performance of the song &quot;Pretty Fly (For a White Guy)&quot;, Israeli actor Guy Cohen, who had appeared in the song&#x27;s music video, joined the band onstage for the performance.
* Korn lead singer Jonathan Davis claimed he was suffering severe heat exhaustion following his band&#x27;s performance. He was briefly given an IV, covered with bags of ice, and put on oxygen after leaving the stage. He described performing the opening song of the set, &quot;Blind&quot;, as like &quot;witnessing an immense wave of sound traveling for miles down the runway&quot; with the movements of the crowd.
* Ice Cube jokingly claimed he was going to end his set short, but returned to the stage after 2 minutes; performing fragments of &quot;Straight Outta Compton&quot; and &quot;Fuck tha Police&quot; by his former band N.W.A, marking the first time he had performed the songs live since leaving the group in 1989.
* Fred Durst began complaining to the sound technicians after the performance of Limp Bizkit&#x27;s song &quot;Break Stuff&quot; as his microphone was cut whilst the main sound tower was being evacuated due to the ongoing vandalism. Numerous celebrities were present for Limp Bizkit&#x27;s set, including Puff Daddy, Kid Rock, Joe C., Jennifer Aniston, Noodles, Jonathan Davis, Fieldy and Verne Troyer (the latter who introduced the band prior to their set).
* Everlast utilized an extensive backing band for his set, and later performed &quot;Jump Around&quot; (his 1992 hit with House of Pain); this was his first concert performance of the song in nearly four years.
* During the Red Hot Chili Peppers&#x27; set, bassist Flea walked onstage naked, addressing the crowd by jumping up and down whilst exposing his genitalia.
* Megadeth frontman Dave Mustaine gave a brief tribute to former drummer Gar Samuelson, who had died earlier that month, prior to the band&#x27;s performance of &quot;Peace Sells&quot;.

== Problems ==
=== Environment ===
Temperatures in Rome on the weekend of the festival were in excess of 100 °F (38 °C). The former Griffiss AFB included large areas of concrete and asphalt with little or no shade, placing the entire facility within its own heat island; this not only caused temperatures to rise during the day, but also kept them elevated at night. The East and West stages were apart, forcing festivalgoers to walk a long distance across hot concrete surfaces. Camping space across the grassy areas quickly became scarce by the middle of the first day, forcing numerous attendees to camp on the heated asphalt surfaces. In an effort to find shade, multiple concertgoers took refuge from the heat under tractor-trailers or tables. In a 2021 interview, Noodles of the Offspring sardonically criticized the facility for its unsuitability for the festival: &quot;You know there was a festival ground in Germany that was literally built by Hitler, and we&#x27;ve played there a buncha times, great venue, buncha fun. That airbase was less hospitable than a place built by Nazis&quot;.

=== Concessions ===
Numerous budget cuts were made during the hiring and delegation process for concession vendors; organizers were forced to lease services from numerous subcontractors, whose contracts gave them complete control of pricing. Concessions sold by onsite vendors were regularly marked up to inconvenient prices; bottled water was sold for $4.00 (). Supplies of food and water dwindled over the three days of the festival, which vendors took advantage of to raise prices; by the third day of the festival, booths charged up to $12.00 () for water bottles. As an alternative, festival-goers faced a long walk or cramped travel via looping buses to Rome&#x27;s modest shopping areas, where stores had long lines and low stock. Most outside food and drink was confiscated by security, though several concertgoers reported that security often overlooked or were bribed to ignore attendees bringing in various drugs. Attendees stood in long lines to access the free water fountains, until frustration led numerous concertgoers to break the pipes to provide water to those in the middle of the line. As a result, numerous mud pits began forming around the concert site. The groundwater and soil at the site had been contaminated by heavy metals and toxic chemicals such as trichloroethylene and PCBs from its time as a military installation, hence its designation as a Superfund clean-up site.

=== Sanitation ===
The number of portable toilets installed proved insufficient for the number of attendees. The toilets and showers soon became unusable and overflowing, and male guests resorted to urinating on the side of the toilets or behind vendor stalls. Excrement from the toilets flowed into the mud pits and camping areas, mixing with water from the broken pipes. Many attendees began jumping into the mud pits and water troughs to stay cool in the intense heat, unaware of the contamination; this led to many cases of trench mouth and trench foot. The Oneida County Health Department analyzed a sample of the free drinking water, finding it to be contaminated with E. coli and other bacteria.

An insufficient number of trash cans was provided on the site, and concertgoers eventually began overturning the cans and drumming on them or rolling them across the field. Subcontracted sanitation workers often failed to appear for their duties, allowing trash to pile up throughout the site.

=== Security ===
The festival&#x27;s lackluster security was another source of blame for violence and poor conditions on site. To further cut costs — and avoid &quot;the influences of the government or of the police state,&quot; according to Lang — organizers did not hire conventional security officers, instead sourcing adolescents and young adults from a nearby job agency to serve as the &quot;Peace Patrol.&quot; Nearly all of the Peace Patrol officers lacked any prior experience in security or law enforcement. All Peace Patrol officers were unarmed, and most seemed uninterested in performing their duties. Many security employees simply sold their spare security shirts to other concertgoers or abandoned their posts entirely; some Peace Patrol guards alleged that others had utilized their positions to demand sexual favors from women in the audience. Many of the officers reported unruly conduct from their peers within the first day of the festival, including the theft of personal items from employees and guests. Multiple security guards confiscated camping supplies from people entering the gates; some confiscated alcoholic beverages which they then drank themselves. Numerous attendees entered with fake passes, few of which security confiscated. A large number of attendees had also smuggled drugs or other illicit substances into the festival, which the Peace Patrol often ignored or allowed onto the grounds in exchange for a bribe.

=== Sexual assaults ===
Extensive substance abuse and poor security, along with a perceived culture of misogyny, contributed to widespread abuse of female concertgoers throughout the festival. During the Offspring&#x27;s performance, singer Dexter Holland condemned the crowd&#x27;s behavior after witnessing numerous women being groped in the audience, as did Red Hot Chili Peppers bassist Flea and Jamiroquai singer Jay Kay during their sets. At least five rapes and numerous other sexual assaults and incidents of sexual harassment at the festival were officially reported, though it is widely believed that a far greater number of unreported incidents occurred. Eyewitnesses reported a crowd-surfing woman being pulled down into the crowd and assaulted in the mosh pit during Limp Bizkit&#x27;s set. During the post-show rave on Saturday night, an apparently intoxicated man stole and drove a maintenance truck into the rave hangar through the crowd during Fatboy Slim&#x27;s set, in which staff reported seeing a teenage girl being raped; Fatboy Slim and his entourage were asked to evacuate the premises immediately, fleeing to a nearby airport and flying out the following morning. A volunteer also reported seeing a gang rape during Korn&#x27;s performance.

== Timeline of incidents ==
=== Friday, July 23 ===
Unruly behavior from those in attendance at the festival was present as early as the second day. Prior to announcing DMX&#x27;s performance on the East stage, numerous male concertgoers began chanting &quot;show your tits&quot; at actress Rosie Perez as she walked up to introduce him with Stephen Baldwin. Annoyed by their chanting, she retorted, &quot;I ain&#x27;t showing y&#x27;all shit!&quot; DMX later performed the song &quot;My Niggas&quot; and had the crowd chant along with him; media outlets later reacted to this in confusion and outrage, as the overwhelmingly white audience chanted the word &quot;nigga&quot; along with him.

The &quot;show your tits&quot; chant returned during Sheryl Crow&#x27;s set, with Crow responding, &quot;You&#x27;d have to pay a whole lot more than you paid to get in to see my tits.&quot; Crow reported that one audience member had thrown feces at her during her performance of &quot;My Favorite Mistake&quot;. She would later criticize the performance and the festival due to the behavior of the crowd, and stated that she had considered ending her set early out of disgust. She recalled the performance as the &quot;single worst gig I have ever had&quot; in 2019.

A fan pelted the Offspring singer Dexter Holland with a beer bottle during the band&#x27;s performance of &quot;Have You Ever&quot;, but he continued performing unfazed. Toward the end, before their performance of &quot;Self Esteem&quot;, Holland condemned sexual misconduct in the crowd after witnessing numerous women being groped: &quot;Just because a girl wants to go crowd surfing, it doesn&#x27;t give the guys the right to molest &#x27;em, you know what I&#x27;m saying?&quot;. Holland later told victims of sexual assault in the crowd to confront the perpetrators and &quot;grab [their] fucking balls!&quot;

Halfway in their set, the Offspring lined up five dummies with the faces of each member of the Backstreet Boys in front of their drum riser during a break in between songs. Holland then began hitting the dummies with a plastic baseball bat, and the crowd joined in by throwing water bottles at them. Some commentators have highlighted this incident as part of a pattern of sometimes violent rockist sentiment and machismo expressed by the festival&#x27;s male performers and attendees, while others felt that it was hypocritical for MTV to promote the festival&#x27;s heavier rock acts while featuring boy bands such as the Backstreet Boys on its television and radio programming.

To protest the exorbitant price of onsite concessions, Insane Clown Posse taped $100 bills to several beach balls and kicked them into the crowd during their performance. Members of the audience then fought over the money.

Korn&#x27;s performance on Friday night considerably riled up the crowd. Bush frontman Gavin Rossdale had reportedly expressed anxiety about performing immediately after Korn due to fears that the crowd&#x27;s energy could turn violent. This sentiment was shared by Korn&#x27;s Jonathan Davis, who later admitted that his band&#x27;s scheduling was mismatched with Bush&#x27;s and felt he had inadvertently placed Rossdale in a dangerous position. Bush&#x27;s performance ultimately proceeded without incident and marginally calmed the crowd.

=== Saturday, July 24 ===
During the Tragically Hip&#x27;s performance opening the festival&#x27;s second day, numerous fans anticipating Kid Rock&#x27;s performance pelted the band with bottles. Attempting to divert attention from the bottles, frontman Gord Downie began humorously singing &quot;O Canada&quot; in appreciation for the large amount of Canadian fans present waving Canadian flags. Many other fans in the crowd then began booing the band and singing &quot;The Star-Spangled Banner&quot; in response.

Ryan Miller of Guster recalled performing in front of a hostile crowd displeased with the band&#x27;s set. Drummer Brian Rosenworcel felt they were unfit for the lineup, as most in attendance were impatiently waiting for nu metal or hip-hop acts such as Limp Bizkit or Ice Cube: &quot;There was this aggressive culture to both the artists that they chose and the audience that they drew, and that is not Guster&#x27;s bread and butter...We were a melodic band and [the others were] Limp Bizkit and Korn and even like DMX [and] I was like, What did we get ourselves into?&quot;

Alanis Morissette noted the apathy of the crowd during her set, as a large majority of fans in attendance were waiting for Limp Bizkit&#x27;s performance; some began booing and chanting &quot;Limp Bizkit&quot; near the end of her set as they grew impatient.

Appalled by the prices of concessions, Kid Rock and Wyclef Jean asked the audience to throw their empty water bottles onstage in between songs.

====Limp Bizkit====
Violence and vandalism would considerably escalate during the evening&#x27;s performance by Limp Bizkit. Concertgoers also began moshing violently, visibly destroying nearby structures, and crowd-surfing by utilizing the plywood barriers. Frontman Fred Durst addressed the crowd following the song &quot;9 Teen 90 Nine&quot; after being approached by festival staff: &quot;They wanna ask us to ask you to mellow out a little bit. They say too many people are getting hurt. Don&#x27;t let anybody get hurt, but I don&#x27;t think you should mellow out. Mellowing out? That&#x27;s what Alanis Morissette had you motherfuckers do. If someone falls, pick &#x27;em up.&quot; The tension ultimately boiled over during their performance of &quot;Break Stuff&quot;. Durst briefly riled up the audience before the song by asking if they liked NSYNC, earning numerous boos and jeers. During the song&#x27;s breakdown, Durst addressed the crowd: &quot;Time to reach deep down inside, and take all that negative energy, all that negative energy, and let that shit out of your fucking system. You got girl problems? You got boy problems? You got parent problems? You got boss problems? You got job problems? You got a problem with me? You got a problem with yourself? It&#x27;s time to take all that negative energy, and put it the fuck out!&quot; Once the breakdown ended, concertgoers immediately began destroying smaller buildings adjacent to the stage and aggressively moshing or punching each other. A large number of attendees also began ripping plywood off of the perimeter fence as they attempted to surf on the broken panels; this resulted in several pieces collapsing, dropping crowd surfers onto other fans and possibly crushing them. Terrified of the hostile crowd, several stage technicians assigned to cover the central sound tower placed a sign reading &quot;The Alamo&quot; below the cameras. The technicians were eventually ordered by the grounds crew to evacuate their post. Following the conclusion of the song, the broadcast team muted Durst&#x27;s microphone while medical staff took in numerous injured concertgoers. Durst addressed the crowd again during a performance of &quot;Nookie&quot;, telling the audience: &quot;We already let all the negative energy out, it&#x27;s time to reach down and bring that positive energy to this motherfucker. It&#x27;s time to let yourself go right now, &#x27;cause there are no motherfuckin&#x27; rules out there.&quot; Following &quot;Nookie&quot;, Durst walked to the edge of the stage and asked the crowd to assist him as he attempted to crowd-surf on the broken plywood. Security implored Durst to not crowd-surf, but he was undeterred as he asked the crowd to pass him a panel of plywood, on which he later sang &quot;Faith&quot;, closing the band&#x27;s set. Durst later explained that he had wanted to demonstrate himself enjoying the performance with his audience. Following the set, he was approached by Limp Bizkit manager Peter Katsis and several police officers who informed him the plywood was ripped off of buildings after fans had destroyed multiple structures during his band&#x27;s performance. John Scher would later vilify Durst for his actions on numerous occasions, noting that numerous staff members had approached Durst between songs asking him to calm the crowd.

Widely blamed for the violence, Durst later stated in an interview, &quot;I didn&#x27;t see anybody getting hurt. You don&#x27;t see that. When you&#x27;re looking out on a sea of people and the stage is twenty feet in the air and you&#x27;re performing, and you&#x27;re feeling your music, how do they expect us to see something bad going on?&quot; Katsis defended Durst in an interview for Netflix 2022 documentary miniseries &quot;,&quot; claiming that &quot;pointing the finger at Fred is about the last thing anybody should do. There really isn&#x27;t a way to control 300,000 people. The best thing he could do is put on the best show possible, and that&#x27;s what he did.&quot; Limp Bizkit guitarist Wes Borland would also defend Durst, instead blaming the festival&#x27;s poor conditions. Jonathan Davis was present for Limp Bizkit&#x27;s performance along with Korn bassist Fieldy; Davis initially condemned Durst&#x27;s conduct, though he would later opine that Durst&#x27;s actions were not the primary catalyst for the violence.

Nine Inch Nails frontman Trent Reznor later mocked Durst&#x27;s actions during the festival in an October 1999 interview with &quot;Rolling Stone&quot;, telling interviewers that &quot;Fred Durst can surf a piece of plywood up my ass&quot;.

Numerous fans reported witnessing further incidents of sexual assault during both Limp Bizkit&#x27;s and Metallica&#x27;s performances.

=== Sunday, July 25 ===
Due to continually deteriorating conditions, violence and misconduct escalated further throughout the final day. In a 2021 interview, Jewel recalled a feeling of dread during her performance due to the audience&#x27;s tension and bitterness; she described them as &quot;really tired and very depleted.&quot; She, her manager, and the road crew immediately returned to their tour bus and fled the site following her set. Fans had begun regularly throwing bottles at the stage during her set, as well as Creed&#x27;s earlier in the day. Sevendust drummer Morgan Rose recalled his band being escorted by numerous security guards to the stage for their set as attendees grew increasingly violent following Jewel&#x27;s performance. Numerous witnesses recalled noticing a growing frequency of fights and property damage across the facility during Godsmack&#x27;s performance.

The tension came to a head during the concert&#x27;s final hours, as Red Hot Chili Peppers performed on the east stage and Megadeth performed on the west stage. One fan shone a laser pointer at Megadeth frontman Dave Mustaine in the middle of their performance, prompting him to criticize the crowd&#x27;s behavior. A group of activists, led by the anti-gun violence organization PAX, had distributed candles to those stopping at their booth during the day, intending them to be lit for a candlelight vigil for the victims of the Columbine High School massacre during the Chili Peppers&#x27; performance of &quot;Under the Bridge&quot;; this had not been mentioned to or approved by local firefighting authorities. The crowd began to light the candles during the Chili Peppers&#x27; set, with some using them to start bonfires. Plywood and trash strewn around the site were used to fuel the fires, which had spread to both stages by the end of the Chili Peppers and Megadeth performances. After the Red Hot Chili Peppers finished their main set, the audience was informed about &quot;a bit of a problem&quot;; an audio tower had caught fire. The local fire department was called in to extinguish it, though they refused the call, fearing the audience. Shortly after the tower began burning, a large group of concertgoers climbed the base of its scaffolding, and the tower then collapsed onto the field.

Rome Mayor Joe Griffo pleaded with the Chili Peppers to return to the stage and calm the crowd in the midst of the chaos. Frontman Anthony Kiedis exclaimed that there was nothing he could do to quell the aggressive crowd as the fires continued to grow. After the band were convinced to return to the stage, Kiedis remarked of the fires, &quot;Holy shit! It&#x27;s, uh, &quot;Apocalypse Now&quot; out there.&quot;

Multiple media outlets blamed the Red Hot Chili Peppers for inciting the fires after performing a cover of the Jimi Hendrix song &quot;Fire&quot;. Kiedis later wrote in his autobiography, &quot;Scar Tissue&quot;, that Hendrix&#x27;s sister had instead asked them to play &quot;Fire&quot; in honor of Hendrix and his performance at the original Woodstock festival. He continued: &quot;It was clear that this situation had nothing to do with Woodstock anymore. It wasn&#x27;t symbolic of peace and love, but of greed and cashing in.&quot;

Prior to the start of the performances that day, rumors arose about a possible unannounced performance following the Red Hot Chili Peppers; Prince, the Rolling Stones, Bruce Springsteen, Guns N&#x27; Roses and Michael Jackson were among the artists thought to be the secret closing act. Scher and Lang continued to hype up the finale to the festival during multiple press conferences earlier in the afternoon. Following the Chili Peppers&#x27; performance, the finale was revealed to be a laser show and footage of Jimi Hendrix performing at the original festival in 1969, much to the anger of the attendees; the audience began to boo and attack the vendor booths in large groups.

Many large, high bonfires were burning before the end of the final performances. Participants danced in circles around the fires. Looking for more fuel, some tore off plywood panels from the supposedly inviolable &quot;Peace Wall&quot; enclosing the festival grounds. ATMs were tipped over and broken into; trailers full of merchandise, food, and equipment were forced open and burglarized; and numerous abandoned vendor booths or tents were turned over and set afire. Approximately $22,000 in total was robbed from ATMs. Frightened festival staff members barricaded themselves inside the control tower, while the few vendors still onsite fled.

MTV was hired to cover the festival extensively; however, as the environment deteriorated, attendees grew increasingly hostile towards anchors and MTV&#x27;s staff. Carson Daly recalls being pelted by bottles, rocks, and batteries frequently while he was covering the festival, noting that executives from MTV issued a statement to their staff on site that the network&#x27;s parent firm Viacom could no longer guarantee their safety. The network ultimately evacuated its entire crew amidst the violence on Sunday night. Longtime anchor Kurt Loder likened the experience to covering news in a war zone, particularly during the final night as concertgoers began violently attacking the news trucks and reporters:

By 11:45pm, the chaos had attracted attention from nearby law enforcement. A large force of 500-700 New York State Police troopers, local police officers, and various other law enforcement arrived. Most had riot control gear and proceeded to form a riot line that flushed the crowd to the northwest, away from the stage located at the eastern end of the airfield. Some reports state that numerous members of the crowd offered strong resistance, and they dispersed back toward the campground and out the main entrance. Others claim that the riot line allowed the concertgoers to &quot;tire themselves out&quot; in the campground area and that the fires were not contained until &quot;well after sunrise&quot;.

== Fatalities ==
Three deaths occurred during the festival.

On Friday, a 44-year-old man, identified as Scott L. Stanley of Hyannis, Massachusetts, succumbed to heat exhaustion in the campground. An attendee of Woodstock 1969, Stanley was in attendance with his 16-year old foster son and other friends. The cause of death was later determined to be a heart attack.

On Saturday, 24-year-old David DeRosia collapsed in the crowd during Metallica&#x27;s performance. Concert medical staff initially tried to treat his seizure and what they suspected to be a drug overdose. DeRosia was transported to the Air Force base medical center and then airlifted to University Hospital in Syracuse. A little more than an hour after he had collapsed, DeRosia&#x27;s body temperature was . The following afternoon, he fell into a coma; he died at 12:09 pm on Monday, July 26, having never awoken. The autopsy report ruled the death accidental, and listed the cause of death as hyperthermia aggravated by cardiomegaly and obesity. In 2001, DeRosia&#x27;s mother filed a lawsuit in the New York Supreme Court against the promoters of Woodstock 1999 and six doctors who worked at the event, maintaining that DeRosia died because of the concert promoters&#x27; negligence in not providing enough fresh water and adequate medical care for the attendees.

Tara K. Weaver, a 28-year-old woman from Troy, New York, was struck and killed by a speeding car while walking along an access road to leave the concert.

== Aftermath ==
Reports suggest that 42 to 44 people were arrested over the course of the festival. Ten state troopers and two state police supervisors were reportedly demoted or suspended for their behavior at the festival:A supervisor of two state troopers who had posed with naked female attendees was suspended; a New York State prison guard was charged with sodomizing a 15-year-old girl during the riots; 253 people had been treated at area hospitals. The official numbers of fans treated on-site is between 4,000 and 4,500, yet Dr. Richard Kaskiw, one of the few area doctors who worked the medical tents, says that he was told by Vuoculo—who issued the official stats—that the numbers were far higher, the 8,000 to 10,000 range.The New York State Department of Health reported 5,162 medical cases related to the festival.

After the conclusion of the festival, members of the National Organization for Women gathered outside the New York offices of one of the promoters to protest the sexual violence against women which had occurred. Police investigated four instances of rape that occurred during the concert. In October 2000, a woman sued Oneida County and Michael Lang for personal injury over sexual assault at the festival. Numerous lawsuits were filed against the organizers over the poor environmental conditions of the festival.

&quot;The New York Times&quot; solicited festival performers Rage Against the Machine for their opinion on the controversies surrounding the festival. Guitarist Tom Morello wrote in Neil Strauss&#x27;s &quot;Times&quot; column on August 5, 1999:
The post-festival cleanup of the site took three weeks. Organizers spent an estimated $78,000 re-sodding the stage and mosh pit areas. Approximately 12 trailers, a small bus, and a number of booths and portable toilets were damaged by fire in the fray. Some of the trailers had coolant or propane tanks that exploded.

After numerous lawsuits and fines resulting from the incidents occurring throughout the event, the city of Rome only profited $200,000 from the entire event.

Following the event, &quot;San Francisco Examiner&quot; journalist Jane Ganahl cast doubt on the ability to promote another high-profile Woodstock concert and described the event as &quot;the day the music died&quot;.

Lang attempted to orchestrate Woodstock 50 in 2019 at Watkins Glen International Raceway (later provisionally moved to Merriweather Post Pavilion) to mark the fiftieth anniversary of the original Woodstock festival. Due to logistical issues and lack of capital funding, he was forced to cancel the festival on July 31, 2019.

Limp Bizkit, who were heavily criticized for their role in the festival, performed at the 2021 Lollapalooza in Chicago while promoting their new album &quot;Still Sucks&quot;. Prior to the band&#x27;s performance of &quot;Break Stuff&quot;, Fred Durst told the crowd: &quot;Let me make this clear, this is &quot;not&quot; Woodstock &#x27;99. Fuck all that bullshit.&quot;

==Legacy==
Less than a week after the conclusion of Woodstock &#x27;99, Los Angeles concert promotors Goldenvoice (later AEG) announced the inaugural Coachella festival in Indio, California with an emphasis to distance themselves from the unrest and damage that unfolded in Rome, including offering free water bottles and parking to those in attendance.

&quot;The Simpsons&quot; poked fun at the festival&#x27;s incidents in the episode &quot;It&#x27;s a Mad, Mad, Mad, Mad Marge&quot;, in which Otto attends the festival; his clothes catch fire and he refuses to pay $8 for a water bottle, only to be saved by a girl who uses her water bottle to extinguish him.

Jon Stewart lampooned Woodstock &#x27;99 on &quot;The Daily Show&quot;, claiming that the destruction and vandalism were all sponsored by the festival&#x27;s corporate sponsors. Stewart and his co-host Beth Littleford also poked fun at the demographics of the attendees and perceived racial bias in news reporting: &quot;it wasn&#x27;t a riot; because the audience was 99% white, the upstate New York authorities classified it as &#x27;youthful exuberance&#x27;&quot;.

== Event schedule ==
During the four days of the festival, various bands and artists performed on one of the three different stages: &quot;West Stage&quot;, &quot;East Stage&quot;, and &quot;Emerging Artists Stage&quot;.

=== July 22, 1999 (Thursday) (pre-show) ===

==== West Stage ====

* Frostbit Blue
* K.J. James
* Little Big Jam
* Gridley Paige
* Djoliba
* Red Herring
* Rattlebasket
* In Bloom
* Flipp
* 3rd Bass
* Vertical Horizon
* Strangefolk
* G. Love &amp; Special Sauce
* The String Cheese Incident
* Bernie Worrell and the Woo Warriors
* George Clinton &amp; the P-Funk All-Stars

==== AMP3.com Emerging Artists Stage ====
* Immoral Fibres
* Simmi
* Chris Glenn
* Gary Durdin &amp; the Clay Pinps
* Johnny Rushmore

=== July 23, 1999 (Friday) ===

==== East Stage ====
* James Brown
* G. Love &amp; Special Sauce
* Jamiroquai
* Live
* Sheryl Crow
* DMX
* The Offspring
* Korn
* Bush

==== West Stage ====

* Spitfire
* Oleander
* The Umbilical Brothers
* moe.
* Lit
* Buckcherry
* The Roots
* Insane Clown Posse
* George Clinton &amp; the P-Funk All-Stars

==== Emerging Artists Stage ====
* F.o.N.
* Linda Rutherford &amp; Celtic Fire
* Animal Planet
* Sugar Daddy
* Sticky Pistil
* Bijou Phillips
* Mike Errico
* King Konga
* Ben Lee
* Beth Hart Band
* Liars Inc.
* Chris McDermott
* Moby

=== July 24, 1999 (Saturday) ===

==== East Stage ====

* The Tragically Hip
* Kid Rock
* Wyclef Jean with the Refugee Allstars
* Counting Crows
* Dave Matthews Band
* Alanis Morissette
* Limp Bizkit
* Rage Against the Machine
* Metallica
==== West Stage ====

* Spitfire
* Guster
* Bruce Hornsby
* Everclear
* Ice Cube
* Los Lobos
* Mickey Hart/Planet Drum
* The Chemical Brothers

==== Rave Tent ====
* Young &amp; Fabulous!
* Gargantua Soul
* 3
* Serial Joe
* American Pearl
* Full Devil Jacket
* Old Pike
* Strangefolk
* DDT
* 2 Skinnee J&#x27;s
* Gigolo Aunts
* Fatboy Slim

=== July 25, 1999 (Sunday) ===

==== East Stage ====

* Willie Nelson
* The Brian Setzer Orchestra
* Everlast
* Elvis Costello
* Jewel
* Creed, featuring Robby Krieger
* Red Hot Chili Peppers

==== West Stage ====
* Spitfire
* Mike Ness
* Our Lady Peace
* Rusted Root
* Sevendust
* Collective Soul
* Godsmack
* Megadeth

==== Emerging Artists Stage ====
* Kirsti Gholson
* Moe Loughran
* The Scoldees
* The Supersuckers
* Stormy Mondays
* Big Sugar
* Muse
* John Oszajca
* Pound
* Pushmonkey
* Cyclefly
* Indigenous
* John Entwistle
* Reveille

== Recordings ==
Music from Woodstock 1999 was released on a two-disc compact disc set, &quot;Woodstock 1999&quot;. The album features 32 performing artists and was released on Epic Records on October 19, 1999.

A DVD of concert highlights entitled &quot;Woodstock 99&quot; was released in March 2000. It features the more positive aspects of the concerts with one song each from 29 of the participating acts, along with interviews from the musicians and concert-goers.

Most of the Bush performance is available on the DVD &quot;The Best of &#x27;94–&#x27;99&quot;.

== Documentaries ==
&quot;The Ringer&quot; produced an eight-part documentary podcast series about the festival entitled &quot;Break Stuff: The Story of Woodstock &#x27;99&quot;.

The documentary &quot;Woodstock 99: Peace, Love, and Rage&quot;, directed by Garret Price, premiered on July 23, 2021, on HBO and HBO Max.

On August 3, 2022, Netflix premiered a three-part documentary miniseries entitled &quot;&quot;, featuring interviews with concertgoers, journalists present at the festival, artists who performed at the festival, and co-promoters John Scher and Michael Lang.

== See also ==

* Pol&#x27;and&#x27;Rock Festival, formerly known as Przystanek Woodstock (1995–present)
* Woodstock (1969)
* Woodstock &#x27;79 (1979)
* Woodstock &#x27;89 (1989)
* Woodstock &#x27;94 (1994)
* Heroes of Woodstock Tour (2009)
* Woodstock 50 (2019)

== References ==
== External links ==
* Original Woodstock 1999 website
* Live Woodstock Report Including Riot Photos
* Woodstock Museum</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1935455" start="0" end="14" title="Woodstock &amp;#x27;99" label="Woodstock 1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935455" start="28" end="46" title="Woodstock &amp;#x27;99" label="Woodstock &amp;#x27;99"/>
<link wikidata="Q868557" start="54" end="68" title="music festival" label="music festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q6586" start="108" end="122" title="Rome, New York" label="Rome, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q933410" start="145" end="163" title="Woodstock &amp;#x27;94" label="Woodstock &amp;#x27;94"/>
<link wikidata="Q164815" start="254" end="272" title="Woodstock" label="Woodstock festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q2018923" start="318" end="334" title="upstate New York" label="upstate New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q5608856" start="369" end="392" title="Griffiss Air Force Base" label="Griffiss Air Force Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q6586" start="396" end="400" title="Rome, New York" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q831256" start="450" end="456" title="Bethel, New York" label="Bethel"/>
<link wikidata="Q43359" start="530" end="533" title="MTV" label="MTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q851440" start="603" end="615" title="pay-per-view" label="pay-per-view"/>
<link wikidata="Q3567563" start="617" end="629" title="Westwood One (1976–2011)" label="Westwood One"/>
<link wikidata="Q1857828" start="727" end="731" title="Much (TV channel)" label="Much"/>
<link wikidata="Q1668049" start="1220" end="1238" title="Internment" label="concentration camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q3072049" start="1319" end="1385" title="zombie film" label="&amp;quot;a scene where zombies are coming over the castle walls&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q181533" start="1447" end="1465" title="Bosnian War" label="&amp;quot;Bosnia&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q720768" start="1487" end="1499" title="Michael Lang (producer)" label="Michael Lang"/>
<link wikidata="Q124048949" start="1633" end="1643" title="John Scher" label="John Scher"/>
<link wikidata="Q6283596" start="2189" end="2202" title="Joseph Griffo" label="Joseph Griffo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6294" start="2355" end="2370" title="Hillary Clinton" label="Hillary Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q131612" start="2490" end="2514" title="Wiener Neustadt" label="Wiener Neustadt, Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q10708" start="2770" end="2791" title="Red Hot Chili Peppers" label="Red Hot Chili Peppers"/>
<link wikidata="Q15920" start="2793" end="2802" title="Metallica" label="Metallica"/>
<link wikidata="Q223769" start="2804" end="2807" title="DMX" label="DMX"/>
<link wikidata="Q240767" start="2809" end="2820" title="Limp Bizkit" label="Limp Bizkit"/>
<link wikidata="Q80304" start="2822" end="2826" title="Korn" label="Korn"/>
<link wikidata="Q130742" start="2828" end="2845" title="Alanis Morissette" label="Alanis Morissette"/>
<link wikidata="Q247949" start="2847" end="2851" title="Bush (British band)" label="Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q158175" start="2853" end="2861" title="Kid Rock" label="Kid Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q308816" start="2867" end="2872" title="Creed (band)" label="Creed"/>
<link wikidata="Q215835" start="3035" end="3049" title="John Entwistle" label="John Entwistle"/>
<link wikidata="Q93346" start="3053" end="3060" title="the Who" label="the Who"/>
<link wikidata="Q522201" start="3086" end="3097" title="Mickey Hart" label="Mickey Hart"/>
<link wikidata="Q212533" start="3114" end="3127" title="Grateful Dead" label="Grateful Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q192474" start="3163" end="3172" title="Jeff Beck" label="Jeff Beck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190060" start="3345" end="3364" title="the Jeff Beck Group" label="the Jeff Beck Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q45354" start="3402" end="3411" title="the Doors" label="the Doors"/>
<link wikidata="Q311900" start="3478" end="3491" title="Robby Krieger" label="Robby Krieger"/>
<link wikidata="Q2419756" start="3570" end="3585" title="Roadhouse Blues" label="Roadhouse Blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q593366" start="3636" end="3651" title="Collective Soul" label="Collective Soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q165714" start="3653" end="3657" title="Live (band)" label="Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q200586" start="3670" end="3681" title="Sheryl Crow" label="Sheryl Crow"/>
<link wikidata="Q270692" start="3765" end="3779" title="Jonathan Davis" label="Jonathan Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7734055" start="3811" end="3825" title="the Firm, Inc." label="the Firm, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q6387" start="3835" end="3845" title="Boeing 737" label="Boeing 737"/>
<link wikidata="Q173637" start="3877" end="3885" title="Ice Cube" label="Ice Cube"/>
<link wikidata="Q186327" start="3991" end="4005" title="Marilyn Manson" label="Marilyn Manson"/>
<link wikidata="Q624790" start="4010" end="4014" title="Hole (band)" label="Hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q929731" start="4175" end="4193" title="Insane Clown Posse" label="Insane Clown Posse"/>
<link wikidata="Q222071" start="4408" end="4421" title="Courtney Love" label="Courtney Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q12006" start="4426" end="4436" title="Dave Grohl" label="Dave Grohl"/>
<link wikidata="Q483718" start="4439" end="4451" title="Foo Fighters" label="Foo Fighters"/>
<link wikidata="Q907605" start="4535" end="4564" title="There Is Nothing Left to Lose" label="There Is Nothing Left to Lose"/>
<link wikidata="Q575400" start="4672" end="4681" title="Sugar Ray" label="Sugar Ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q575444" start="4770" end="4782" title="Mark McGrath" label="Mark McGrath"/>
<link wikidata="Q313260" start="4811" end="4819" title="Al Green" label="Al Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q23197" start="4861" end="4870" title="Nashville, Tennessee" label="Nashville"/>
<link wikidata="Q6232326" start="4925" end="4974" title="John F. Kennedy Jr. plane crash" label="John F. Kennedy Jr.&amp;#x27;s death in a plane crash"/>
<link wikidata="Q263734" start="4985" end="4993" title="nu metal" label="nu metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q254138" start="5008" end="5016" title="Slipknot (band)" label="Slipknot"/>
<link wikidata="Q298255" start="5018" end="5028" title="Rob Zombie" label="Rob Zombie"/>
<link wikidata="Q45165" start="5030" end="5046" title="System of a Down" label="System of a Down"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752700" start="5048" end="5061" title="Powerman 5000" label="Powerman 5000"/>
<link wikidata="Q491892" start="5063" end="5071" title="Static-X" label="Static-X"/>
<link wikidata="Q485039" start="5077" end="5085" title="Deftones" label="Deftones"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5195" end="5202" title="Ozzfest lineups by year#Ozzfest 1999" label="Ozzfest"/>
<link wikidata="Q453074" start="5298" end="5310" title="Brian Setzer" label="Brian Setzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q207306" start="5312" end="5320" title="Godsmack" label="Godsmack"/>
<link wikidata="Q83431" start="5325" end="5333" title="Megadeth" label="Megadeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q486168" start="5445" end="5459" title="San Bernardino" label="San Bernardino"/>
<link wikidata="Q971625" start="5519" end="5535" title="Warped Tour" label="1999 Warped Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q176305" start="5570" end="5578" title="Reveille (band)" label="Reveille"/>
<link wikidata="Q741801" start="5583" end="5592" title="Sevendust" label="Sevendust"/>
<link wikidata="Q5608856" start="5684" end="5707" title="Griffiss Air Force Base" label="Griffiss Air Force Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q3504641" start="5722" end="5731" title="Superfund" label="Superfund"/>
<link wikidata="Q11223" start="5756" end="5770" title="United States Air Force" label="U.S. Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q4588355" start="5775" end="5800" title="1993 Base Realignment and Closure Commission" label="decommissioned and closed"/>
<link wikidata="Q174534" start="5805" end="5809" title="Boeing B-52 Stratofortress" label="B-52"/>
<link wikidata="Q219803" start="6165" end="6172" title="plywood" label="plywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057860" start="6370" end="6391" title="New York State Police" label="New York State Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q645767" start="6537" end="6541" title="rave" label="rave"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150514" start="6603" end="6627" title="IFC (American TV channel)" label="Independent Film Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q192375" start="6655" end="6661" title="hangar" label="hangar"/>
<link wikidata="Q81235" start="6881" end="6884" title="Automated teller machine" label="ATM"/>
<link wikidata="Q2144423" start="7098" end="7112" title="Subcontractor" label="subcontracting"/>
<link wikidata="Q115043" start="7849" end="7862" title="Oneida County, New York" label="Oneida County"/>
<link wikidata="Q310834" start="9229" end="9236" title="Vox populi" label="vox pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q374313" start="9314" end="9330" title="gonzo journalism" label="gonzo journalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q40469" start="10352" end="10368" title="Associated Press" label="Associated Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q80304" start="10376" end="10380" title="Korn" label="Korn"/>
<link wikidata="Q240767" start="10382" end="10393" title="Limp Bizkit" label="Limp Bizkit"/>
<link wikidata="Q158175" start="10395" end="10403" title="Kid Rock" label="Kid Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q929731" start="10405" end="10423" title="Insane Clown Posse" label="Insane Clown Posse"/>
<link wikidata="Q72092" start="10428" end="10452" title="Rage Against the Machine" label="Rage Against the Machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q157041" start="10517" end="10530" title="the Offspring" label="the Offspring"/>
<link wikidata="Q832086" start="10532" end="10550" title="Dave Matthews Band" label="Dave Matthews Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q223769" start="10552" end="10555" title="DMX" label="DMX"/>
<link wikidata="Q200586" start="10557" end="10568" title="Sheryl Crow" label="Sheryl Crow"/>
<link wikidata="Q202041" start="10574" end="10584" title="Jamiroquai" label="Jamiroquai"/>
<link wikidata="Q154234" start="10802" end="10826" title="Clinton–Lewinsky scandal" label="Clinton–Lewinsky scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q212659" start="10834" end="10849" title="Monica Lewinsky" label="Monica Lewinsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124" start="10871" end="10883" title="Bill Clinton" label="Bill Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q380381" start="10911" end="10924" title="Dave Matthews" label="Dave Matthews"/>
<link wikidata="Q2082791" start="11217" end="11245" title="Pretty Fly (For a White Guy)" label="Pretty Fly (For a White Guy)"/>
<link wikidata="Q80304" start="11374" end="11378" title="Korn" label="Korn"/>
<link wikidata="Q270692" start="11391" end="11405" title="Jonathan Davis" label="Jonathan Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q640448" start="11517" end="11519" title="Intravenous therapy" label="IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q2707267" start="11649" end="11654" title="Blind (Korn song)" label="Blind"/>
<link wikidata="Q173637" start="11789" end="11797" title="Ice Cube" label="Ice Cube"/>
<link wikidata="Q3737445" start="11917" end="11951" title="Straight Outta Compton (song)" label="&amp;quot;Straight Outta Compton&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2533270" start="11962" end="11977" title="Fuck tha Police" label="Fuck tha Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q216856" start="12003" end="12008" title="N.W.A" label="N.W.A"/>
<link wikidata="Q44707" start="12100" end="12110" title="Fred Durst" label="Fred Durst"/>
<link wikidata="Q2260730" start="12209" end="12220" title="Break Stuff" label="Break Stuff"/>
<link wikidata="Q216936" start="12403" end="12413" title="Sean Combs" label="Puff Daddy"/>
<link wikidata="Q158175" start="12415" end="12423" title="Kid Rock" label="Kid Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q671837" start="12425" end="12431" title="Joe C." label="Joe C."/>
<link wikidata="Q32522" start="12433" end="12449" title="Jennifer Aniston" label="Jennifer Aniston"/>
<link wikidata="Q2335614" start="12451" end="12458" title="Noodles (musician)" label="Noodles"/>
<link wikidata="Q270692" start="12460" end="12474" title="Jonathan Davis" label="Jonathan Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q313135" start="12476" end="12482" title="Reginald Arvizu" label="Fieldy"/>
<link wikidata="Q271471" start="12487" end="12499" title="Verne Troyer" label="Verne Troyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q453048" start="12559" end="12567" title="Everlast" label="Everlast"/>
<link wikidata="Q3811222" start="12642" end="12653" title="Jump Around" label="Jump Around"/>
<link wikidata="Q752410" start="12679" end="12692" title="House of Pain" label="House of Pain"/>
<link wikidata="Q202859" start="12822" end="12826" title="Flea (musician)" label="Flea"/>
<link wikidata="Q187165" start="12944" end="12957" title="Dave Mustaine" label="Dave Mustaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q46923" start="12997" end="13010" title="Gar Samuelson" label="Gar Samuelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q316312" start="13091" end="13102" title="Peace Sells" label="Peace Sells"/>
<link wikidata="Q215712" start="13369" end="13380" title="heat island" label="heat island"/>
<link wikidata="Q2335614" start="13881" end="13888" title="Noodles (musician)" label="Noodles"/>
<link wikidata="Q157041" start="13892" end="13905" title="the Offspring" label="the Offspring"/>
<link wikidata="Q819439" start="14010" end="14036" title="Zeppelinfeld" label="festival ground in Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="14065" end="14071" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="14197" end="14202" title="Nazism" label="Nazis"/>
<link wikidata="Q407936" start="15491" end="15508" title="trichloroethylene" label="trichloroethylene"/>
<link wikidata="Q211171" start="15513" end="15517" title="Polychlorinated biphenyl" label="PCBs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3504641" start="15587" end="15596" title="Superfund" label="Superfund"/>
<link wikidata="Q3106761" start="16141" end="16153" title="Necrotizing gingivitis" label="trench mouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1660072" start="16158" end="16169" title="trench foot" label="trench foot"/>
<link wikidata="Q25419" start="16288" end="16295" title="Escherichia coli" label="E. coli"/>
<link wikidata="Q217405" start="16821" end="16833" title="police state" label="police state"/>
<link wikidata="Q308857" start="18169" end="18177" title="misogyny" label="misogyny"/>
<link wikidata="Q157041" start="18266" end="18279" title="the Offspring" label="the Offspring"/>
<link wikidata="Q317095" start="18307" end="18321" title="Dexter Holland" label="Dexter Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q10708" start="18427" end="18448" title="Red Hot Chili Peppers" label="Red Hot Chili Peppers"/>
<link wikidata="Q202859" start="18457" end="18461" title="Flea (musician)" label="Flea"/>
<link wikidata="Q202041" start="18466" end="18476" title="Jamiroquai" label="Jamiroquai"/>
<link wikidata="Q259691" start="18484" end="18491" title="Jay Kay" label="Jay Kay"/>
<link wikidata="Q673281" start="18550" end="18564" title="sexual assault" label="sexual assault"/>
<link wikidata="Q240767" start="18846" end="18857" title="Limp Bizkit" label="Limp Bizkit"/>
<link wikidata="Q272619" start="19027" end="19038" title="Fatboy Slim" label="Fatboy Slim"/>
<link wikidata="Q80304" start="19307" end="19311" title="Korn" label="Korn"/>
<link wikidata="Q223769" start="19502" end="19505" title="DMX" label="DMX"/>
<link wikidata="Q234076" start="19624" end="19635" title="Rosie Perez" label="Rosie Perez"/>
<link wikidata="Q310947" start="19675" end="19690" title="Stephen Baldwin" label="Stephen Baldwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001997" start="19818" end="19827" title="Flesh of My Flesh, Blood of My Blood" label="My Niggas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4117010" start="19996" end="20001" title="nigga" label="nigga"/>
<link wikidata="Q200586" start="20078" end="20089" title="Sheryl Crow" label="Sheryl Crow"/>
<link wikidata="Q6945424" start="20311" end="20330" title="My Favorite Mistake" label="My Favorite Mistake"/>
<link wikidata="Q157041" start="20607" end="20620" title="the Offspring" label="the Offspring"/>
<link wikidata="Q317095" start="20628" end="20642" title="Dexter Holland" label="Dexter Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q960731" start="20814" end="20825" title="Self Esteem (song)" label="Self Esteem"/>
<link wikidata="Q17140" start="21306" end="21321" title="Backstreet Boys" label="Backstreet Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q130750875" start="21602" end="21609" title="Rockism and poptimism" label="rockist"/>
<link wikidata="Q842254" start="21624" end="21632" title="machismo" label="machismo"/>
<link wikidata="Q216337" start="21813" end="21821" title="boy band" label="boy band"/>
<link wikidata="Q929731" start="21948" end="21966" title="Insane Clown Posse" label="Insane Clown Posse"/>
<link wikidata="Q80304" start="22117" end="22121" title="Korn" label="Korn"/>
<link wikidata="Q247949" start="22190" end="22194" title="Bush (British band)" label="Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q432743" start="22204" end="22218" title="Gavin Rossdale" label="Gavin Rossdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q270692" start="22395" end="22409" title="Jonathan Davis" label="Jonathan Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q682030" start="22694" end="22712" title="the Tragically Hip" label="the Tragically Hip"/>
<link wikidata="Q158175" start="22799" end="22807" title="Kid Rock" label="Kid Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q5585076" start="22915" end="22926" title="Gord Downie" label="Gord Downie"/>
<link wikidata="Q80110" start="23042" end="23056" title="Flag of Canada" label="Canadian flags"/>
<link wikidata="Q7384339" start="23177" end="23188" title="Ryan Miller (musician)" label="Ryan Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q775690" start="23192" end="23198" title="Guster" label="Guster"/>
<link wikidata="Q4965178" start="23292" end="23309" title="Brian Rosenworcel" label="Brian Rosenworcel"/>
<link wikidata="Q173637" start="23446" end="23454" title="Ice Cube" label="Ice Cube"/>
<link wikidata="Q130742" start="23755" end="23772" title="Alanis Morissette" label="Alanis Morissette"/>
<link wikidata="Q202663" start="24066" end="24077" title="Wyclef Jean" label="Wyclef Jean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1463560" start="24308" end="24315" title="moshing" label="moshing"/>
<link wikidata="Q44707" start="24427" end="24437" title="Fred Durst" label="Fred Durst"/>
<link wikidata="Q846179" start="24483" end="24497" title="9 Teen 90 Nine" label="9 Teen 90 Nine"/>
<link wikidata="Q130742" start="24763" end="24780" title="Alanis Morissette" label="Alanis Morissette"/>
<link wikidata="Q2260730" start="24918" end="24929" title="Break Stuff" label="Break Stuff"/>
<link wikidata="Q154454" start="25013" end="25018" title="NSYNC" label="NSYNC"/>
<link wikidata="Q235344" start="26040" end="26049" title="Battle of the Alamo" label="The Alamo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093259" start="26367" end="26373" title="Nookie (Limp Bizkit song)" label="Nookie"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26950" end="26955" title="Faith (George Michael song)#Limp Bizkit version" label="Faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q907311" start="27907" end="27914" title="Netflix" label="Netflix"/>
<link wikidata="Q44721" start="28223" end="28234" title="Wes Borland" label="Wes Borland"/>
<link wikidata="Q313135" start="28399" end="28405" title="Reginald Arvizu" label="Fieldy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11647" start="28558" end="28573" title="Nine Inch Nails" label="Nine Inch Nails"/>
<link wikidata="Q282722" start="28583" end="28595" title="Trent Reznor" label="Trent Reznor"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="28690" end="28703" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q15920" start="28905" end="28914" title="Metallica" label="Metallica"/>
<link wikidata="Q229018" start="29095" end="29100" title="Jewel (singer)" label="Jewel"/>
<link wikidata="Q741801" start="29496" end="29505" title="Sevendust" label="Sevendust"/>
<link wikidata="Q2306350" start="29514" end="29525" title="Morgan Rose" label="Morgan Rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q207306" start="29803" end="29811" title="Godsmack" label="Godsmack"/>
<link wikidata="Q83431" start="29956" end="29964" title="Megadeth" label="Megadeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q187165" start="30045" end="30058" title="Dave Mustaine" label="Dave Mustaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7721910" start="30213" end="30216" title="The Center to Prevent Youth Violence" label="PAX"/>
<link wikidata="Q473845" start="30363" end="30393" title="Columbine High School massacre" label="Columbine High School massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q970993" start="30446" end="30462" title="Under the Bridge" label="Under the Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q9505308" start="30651" end="30658" title="bonfire" label="bonfire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6283596" start="31248" end="31258" title="Joseph Griffo" label="Joe Griffo"/>
<link wikidata="Q204751" start="31368" end="31382" title="Anthony Kiedis" label="Anthony Kiedis"/>
<link wikidata="Q182692" start="31612" end="31626" title="Apocalypse Now" label="Apocalypse Now"/>
<link wikidata="Q5928" start="31762" end="31774" title="Jimi Hendrix" label="Jimi Hendrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q2714734" start="31786" end="31790" title="Fire (The Jimi Hendrix Experience song)" label="Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765268" start="31845" end="31856" title="Scar Tissue (autobiography)" label="Scar Tissue"/>
<link wikidata="Q7542" start="32329" end="32335" title="Prince (musician)" label="Prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q11036" start="32337" end="32355" title="the Rolling Stones" label="the Rolling Stones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1225" start="32357" end="32374" title="Bruce Springsteen" label="Bruce Springsteen"/>
<link wikidata="Q11895" start="32376" end="32394" title="Guns N&amp;#x27; Roses" label="Guns N&amp;#x27; Roses"/>
<link wikidata="Q2831" start="32399" end="32414" title="Michael Jackson" label="Michael Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5928" start="32704" end="32716" title="Jimi Hendrix" label="Jimi Hendrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q43359" start="33517" end="33520" title="MTV" label="MTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739748" start="33682" end="33693" title="Carson Daly" label="Carson Daly"/>
<link wikidata="Q3088127" start="33905" end="33911" title="Viacom (1952–2006)" label="Viacom"/>
<link wikidata="Q6446871" start="34054" end="34064" title="Kurt Loder" label="Kurt Loder"/>
<link wikidata="Q160146" start="34437" end="34449" title="riot control" label="riot control"/>
<link wikidata="Q1015021" start="35065" end="35087" title="Hyannis, Massachusetts" label="Hyannis, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q3297997" start="35596" end="35615" title="State University of New York Upstate Medical University" label="University Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q128069" start="35619" end="35627" title="Syracuse, New York" label="Syracuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q242165" start="35905" end="35917" title="hyperthermia" label="hyperthermia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1729124" start="35932" end="35944" title="cardiomegaly" label="cardiomegaly"/>
<link wikidata="Q12174" start="35949" end="35956" title="obesity" label="obesity"/>
<link wikidata="Q3001111" start="36012" end="36034" title="New York Supreme Court" label="New York Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q600301" start="36319" end="36333" title="Troy, New York" label="Troy, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q7014077" start="37173" end="37208" title="New York State Department of Health" label="New York State Department of Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967556" start="37317" end="37348" title="National Organization for Women" label="National Organization for Women"/>
<link wikidata="Q47092" start="37514" end="37518" title="rape" label="rape"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="37786" end="37804" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q72092" start="37841" end="37865" title="Rage Against the Machine" label="Rage Against the Machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q297552" start="37941" end="37952" title="Tom Morello" label="Tom Morello"/>
<link wikidata="Q519984" start="37962" end="37974" title="Neil Strauss" label="Neil Strauss"/>
<link wikidata="Q62112097" start="38753" end="38765" title="Woodstock 50" label="Woodstock 50"/>
<link wikidata="Q171449" start="38777" end="38811" title="Watkins Glen International" label="Watkins Glen International Raceway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3306612" start="38842" end="38868" title="Merriweather Post Pavilion" label="Merriweather Post Pavilion"/>
<link wikidata="Q240767" start="39049" end="39060" title="Limp Bizkit" label="Limp Bizkit"/>
<link wikidata="Q889643" start="39144" end="39156" title="Lollapalooza" label="Lollapalooza"/>
<link wikidata="Q14380458" start="39206" end="39217" title="Still Sucks" label="Still Sucks"/>
<link wikidata="Q569417" start="39524" end="39535" title="Goldenvoice" label="Goldenvoice"/>
<link wikidata="Q569417" start="39543" end="39546" title="Anschutz Entertainment Group" label="AEG"/>
<link wikidata="Q889872" start="39572" end="39590" title="Coachella (festival)" label="Coachella festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q838789" start="39594" end="39611" title="Indio, California" label="Indio, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q886" start="39783" end="39795" title="The Simpsons" label="The Simpsons"/>
<link wikidata="Q866551" start="39866" end="39902" title="It&amp;#x27;s a Mad, Mad, Mad, Mad Marge" label="It&amp;#x27;s a Mad, Mad, Mad, Mad Marge"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="39919" end="39923" title="List of recurring The Simpsons characters#Otto Mann" label="Otto"/>
<link wikidata="Q211987" start="40087" end="40098" title="Jon Stewart" label="Jon Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q824192" start="40137" end="40151" title="The Daily Show" label="The Daily Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q461954" start="40289" end="40304" title="Beth Littleford" label="Beth Littleford"/>
<link wikidata="Q5459686" start="40960" end="40965" title="Flipp" label="Flipp"/>
<link wikidata="Q229781" start="40968" end="40976" title="3rd Bass" label="3rd Bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q2061582" start="40979" end="40995" title="Vertical Horizon" label="Vertical Horizon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7621502" start="40998" end="41009" title="Strangefolk" label="Strangefolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006939" start="41012" end="41039" title="G. Love &amp;amp; Special Sauce" label="G. Love &amp;amp; Special Sauce"/>
<link wikidata="Q493697" start="41042" end="41068" title="The String Cheese Incident" label="The String Cheese Incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q826598" start="41071" end="41106" title="Bernie Worrell" label="Bernie Worrell and the Woo Warriors"/>
<link wikidata="Q336272" start="41109" end="41150" title="George Clinton (funk musician)" label="George Clinton &amp;amp; the P-Funk All-Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q5950" start="41342" end="41353" title="James Brown" label="James Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006939" start="41356" end="41383" title="G. Love &amp;amp; Special Sauce" label="G. Love &amp;amp; Special Sauce"/>
<link wikidata="Q202041" start="41386" end="41396" title="Jamiroquai" label="Jamiroquai"/>
<link wikidata="Q165714" start="41399" end="41403" title="Live (band)" label="Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q200586" start="41406" end="41417" title="Sheryl Crow" label="Sheryl Crow"/>
<link wikidata="Q223769" start="41420" end="41423" title="DMX" label="DMX"/>
<link wikidata="Q157041" start="41426" end="41439" title="The Offspring" label="The Offspring"/>
<link wikidata="Q80304" start="41442" end="41446" title="Korn" label="Korn"/>
<link wikidata="Q247949" start="41449" end="41453" title="Bush (British band)" label="Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q820600" start="41490" end="41498" title="Oleander (band)" label="Oleander"/>
<link wikidata="Q3989772" start="41501" end="41523" title="The Umbilical Brothers" label="The Umbilical Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6889949" start="41526" end="41530" title="Moe (band)" label="moe."/>
<link wikidata="Q1142016" start="41533" end="41536" title="Lit (band)" label="Lit"/>
<link wikidata="Q430224" start="41539" end="41549" title="Buckcherry" label="Buckcherry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052139" start="41552" end="41561" title="The Roots" label="The Roots"/>
<link wikidata="Q929731" start="41564" end="41582" title="Insane Clown Posse" label="Insane Clown Posse"/>
<link wikidata="Q336272" start="41585" end="41626" title="George Clinton (funk musician)" label="George Clinton &amp;amp; the P-Funk All-Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q45362" start="41755" end="41769" title="Bijou Phillips" label="Bijou Phillips"/>
<link wikidata="Q6846708" start="41772" end="41783" title="Mike Errico" label="Mike Errico"/>
<link wikidata="Q334920" start="41799" end="41806" title="Ben Lee" label="Ben Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q204804" start="41809" end="41823" title="Beth Hart" label="Beth Hart Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q14045" start="41857" end="41861" title="Moby" label="Moby"/>
<link wikidata="Q682030" start="41921" end="41939" title="The Tragically Hip" label="The Tragically Hip"/>
<link wikidata="Q158175" start="41942" end="41950" title="Kid Rock" label="Kid Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q202663" start="41953" end="41964" title="Wyclef Jean" label="Wyclef Jean"/>
<link wikidata="Q178549" start="41993" end="42007" title="Counting Crows" label="Counting Crows"/>
<link wikidata="Q832086" start="42010" end="42028" title="Dave Matthews Band" label="Dave Matthews Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q130742" start="42031" end="42048" title="Alanis Morissette" label="Alanis Morissette"/>
<link wikidata="Q240767" start="42051" end="42062" title="Limp Bizkit" label="Limp Bizkit"/>
<link wikidata="Q72092" start="42065" end="42089" title="Rage Against the Machine" label="Rage Against the Machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q15920" start="42092" end="42101" title="Metallica" label="Metallica"/>
<link wikidata="Q775690" start="42137" end="42143" title="Guster" label="Guster"/>
<link wikidata="Q918502" start="42146" end="42159" title="Bruce Hornsby" label="Bruce Hornsby"/>
<link wikidata="Q1381972" start="42162" end="42171" title="Everclear (band)" label="Everclear"/>
<link wikidata="Q173637" start="42174" end="42182" title="Ice Cube" label="Ice Cube"/>
<link wikidata="Q370400" start="42185" end="42194" title="Los Lobos" label="Los Lobos"/>
<link wikidata="Q522201" start="42197" end="42220" title="Mickey Hart" label="Mickey Hart/Planet Drum"/>
<link wikidata="Q208507" start="42223" end="42244" title="The Chemical Brothers" label="The Chemical Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2279110" start="42309" end="42310" title="3 (American band)" label="3"/>
<link wikidata="Q3956364" start="42313" end="42323" title="Serial Joe" label="Serial Joe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4744667" start="42326" end="42340" title="American Pearl" label="American Pearl"/>
<link wikidata="Q5508024" start="42343" end="42360" title="Full Devil Jacket" label="Full Devil Jacket"/>
<link wikidata="Q7621502" start="42374" end="42385" title="Strangefolk" label="Strangefolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q4633378" start="42394" end="42412" title="2 Skinnee J&amp;#x27;s" label="2 Skinnee J&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q4039436" start="42415" end="42427" title="Gigolo Aunts" label="Gigolo Aunts"/>
<link wikidata="Q272619" start="42430" end="42441" title="Fatboy Slim" label="Fatboy Slim"/>
<link wikidata="Q206112" start="42499" end="42512" title="Willie Nelson" label="Willie Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3266912" start="42515" end="42541" title="The Brian Setzer Orchestra" label="The Brian Setzer Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q453048" start="42544" end="42552" title="Everlast" label="Everlast"/>
<link wikidata="Q206939" start="42555" end="42569" title="Elvis Costello" label="Elvis Costello"/>
<link wikidata="Q229018" start="42572" end="42577" title="Jewel (singer)" label="Jewel"/>
<link wikidata="Q308816" start="42580" end="42585" title="Creed (band)" label="Creed"/>
<link wikidata="Q311900" start="42597" end="42610" title="Robby Krieger" label="Robby Krieger"/>
<link wikidata="Q10708" start="42613" end="42634" title="Red Hot Chili Peppers" label="Red Hot Chili Peppers"/>
<link wikidata="Q713521" start="42670" end="42679" title="Mike Ness" label="Mike Ness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047508" start="42682" end="42696" title="Our Lady Peace" label="Our Lady Peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q2316071" start="42699" end="42710" title="Rusted Root" label="Rusted Root"/>
<link wikidata="Q741801" start="42713" end="42722" title="Sevendust" label="Sevendust"/>
<link wikidata="Q593366" start="42725" end="42740" title="Collective Soul" label="Collective Soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q207306" start="42743" end="42751" title="Godsmack" label="Godsmack"/>
<link wikidata="Q83431" start="42754" end="42762" title="Megadeth" label="Megadeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1611056" start="42846" end="42862" title="The Supersuckers" label="The Supersuckers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4906480" start="42882" end="42891" title="Big Sugar (band)" label="Big Sugar"/>
<link wikidata="Q22151" start="42894" end="42898" title="Muse (band)" label="Muse"/>
<link wikidata="Q6251389" start="42901" end="42913" title="John Oszajca" label="John Oszajca"/>
<link wikidata="Q7235623" start="42916" end="42921" title="Pound (band)" label="Pound"/>
<link wikidata="Q7261826" start="42924" end="42934" title="Pushmonkey" label="Pushmonkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5198188" start="42937" end="42945" title="Cyclefly" label="Cyclefly"/>
<link wikidata="Q16847388" start="42948" end="42958" title="Indigenous (band)" label="Indigenous"/>
<link wikidata="Q215835" start="42961" end="42975" title="John Entwistle" label="John Entwistle"/>
<link wikidata="Q176305" start="42978" end="42986" title="Reveille (band)" label="Reveille"/>
<link wikidata="Q4020793" start="43082" end="43096" title="Woodstock 1999 (album)" label="Woodstock 1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q216364" start="43165" end="43177" title="Epic Records" label="Epic Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q5294" start="43202" end="43205" title="DVD" label="DVD"/>
<link wikidata="Q3985873" start="43518" end="43547" title="The Best of &amp;#x27;94–&amp;#x27;99" label="The Best of &amp;#x27;94–&amp;#x27;99"/>
<link wikidata="Q37470793" start="43582" end="43592" title="The Ringer (website)" label="The Ringer"/>
<link wikidata="Q20899" start="43634" end="43641" title="podcast" label="podcast"/>
<link wikidata="" start="43758" end="43793" title="Woodstock 99: Peace, Love, and Rage" label="Woodstock 99: Peace, Love, and Rage"/>
<link wikidata="Q23633" start="43858" end="43861" title="HBO" label="HBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q117078710" start="43866" end="43873" title="HBO Max" label="HBO Max"/>
<link wikidata="Q907311" start="43895" end="43902" title="Netflix" label="Netflix"/>
<link wikidata="Q720768" start="44120" end="44132" title="Michael Lang (producer)" label="Michael Lang"/>
<link wikidata="Q945758" start="44153" end="44184" title="Pol&amp;#x27;and&amp;#x27;Rock Festival" label="Pol&amp;#x27;and&amp;#x27;Rock Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q164815" start="44242" end="44251" title="Woodstock" label="Woodstock"/>
<link wikidata="Q8033401" start="44261" end="44279" title="Woodstock &amp;#x27;79" label="Woodstock &amp;#x27;79"/>
<link wikidata="Q8033400" start="44289" end="44307" title="Woodstock &amp;#x27;89" label="Woodstock &amp;#x27;89"/>
<link wikidata="Q933410" start="44317" end="44335" title="Woodstock &amp;#x27;94" label="Woodstock &amp;#x27;94"/>
<link wikidata="Q16843271" start="44345" end="44369" title="Heroes of Woodstock Tour" label="Heroes of Woodstock Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q62112097" start="44379" end="44391" title="Woodstock 50" label="Woodstock 50"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="187398" wikidata="Q753576" url="?curid=187398" title="Cisco IOS">
<text>The Internetworking Operating System (IOS) is a family of proprietary network operating systems used on several router and network switch models manufactured by Cisco Systems. The system is a package of routing, switching, internetworking, and telecommunications functions integrated into a multitasking operating system. Although the IOS code base includes a cooperative multitasking kernel, most IOS features have been ported to other kernels, such as Linux and QNX, for use in Cisco products.

Not all Cisco networking products run IOS. Exceptions include some Cisco Catalyst switches, which run IOS XE, and Cisco ASR routers, which run either IOS XE or IOS XR; both are Linux-based operating systems. For data center environments, Cisco Nexus switches (Ethernet) and Cisco MDS switches (Fibre Channel) both run Cisco NX-OS, also a Linux-based operating system.

== History ==
The IOS network operating system was created from code written by William Yeager at Stanford University, which was developed in the 1980s for routers with 256 kB of memory and low CPU processing power. Through modular extensions, IOS has been adapted to increasing hardware capabilities and new networking protocols. When IOS was developed, Cisco Systems&#x27; main product line were routers. The company acquired a number of young companies that focused on network switches, such as the inventor of the first Ethernet switch Kalpana, and as a result Cisco switches did not initially run IOS. Prior to IOS, the Cisco Catalyst series ran CatOS.

==Command-line interface==
The IOS command-line interface (CLI) provides a fixed set of multiple-word commands. The set available is determined by the &quot;mode&quot; and the privilege level of the current user. &quot;Global configuration mode&quot; provides commands to change the system&#x27;s configuration, and &quot;interface configuration mode&quot; provides commands to change the configuration of a specific interface. All commands are assigned a &quot;privilege level&quot;, from 0 to 15, and can only be accessed by users with the necessary privilege. Through the CLI, the commands available to each privilege level can be defined.

Most builds of IOS include a Tcl interpreter. Using the embedded event manager feature, the interpreter can be scripted to react to events within the networking environment, such as interface failure or periodic timers.

Available command modes include:
* User EXEC Mode
* Privileged EXEC Mode
* Global Configuration Mode
* ROM Monitor Mode
* Setup Mode
And more than 100 configuration modes and submodes.

== Architecture ==
Cisco IOS has a monolithic architecture, owing to the limited hardware resources of routers and switches in the 1980s. This means that all processes have direct hardware access to conserve CPU processing time. There is no memory protection between processes and IOS has a run to completion scheduler, which means that the kernel does not pre-empt a running process. Instead the process must make a kernel call before other processes get a chance to run. IOS considers each process a single thread and assigns it a priority value, so that high priority processes are executed on the CPU before queued low priority processes, but high priority processes cannot interrupt running low priority processes.

The Cisco IOS monolithic kernel does not implement memory protection for the data of different processes. The entire physical memory is mapped into one virtual address space. The Cisco IOS kernel does not perform any memory paging or swapping. Therefore the addressable memory is limited to the physical memory of the network device on which the operating system is installed. IOS does however support aliasing of duplicated virtual memory contents to the same physical memory. This architecture was implemented by Cisco in order to ensure system performance and minimize the operational overheads of the operating system.

The disadvantage of the IOS architecture is that it increases the complexity of the operating system, data corruption is possible as one process can write over the data of another, and one process can destabilize the entire operating system or even cause a software-forced crash. In the event of an IOS crash, the operating system automatically reboots and reloads the saved configuration.

== Routing ==
In all versions of Cisco IOS, packet routing and forwarding (switching) are distinct functions. Routing and other protocols run as Cisco IOS processes and contribute to the Routing Information Base (RIB). This is processed to generate the final IP forwarding table (FIB, Forwarding Information Base), which is used by the forwarding function of the router. On router platforms with software-only forwarding (e.g., Cisco 7200), most traffic handling, including access control list filtering and forwarding, is done at interrupt level using Cisco Express Forwarding (CEF) or dCEF (Distributed CEF). This means IOS does not have to do a process context switch to forward a packet. Routing functions such as OSPF or BGP run at the process level. In routers with hardware-based forwarding, such as the Cisco 12000 series, IOS computes the FIB in software and loads it into the forwarding hardware (such as an ASIC or network processor), which performs the actual packet forwarding function.

== Interface descriptor block ==
An Interface Descriptor Block, or simply IDB, is a portion of memory or Cisco IOS internal data structure that contains information such as the IP address, interface state, and packet statistics for networking data. Cisco&#x27;s IOS software maintains one IDB for each hardware interface in a particular Cisco switch or router and one IDB for each subinterface. The number of IDBs present in a system varies with the Cisco hardware platform type.

Physical and logical interfaces on the switch will be referenced with either expanded or abbreviated port description names. This combined with slot, module, and interface numbering creates a unique reference to that interface.

== Packages and feature sets ==
IOS is shipped as a unique file that has been compiled for specific Cisco network devices. Each IOS Image therefore include a feature set, which determine the command-line interface (CLI) commands and features that are available on different Cisco devices. Upgrading to another feature set therefore entails the installation of a new IOS image on the networking device and reloading the IOS operating system. Information about the IOS version and feature-set running on a Cisco device can be obtained with the &quot;show version&quot; command.
Most Cisco products that run IOS also have one or more &quot;feature sets&quot; or &quot;packages&quot;, typically eight packages for Cisco routers and five packages for Cisco network switches. For example, Cisco IOS releases meant for use on Catalyst switches are available as &quot;standard&quot; versions (providing only basic IP routing), &quot;enhanced&quot; versions, which provide full IPv4 routing support, and &quot;advanced IP services&quot; versions, which provide the enhanced features as well as IPv6 support.

Beginning with the 1900, 2900 and 3900 series of ISR Routers, Cisco revised the licensing model of IOS. To simplify the process of enlarging the feature-set and reduce the need for network operating system reloads, Cisco introduced universal IOS images, that include all features available for a device and customers may unlock certain features by purchasing an additional software license. The exact feature set required for a particular function can be determined using the Cisco Feature Navigator. Routers come with IP Base installed, and additional feature pack licenses can be installed as bolt-on additions to expand the feature set of the device. The available feature packs are:

* Data adds features like BFD, IP SLAs, IPX, L2TPv3, Mobile IP, MPLS, SCTP.
* Security adds features like VPN, Firewall, IP SLAs, NAC.
* Unified Comms adds features like CallManager Express, Gatekeeper, H.323, IP SLAs, MGCP, SIP, VoIP, CUBE(SBC).

IOS images can not be updated with software bug fixes. To patch a vulnerability in IOS, a binary file with the entire operating system needs to be loaded.

== Versioning ==
Cisco IOS is versioned using three numbers and some letters, in the general form &quot;a.b(c.d)e&quot;, where:

* &quot;a&quot; is the major version number.
* &quot;b&quot; is the minor version number.
* &quot;c&quot; is the release number, which begins at one and increments as new releases in a same way &quot;a.b&quot; train are released. &quot;Train&quot; is Cisco-speak for &quot;a vehicle for delivering Cisco software to a specific set of platforms and features.&quot;
* &quot;d&quot; (omitted from general releases) is the interim build number.
* &quot;e&quot; (zero, one or two letters) is the software release train identifier, such as none (which designates the mainline, see below), &quot;T&quot; (for Technology), &quot;E&quot; (for Enterprise), &quot;S&quot; (for Service provider), &quot;XA&quot; as a special functionality train, &quot;XB&quot; as a different special functionality train, etc.

Rebuilds – Often a rebuild is compiled to fix a single specific problem or vulnerability for a given IOS version. For example, 12.1(8)E14 is a Rebuild, the 14 denoting the 14th rebuild of 12.1(8)E. Rebuilds are produced to either quickly repair a defect, or to satisfy customers who do not want to upgrade to a later major revision because they may be running critical infrastructure on their devices, and hence prefer to minimize change and risk.

Interim releases – Are usually produced on a weekly basis, and form a roll-up of current development effort. The Cisco advisory web site may list more than one possible interim to fix an associated issue (the reason for this is unknown to the general public).

Maintenance releases – Rigorously tested releases that are made available and include enhancements and bug fixes. Cisco recommend upgrading to Maintenance releases where possible, over Interim and Rebuild releases.

=== Trains ===
Cisco says, &quot;A train is a vehicle for delivering Cisco software to a specific set of platforms and features.&quot;

==== Until 12.4 ====
Before Cisco IOS release 15, releases were split into several &quot;trains&quot;, each containing a different set of features. Trains more or less map onto distinct markets or groups of customers that Cisco targeted.

* The mainline train is intended to be the most stable release the company can offer, and its feature set never expands during its lifetime. Updates are released only to address bugs in the product. The previous technology train becomes the source for the current mainline train — for example, the 12.1T train becomes the basis for the 12.2 mainline. Therefore, to determine the features available in a particular mainline release, look at the previous T train release.
* The T – Technology train, gets new features and bug fixes throughout its life, and is therefore potentially less stable than the mainline. (In releases prior to Cisco IOS Release 12.0, the P train served as the Technology train.) Cisco doesn&#x27;t recommend usage of T train in production environments unless there is urgency to implement a certain T train&#x27;s new IOS feature.
* The S – Service Provider train, runs only on the company&#x27;s core router products and is heavily customized for Service Provider customers.
* The E – Enterprise train, is customized for implementation in enterprise environments.
* The B – broadband train, supports internet based broadband features.
* The X* (XA, XB, etc.) – Special Release train, contains one-off releases designed to fix a certain bug or provide a new feature. These are eventually merged with one of the above trains.

There were other trains from time to time, designed for specific needs — for example, the 12.0AA train contained new code required for Cisco&#x27;s AS5800 product.

=== Since 15.0 ===
Starting with Cisco IOS release 15, there is just a single train, the M/T train. This train includes both extended maintenance releases and standard maintenance releases. The M releases are extended maintenance releases, and Cisco will provide bug fixes for 44 months. The T releases are standard maintenance releases, and Cisco will only provide bug fixes for 18 months.

== Security and vulnerabilities ==
Because IOS needs to know the cleartext password for certain uses, (e.g., CHAP authentication) passwords entered into the CLI by default are weakly encrypted as &#x27;Type 7&#x27; ciphertext, such as &quot;codice_1&quot;. This is designed to prevent &quot;shoulder-surfing&quot; attacks when viewing router configurations and is not secure – they are easily decrypted using software called &quot;getpass&quot; available since 1995, or &quot;ios7crypt&quot;, a modern variant, although the passwords can be decoded by the router using the &quot;key chain&quot; command and entering the type 7 password as the key, and then issuing a &quot;show key&quot; command; the above example decrypts to &quot;stupidpass&quot;. However, the program will not decrypt &#x27;Type 5&#x27; passwords or passwords set with the codice_2 command, which uses salted MD5 hashes.

Cisco recommends that all Cisco IOS devices implement the authentication, authorization, and accounting (AAA) security model. AAA can use local, RADIUS, and TACACS+ databases. However, a local account is usually still required for emergency situations.

At the Black Hat Briefings conference in July 2005, Michael Lynn, working for Internet Security Systems at the time, presented information about a vulnerability in IOS. Cisco had already issued a patch, but asked that the flaw not be disclosed. Cisco filed a lawsuit, but settled after an injunction was issued to prevent further disclosures.

With IOS being phased out on devices, IOS-XE adopted many improvements including updated defaults. Some use cases can now store secrets as one-way hashes.

== IOS XR train ==
For Cisco products that required very high availability, such as the Cisco CRS-1, the limitations of a monolithic kernel were not acceptable. In addition, competitive router operating systems that emerged 10–20 years after IOS, such as Juniper&#x27;s Junos OS, were designed to not have these limitations. Cisco&#x27;s response was to develop a completely new operating system that offered modularity, memory protection between processes, lightweight threads, pre-emptive scheduling, ability to independently restart failed processes and massive scale for use in Service Provider networks. The IOS XR development train initially used the real-time operating system microkernel (QNX) and a large part of the IOS source code was re-written to take advantage of the features offered by the kernel. In 2005 Cisco introduced the Cisco IOS XR network operating system on the 12000 series of network routers, extending the microkernel architecture from the CRS-1 routers to Cisco&#x27;s widely deployed core routers. As of release 6.x of Cisco IOS XR, QNX was dropped in favor of Linux. Part of the initial work focused on modularity inspired modification of monolithic IOS into modular IOS, which extends the microkernel architecture into the IOS environment, while still providing the software upgrade capabilities. That idea was only tested on Catalyst 6500, got limited exposure and was quickly discontinued as requirements were too high and significantly impaired platform operation.

== See also ==
* Cisco IOS XE
* Cisco IOS XR
* Cisco NX-OS
* Junos OS
* Supervisor Engine (Cisco)
* Network operating system
* Packet Tracer

== References ==
== External links ==
* Cisco Content Hub
* Cisco Feature Navigator
* Cisco Security Advisories</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q753576" start="4" end="36" title="Cisco IOS" label="Internetworking Operating System"/>
<link wikidata="Q753576" start="38" end="41" title="Cisco IOS" label="IOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q282080" start="70" end="94" title="network operating system" label="network operating system"/>
<link wikidata="Q5318" start="112" end="118" title="Router (computing)" label="router"/>
<link wikidata="Q4503" start="123" end="137" title="network switch" label="network switch"/>
<link wikidata="Q173395" start="161" end="174" title="Cisco" label="Cisco Systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q192969" start="291" end="303" title="computer multitasking" label="multitasking"/>
<link wikidata="Q16969336" start="360" end="384" title="cooperative multitasking" label="cooperative multitasking"/>
<link wikidata="Q388" start="454" end="459" title="Linux" label="Linux"/>
<link wikidata="Q676052" start="464" end="467" title="QNX" label="QNX"/>
<link wikidata="Q2033353" start="564" end="578" title="Cisco Catalyst" label="Cisco Catalyst"/>
<link wikidata="Q23016711" start="599" end="605" title="Cisco IOS XE" label="IOS XE"/>
<link wikidata="Q4654333" start="611" end="620" title="Cisco ASR" label="Cisco ASR"/>
<link wikidata="Q1956317" start="657" end="663" title="Cisco IOS XR" label="IOS XR"/>
<link wikidata="Q5122165" start="735" end="746" title="Cisco Nexus switches" label="Cisco Nexus"/>
<link wikidata="Q79984" start="757" end="765" title="Ethernet" label="Ethernet"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="771" end="780" title="Cisco MDS" label="Cisco MDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q376827" start="791" end="804" title="Fibre Channel" label="Fibre Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3869717" start="815" end="826" title="Cisco NX-OS" label="Cisco NX-OS"/>
<link wikidata="Q2581146" start="946" end="960" title="William Yeager" label="William Yeager"/>
<link wikidata="Q41506" start="964" end="983" title="Stanford University" label="Stanford University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300" start="1060" end="1063" title="CPU" label="CPU"/>
<link wikidata="Q2727352" start="1406" end="1413" title="Kalpana (company)" label="Kalpana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2033353" start="1517" end="1522" title="Cisco Catalyst" label="CatOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q189053" start="1560" end="1582" title="command-line interface" label="command-line interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079196" start="1627" end="1635" title="command (computing)" label="commands"/>
<link wikidata="Q5288" start="2198" end="2201" title="Tcl" label="Tcl"/>
<link wikidata="Q5370002" start="2225" end="2247" title="embedded event manager" label="embedded event manager"/>
<link wikidata="Q720353" start="2611" end="2621" title="Monolithic kernel" label="monolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7379593" start="2867" end="2894" title="Run to completion scheduling" label="run to completion scheduler"/>
<link wikidata="Q205663" start="2952" end="2959" title="Process (computing)" label="process"/>
<link wikidata="Q213092" start="3085" end="3091" title="Thread (computing)" label="thread"/>
<link wikidata="Q163585" start="3348" end="3365" title="memory protection" label="memory protection"/>
<link wikidata="Q656083" start="3521" end="3527" title="paging" label="paging"/>
<link wikidata="Q333501" start="4194" end="4199" title="Crash (computing)" label="crash"/>
<link wikidata="Q22725" start="4356" end="4370" title="Routing" label="packet routing"/>
<link wikidata="Q874048" start="4375" end="4385" title="packet forwarding" label="forwarding"/>
<link wikidata="Q193446" start="4387" end="4396" title="Packet switching" label="switching"/>
<link wikidata="Q338966" start="4786" end="4805" title="access control list" label="access control list"/>
<link wikidata="Q4036233" start="4865" end="4889" title="Cisco Express Forwarding" label="Cisco Express Forwarding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061424" start="4968" end="4982" title="context switch" label="context switch"/>
<link wikidata="Q220169" start="5030" end="5034" title="Open Shortest Path First" label="OSPF"/>
<link wikidata="Q11155" start="5038" end="5041" title="Border Gateway Protocol" label="BGP"/>
<link wikidata="Q217302" start="5230" end="5234" title="Application-specific integrated circuit" label="ASIC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2033353" start="6842" end="6857" title="Catalyst switch" label="Catalyst switch"/>
<link wikidata="Q11103" start="6992" end="6996" title="IPv4" label="IPv4"/>
<link wikidata="Q2551624" start="7108" end="7112" title="IPv6" label="IPv6"/>
<link wikidata="Q207621" start="7496" end="7512" title="software license" label="software license"/>
<link wikidata="Q576997" start="7881" end="7885" title="SCTP" label="SCTP"/>
<link wikidata="Q179550" start="8094" end="8106" title="software bug" label="software bug"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859422" start="8835" end="8857" title="software release train" label="software release train"/>
<link wikidata="Q179550" start="10622" end="10626" title="Software bug" label="bugs"/>
<link wikidata="Q11016" start="10924" end="10934" title="Technology" label="Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2169973" start="11308" end="11324" title="Service Provider" label="Service Provider"/>
<link wikidata="Q194163" start="11542" end="11551" title="Broadband Internet access" label="broadband"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060131" start="12459" end="12463" title="Challenge-handshake authentication protocol" label="CHAP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500258" start="13223" end="13229" title="Salt (cryptography)" label="salted"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13230" end="13240" title="Crypt (Unix)#MD5-based scheme" label="MD5 hashes"/>
<link wikidata="Q747499" start="13388" end="13394" title="RADIUS" label="RADIUS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1678488" start="13400" end="13407" title="TACACS+" label="TACACS+"/>
<link wikidata="Q502349" start="13504" end="13523" title="Black Hat Briefings" label="Black Hat Briefings"/>
<link wikidata="Q890447" start="13575" end="13600" title="IBM Internet Security Systems" label="Internet Security Systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045076" start="14085" end="14096" title="Cisco CRS-1" label="Cisco CRS-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049080" start="14252" end="14259" title="Juniper Networks" label="Juniper"/>
<link wikidata="Q4041744" start="14267" end="14275" title="Junos OS" label="Junos OS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193100" start="14476" end="14498" title="Preemption (computing)" label="pre-emptive scheduling"/>
<link wikidata="Q213666" start="14654" end="14680" title="real-time operating system" label="real-time operating system"/>
<link wikidata="Q726378" start="14681" end="14692" title="microkernel" label="microkernel"/>
<link wikidata="Q676052" start="14694" end="14697" title="QNX" label="QNX"/>
<link wikidata="Q128751" start="14727" end="14738" title="source code" label="source code"/>
<link wikidata="Q5122132" start="14885" end="14897" title="Cisco 12000" label="12000 series"/>
<link wikidata="Q5170211" start="15012" end="15023" title="core router" label="core router"/>
<link wikidata="Q23016711" start="15516" end="15528" title="Cisco IOS XE" label="Cisco IOS XE"/>
<link wikidata="Q1956317" start="15531" end="15543" title="Cisco IOS XR" label="Cisco IOS XR"/>
<link wikidata="Q3869717" start="15546" end="15557" title="Cisco NX-OS" label="Cisco NX-OS"/>
<link wikidata="Q4041744" start="15560" end="15568" title="JUNOS" label="Junos OS"/>
<link wikidata="Q7644319" start="15571" end="15596" title="Supervisor Engine (Cisco)" label="Supervisor Engine (Cisco)"/>
<link wikidata="Q282080" start="15599" end="15623" title="Network operating system" label="Network operating system"/>
<link wikidata="Q2373116" start="15626" end="15639" title="Packet Tracer" label="Packet Tracer"/>
</links>
</doc>
