<doc id="192093" wikidata="Q34932" url="?curid=192093" title="Brisbane">
<text>Brisbane ( , ) is the capital and largest city of the state of Queensland and the third-most populous city in Australia, with a population over 2.7 million. Brisbane lies at the centre of South East Queensland, an urban agglomeration with a population of approximately 4 million which includes several other regional centres and cities. The central business district is situated within a peninsula of the Brisbane River about from its mouth at Moreton Bay. Brisbane is located in the hilly floodplain of the Brisbane River Valley between Moreton Island and the Taylor and D&#x27;Aguilar mountain ranges. It sprawls across several local government areas, most centrally the City of Brisbane. The demonym of Brisbane is &quot;Brisbanite&quot;.

The Moreton Bay penal settlement was founded in 1824 at Redcliffe as a place for secondary offenders from the Sydney colony, but in May 1825 moved to North Quay on the banks of the Brisbane River, so named for British army general and Governor of New South Wales Sir Thomas Brisbane. German Lutherans established the first free settlement of Zion Hill at Nundah in 1838, and in 1859 Brisbane was chosen as Queensland&#x27;s capital when the state separated from New South Wales. By the late 19th century, the city had grown into a major port and centre of immigration. During World War II, the Allied command in the South West Pacific was based in the city, along with the headquarters for General Douglas MacArthur of the United States Army.

Brisbane is a global centre for research and innovation and is a transportation hub, being served by large rail, bus and ferry networks, as well as Brisbane Airport and the Port of Brisbane, Australia&#x27;s third-busiest airport and seaport.

A diverse city with over 36% of its metropolitan population being foreign-born, Brisbane is frequently ranked highly in lists of the most liveable cities. Brisbane has hosted major events including the 1982 Commonwealth Games, World Expo 88, the 2001 Goodwill Games, the 2014 G20 summit, and will host the 2032 Summer Olympics and Paralympics.

Brisbane is one of Australia&#x27;s most popular tourist destinations and is Australia&#x27;s most biodiverse and greenest city. South Bank and its extensive parklands attracts an estimated 14 million visitors every year. Other major landmarks and precincts of the city include the Queensland Cultural Centre (including the Queensland Art Gallery, the Gallery of Modern Art, the Queensland Museum, the State Library of Queensland and the Queensland Performing Arts Centre), Brisbane City Hall, the Story Bridge, Howard Smith Wharves, Queen&#x27;s Wharf, St John&#x27;s cathedral, and Mount Coot-tha Lookout. Much of Brisbane&#x27;s inner-city neighbourhoods are also characterised by its historic Queenslander architecture. Brisbane is also known for its extensive parks and outdoor attractions including the City Botanic Gardens, Victoria Park, Roma Street Parkland, New Farm Park, the Mount Coot-tha Botanic Gardens, the Brisbane Riverwalk, Moreton Bay, Moreton Island and D&#x27;Aguilar National Park.

==Toponymy==
Brisbane is named after the Brisbane River, which in turn was named after Sir Thomas Brisbane, the governor of New South Wales from 1821 to 1825. The name is derived from the Scottish Gaelic , meaning and the Old English word meaning &quot;.&quot;

Popular nicknames for Brisbane include &quot;Brissie&quot;, &quot;Brisvegas&quot;, &quot;Brizzie&quot; and &quot;the&quot; &quot;River City&quot;.

Part of the Brisbane conurbation is located on traditional indigenous land known also as , &quot;Meaanjin, Maganjin&quot; or &quot;Magandjin&quot; amongst other spellings. There is a difference of opinion between local traditional owners over the spelling, provenance and pronunciation of indigenous names for Brisbane. Tom Petrie in 1901 stated that the name referred to the area that Brisbane CBD now straddles. Some sources state that the name means or &#x27;the spearhead&#x27; referencing the shape of the Brisbane River along the area of the Brisbane CBD. A contemporary Turrbal organisation has also suggested it means . Local Elder Gaja Kerry Charlton posits that is based on a European understanding of , and that the phonetically similar Yagara name — after the native tulipwood trees () at Gardens Point — is a more accurate and appropriate Aboriginal name for Brisbane.

Aboriginal groups claiming traditional ownership of the area include the Yagara, Turrbal and Quandamooka peoples. Brisbane is home to the land of a number of Aboriginal language groups, primarily the Yagara language group which includes the Turrbal language.

==History==

=== Pre-colonisation ===

Aboriginal Australians have lived in coastal South East Queensland for at least 22,000 years, with an estimated population between 6,000 and 10,000 individuals before European settlement in the 1820s. Aboriginal groups claiming traditional ownership of the area include the Yagara, Turrbal and Quandamooka peoples. A website representing a Turrbal culture organisation claims that historical documents suggest that the Turrbal peoples were the only traditional owners of Brisbane when British settlers first arrived.

Archaeological evidence suggests frequent habitation around the Brisbane River, and notably at the site now known as Musgrave Park. The rivers were integral to life and supplied an abundance of food included fish, shellfish, crab, and prawns. Good fishing places became campsites and the focus of group activities. The district was defined by open woodlands with rainforest in some pockets or bends of the Brisbane River.

Being a resource-rich area and a natural avenue for seasonal movement, and the surrounding areas acted as a way station for groups travelling to ceremonies and spectacles. The region had several large (200–600 person) seasonal camps, the biggest and most important located along waterways north and south of the current city heart: &#x27; or York&#x27;s Hollow camp (today&#x27;s Victoria Park) and &#x27; (Woolloongabba/South Brisbane), also known as &quot;&quot;. These camping grounds continued to function well into colonial times, and were the basis of European settlement in parts of Brisbane.

===18th and 19th centuries===

In 1770, British navigator James Cook sailed through South Passage between the main offshore islands leading to the bay, which he named after James Douglas, 14th Earl of Morton, misspelled as &quot;Moreton&quot;.

Matthew Flinders initially explored the Moreton Bay area on behalf of the British authorities. On 17 July 1799, Flinders landed at present-day Woody Point, which he named &quot;Red Cliff Point&quot; after the red-coloured cliffs visible from the bay.

In 1823 the Governor of New South Wales, Sir Thomas Brisbane, gave instructions for the development of a new northern penal settlement, and an exploration party commanded by John Oxley further explored Moreton Bay in November 1823.

Oxley explored the Brisbane River as far as Goodna, upstream from the present-day central business district of Brisbane. He also named the river after the governor of the time. Oxley also recommended Red Cliff Point for the new colony, reporting that ships could land at any tide and easily get close to the shore. The convict settlement party landed in Redcliffe on 13 September 1824 formally establishing the Moreton Bay Penal Settlement that would become Brisbane. The party was under the command of Lieutenant Henry Miller and consisted of 14 soldiers (some with wives and children) and 29 convicts. However, the settlers abandoned this site after a year and moved to an area on the Brisbane River now known as North Quay, south, which offered a more reliable water-supply. The newly selected Brisbane region was plagued by mosquitoes at the time.

After visiting the Redcliffe settlement, Sir Thomas Brisbane then travelled up the Brisbane River in December 1824. Governor Brisbane stayed overnight in a tent and often landed ashore, thus bestowing upon the future Brisbane City the distinction of being the only Australian capital city visited by its namesake. Chief Justice Forbes gave the new settlement the name of &quot;Edenglassie&quot; before it was named &quot;Brisbane&quot;.

The penal settlement under the control of Captain Patrick Logan (Commandant from 1826 to 1830) flourished, with the numbers of convicts increasing dramatically from around 200 to over 1,000 men. He developed a substantial settlement of brick and stone buildings, complete with school and hospital. He formed additional outstations and made several important journeys of exploration. Logan became infamous for his extreme use of the cat o&#x27; nine tails on convicts. The maximum allowed limit of lashes was 50; however, Logan regularly applied sentences of 150 lashes.

During this period raids on maize fields were conducted by local Aboriginal groups in the Corn Field Raids of 1827-1828. These groups destroyed and plundered the maize fields in South Bank and Kangaroo Point, with the possible motive of extracting compensation from the settlers or warning them not to expand beyond their current area.

Between 1824 and 1842, almost 2,400 men and 145 women were detained at the Moreton Bay convict settlement under the control of military commandants. However, non-convict European settlement of the Brisbane region commenced in 1838 and the population grew strongly thereafter, with free settlers soon far outstripping the convict population. German missionaries settled at Zions Hill, Nundah as early as 1837, five years before Brisbane was officially declared a free settlement. The band consisted of ministers Christopher Eipper (1813–1894), Carl Wilhelm Schmidt, and lay missionaries Haussmann, Johann Gottried Wagner, Niquet, Hartenstein, Zillman, Franz, Rode, Doege and Schneider. They were allocated 260 hectares and set about establishing the mission, which became known as the German Station. Later in the 1860s many German immigrants from the Uckermark region in Prussia as well as from other German regions settled in the areas of Bethania, Beenleigh and the Darling Downs. These immigrants were selected and assisted through immigration programs established by Rev Dr John Dunmore Lang and Johann Christian Heussler and were offered free passage, good wages, and selections of land.

Scottish immigrants from the ship arrived in Brisbane in 1849, enticed by Lang on the promise of free land grants. Denied land, the immigrants set up camp in York&#x27;s Hollow waterholes in the vicinity of today&#x27;s Victoria Park, Herston, Queensland. A number of the immigrants moved in and settled the suburb, naming it Fortitude Valley after the ship on which they arrived.

Free settlers entered the area from 1835, and by the end of 1840, Robert Dixon had begun work on the first plan of Brisbane Town, in anticipation of future development. The Roman Catholic church erected the Pugin Chapel in 1850, to the design by the gothic revivalist Augustus Pugin. Letters patent dated 6 June 1859, proclaimed by Sir George Ferguson Bowen on 10 December 1859, separated Queensland from New South Wales, whereupon Bowen became Queensland&#x27;s first governor, with Brisbane chosen as the capital. Old Government House was constructed in 1862 to house Sir George Bowen&#x27;s family, including his wife, the noblewoman Diamantina, Lady Bowen di Roma. During the tenure of Lord Lamington, Old Government House was the likely site of the origin of Lamingtons.

During the War of Southern Queensland, Indigenous attacks occurred across the city, committing robberies and terrorising unarmed residents. Reprisal raids took place against the Duke of York&#x27;s clan in Victoria Park in 1846 and 1849 by British soldiers of the 11th Regiment, however the clan had been wrongfully targeted as the attacks on Brisbane had not been committed by the Turrbal themselves but other tribes farther north. In 1855, Dundalli, a prominent leader during the conflict, was captured and executed by hanging at the present site of the GPO.

In 1862, the first sugarcane plantation in Queensland was established near Brisbane by Captain Louis Hope and John Buhôt.

In 1864, the Great Fire of Brisbane burned through the central parts of the city, destroying much of Queen Street. The 1860s were a period of economic and political turmoil leading to high unemployment, in 1866 hundreds of impoverished workers convened a meeting at the Treasury Hotel, with a cry for &quot;bread or blood&quot;, rioted and attempted to ransack the Government store.

The City Botanic Gardens were originally established in 1825 as a farm for the Moreton Bay penal settlement, and were planted by convicts in 1825 with food crops to feed the prison colony. In 1855, several acres was declared a Botanic Reserve under the Superintendent Walter Hill, a position he held until 1881. Some trees planted in the Gardens were among the first of their species to be planted in Australia, including the jacaranda and poinciana.

 Charles Tiffin was appointed as Queensland Government Architect in 1859, and pursued an intellectual policy in the design of public buildings based on Italianate and Renaissance revivalism, with such buildings as Government House, the Department of Primary Industries Building in 1866, and the Queensland Parliament built in 1867. The 1880s brought a period of economic prosperity and a major construction boom in Brisbane, that produced an impressive number of notable public and commercial buildings. John James Clark was appointed Queensland Government Architect in 1883, and continuing in Tiffin&#x27;s design for public buildings, asserted the propriety of the Italian Renaissance, drawing upon typological elements and details from conservative High Renaissance sources. Building in this trace of intellectualism, Clark designed the Treasury Building in 1886, and the Yungaba Immigration Centre in 1885. Other major works of the era include Customs House in 1889, and the Old Museum Building completed in 1891.

Fort Lytton was constructed in 1882 at the mouth of the Brisbane river, to protect the city against foreign colonial powers such as Russia and France, and was the only moated fort ever built in Australia.

The city&#x27;s slum district of Frog&#x27;s Hollow, named so for its location being low-lying and swampy, was both the red light district of colonial Brisbane and its Chinatown, and was the site of prostitution, sly grog, and opium dens. In 1888, Frog&#x27;s Hollow was the site of anti-Chinese riots, where more than 2000 people attacked Chinese homes and businesses.

In 1893 Brisbane was affected by the Black February flood, when the Brisbane River burst its banks on three occasions in February and again in June in the same year, with the city receiving more than a year&#x27;s rainfall during February 1893, leaving much of the city&#x27;s population homeless. In 1896, the Brisbane river saw its worst maritime disaster with the capsize of the ferry Pearl, between the 80–100 people on board there were only 40 survivors.

===20th century===

When the colonies federated in 1901, celebrations were held in Brisbane to mark the event, with a triumphal arch erected in Queen Street. In May that year, the Duke of Cornwall and York (later King George V) laid the foundation stone of St John&#x27;s Cathedral, one of the great cathedrals of Australia. The University of Queensland was founded in 1909 and first sited at Old Government House, which became vacated as the government planned for a larger residence. Fernberg House, built in 1865, became the temporary residence in 1910, and later made the permanent government house.

In 1912, Tramway employees were stood down for wearing union badges which sparked Australia&#x27;s first general strike, the 1912 Brisbane General Strike, which became known as Black Friday, for the savagery of the police baton charges on crowds of trade unionists and their supporters. In 1917, during World War I, the Commonwealth Government conducted a raid on the Queensland Government Printing Office, with the aim of confiscating copies of Hansard that covered debates in the Queensland Parliament where anti-conscription sentiments had been aired.

Russian immigration took place in the years 1911–1914. Many were radicals and revolutionaries seeking asylum from tsarist political repression in the final chaotic years of the Russian Empire; considerable numbers were Jews escaping state-inspired pogroms. They had fled Russia via Siberia and Northern China, most making their way to Harbin, in Manchuria, then taking passage from the port of Dalian to Townsville or Brisbane, the first Australian ports of call.

Following the First World War, conflict arose between returned servicemen of the First Australian Imperial Force and socialists along with other elements of society that the ex-servicemen considered to be disloyal toward Australia. Over the course of 1918–1919, a series of violent demonstrations and attacks known as the Red Flag riots, were waged throughout Brisbane. The most notable incident occurred on 24 March 1919, when a crowd of about 8,000 ex-servicemen clashed violently with police who were preventing them from attacking the Russian Hall in Merivale Street, South Brisbane, which was known as the Battle of Merivale Street. Over 20 small municipalities and shires were amalgamated in 1925 to form the City of Brisbane, governed by the Brisbane City Council. A significant year for Brisbane was 1930, with the completion of Brisbane City Hall, then the city&#x27;s tallest building and the Shrine of Remembrance, in ANZAC Square, which has become Brisbane&#x27;s main war memorial.

These historic buildings, along with the Story Bridge which opened in 1940, are key landmarks that help define the architectural character of the city. Following the death of King George V in 1936, Albert square was widened to include the area which had been Albert Street, and renamed King George Square in honour of the King. An equestrian statue of the king and two Bronze Lion sculptures were unveiled in 1938.

In 1939, armed farmers marched on the Queensland Parliament and stormed the building in an attempt to take hostage the Queensland Government led by Labor Premier William Forgan Smith, in an event that became known as the Pineapple rebellion.

During World War II, Brisbane became central to the Allied campaign, since it was the northernmost city with adequate communications facilities. From July 1942 to September 1944, AMP Building (now called MacArthur Central) was used as the headquarters for South West Pacific Area under General MacArthur. MacArthur had previously rejected use of the University of Queensland complex as his headquarters, as the distinctive bends in the river at St Lucia could have aided enemy bombers. Also used as a headquarters by the American troops during World War II was the T &amp; G Building. About one million US troops passed through Australia during the war, as the primary co-ordination point for the South West Pacific. Wartime Brisbane was defined by the racial segregation of African American servicemen, prohibition and sly grog, crime, and jazz ballrooms.

In 1942, Brisbane was the site of a violent clash between visiting US military personnel and Australian servicemen and civilians, which resulted in one death and hundreds of injuries. This incident became known colloquially as the Battle of Brisbane.

Post-war Brisbane had developed a big country town stigma, an image the city&#x27;s politicians and marketers were very keen to remove. In the late 1950s, an anonymous poet known as The Brisbane Bard generated much attention to the city which helped shake this stigma. In 1955, Wickham Terrace was the site of a terrorist incident involving shootings and bombs, by the German immigrant Karl Kast. Despite steady growth, Brisbane&#x27;s development was punctuated by infrastructure problems. The state government under Joh Bjelke-Petersen began a major program of change and urban renewal, beginning with the central business district and inner suburbs. Trams in Brisbane were a popular mode of public transport until the network was closed in 1969, in part the result of the Paddington tram depot fire.

Between 1968 and 1987, Queensland was governed by Bjelke-Petersen, whose government was characterised by social conservatism, police corruption, and the brutal suppression of protest and has been described as a police state. However, during this time Brisbane developed a counterculture focused on the University of Queensland, street marches and Brisbane punk rock music.

In 1971, the touring Springboks were to play against the Australian Rugby team. This was met with plans for protests due to the growing international and local opposition to apartheid in South Africa. However, before their arrival Bjelke-Petersen declared a state of emergency for a month, citing the importance of the tour. This did not stop the protest however with violent clashes between protestors and police erupting when several hundred demonstrators assembled outside a Brisbane motel on Thursday, 22 July 1971, where the Springbok team was staying. A second protest saw a large number of demonstrators assembled once more outside the Tower Mill Motel and after 15 minutes of peaceful protest, a brick was thrown into the motel room and police took action to clear the road and consequently disproportionate violence was used against demonstrators.

In the lead up to the 1980s Queensland fell subject to many forms of censorship. In 1977 things had escalated from prosecutions and book burnings, under the introduction of the Literature Board of Review, to a statewide ban on protests and street marches. In September 1977 the Queensland Government introduced a ban on all street protests, resulting in a statewide civil liberties campaign of defiance. This saw two thousand people arrested and fined, with another hundred being imprisoned, at a cost of almost five million dollars to the State Government. Bjelke-Petersen publicly announced on 4 September 1977 that &quot;the day of the political street march is over ... Don&#x27;t bother to apply for a permit. You won&#x27;t get one. That&#x27;s government policy now.&quot; In response to this, protesters came up with the idea of Phantom Civil Liberties Marches where protesters would gather and march until the police and media arrived. They would then disperse, and gather together again until the media and police returned, repeating the process over and over again.

The end of the Bjelke-Petersen era began with the Fitzgerald Inquiry of 1987 to 1989, a judicial inquiry presided over by Tony Fitzgerald investigating Queensland Police corruption. The inquiry resulted in the resignation of Premier Bjelke-Petersen, the calling of two by-elections, the jailing of three former ministers and the Police Commissioner Terry Lewis (who also lost his knighthood). It also contributed to the end of the National Party of Australia&#x27;s 32-year run as the governing political party in Queensland.

In 1973, the Whiskey Au Go Go nightclub in the city&#x27;s entertainment district, was firebombed that resulted in 15 deaths, in what is one of Australia&#x27;s worst mass killings. The 1974 Brisbane flood was a major disaster which temporarily crippled the city, and saw a substantial landslip at Corinda. During this era, Brisbane grew and modernised, rapidly becoming a destination of interstate migration. Some of Brisbane&#x27;s popular landmarks were lost to development in controversial circumstances, including the Bellevue Hotel in 1979 and Cloudland in 1982. Major public works included the Riverside Expressway, the Gateway Bridge, and later, the redevelopment of South Bank. Starting with the monumental Robin Gibson-designed Queensland Cultural Centre, with the first stage the Queensland Art Gallery completed in 1982, the Queensland Performing Arts Centre in 1985, and the Queensland Museum in 1986.

Brisbane hosted the 1982 Commonwealth Games and World Expo 88. These events were accompanied by a scale of public expenditure, construction, and development not previously seen in the state of Queensland. Brisbane&#x27;s population growth far exceeded the national average in the last two decades of the 20th century, with a high level of interstate migration from Victoria and New South Wales. In the late 1980s Brisbane&#x27;s inner-city areas were struggling with economic stagnation, urban decay and crime which resulted in an exodus of residents and business to the suburban fringe, in the early 1990s the city undertook an extensive and successful urban renewal of the Woolstore precinct as well as the development of South Bank Parklands.

===21st century===

Brisbane was impacted by major floods in January 2011 and February 2022. The Brisbane River did not reach the same height as the previous 1974 flood on either occasion, but caused extensive disruption and damage to infrastructure.

The Queensland Cultural Centre was also expanded, with the completion of the State Library and the Gallery of Modern Art in 2006, and the Kurilpa Bridge in 2009, the world&#x27;s largest hybrid tensegrity bridge. Brisbane also hosted major international events including the final Goodwill Games in 2001, the Rugby League World Cup final in 2008 and again in 2017, as well as the 2014 G20 Brisbane summit.

Population growth has continued to be among the highest of the Australian capital cities in the first two decades of the 21st century, and major infrastructure including the Howard Smith Wharves, Roma Street Parklands, Queens Wharf, the Brisbane Riverwalk, the Queen&#x27;s Wharf casino and resort precinct, the Brisbane International Cruise Terminal, the Clem Jones, Airport Link, and Legacy Way road tunnels, and the Airport, Springfield, Redcliffe Peninsula and Cross River Rail railway lines have been completed or are under construction.

Brisbane will host the 2032 Summer Olympics and 2032 Summer Paralympics.

==Geography and environment==

Brisbane is in the southeast corner of Queensland. The city is centred along the Brisbane River, and its eastern suburbs line the shores of Moreton Bay, a bay of the Coral Sea. The greater Brisbane region is on the coastal plain east of the Great Dividing Range, with the Taylor and D&#x27;Aguilar ranges extending into the metropolitan area. Brisbane&#x27;s metropolitan area sprawls along the Moreton Bay floodplain between the Gold and Sunshine coasts, approximately from Caboolture in the north to Beenleigh in the south, and across to Ipswich in the south west.

The Brisbane River is a wide tidal estuary and its waters throughout most of the metropolitan area are brackish and navigable. The river takes a winding course through the metropolitan area with many steep curves from the southwest to its mouth at Moreton Bay in the east. The metropolitan area is also traversed by several other rivers and creeks including the North Pine and South Pine rivers in the northern suburbs, which converge to form the Pine River estuary at Bramble Bay, the Caboolture River further north, the Logan and Albert rivers in the south-eastern suburbs, and tributaries of the Brisbane River including the Bremer River in the south-western suburbs, Breakfast Creek in the inner-north, Norman Creek in the inner-south, Oxley Creek in the south, Bulimba Creek in the inner south-east and Moggill Creek in the west. The city is on a low-lying floodplain, with the risk of flooding addressed by various state and local government regulations and plans.

The waters of Moreton Bay are sheltered from large swells by Moreton, Stradbroke and Bribie islands, so whilst the bay can become rough in windy conditions, the waves at the Moreton Bay coastline are generally not surfable. Unsheltered surf beaches lie on the eastern coasts of Moreton, Stradbroke and Bribie islands and on the Gold Coast and Sunshine Coast to the south and north respectively. The southern part of Moreton Bay also contains smaller islands such as St Helena Island, Peel Island, Coochiemudlo Island, Russell Island, Lamb Island and Macleay Island.

The city of Brisbane is hilly. The urban area, including the central business district, are partially elevated by spurs of the Herbert Taylor Range, such as the summit of Mount Coot-tha, reaching up to and Enoggera Hill. The D&#x27;Aguilar National Park, encompassing the D&#x27;Aguilar Range, bounds the north-west of Brisbane&#x27;s built-up area, and contains the taller peaks of Mount Nebo, Camp Mountain, Mount Pleasant, Mount Glorious, Mount Samson and Mount Mee. Other prominent rises in Brisbane are Mount Gravatt, Toohey Mountain, Mount Petrie, Highgate Hill, Mount Ommaney, Stephens Mountain, and Whites Hill, which are dotted across the city.

Much of the rock upon which Brisbane is located is the characteristic Brisbane tuff, a form of welded ignimbrite, which is most prominently found at the Kangaroo Point Cliffs at Kangaroo Point and the New Farm Cliffs on the Petrie Bight reach of the Brisbane River. The stone was used in the construction of historical buildings such as the Commissariat Store and Cathedral of St Stephen, and the roadside kerbs in inner areas of Brisbane are still manufactured of Brisbane tuff.

===Ecology===

Brisbane is located within the South East Queensland biogeographic region, and is home to numerous Eucalyptus varieties. Common trees in Brisbane include the Moreton Bay fig, an evergreen banyan with large buttress roots named for the region which are often lit with decorative lights in the inner city, as well as the jacaranda, a subtropical tree native to South America which line many avenues and parks and bloom with purple flowers during October. Other trees common to the metropolitan area include Moreton Bay chestnut, broad-leaved paperbark, poinciana, weeping lilli pilli and Bangalow palm. Some of the banks of the Brisbane River and Moreton Bay are home to mangrove wetlands. The red poinsettia is the original official floral emblem of Brisbane, however it is native to Central America. An additional floral emblem, the Brisbane wattle, which is native to the Brisbane area, was added in 2023.

Brisbane is home to numerous bird species, with common species including rainbow lorikeets, kookaburras, galahs, Australian white ibises, Australian brushturkeys, Torresian crows, Australian magpies and noisy miners. Common reptiles include common garden skinks, Australian water dragons, bearded dragons and blue-tongued lizards. Common ringtail possums and flying foxes are common in parks and yards throughout the city, as are common crow butterflies, blue triangle butterflies, golden orb-weaver spiders and St Andrew&#x27;s Cross spiders. The Brisbane River is home to many fish species including yellowfin bream, flathead, Australasian snapper, and bull sharks. The waters of Moreton Bay are home to dugongs, humpback whales, dolphins, mud crabs, soldier crabs, Moreton Bay bugs and numerous shellfish species. The koala and the graceful tree frog are the official faunal emblems of Brisbane, however both are increasingly less common due to the effects of increased development and climate-change.

===Climate===

Brisbane has a humid subtropical climate (Köppen climate classification: &quot;Cfa&quot;) with hot, wet summers and moderately drier, mild winters. Brisbane experiences an annual mean minimum of and mean maximum of , making it Australia&#x27;s second-hottest capital city after Darwin. Seasonality is not pronounced, and average maximum temperatures of above persist from October through to April.

Due to its proximity to the Coral Sea and a warm ocean current, Brisbane&#x27;s overall temperature variability is somewhat less than most Australian capitals. Summers are long, hot, and wet, but temperatures only occasionally reach or more. Eighty percent of summer days record a maximum temperature of . Winters are short and warm, with average maximums of about ; maximum temperatures below are rare.

The city&#x27;s highest recorded temperature was on Australia Day 1940 at the Brisbane Regional Office, with the highest temperature at the current station being on 22 February 2004; but temperatures above are uncommon. On 19 July 2007, Brisbane&#x27;s temperature fell below the freezing point for the first time since records began, registering at the airport station. The city station has never dropped below , with the average coldest night during winter being around , however locations in the west of the metropolitan area such as Ipswich have dropped as low as with heavy ground frost.

In 2009, Brisbane recorded its hottest winter day (from June to August) at on 24 August; The average July day however is around with sunny skies and low humidity, occasionally as high as , whilst maximum temperatures below are uncommon and usually associated with brief periods of cloud and winter rain. The highest minimum temperature ever recorded in Brisbane was on 29 January 1940 and again on 21 January 2017, whilst the lowest maximum temperature was on 12 August 1954.

Annual precipitation is ample. From November to March, thunderstorms are common over Brisbane, with the more severe events accompanied by large damaging hail stones, torrential rain and destructive winds. On an annual basis, Brisbane averages 124 clear days, with overcast skies more common in the warmer months. Dewpoints in the summer average at around ; the apparent temperature exceeds on almost all summer days. Brisbane&#x27;s wettest day occurred on 21 January 1887, when of rain fell on the city, the highest maximum daily rainfall of Australia&#x27;s capital cities. The wettest month on record was February 1893, when of rain fell, although in the last 30 years the record monthly rainfall has been a much lower from December 2010. Very occasionally a whole month will pass with no recorded rainfall, the last time this happened was August 1991. The city has suffered four major floods since its founding, in February 1893, January 1974 (partially a result of Cyclone Wanda), January 2011 (partially a result of Cyclone Tasha) and February 2022.

Brisbane is within the southern reaches of the tropical cyclone risk zone. Full-strength tropical cyclones rarely affect Brisbane, but occasionally do so. The biggest risk is from ex-tropical cyclones, which can cause destructive winds and flooding rains.

The average annual temperature of the sea ranges from in July to in February.

==Urban structure==

The Brisbane central business district (CBD, colloquially referred to as &quot;the city&quot;) lies in a curve of the Brisbane river. The CBD covers and is walkable. Most central streets are named after members of the House of Hanover. Queen Street (named in honour of Queen Victoria) is Brisbane&#x27;s traditional main street and contains its largest pedestrian mall, the Queen Street Mall. Streets named after female members (Adelaide, Alice, Ann, Charlotte, Elizabeth, Margaret, and Mary) run parallel to Queen Street and perpendicular to streets named after male members (Albert, Edward, George, and William).

The CBD&#x27;s squares include King George Square, Post Office Square and ANZAC Square (home to the city&#x27;s central war memorial).

At the broadest level, Brisbane&#x27;s metropolitan area is informally divided into the northside and the southside, with the dividing line being the Brisbane River, as crossing one of the 15 bridges across the river is required to travel to the opposite side by land transport. Due to the river&#x27;s winding trajectory, this results in many areas which are south of the CBD being classified as located in the northside, and vice versa. At a more specific level, the metropolitan area contains informal regions including the northern, southern, eastern and western suburbs, the bayside suburbs along the Moreton Bay coastline, and the Moreton Bay, Redland, Logan and Ipswich regions in the outer north, east, south and west respectively.

Greater Brisbane had a density of in 2021. Like most Australian cities, Brisbane has a sprawling metropolitan area which takes in excess of one hour to traverse either north to south or east to west by car without traffic.

From the 1970s onwards, there has been a large increase in the construction of apartment developments, including mid-rise and high rise buildings, which has quickened in the 21st century. At the 2021 census, 73.4% of residents lived in separate houses, 14.7% lived in apartments, and 11.4% lived in townhouses, terrace houses, or semidetached houses.

===Parklands===

Brisbane&#x27;s major parklands include the riverside City Botanic Gardens at Gardens Point, Roma Street Parkland, the 27-hectare Victoria Park at Spring Hill and Herston, South Bank Parklands along the river at South Bank, the Brisbane Botanic Gardens at Mount Coot-tha and the riverside New Farm Park at New Farm.

There are many national parks surrounding the Brisbane metropolitan area. The D&#x27;Aguilar National Park is a major national park along the northwest of the metropolitan area in the D&#x27;Aguilar Range. The Glass House Mountains National Park is located to the north of the metropolitan area in the Glass House Mountains and provides green space between the Brisbane metropolitan area and the Sunshine Coast. The Tamborine National Park at Tamborine Mountain is located in the Gold Coast hinterland to the south of the metropolitan area.

The eastern metropolitan area is built along the Moreton Bay Marine Park, encompassing Moreton Bay. Significant areas of Moreton, North Stradbroke and Bribie islands also covered by the Moreton Island National Park, Naree Budjong Djara National Park and the Bribie Island National Park respectively. The Boondall Wetlands in the suburb of Boondall include 1,100 hectares of wetlands which are home to mangroves and shorebirds as well as walking tracks.

===Architecture===
Brisbane has a number of heritage buildings, some of which date back to the 1820s, including The Old Windmill in Wickham Park, built by convict labour in 1824, which is the oldest surviving building in Brisbane, and the Commissariat Store on William Street, built by convict labour in 1828, which was originally used as a grain house, and is now the home of the Royal Historical Society of Brisbane and contains a museum. Other 19th and early 20th-century buildings of architectural significance include the Treasury Building, City Hall, Customs House, Land Administration Building, MacArthur Chambers, The Mansions, National Australia Bank Building, and the Federation-style People&#x27;s Palace, a former temperance hotel on Edward Street.

One of the oldest synagogues in the Queensland area is the Brisbane Synagogue located on Margaret Street in Brisbane city. This historic synagogue can be attributed as the &quot;centerpiece of the Jewish community&#x27;s presence in the state&quot; It was established in 1866 and designed by architect Arthur Morry. Another architect by the name of Andrea Stombuco has also been credited as a designer of the synagogue by previous members of the community. The architectural design of this historic synagogue is in the style of Neo-Moorish also known as Byzantine style.
Queenslander-style housing is common in Brisbane. Queenslander homes typically feature timber construction with large verandahs, gabled corrugated iron roofs, and high ceilings. Most of these houses are elevated on stumps (also called stilts), traditionally built of timber, which allow for a void under the houses which aids in cooling. The relatively low cost of timber in south-east Queensland meant that until recently, most residences were constructed of timber, rather than brick or stone. Early legislation decreed a minimum size for residential blocks leading to few terrace houses being constructed in Brisbane. The high-density housing that historically existed came in the form of miniature Queenslander-style houses which resemble the much larger traditional styles, but are sometimes only one-quarter the size. These houses are most common in the inner-city suburbs.

Brisbane is home to several of Australia&#x27;s tallest buildings. All of Brisbane&#x27;s skyscrapers (buildings with a height greater than ) are located within the CBD, but the inner suburbs are also home to a number of high-density buildings, Torbreck being the first high-rise and mix-use residential development in Queensland. Brisbane&#x27;s 91-metre City Hall was the city&#x27;s tallest building for decades after its completion in 1930 and was finally surpassed in 1970, which marked the beginning of the widespread construction of high-rise buildings.

Brisbane&#x27;s tallest building is currently Brisbane Skytower, which has a height of . Architecturally prominent skyscrapers include the Harry Seidler-designed Riparian Plaza, One One One Eagle Street, which incorporates LED lighting resembling the buttress roots of the Moreton Bay fig, and 1 William Street, the headquarters of the Queensland Government.

==Demographics==
Brisbane&#x27;s Greater Capital City Statistical Area includes the Local Government Areas of City of Brisbane, City of Ipswich, City of Moreton Bay, Logan City and Redland City, as well as parts of Lockyer Valley Region, Scenic Rim Region and Somerset Region, which form a continuous metropolitan area. The Australian Bureau of Statistics estimates that the population of Greater Brisbane is 2,706,966 as of June 2023, making it the third-largest city in Australia.

===Ancestry and immigration===

At the 2021 census, the most commonly nominated ancestries were: 
The 2021 census showed that 20.7% of Brisbane&#x27;s inhabitants were born overseas and 25.2% of inhabitants had at least one parent born overseas. Brisbane has the 26th largest immigrant population among world metropolitan areas. Of inhabitants born outside of Australia, the five most prevalent countries of birth were New Zealand, England, India, mainland China and the Philippines.

The areas of Sunnybank, Sunnybank Hills, Stretton, Robertson, Calamvale, Macgregor, Eight Mile Plains, Runcorn, and Rochedale, are home to a large proportion of Brisbane&#x27;s Mainland China, Taiwan and Hong Kong-born population, with Chinese being the most commonly-reported ancestry in each of these areas. The Vietnamese-born are the largest immigrant group in Inala, Darra, Durack, Willawong, Richlands, and Doolandella. The Indian-born are the largest immigrant group in Chermside.

At the 2021 census, 3.0% of Brisbane&#x27;s population identified as being Indigenous, which includes Aboriginal Australians and Torres Strait Islanders.

===Language===
At the 2021 census, 77.3% of inhabitants spoke only English at home, with the next most common languages being Mandarin (2.5%), Vietnamese (1.1%), Punjabi (0.9%), Cantonese (0.9%), and Spanish (0.8%).

=== Religion ===
At the 2021 census, the most commonly cited religious affiliation was &quot;No religion&quot; (41.4%).
Brisbane&#x27;s most popular religion at the 2021 census was Christianity at 44.3%, the most popular denominations of which were Catholicism (18.6%) and Anglicanism (9.7%). Brisbane&#x27;s CBD is home to two cathedrals – St John&#x27;s (Anglican) and St Stephen&#x27;s (Catholic).

The most popular non-Christian religions at the 2021 census were Hindu (2%), Buddhist (1.9%), and Muslim (1.8%).

==Economy==

Categorised as a global city, Brisbane is among Asia-Pacific cities with largest GDPs and is one of the major business hubs in Australia, with strengths in mining, banking, insurance, transportation, information technology, real estate and food.

Some of the largest companies headquartered in Brisbane, all among Australia&#x27;s largest, include Suncorp Group, Virgin Australia, Aurizon, Bank of Queensland, Flight Centre, CUA, Sunsuper, QSuper, Domino&#x27;s Pizza Enterprises, Star Entertainment Group, ALS, TechnologyOne, NEXTDC, Super Retail Group, New Hope Coal, Jumbo Interactive, National Storage, Collins Foods, and Boeing Australia. Most major Australian companies, as well as numerous international companies, have contact offices in Brisbane.

Brisbane throughout its history has been one of Australia&#x27;s most important seaport cities. The Port of Brisbane is located at the Brisbane River&#x27;s mouth on Moreton Bay and on the adjacent Fisherman&#x27;s Island, created by means of land reclamation. It is the 3rd busiest port in Australia for value of goods. Container freight, sugar, grain, coal and bulk liquids are the major exports. Most of the port facilities are less than three decades old and some are built on reclaimed mangroves and wetlands. The Port is a part of the Australia TradeCoast, which includes the Brisbane Airport along with large industrial estates located along both banks at the mouth of the Brisbane River.

White-collar industries include information technology, financial services, higher education and public sector administration generally concentrated in and around the central business district and satellite hubs located in the inner suburbs such as South Brisbane, Fortitude Valley, Spring Hill, Milton, and Toowong.

Blue-collar industries, including petroleum refining, stevedoring, paper milling, metalworking and QR railway workshops, tend to be located on the lower reaches of the Brisbane River proximal to the Port of Brisbane and in new industrial zones on the urban fringe.

Tourism is an important part of the Brisbane economy, both in its own right and as a gateway to other areas of Queensland, as is international education, with over 95,000 international students enrolled in universities and other tertiary education institutions in the central City of Brisbane local government area alone in 2018.

===Retail===

Retail in the CBD is centred around the Queen Street Mall, which is Queensland&#x27;s largest pedestrian mall. Shopping centres in the CBD include Uptown (formerly the Myer Centre), the Wintergarden, MacArthur Central and QueensPlaza, with the last of these along with Edward Street forming the city&#x27;s focus for luxury brands. There are historical shopping arcades at Brisbane Arcade and Tattersalls Arcade. Suburbs adjacent to the CBD such as Fortitude Valley (particularly James Street), South Brisbane and West End are also a major inner-city retail hubs.

Outside of the inner-city, retail is focused on indoor shopping centres, including numerous regional shopping centres along with six super regional shopping centres, all of which are among Australia&#x27;s largest, namely: Westfield Chermside in the north; Westfield Mt Gravatt in the south; Westfield Carindale in the east; Indooroopilly Shopping Centre in the west; Westfield North Lakes in the outer-north; and Logan Hyperdome in the outer-south. Brisbane&#x27;s major factory outlet centres are the Direct Factory Outlets at Skygate and Jindalee.

The Brisbane Markets at Rocklea are Brisbane&#x27;s largest wholesale markets, whilst smaller markets operate at numerous locations throughout the city including South Bank Parklands, Davies Park in West End, Queensland, and the Eat Street Markets at Hamilton.

==Culture and sport==

Brisbane is home to several art galleries, the largest of which are the Queensland Art Gallery and the Queensland Gallery of Modern Art (GOMA), which is the largest modern art gallery in Australia. GOMA holds the Asia Pacific Triennial (APT) which focuses on contemporary art from the Asia and Pacific in a variety of media from painting to video work. In addition, its size enables the gallery to exhibit particularly large shows.

GOMA houses the Australian Cinémathèque, a dedicated film facility offering a diverse program of screenings, including international cinema, influential filmmakers, rare prints, restorations and silent films with a live musical accompaniment. Screenings take place Wednesday and Friday nights, as well as matinees on weekends. Most screenings are free admission.
Dramatic and musical theatre performances are held at the multiple large theatres located at Queensland Performing Arts Centre (QPAC). The Brisbane Powerhouse in New Farm and the Judith Wright Arts Centre in Fortitude Valley also feature diverse programs featuring exhibitions and festivals of visual art, music and dance. Brisbane is also home to numerous small theatres including the Brisbane Arts Theatre in Petrie Terrace, the La Boite Theatre Company which performs at the Roundhouse Theatre at Kelvin Grove, the Twelfth Night Theatre at Bowen Hills, the Metro Arts Theatre in Edward Street, and the Queensland Theatre Company&#x27;s Bille Brown Theatre in West End.

The Queensland Performing Arts Centre (QPAC) at South Bank, consists of the Lyric Theatre, the Concert Hall, the Cremorne Theatre and the Playhouse Theatre and is home to the Queensland Ballet, Opera Queensland, the Queensland Theatre Company, and the Queensland Symphony Orchestra. The Queensland Conservatorium, a musical conservatorium in which professional music companies and conservatorium students also stage performances, is located within the South Bank Parklands. Numerous choirs present performances across the city annually. These choirs include the Brisbane Chorale, Queensland Choir, Brisbane Chamber Choir, Canticum Chamber Choir, ChoirWorks, Imogen Children&#x27;s Chorale, and Brisbane Birralee Voices.
Brisbane&#x27;s live music scene is diverse and its history is often intertwined with social unrest and authoritarian politics, as retold by journalist Andrew Stafford in &quot;Pig City: From The Saints to Savage Garden&quot;. Popular live music venues, including pubs and clubs, can be found within both the CBD and Fortitude Valley. The Brisbane Entertainment Centre at Boondall hosts many musical concerts, with some of the largest being held at Lang Park. Musicians from Brisbane include the Bee Gees (raised in Redcliffe and Cribb Island), the Saints (based in Brisbane since 1974, one of the first punk rock bands), the Go-Betweens (after whom Brisbane&#x27;s Go Between Bridge is named, and whose songs and albums, such as &quot;Spring Hill Fair&quot;, reflect the attitudes of 1980s Brisbane), Savage Garden, Powderfinger (who met at Brisbane Grammar School and the University of Queensland), and the Veronicas (born and raised in Albany Creek). The city is featured in music including the Saints&#x27; &quot;Brisbane (Security City)&quot; (1978); the Stranglers&#x27; &quot;Nuclear Device&quot; (1979) about Joh Bjelke-Petersen; Midnight Oil&#x27;s single &quot;Dreamworld&quot; (1987); and Powderfinger&#x27;s album &quot;Vulture Street&quot; (2003).
Prominent writers from Brisbane include David Malouf (whose 1975 novel &quot;Johnno&quot; is set in Brisbane and at Brisbane Grammar School during World War II), Nick Earls (whose 1996 novel &quot;Zigzag Street&quot; is set at Zigzag Street in Red Hill), and Li Cunxin, author of Mao&#x27;s Last Dancer and artistic director of the Queensland Ballet. &quot;Brisbane&quot; is a 2018 novel by Russian writer Eugene Vodolazkin. In the novel, the city serves as a metaphor of the promised land for the protagonist. The State Library of Queensland, the state&#x27;s largest library, is located at the Queensland Cultural Centre.

Since the late 20th century, numerous films have been shot in Brisbane, and the popular children&#x27;s animated television series &quot;Bluey&quot; is produced and set in Brisbane.

Brisbane is home to over 6,000 restaurants and dining establishments, with outdoor dining featuring prominently. The most popular cuisines by number of dining establishments are Japanese, Chinese, Modern Australian, Italian, American, Indian, and Vietnamese. Moreton Bay bugs, less commonly known as flathead lobsters, are an ingredient named for the Brisbane region and which feature commonly in the city&#x27;s cuisine, along with macadamia nuts, also native to the region.

===Annual events===

The Royal Queensland Exhibition (known locally as the Ekka), an agricultural exhibition held each August at the Brisbane Showgrounds in Bowen Hills, is the longest-running major annual event held in Brisbane. A public holiday is held for each local government area across Brisbane to enable widespread public attendance.

The Brisbane Festival is held each September at South Bank Parklands, the CBD and surrounding areas. It includes Riverfire, one of the nation&#x27;s largest annual fireworks displays, which is attended by hundreds of thousands of residents.

The Brisbane International Film Festival (BIFF) is held in July/August each year in a variety of venues around Brisbane. BIFF features new films and retrospectives by domestic and international filmmakers along with seminars and awards.

The Brisbane Portrait Prize is an annual arts event held formerly at the Brisbane Powerhouse and from 2024, at the State Library of Queensland. Sitters for the portrait must have a connection to Brisbane city.

The Buddha Birth Day festival at South Bank parklands attracts over 200,000 visitors each year, and is the largest event of its type in Australia.

There are also many smaller community events such as the Paniyiri Greek Festival (held over two days in May), the Brisbane Medieval Fayre and Tournament (held each June), the Bridge to Brisbane charity fun run, the Anywhere Festival and the Caxton Street Seafood and Wine Festival.

Major events are often held at the Brisbane Convention &amp; Exhibition Centre in South Brisbane.

===Sport===

Brisbane has hosted several major sporting events including the 1982 Commonwealth Games and the 2001 Goodwill Games, as well as events during the 1987 Rugby World Cup, 1992 Cricket World Cup, 2000 Sydney Olympics, 2003 Rugby World Cup, 2008 Rugby League World Cup, 2015 Asian Cup, 2017 Rugby League World Cup, 2018 Commonwealth Games and the 2023 Women&#x27;s World Cup.
It will host the 2032 Summer Olympics and 2032 Summer Paralympics. The city also bid for the 1992 Summer Olympics but lost to Barcelona. It holds the Brisbane International tennis competition every year.

Brisbane is represented by the rugby league teams the Brisbane Broncos and Dolphins, who play in the National Rugby League, and is also home to the Queensland Maroons, who play in the State of Origin series. In rugby union the city hosts the Queensland Reds who play in the Super Rugby competition. Brisbane also hosts a professional Australian rules football team, the Brisbane Lions, who play in the Australian Football League; as well as an A-League soccer team, the Brisbane Roar FC.

Cricket is popular in the Brisbane and the city hosts the Brisbane Heat who play in the Big Bash League and the Queensland Bulls who play in the Sheffield Shield and the Ryobi One Day Cup. Other Brisbane sports teams include a basketball team, the Brisbane Bullets; a baseball team, the Brisbane Bandits; a netball team, the Queensland Firebirds; a field hockey team, the Brisbane Blaze; and water polo teams the Brisbane Barracudas and Queensland Breakers.

The city&#x27;s major stadiums and sporting venues include the Gabba (a 42,000 seat round stadium at Woolloongabba), Lang Park (a 52,500 seat rectangular stadium at Milton also known by its corporate name Suncorp Stadium), Ballymore Stadium, the Queensland Sport and Athletics Centre, the Sleeman Centre (swimming), the State Tennis Centre, the Eagle Farm Racecourse, and the Doomben Racecourse. The city is also home to numerous golf courses, with the largest being the Indooroopilly Golf Club at Indooroopilly, Queensland, the Brookwater Golf and Country Club at Brookwater, Nudgee Golf Club at Nudgee, the Keperra Country Golf Club at Keperra, and the Royal Queensland Golf Club at Eagle Farm.

In addition to its flagship sport franchises, Brisbane and its regions and suburbs have numerous teams in secondary leagues including the Intrust Super Cup, National Rugby Championship, Queensland Premier Rugby, National Premier League Queensland, National Basketball League, ANZ Championship, Australian Baseball League, Hockey One, National Water Polo League, and F-League.

==Tourism and recreation==

Tourism plays a major role in Brisbane&#x27;s economy, being the third-most popular destination for international tourists after Sydney and Melbourne. Popular tourist and recreation areas near inner city Brisbane include the South Bank Parklands (including the Wheel of Brisbane), the City Botanic Gardens, Roma Street Parkland, New Farm Park, the Howard Smith Wharves, Queens Wharf &amp; Casino, the Teneriffe woolstores precinct, Fortitude Valley (including James Street and Chinatown), West End, City Hall (including the Museum of Brisbane), the Parliament of Queensland, the Story Bridge and bridge climb; St John&#x27;s Cathedral, ANZAC Square and the Queensland Cultural Centre (including the Queensland Museum, Queensland Performing Arts Centre, Queensland Art Gallery, the Gallery of Modern Art and the State Library of Queensland), the Kangaroo Point Cliffs and park, and the Queensland Maritime Museum.

Away from the inner city, Brisbane has a number of tourist attractions and destinations such as the, University of Queensland in St Lucia, Sirromet Winery at Mount Cotton, Tangalooma on Moreton Island, Lone Pine Koala Sanctuary in Fig Tree Pocket, Eat Street (food night markets) at Northshore Hamilton, Fort Lytton, and Mount Coot-tha (including the Mount Coot-tha Reserve, Mount Coot-tha Lookout, the Mount Coot-tha Botanic Gardens and the Sir Thomas Brisbane Planetarium) is a popular recreational attraction for hiking and bushwalking.

Brisbane is notable for its Brisbane Riverwalk network, which runs along much of the Brisbane River foreshore throughout the inner-city area, with the longest span running between Newstead and Toowong. Another popular stretch runs beneath the Kangaroo Point Cliffs between South Brisbane and Kangaroo Point. Several spans of the Riverwalk are built out over the Brisbane River. Brisbane also has over of bicycle pathways, mostly surrounding the Brisbane River and city centre. Other popular recreation activities include the Story Bridge adventure climb and rock climbing at the Kangaroo Point Cliffs.

Moreton Bay and its marine park is also a major attraction, and its three primary islands Moreton Island, North Stradbroke Island and Bribie Island, accessible by ferry, contain popular surf beaches and resorts. Tangalooma resort on Moreton Island is popular for its nightly wild dolphin feeding attraction, and for operating Australia&#x27;s longest running whale watching cruises. The Fort Lytton National Park including a colonial defence fort and museum is also a historical bayside attraction. Beachside suburbs such as those on the Redcliffe Peninsula, as well as Shorncliffe, Sandgate, Wynnum, Manly and Wellington Point are also popular attractions for their bayside beaches, piers, and infrastructure for boating, sailing, fishing and kitesurfing.

There are many national parks surrounding the Brisbane metropolitan area which are popular recreational attractions for hiking and bushwalking. The D&#x27;Aguilar National Park runs along the northwest of the metropolitan area in the D&#x27;Aguilar Range, and contains popular bushwalking and hiking peaks at Mount Nebo, Camp Mountain, Mount Pleasant, Mount Glorious, Mount Samson and Mount Mee. The Glass House Mountains National Park is located to the north of the metropolitan area in the Glass House Mountains between it and that of the Sunshine Coast. The Tamborine National Park at Tamborine Mountain is located in the Gold Coast hinterland to the south of the metropolitan area. Moreton, North Stradbroke and Bribie islands are substantially covered by the Moreton Island National Park, Naree Budjong Djara National Park and the Bribie Island National Park respectively. The Boondall Wetlands in the suburb of Boondall are protected mangrove wetlands with floating walking trails.

Immediately to the south and north of Brisbane are the Gold Coast and Sunshine Coast respectively, which are home to several of Australia&#x27;s most popular swimming and surfing beaches, and are popular day and weekend destinations for Brisbanites.

In 2015, a competition by travel guidebook &quot;Rough Guides&quot; saw Brisbane elected as one of the top ten most beautiful cities in the world, citing reasons such as &quot;its winning combination of high-rise modern architecture, lush green spaces and the enormous Brisbane River that snakes its way through the centre before emptying itself into the azure Moreton Bay&quot;.

==Governance==


Unlike other Australian capital cities, a large portion of the greater metropolitan area, or Greater Capital City Statistical Area (GCCSA) of Brisbane is controlled by a single local government area, the City of Brisbane, which is the largest local government area (in terms of population and budget) in Australia, serving more than 40% of the GCCSA&#x27;s population. It was formed by the merger of twenty smaller LGAs in 1925, and covers an area of . The remainder of the metropolitan area falls into the LGAs of Logan City to the south, City of Moreton Bay in the northern suburbs, the City of Ipswich to the south west, Redland City to the south east, and into the Somerset, Scenic Rim and Lockyer Valley regions on the urban periphery. Several of these are also among the nation&#x27;s most populous LGAs.

Each LGA is governed under a similar structure, including a directly elected mayor (including the Lord Mayor of Brisbane), as well as a council composed of councillors representing geographical wards. Brisbane City Hall is the seat of the Brisbane City Council, the governing corporation of the City of Brisbane LGA, and the bulk of its executive offices are located at the Brisbane Square skyscraper.

As the capital city of Queensland, Brisbane is home to the Parliament of Queensland at Parliament House at Gardens Point in the CBD, adjacent to Old Government House. Queensland&#x27;s current Government House is located in Paddington. The bulk of the state government&#x27;s executive offices are located at the 1 William Street skyscraper. The Queensland Supreme and District courts are located at the Queen Elizabeth II Courts of Law in George Street, while the Magistrates court is located at the adjacent Brisbane Magistrates Court building. The various federal courts are located at the Commonwealth Law Courts building on North Quay.

The Australian Army&#x27;s Enoggera Barracks is located in Enoggera, while the historic Victoria Barracks in Petrie Terrace now hosts a military museum. The Royal Australian Navy&#x27;s HMAS Moreton base is located at Bulimba. The Royal Australian Air Force&#x27;s RAAF Base Amberley is located in Amberley in the outer south-west of the metropolitan area.

Brisbane&#x27;s largest prisons and correctional facilities, the Brisbane Correctional Centre, Brisbane Women&#x27;s Correctional Centre, Arthur Gorrie Correctional Centre and Wolston Correctional Centre are located at Wacol, while the city&#x27;s main historical prison, the Boggo Road Gaol, is now a museum.

===Politics===
Greater Brisbane is represented by five local government areas (LGAs): the City of Brisbane, the City of Ipswich, Logan City, the City of Moreton Bay and Redland City. The City of Brisbane is by far the largest and the most populated of the four, and Brisbane City Council has 27 members: 26 councillors elected from single-member wards and one directly elected Lord Mayor.

In the Queensland Legislative Assembly, Brisbane is represented by 41 single-member electoral districts. In the House of Representatives, Brisbane is represented by 17 single-member electoral divisions.

Brisbane has a diverse political climate. On the federal level, the centre-right Liberal National Party (LNP) holds six Brisbane-based seats, the centre-left Labor Party holds four and the left-wing Greens hold three. On the state level, Labor holds the vast majority of Brisbane-based seats, while the LNP holds just five and the Greens hold two. On the local level, LNP hold the Lord Mayoralty of Brisbane (with Adrian Schrinner as Lord Mayor) and 20 of the 26 wards of the City of Brisbane, while Labor holds five and the Greens and an independent hold one each.

==Education==


Three major universities are headquartered in Brisbane, namely:
* The University of Queensland (UQ), which is Queensland&#x27;s oldest university and frequently ranks among the world&#x27;s top 50, with campuses in St Lucia, Herston and Gatton
* Queensland University of Technology (QUT), with campuses in the central business district (Gardens Point) and Kelvin Grove
* Griffith University (GU), with campuses in Nathan, Mount Gravatt, South Bank and Meadowbrook

Two other major universities, which are not headquartered in Brisbane, have multiple campuses in the Brisbane metropolitan area, namely:
* The University of Southern Queensland (USQ), with campuses in Springfield and Ipswich and the central business district
* The University of the Sunshine Coast (USC), with campuses in Petrie and Caboolture

Other universities which have campuses in Brisbane include the Australian Catholic University, Central Queensland University and James Cook University.

Brisbane is a major destination for international students, who constitute a large proportion of enrolments in Brisbane&#x27;s universities and are important to the city&#x27;s economy and real estate market. In 2018, there were over 95,000 international students enrolled in universities and other tertiary education institutions in the central City of Brisbane local government area alone. The majority of Brisbane&#x27;s international students originate from China, India and other countries in the Asia-Pacific region.

There are biotechnology and research facilities at several universities in Brisbane, including the Institute for Molecular Bioscience and CSIRO at the University of Queensland and the Institute of Health and Biomedical Innovation at Queensland University of Technology.

There are three major TAFE colleges in Brisbane; the Brisbane North Institute of TAFE, the Metropolitan South Institute of TAFE, and the Southbank Institute of TAFE. Brisbane is also home to numerous other independent tertiary providers, including the Australian College of Natural Medicine, the Queensland Theological College, the Brisbane College of Theology, SAE Institute, , JMC Academy, and American College, and the Aboriginal Centre for the Performing Arts.

Many of Brisbane&#x27;s pre-school, primary, and secondary schools are under the jurisdiction of Education Queensland, a department of the Queensland Government. Independent (private), Roman Catholic and other religious schools also constitute a large share of Brisbane&#x27;s primary and secondary schooling sectors, with the oldest such independent schools composing the memberships of the Great Public Schools Association of Queensland (GPS) for boys schools and Queensland Girls&#x27; Secondary Schools Sports Association (QGSSSA) for girls schools.

==Infrastructure==

===Transport===
Brisbane has an extensive transport network within the city, as well as connections to regional centres, interstate and to overseas destinations. Like all Australian cities, the most popular mode of transport is private car. Public transport is provided by rail, bus and ferry services and is coordinated by Translink, which provides a unified ticketing and electronic payment system (known as &quot;go card&quot;) for South East Queensland. The region is divided into seven fare zones radiating outwards from the Brisbane central business district (CBD), with Brisbane&#x27;s built-up area falling within zones 1–3. Bus services are operated by public and private operators whereas trains and ferries are operated by public agencies. The CBD is the central hub for all public transport services with services focusing on Roma Street, Central and Fortitude Valley railway stations; King George Square, Queen Street and Roma Street busway stations; and North Quay, Riverside and QUT Gardens Point ferry wharves.

====Roads====

Brisbane is served by a large network of urban and inter-urban motorways. The Pacific Motorway (M3/M1) connects the inner-city with the southern suburbs, Gold Coast and New South Wales. The Ipswich Motorway (M7/M2) connects the inner-city with the outer south-western suburbs. The Western Freeway and Centenary Motorway (M5) connect the city&#x27;s inner-west and outer south-west. The Bruce Highway and Gympie Arterial Road (M1/M3) connect the city&#x27;s northern suburbs with the Sunshine Coast and northern Queensland. The Logan Motorway (M2/M6) connects the southern and south-western suburbs. The Gateway Motorway is a toll road which connects the Gold and Sunshine Coast. The Port of Brisbane Motorway links the Gateway Motorway to the Port of Brisbane. The Inner City Bypass and Riverside Expressway serve as an inner ring freeway system to prevent motorists from travelling through the city&#x27;s congested centre.

Brisbane also has a large network of major road tunnels under the metropolitan area, known as the TransApex network, which include the Clem Jones Tunnel between the inner-north and inner-south, the Airport Link tunnel in the north-east and the Legacy Way tunnel in the south-west. They are the three longest road tunnels in Australia.

====Bridges====

The Brisbane River creates a barrier to road transport routes. In total there are sixteen bridges over the river, mostly concentrated in the inner city area. The road bridges (which usually also include provision for pedestrians and cyclists) by distance from the river mouth are the Sir Leo Hielscher Bridges, the Story Bridge, the Captain Cook Bridge, the Victoria Bridge, the William Jolly Bridge, the Go Between Bridge, the Eleanor Schonell Bridge, the Walter Taylor Bridge the Centenary Bridge, the Colleges Crossing and the Neville Bonner Bridge. There are three railway bridges, namely the Merivale Bridge, the Albert Bridge and the Indooroopilly Railway Bridge. There are also three pedestrian only bridges: the Goodwill Bridge, the Kurilpa Bridge and the Jack Pesch Bridge.

The Houghton Highway (northbound) and Ted Smout Memorial Bridge (southbound) bridges, over Bramble Bay between Brighton, Queensland and the Redcliffe Peninsula, are the longest bridges in the state. The abutment arches of the original crossing The Hornibrook Bridge still remain in place.

====Rail====

The Queensland Rail City network consists of 154 train stations along 13 suburban and interurban rail lines and across the metropolitan area, namely: the Airport, Beenleigh, Caboolture, Cleveland, Doomben, Ferny Grove, Ipswich/Rosewood, Redcliffe Peninsula, Shorncliffe, and Springfield lines, as well as the Exhibition line which is used only for events at the Brisbane Showgrounds, as well as an inner-city bypass for freight and a turnback for long-distance services. The network extends to the Gold and Sunshine coasts, which are fully integrated into the network on the Gold Coast line and Sunshine Coast line. The Airtrain service which runs on the Airport line is jointly operated between Queensland Rail and Airtrain Citylink.

55 million passenger trips were taken across the network in 2018–19.

Construction of the network began in 1865 and has been progressively expanded in the subsequent centuries. Electrification of the network was completed between 1979 and 1988.

The Cross River Rail project includes a twin rail tunnel ( long) which will pass under the Brisbane River to link two new railway stations at Albert Street in the CBD and Wooloongabba; it is under construction and scheduled to be completed in early 2025.

====Bus====

Brisbane&#x27;s busway network is a large dedicated bus rapid transit network. The network comprises the South East Busway, the Northern Busway and the Eastern Busway. The main network hubs are the King George Square, Queen Street, and Roma Street busway stations.

There are also numerous suburban bus routes operating throughout the metropolitan area, including the high-frequency blue and maroon CityGlider routes which run between Newstead and West End (blue), and Ashgrove and Coorparoo (maroon) respectively.

Brisbane Metro is a bus rapid transit (BRT) project which will initially consist of two routes (Metro 1 and 2) running between Eight Mile Plains and Roma Street, and UQ St Lucia (UQ Lakes) and the Royal Brisbane and Women&#x27;s Hospital respectively. It is set to open in 2024.

====Ferry====

RiverCity Ferries operates three ferry services along the Brisbane River, CityCat, Cross River and CityHopper. Brisbane&#x27;s ferries, and particularly its catamaran CityCats, are considered iconic to the city.

The CityCat high-speed catamaran ferry service, popular with tourists and commuters, operates services along the Brisbane River between the University of Queensland and Northshore Hamilton, with wharves at UQ St Lucia, West End, Guyatt Park, Regatta, Milton, North Quay, South Bank, QUT Gardens Point, Riverside, Sydney Street, Mowbray Park, New Farm Park, Hawthorne, Bulimba, Teneriffe, Bretts Wharf, Apollo Road, and Northshore Hamilton.

The Cross River services operate smaller vessels for popular cross-river routes, namely: Bulimba–Teneriffe and Holman Street–Riverside.

The free CityHopper service operates smaller vessels along a route between North Quay and Sydney Street, stopping at South Bank, Maritime Museum, Riverside and Holman Street.

There are tourist passenger ferries that depart the Brisbane River at Pinkenba to Tangalooma on Moreton Island four times daily, and Micat 4WD car ferries that depart from the Port of Brisbane daily. 

====Pedestrian====
An extensive network of pedestrian and cyclist pathways span the banks of the Brisbane River in the inner suburbs to form the Riverwalk network. In some segments, the Riverwalk is built over the river. The longest span of the Riverwalk connects Newstead in the east with Toowong in the west.

====Airports====

Brisbane Airport is the city&#x27;s main airport, the third busiest in Australia after Sydney Airport and Melbourne Airport. It is located north-east of the city centre on Moreton Bay and provides domestic and international passenger services. In 2017, Brisbane Airport handled over 23 million passengers. The airport is the main hub for Virgin Australia as well as a number of minor and freight airlines, and a focus city for Qantas and Jetstar. The airport is served by the Airtrain service which runs on the Airport line, providing a direct service to the CBD.

Archerfield Airport in Brisbane&#x27;s southern suburbs, Redcliffe Airport on the Redcliffe Peninsula and Caboolture Airfield in the far north of the metropolitan area serve Brisbane as general aviation airports.

Brisbane is also served by other major airports in South East Queensland, including Gold Coast Airport at Coolangatta, Sunshine Coast Airport at Marcoola, and Toowoomba Wellcamp Airport at Wellcamp.

====Seaport====

The Port of Brisbane is located on the south side of the mouth of the Brisbane River on Moreton Bay and on the adjacent Fisherman&#x27;s Island, an artificial island created by land reclamation. It is the third busiest port in Australia for value of goods. The port is the endpoint of the main shipping channel across Moreton Bay which extends 90 kilometres north near Mooloolaba. The port has 29 operating berths including nine deep-water container berths and three deep-water bulk berths as well as 17 bulk and general cargo berths.

There are two cruise ship terminals in Brisbane. Portside Wharf on the north side of the river at Hamilton is an international standard facility for cruise liners. Due to the height of the Gateway Bridge which must be passed to reach the terminal, the wharf services small and medium-sized cruise ships. The Brisbane International Cruise Terminal at Luggage Point in Pinkenba on the north side of the river opposite the Port of Brisbane is able to accommodate the largest cruise vessels in the world.

===Healthcare===

Brisbane is covered by Queensland Health&#x27;s Hospital and Health Services (divided in Metro North, Metro South and Children&#x27;s Health Queensland). Within the greater Brisbane area there are eight major public hospitals, four major private hospitals, and numerous smaller public and private facilities. The Royal Brisbane and Women&#x27;s Hospital and the Princess Alexandra Hospital are two of Queensland&#x27;s three major trauma centres. Standing alone, they are the largest hospitals in Australia. The Princess Alexandra Hospital houses the Translational Research Institute (Australia) along with the state&#x27;s renal and liver transplant services. The Royal Brisbane and Women&#x27;s Hospital includes a specialist burns unit. The Prince Charles Hospital is the state&#x27;s major cardiac transplant centre. Other major public hospitals include the Queensland Children&#x27;s Hospital, the Queen Elizabeth II Jubilee Hospital, and the Mater Hospital.

Specialist and general medical practices are located in the CBD, and most suburbs and localities.

Brisbane is also home to the headquarters of the Queensland Ambulance Service central executive, located at the Emergency Services Complex Kedron Park, along with the headquarters of the Queensland Fire and Emergency Services and the Queensland Emergency Operations Centre.

===Other utilities===

Water in Brisbane is managed by two statutory authorities: Seqwater and Urban Utilities. Bulk water storage, treatment and transportation for South East Queensland is managed by Seqwater, with Urban Utilities (previously Brisbane Water) responsible for distribution to the greater Brisbane area. Water for the area is stored in three major dams to the north-west of the metropolitan area: Wivenhoe, Somerset and North Pine.

The provision of electricity in Brisbane is managed by government and private bodies. Generators (some private and some owned by the Queensland government) sell energy into the wholesale market for eastern Australia known as the National Electricity Market. Transmission and distribution of electricity is managed by the Queensland government owned corporations Energex and Powerlink Queensland respectively. Private retailers then purchase electricity from the wholesale market and sell it to consumers, which have the ability to choose between different retailers in a partially de-regulated market.

The supply of gas to users is more heavily privatised, with the private APA Group distributing gas in Brisbane, which is then bought and sold by retailers (mainly Origin Energy and AGL Energy) in a partially de-regulated market.

Metropolitan Brisbane is serviced by all major and most minor telecommunications companies and their networks, including Telstra, Optus, and Vodafone Australia.

Brisbane is home to numerous cemeteries including the following large 19th-century historical cemeteries: the 44-hectare Toowong Cemetery (the largest cemetery in Queensland, which is a popular destination for walkers and joggers), Balmoral Cemetery, Lutwyche Cemetery, Nudgee Cemetery, Nundah Cemetery, and South Brisbane Cemetery.

==Media==

===Print===
The main local print newspapers of Brisbane are &quot;The Courier-Mail&quot; and its sibling &quot;The Sunday Mail&quot;, both owned by News Corporation. Brisbane also receives the national daily, &quot;The Australian&quot; and its sibling the &quot;Weekend Australian.&quot;

The &quot;Brisbane Times&quot; is Brisbane&#x27;s second major local news source, owned by Nine, and is online only. Its sibling papers, &quot;The Sydney Morning Herald&quot; and Melbourne&#x27;s &quot;The Age&quot; are sometimes sold in print in Brisbane in small numbers. The national broadsheet &quot;Australian Financial Review&quot;, also owned by Nine, is sold in print in Brisbane.

There are community and suburban newspapers throughout the metropolitan area, including &quot;Brisbane News&quot; and &quot;City News&quot;, many of which are produced by Quest Community Newspapers.

===Television===

Brisbane is served by all five major television networks in Australia, which broadcast from prominent television transmission towers on the summit of Mount Coot-tha. The three commercial stations, Seven, Nine, and Ten, are accompanied by two government networks, ABC and SBS. Channels provided by these networks include 10 HD (10 broadcast in HD), 10 Bold, 10 Peach, 10 Shake, TVSN, ABC TV HD (ABC TV broadcast in HD), ABC TV Plus/Kids, ABC ME, ABC News, SBS HD (SBS broadcast in HD), SBS World Movies, SBS Viceland HD (SBS Viceland broadcast in HD), SBS Food, NITV, SBS WorldWatch, 7HD (Seven broadcast in HD), 7two, 7mate, 7flix, 7mate HD (7mate broadcast in HD), Racing.com, 9HD (Nine broadcast in HD), 9Gem, 9Go!, 9Life, 9Gem HD (9Gem broadcast in HD) and 9Rush. 31 Digital, a community station, also broadcast in Brisbane until 2017. Optus and Foxtel operates Pay TV services in Brisbane, via cable and satellite means.

===Radio===
Brisbane is serviced by five major public radio stations including major commercial radio stations, including ABC Radio Brisbane (local news, current affairs and talk); ABC Radio National (national news and current affairs); ABC NewsRadio (national news); ABC Classic FM (classical music); Triple J (alternative music); and SBS Radio (multicultural broadcasting).

Brisbane is serviced by numerous major commercial and community radio stations including 4BC (local and national talk, news and current affairs); SENQ (sport); 4BH (classic hits); KIIS 97.3 (pop); B105 (pop); Nova 106.9 (top 40); Triple M (rock); 96five Family FM (Christian/pop); Radio TAB (betting); and 4MBS (classical).

Brisbane is also serviced by community radio stations such as VAC Radio (Mandarin); Radio Brisvaani (Hindi); Radio Arabic (Arabic); 4EB (multiple languages); 98.9 FM (indigenous); 4RPH (vision impaired); Switch 1197 (youth broadcasting); 4ZZZ (community radio); and Vision Christian Radio (Christian). Additional channels are also available via DAB digital radio.

==Sister cities==
Sister cities of Brisbane include:

* Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates
* Auckland, New Zealand
* Chongqing, China
* Daejeon, South Korea
* Hyderabad, India
* Kaohsiung, Taiwan
* Kobe, Japan
* Sapporo, Japan
* Seattle, United States
* Semarang, Indonesia
* Shenzhen, China

==See also==

* Climate of Brisbane
* Culture of Brisbane
* Demographics of Brisbane
* Economy of Brisbane
* Geography of Brisbane
* History of Brisbane
* List of Brisbane suburbs
* List of museums in Brisbane
* List of tallest buildings in Brisbane
* List of people from Brisbane
* Sport in Brisbane
* Transport in Brisbane

== Explanatory notes ==
==References==
==External links==
* City of Brisbane
* Official tourism website of Brisbane
* Official Tourism Board Brisbane Page – Tourism Australia
* Historical footage of Brisbane and Southern Queensland 
* Peter Fischmann photographs of Brisbane and South-East Queensland, State Library of Queensland</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q34932" start="0" end="8" title="Brisbane" label="Brisbane"/>
<link wikidata="Q2994461" start="22" end="29" title="List of Australian capital cities" label="capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q178712" start="54" end="59" title="States and territories of Australia" label="state"/>
<link wikidata="Q36074" start="63" end="73" title="Queensland" label="Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3250404" start="82" end="106" title="list of cities in Australia by population" label="third-most populous city"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="110" end="119" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1894392" start="188" end="209" title="South East Queensland" label="South East Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q702492" start="214" end="233" title="urban agglomeration" label="urban agglomeration"/>
<link wikidata="Q978583" start="341" end="366" title="Brisbane central business district" label="central business district"/>
<link wikidata="Q905910" start="405" end="419" title="Brisbane River" label="Brisbane River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1947589" start="444" end="455" title="Moreton Bay" label="Moreton Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q193110" start="490" end="500" title="floodplain" label="floodplain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438372" start="538" end="552" title="Moreton Island" label="Moreton Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q2961789" start="561" end="567" title="Taylor Range" label="Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5203050" start="572" end="586" title="D&amp;#x27;Aguilar Range" label="D&amp;#x27;Aguilar"/>
<link wikidata="Q46831" start="587" end="601" title="mountain range" label="mountain range"/>
<link wikidata="Q18481123" start="630" end="652" title="local government in Australia" label="local government areas"/>
<link wikidata="Q917682" start="673" end="689" title="City of Brisbane" label="City of Brisbane"/>
<link wikidata="Q217438" start="695" end="702" title="demonym" label="demonym"/>
<link wikidata="Q86750263" start="747" end="775" title="Moreton Bay penal settlement" label="Moreton Bay penal settlement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026184" start="799" end="808" title="Redcliffe, Queensland" label="Redcliffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130" start="853" end="866" title="Sydney" label="Sydney colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q7056435" start="893" end="903" title="North Quay, Brisbane" label="North Quay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1528895" start="978" end="1005" title="Governor of New South Wales" label="Governor of New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q376367" start="1010" end="1025" title="Thomas Brisbane" label="Thomas Brisbane"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="1027" end="1043" title="Lutheranism" label="German Lutherans"/>
<link wikidata="Q8072527" start="1085" end="1094" title="Zion Hill Mission" label="Zion Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q7069789" start="1098" end="1104" title="Nundah" label="Nundah"/>
<link wikidata="Q19878838" start="1180" end="1199" title="Separation of Queensland" label="the state separated"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224" start="1205" end="1220" title="New South Wales" label="New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q44782" start="1280" end="1284" title="port" label="port"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1319" end="1331" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="1337" end="1343" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allied"/>
<link wikidata="Q581261" start="1359" end="1377" title="South West Pacific Area (command)" label="South West Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q28183396" start="1416" end="1428" title="MacArthur Chambers" label="headquarters"/>
<link wikidata="Q127417" start="1441" end="1458" title="Douglas MacArthur" label="Douglas MacArthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q7283988" start="1594" end="1598" title="Queensland Rail City network" label="rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q5002229" start="1600" end="1603" title="Busways in Brisbane" label="bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q97194713" start="1608" end="1613" title="RiverCity Ferries" label="ferry"/>
<link wikidata="Q45523" start="1635" end="1651" title="Brisbane Airport" label="Brisbane Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064859" start="1660" end="1676" title="Port of Brisbane" label="Port of Brisbane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199177" start="1864" end="1884" title="most liveable cities" label="most liveable cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q1116438" start="1933" end="1956" title="1982 Commonwealth Games" label="1982 Commonwealth Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q2714516" start="1958" end="1971" title="World Expo 88" label="World Expo 88"/>
<link wikidata="Q3558601" start="1977" end="1996" title="2001 Goodwill Games" label="2001 Goodwill Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q4630232" start="2002" end="2017" title="2014 G20 summit" label="2014 G20 summit"/>
<link wikidata="Q31039462" start="2037" end="2057" title="2032 Summer Olympics" label="2032 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q107612437" start="2062" end="2073" title="2032 Summer Paralympics" label="Paralympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7829124" start="2117" end="2145" title="Tourism in Brisbane" label="popular tourist destinations"/>
<link wikidata="Q47041" start="2175" end="2185" title="biodiverse" label="biodiverse"/>
<link wikidata="Q652360" start="2190" end="2203" title="Sustainable city" label="greenest city"/>
<link wikidata="Q3560726" start="2205" end="2215" title="South Bank, Queensland" label="South Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492231" start="2224" end="2243" title="South Bank Parklands" label="extensive parklands"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270928" start="2358" end="2384" title="Queensland Cultural Centre" label="Queensland Cultural Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270900" start="2400" end="2422" title="Queensland Art Gallery" label="Queensland Art Gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270943" start="2428" end="2449" title="Gallery of Modern Art, Brisbane" label="Gallery of Modern Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537684" start="2455" end="2472" title="Queensland Museum" label="Queensland Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2050653" start="2478" end="2505" title="State Library of Queensland" label="State Library of Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270976" start="2514" end="2547" title="Queensland Performing Arts Centre" label="Queensland Performing Arts Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q4968552" start="2550" end="2568" title="Brisbane City Hall" label="Brisbane City Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q914048" start="2574" end="2586" title="Story Bridge" label="Story Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5920894" start="2588" end="2608" title="Howard Smith Wharves" label="Howard Smith Wharves"/>
<link wikidata="Q90785057" start="2610" end="2628" title="Queen&amp;#x27;s Wharf, Brisbane" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s Wharf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566208" start="2630" end="2654" title="St John&amp;#x27;s Cathedral (Brisbane)" label="St John&amp;#x27;s cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q19875790" start="2660" end="2682" title="Mount Coot-tha Lookout" label="Mount Coot-tha Lookout"/>
<link wikidata="Q2860282" start="2773" end="2798" title="Queenslander (architecture)" label="Queenslander architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q917681" start="2885" end="2905" title="City Botanic Gardens" label="City Botanic Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q21030032" start="2907" end="2920" title="Victoria Park, Brisbane" label="Victoria Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q7361492" start="2922" end="2942" title="Roma Street Parkland" label="Roma Street Parkland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7007567" start="2944" end="2957" title="New Farm Park" label="New Farm Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q917672" start="2963" end="2993" title="Mount Coot-tha Botanic Gardens" label="Mount Coot-tha Botanic Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q905910" start="2999" end="3017" title="Brisbane Riverwalk" label="Brisbane Riverwalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1947589" start="3019" end="3030" title="Moreton Bay" label="Moreton Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438372" start="3032" end="3046" title="Moreton Island" label="Moreton Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1272834" start="3051" end="3079" title="D&amp;#x27;Aguilar National Park" label="D&amp;#x27;Aguilar National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q905910" start="3123" end="3137" title="Brisbane River" label="Brisbane River"/>
<link wikidata="Q376367" start="3169" end="3188" title="Sir Thomas Brisbane" label="Sir Thomas Brisbane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1528895" start="3194" end="3221" title="governor of New South Wales" label="governor of New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q9314" start="3270" end="3285" title="Scottish Gaelic" label="Scottish Gaelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="3304" end="3315" title="Old English" label="Old English"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969638" start="3539" end="3566" title="Traditional owner" label="traditional indigenous land"/>
<link wikidata="Q7793130" start="3812" end="3822" title="Tom Petrie" label="Tom Petrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q905910" start="4003" end="4017" title="Brisbane River" label="Brisbane River"/>
<link wikidata="Q16979305" start="4240" end="4246" title="Yagara language" label="Yagara"/>
<link wikidata="Q5663711" start="4271" end="4286" title="Harpullia pendula" label="tulipwood trees"/>
<link wikidata="Q5522473" start="4293" end="4306" title="Gardens Point" label="Gardens Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969638" start="4402" end="4420" title="traditional owners" label="traditional owners"/>
<link wikidata="Q2415617" start="4448" end="4454" title="Jagera people" label="Yagara"/>
<link wikidata="Q7856348" start="4456" end="4463" title="Turrbal" label="Turrbal"/>
<link wikidata="Q19877350" start="4468" end="4479" title="Quandamooka" label="Quandamooka"/>
<link wikidata="Q16979305" start="4616" end="4632" title="Turrbal language" label="Turrbal language"/>
<link wikidata="Q12060728" start="4674" end="4696" title="Aboriginal Australians" label="Aboriginal Australians"/>
<link wikidata="Q5775114" start="4841" end="4860" title="History of Australia (1788–1850)" label="European settlement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2415617" start="4948" end="4954" title="Yagara people" label="Yagara"/>
<link wikidata="Q7856348" start="4956" end="4963" title="Turrbal" label="Turrbal"/>
<link wikidata="Q19877350" start="4968" end="4979" title="Quandamooka" label="Quandamooka"/>
<link wikidata="Q6941170" start="5309" end="5322" title="Musgrave Park, Brisbane" label="Musgrave Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058410" start="5427" end="5432" title="prawn" label="prawn"/>
<link wikidata="Q21030032" start="5995" end="6008" title="Victoria Park, Brisbane" label="Victoria Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q8033858" start="6022" end="6035" title="Woolloongabba" label="Woolloongabba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049706" start="6036" end="6050" title="South Brisbane" label="South Brisbane"/>
<link wikidata="Q7324" start="6274" end="6284" title="James Cook" label="James Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q377335" start="6389" end="6423" title="James Douglas, 14th Earl of Morton" label="James Douglas, 14th Earl of Morton"/>
<link wikidata="Q219895" start="6461" end="6477" title="Matthew Flinders" label="Matthew Flinders"/>
<link wikidata="Q8033693" start="6604" end="6615" title="Woody Point, Queensland" label="Woody Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q913919" start="6831" end="6847" title="Convicts in Australia" label="penal settlement"/>
<link wikidata="Q540949" start="6887" end="6897" title="John Oxley" label="John Oxley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5583486" start="6990" end="6996" title="Goodna" label="Goodna"/>
<link wikidata="Q913919" start="7265" end="7283" title="Convicts in Australia" label="convict settlement"/>
<link wikidata="Q86750263" start="7357" end="7385" title="Moreton Bay Penal Settlement" label="Moreton Bay Penal Settlement"/>
<link wikidata="Q19874249" start="7460" end="7472" title="Henry Miller (commandant)" label="Henry Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q376367" start="7840" end="7859" title="Sir Thomas Brisbane" label="Sir Thomas Brisbane"/>
<link wikidata="Q5096795" start="8113" end="8126" title="Chief Justice of New South Wales" label="Chief Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q5480968" start="8127" end="8133" title="Francis Forbes" label="Forbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q325721" start="8287" end="8300" title="Patrick Logan" label="Patrick Logan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048914" start="8669" end="8691" title="cat o&amp;#x27; nine tails" label="cat o&amp;#x27; nine tails"/>
<link wikidata="Q108898357" start="8898" end="8927" title="Corn Field Raids of 1827-1828" label="Corn Field Raids of 1827-1828"/>
<link wikidata="Q3560726" start="8986" end="8996" title="South Bank, Queensland" label="South Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q14935456" start="9001" end="9015" title="Kangaroo Point, Queensland" label="Kangaroo Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q219477" start="9493" end="9505" title="missionaries" label="missionaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q7069789" start="9529" end="9535" title="Nundah" label="Nundah"/>
<link wikidata="Q5112266" start="9656" end="9674" title="Christopher Eipper" label="Christopher Eipper"/>
<link wikidata="Q5040961" start="9688" end="9708" title="Carl Wilhelm Schmidt" label="Carl Wilhelm Schmidt"/>
<link wikidata="Q15407657" start="9714" end="9717" title="Laity" label="lay"/>
<link wikidata="Q338635" start="9996" end="10005" title="Uckermark" label="Uckermark"/>
<link wikidata="Q38872" start="10016" end="10023" title="Prussia" label="Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q370896" start="10085" end="10093" title="Bethania, Queensland" label="Bethania"/>
<link wikidata="Q4879907" start="10095" end="10104" title="Beenleigh" label="Beenleigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166361" start="10113" end="10126" title="Darling Downs" label="Darling Downs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3181392" start="10223" end="10240" title="John Dunmore Lang" label="John Dunmore Lang"/>
<link wikidata="Q19874269" start="10245" end="10270" title="Johann Christian Heussler" label="Johann Christian Heussler"/>
<link wikidata="Q21030032" start="10497" end="10515" title="York&amp;#x27;s Hollow" label="York&amp;#x27;s Hollow"/>
<link wikidata="Q21030032" start="10559" end="10572" title="Victoria Park, Brisbane" label="Victoria Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5744618" start="10574" end="10581" title="Herston, Queensland" label="Herston"/>
<link wikidata="Q59593" start="10665" end="10681" title="Fortitude Valley" label="Fortitude Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7343560" start="10787" end="10799" title="Robert Dixon (explorer)" label="Robert Dixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="10894" end="10908" title="Roman Catholic" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q16970" start="10909" end="10915" title="church (building)" label="church"/>
<link wikidata="Q19876675" start="10928" end="10940" title="Pugin Chapel" label="Pugin Chapel"/>
<link wikidata="Q186363" start="10971" end="10988" title="Gothic Revival architecture" label="gothic revivalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q313288" start="10989" end="11003" title="Augustus Pugin" label="Augustus Pugin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511010" start="11005" end="11019" title="Letters patent" label="Letters patent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1392013" start="11057" end="11078" title="George Ferguson Bowen" label="George Ferguson Bowen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2018368" start="11237" end="11257" title="Old Government House, Brisbane" label="Old Government House"/>
<link wikidata="Q1392013" start="11291" end="11314" title="George Bowen" label="Sir George Bowen&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q5270657" start="11358" end="11388" title="Diamantina Bowen" label="Diamantina, Lady Bowen di Roma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063964" start="11411" end="11425" title="Charles Cochrane-Baillie, 2nd Baron Lamington" label="Lord Lamington"/>
<link wikidata="Q341707" start="11485" end="11495" title="Lamingtons" label="Lamingtons"/>
<link wikidata="Q65067424" start="11509" end="11535" title="War of Southern Queensland" label="War of Southern Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q21030032" start="11704" end="11717" title="Victoria Park, Brisbane" label="Victoria Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q8338604" start="11762" end="11775" title="11th Regiment of Foot" label="11th Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q7856348" start="11880" end="11887" title="Turrbal" label="Turrbal"/>
<link wikidata="Q21536940" start="11940" end="11948" title="Dundalli" label="Dundalli"/>
<link wikidata="Q5532113" start="12054" end="12057" title="General Post Office, Brisbane" label="GPO"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12170" end="12180" title="John Buhôt" label="John Buhôt"/>
<link wikidata="Q17005722" start="12196" end="12218" title="Great Fire of Brisbane" label="Great Fire of Brisbane"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270510" start="12284" end="12297" title="Queen Street, Brisbane" label="Queen Street."/>
<link wikidata="Q19880067" start="12453" end="12467" title="Treasury Hotel" label="Treasury Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152612" start="12548" end="12564" title="Commissariat Store, Brisbane" label="Government store"/>
<link wikidata="Q917681" start="12571" end="12591" title="City Botanic Gardens" label="City Botanic Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q86750263" start="12646" end="12674" title="Moreton Bay penal settlement" label="Moreton Bay penal settlement"/>
<link wikidata="Q7965146" start="12835" end="12846" title="Walter Hill (garden curator)" label="Walter Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q311105" start="12993" end="13002" title="jacaranda" label="jacaranda"/>
<link wikidata="Q238486" start="13007" end="13016" title="Delonix regia" label="poinciana"/>
<link wikidata="Q5082953" start="13020" end="13034" title="Charles Tiffin" label="Charles Tiffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q17054196" start="13052" end="13083" title="Queensland Government Architect" label="Queensland Government Architect"/>
<link wikidata="Q615196" start="13171" end="13181" title="Italianate" label="Italianate"/>
<link wikidata="Q502163" start="13186" end="13208" title="Renaissance Revival architecture" label="Renaissance revivalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2018368" start="13233" end="13249" title="Old Government House, Brisbane" label="Government House"/>
<link wikidata="Q19872851" start="13255" end="13296" title="Department of Primary Industries Building" label="Department of Primary Industries Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q153825" start="13314" end="13335" title="Parliament House, Brisbane" label="Queensland Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q6241522" start="13523" end="13539" title="John James Clark" label="John James Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q17054196" start="13554" end="13585" title="Queensland Government Architect" label="Queensland Government Architect"/>
<link wikidata="Q7836792" start="13859" end="13876" title="Treasury Building, Brisbane" label="Treasury Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q8061270" start="13894" end="13920" title="Yungaba Immigration Centre" label="Yungaba Immigration Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146279" start="13967" end="13980" title="Customs House, Brisbane" label="Customs House"/>
<link wikidata="Q7084585" start="13998" end="14017" title="Old Museum Building, Brisbane" label="Old Museum Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q25182614" start="14038" end="14049" title="Fort Lytton" label="Fort Lytton"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="14170" end="14176" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="14181" end="14187" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q88480" start="14206" end="14217" title="Moat" label="moated fort"/>
<link wikidata="Q19873560" start="14277" end="14295" title="Frog&amp;#x27;s Hollow" label="Frog&amp;#x27;s Hollow"/>
<link wikidata="Q272888" start="14364" end="14382" title="red light district" label="red light district"/>
<link wikidata="Q202509" start="14412" end="14421" title="Chinatown" label="Chinatown"/>
<link wikidata="Q36633" start="14443" end="14455" title="prostitution" label="prostitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7542403" start="14457" end="14465" title="sly grog" label="sly grog"/>
<link wikidata="Q847761" start="14471" end="14480" title="opium den" label="opium den"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144708" start="14527" end="14539" title="anti-Chinese" label="anti-Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q4556703" start="14652" end="14672" title="Black February flood" label="Black February flood"/>
<link wikidata="Q16896519" start="14982" end="15008" title="capsize of the ferry Pearl" label="capsize of the ferry Pearl"/>
<link wikidata="Q143912" start="15194" end="15208" title="triumphal arch" label="triumphal arch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270510" start="15220" end="15232" title="Queen Street, Brisbane" label="Queen Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q269412" start="15256" end="15281" title="Duke of Cornwall and York" label="Duke of Cornwall and York"/>
<link wikidata="Q269412" start="15294" end="15302" title="George V" label="George V"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133673" start="15313" end="15329" title="foundation stone" label="foundation stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566208" start="15333" end="15357" title="St John&amp;#x27;s Cathedral (Brisbane)" label="St John&amp;#x27;s Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="15390" end="15399" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q866012" start="15405" end="15429" title="University of Queensland" label="University of Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2018368" start="15469" end="15489" title="Old Government House, Brisbane" label="Old Government House"/>
<link wikidata="Q747133" start="15562" end="15576" title="Government House, Brisbane" label="Fernberg House"/>
<link wikidata="Q49775" start="15786" end="15800" title="general strike" label="general strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501959" start="15806" end="15834" title="1912 Brisbane General Strike" label="1912 Brisbane General Strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="15984" end="15995" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991162" start="16001" end="16024" title="Commonwealth Government" label="Commonwealth Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q28219841" start="16037" end="16086" title="raid on the Queensland Government Printing Office" label="raid on the Queensland Government Printing Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q524352" start="16127" end="16134" title="Hansard" label="Hansard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3365548" start="16163" end="16184" title="Queensland Parliament" label="Queensland Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="16414" end="16428" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5428" start="16519" end="16526" title="Siberia" label="Siberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q42956" start="16572" end="16578" title="Harbin" label="Harbin"/>
<link wikidata="Q81126" start="16583" end="16592" title="Manchuria" label="Manchuria"/>
<link wikidata="Q74881" start="16631" end="16637" title="Dalian" label="Dalian"/>
<link wikidata="Q190021" start="16641" end="16651" title="Townsville" label="Townsville"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="16716" end="16731" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2631278" start="16783" end="16814" title="First Australian Imperial Force" label="First Australian Imperial Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="16819" end="16829" title="socialists" label="socialists"/>
<link wikidata="Q16931680" start="17024" end="17038" title="Red Flag riots" label="Red Flag riots"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049706" start="17274" end="17288" title="South Brisbane" label="South Brisbane"/>
<link wikidata="Q56477660" start="17451" end="17472" title="Brisbane City Council" label="Brisbane City Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q4968552" start="17539" end="17557" title="Brisbane City Hall" label="Brisbane City Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7504073" start="17605" end="17626" title="Shrine of Remembrance, Brisbane" label="Shrine of Remembrance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2819304" start="17631" end="17643" title="ANZAC Square, Brisbane" label="ANZAC Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q914048" start="17739" end="17751" title="Story Bridge" label="Story Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q269412" start="17873" end="17886" title="King George V" label="King George V"/>
<link wikidata="Q1279655" start="17984" end="18002" title="King George Square" label="King George Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q659396" start="18029" end="18046" title="equestrian statue" label="equestrian statue"/>
<link wikidata="Q34095" start="18067" end="18073" title="Bronze" label="Bronze"/>
<link wikidata="Q140" start="18074" end="18078" title="Lion" label="Lion"/>
<link wikidata="Q11634" start="18079" end="18088" title="sculpture" label="sculpture"/>
<link wikidata="Q153825" start="18152" end="18173" title="Parliament House, Brisbane" label="Queensland Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112627" start="18233" end="18254" title="Queensland Government" label="Queensland Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q8009210" start="18276" end="18296" title="William Forgan Smith" label="William Forgan Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q6721722" start="18561" end="18578" title="MacArthur Central" label="MacArthur Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q581261" start="18613" end="18636" title="South West Pacific Area" label="South West Pacific Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q7672619" start="18922" end="18940" title="T &amp;amp; G Building, Brisbane" label="T &amp;amp; G Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q59816" start="19110" end="19128" title="racial segregation" label="racial segregation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6857543" start="19132" end="19148" title="Military history of African Americans" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q46388" start="19161" end="19172" title="prohibition" label="prohibition"/>
<link wikidata="Q917046" start="19177" end="19185" title="Moonshine" label="sly grog"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="19198" end="19202" title="jazz" label="jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q805353" start="19203" end="19211" title="ballroom" label="ballroom"/>
<link wikidata="Q4870553" start="19446" end="19464" title="Battle of Brisbane" label="Battle of Brisbane"/>
<link wikidata="Q20861567" start="19745" end="19760" title="Wickham Terrace" label="Wickham Terrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q6371973" start="19853" end="19862" title="Karl Kast" label="Karl Kast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1528405" start="19985" end="20004" title="Joh Bjelke-Petersen" label="Joh Bjelke-Petersen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4096563" start="20120" end="20137" title="Trams in Brisbane" label="Trams in Brisbane"/>
<link wikidata="Q7123339" start="20242" end="20268" title="Paddington tram depot fire" label="Paddington tram depot fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414298" start="20376" end="20395" title="social conservatism" label="social conservatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248389" start="20397" end="20414" title="police corruption" label="police corruption"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270922" start="20420" end="20453" title="Queensland street marches" label="the brutal suppression of protest"/>
<link wikidata="Q217405" start="20482" end="20494" title="police state" label="police state"/>
<link wikidata="Q866012" start="20573" end="20597" title="University of Queensland" label="University of Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270922" start="20599" end="20613" title="Queensland street marches" label="street marches"/>
<link wikidata="Q4968631" start="20618" end="20636" title="Brisbane punk rock" label="Brisbane punk rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q498478" start="20666" end="20676" title="Springboks" label="Springboks"/>
<link wikidata="Q11409" start="20819" end="20828" title="apartheid" label="apartheid"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112627" start="21781" end="21802" title="Queensland Government" label="Queensland Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q5455603" start="22631" end="22649" title="Fitzgerald Inquiry" label="Fitzgerald Inquiry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7822344" start="22703" end="22718" title="Tony Fitzgerald" label="Tony Fitzgerald"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270980" start="22733" end="22750" title="Queensland Police" label="Queensland Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248389" start="22751" end="22761" title="Police corruption" label="corruption"/>
<link wikidata="Q13526082" start="22806" end="22813" title="Premier of Queensland" label="Premier"/>
<link wikidata="Q2101758" start="22910" end="22929" title="Police Commissioner" label="Police Commissioner"/>
<link wikidata="Q7704684" start="22930" end="22941" title="Terry Lewis (police officer)" label="Terry Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q102083" start="22961" end="22971" title="knighthood" label="knighthood"/>
<link wikidata="Q946040" start="23012" end="23039" title="National Party of Australia" label="National Party of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7993854" start="23121" end="23147" title="Whiskey Au Go Go fire" label="Whiskey Au Go Go nightclub"/>
<link wikidata="Q59593" start="23155" end="23189" title="Fortitude Valley, Queensland" label="city&amp;#x27;s entertainment district"/>
<link wikidata="Q6627227" start="23252" end="23288" title="List of massacres in Australia" label="Australia&amp;#x27;s worst mass killings"/>
<link wikidata="Q4576018" start="23294" end="23313" title="1974 Brisbane flood" label="1974 Brisbane flood"/>
<link wikidata="Q5170546" start="23382" end="23402" title="Corinda landslip" label="substantial landslip"/>
<link wikidata="Q5170545" start="23406" end="23413" title="Corinda" label="Corinda"/>
<link wikidata="Q19817110" start="23631" end="23645" title="Bellevue Hotel, Brisbane" label="Bellevue Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5135751" start="23658" end="23667" title="Cloudland" label="Cloudland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7338488" start="23709" end="23729" title="Riverside Expressway" label="Riverside Expressway"/>
<link wikidata="Q644535" start="23735" end="23749" title="Gateway Bridge" label="Gateway Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3560726" start="23783" end="23793" title="South Bank, Queensland" label="South Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q7352415" start="23824" end="23836" title="Robin Gibson (architect)" label="Robin Gibson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270928" start="23846" end="23872" title="Queensland Cultural Centre" label="Queensland Cultural Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270900" start="23899" end="23921" title="Queensland Art Gallery" label="Queensland Art Gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270976" start="23945" end="23978" title="Queensland Performing Arts Centre" label="Queensland Performing Arts Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537684" start="23996" end="24013" title="Queensland Museum" label="Queensland Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1116438" start="24044" end="24067" title="1982 Commonwealth Games" label="1982 Commonwealth Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q2714516" start="24072" end="24085" title="World Expo 88" label="World Expo 88"/>
<link wikidata="Q36687" start="24389" end="24397" title="Victoria (Australia)" label="Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2039238" start="24512" end="24523" title="urban decay" label="urban decay"/>
<link wikidata="Q30588133" start="24678" end="24717" title="Urban renewal in Woolstore Precinct, Teneriffe" label="urban renewal of the Woolstore precinct"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492231" start="24748" end="24768" title="South Bank Parklands" label="South Bank Parklands"/>
<link wikidata="Q837833" start="24832" end="24844" title="2010–2011 Queensland floods" label="January 2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q111047748" start="24849" end="24862" title="2022 eastern Australia floods" label="February 2022"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270928" start="25027" end="25053" title="Queensland Cultural Centre" label="Queensland Cultural Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2050653" start="25100" end="25113" title="State Library of Queensland" label="State Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270943" start="25122" end="25143" title="Gallery of Modern Art, Brisbane" label="Gallery of Modern Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q3200544" start="25161" end="25175" title="Kurilpa Bridge" label="Kurilpa Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930978" start="25217" end="25227" title="tensegrity" label="tensegrity"/>
<link wikidata="Q3558601" start="25304" end="25318" title="2001 Goodwill Games" label="Goodwill Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q4630232" start="25403" end="25427" title="2014 G20 Brisbane summit" label="2014 G20 Brisbane summit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5920894" start="25604" end="25624" title="Howard Smith Wharves" label="Howard Smith Wharves"/>
<link wikidata="Q7361492" start="25626" end="25647" title="Roma Street Parklands" label="Roma Street Parklands"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25649" end="25661" title="Star Entertainment Group#Queen&amp;#x27;s Wharf, Brisbane" label="Queens Wharf"/>
<link wikidata="Q905910" start="25667" end="25685" title="Brisbane Riverwalk" label="Brisbane Riverwalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q90785057" start="25691" end="25709" title="Queen&amp;#x27;s Wharf, Brisbane" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s Wharf"/>
<link wikidata="Q5131179" start="25786" end="25796" title="Clem Jones Tunnel" label="Clem Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698918" start="25798" end="25810" title="Airport Link, Brisbane" label="Airport Link"/>
<link wikidata="Q6517269" start="25816" end="25826" title="Legacy Way" label="Legacy Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192191" start="25849" end="25856" title="Airport railway line" label="Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q7581106" start="25858" end="25869" title="Springfield railway line" label="Springfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q7419371" start="25871" end="25890" title="Redcliffe Peninsula railway line" label="Redcliffe Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q5188395" start="25895" end="25911" title="Cross River Rail" label="Cross River Rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q31039462" start="25997" end="26017" title="2032 Summer Olympics" label="2032 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q107612437" start="26022" end="26045" title="2032 Summer Paralympics" label="2032 Summer Paralympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q192583" start="26320" end="26340" title="Great Dividing Range" label="Great Dividing Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q2961789" start="26351" end="26357" title="Taylor Range" label="Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5203050" start="26362" end="26376" title="D&amp;#x27;Aguilar Range" label="D&amp;#x27;Aguilar"/>
<link wikidata="Q140075" start="26509" end="26513" title="Gold Coast, Queensland" label="Gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q828357" start="26518" end="26526" title="Sunshine Coast, Queensland" label="Sunshine"/>
<link wikidata="Q913820" start="26554" end="26564" title="Caboolture" label="Caboolture"/>
<link wikidata="Q4879907" start="26581" end="26590" title="Beenleigh" label="Beenleigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009253" start="26619" end="26626" title="Ipswich, Queensland" label="Ipswich"/>
<link wikidata="Q23384" start="26676" end="26681" title="tide" label="tidal"/>
<link wikidata="Q47053" start="26682" end="26689" title="estuary" label="estuary"/>
<link wikidata="Q105533" start="26750" end="26758" title="brackish" label="brackish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1666353" start="26763" end="26772" title="navigable" label="navigable"/>
<link wikidata="Q7056335" start="27009" end="27019" title="North Pine River" label="North Pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7568224" start="27024" end="27034" title="South Pine River" label="South Pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7195342" start="27094" end="27104" title="Pine River (Queensland)" label="Pine River"/>
<link wikidata="Q4956114" start="27116" end="27127" title="Bramble Bay" label="Bramble Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q5015756" start="27133" end="27149" title="Caboolture River" label="Caboolture River"/>
<link wikidata="Q429933" start="27169" end="27174" title="Logan River" label="Logan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4711118" start="27179" end="27185" title="Albert River (Queensland)" label="Albert"/>
<link wikidata="Q159675" start="27227" end="27238" title="tributaries" label="tributaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q907816" start="27275" end="27287" title="Bremer River (Queensland)" label="Bremer River"/>
<link wikidata="Q4959454" start="27318" end="27333" title="Breakfast Creek" label="Breakfast Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859407" start="27354" end="27366" title="Norman Creek (Queensland)" label="Norman Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q7115686" start="27387" end="27398" title="Oxley Creek" label="Oxley Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q4996410" start="27413" end="27426" title="Bulimba Creek" label="Bulimba Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q6890521" start="27455" end="27468" title="Moggill Creek" label="Moggill Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q193110" start="27509" end="27519" title="floodplain" label="floodplain"/>
<link wikidata="Q185411" start="27670" end="27676" title="swell (ocean)" label="swells"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438372" start="27680" end="27687" title="Moreton Island" label="Moreton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546321" start="27689" end="27699" title="North Stradbroke Island" label="Stradbroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q913347" start="27704" end="27710" title="Bribie Island" label="Bribie"/>
<link wikidata="Q159992" start="27833" end="27841" title="surfing" label="surfable"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438372" start="27897" end="27904" title="Moreton Island" label="Moreton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546321" start="27906" end="27916" title="North Stradbroke Island" label="Stradbroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q913347" start="27921" end="27927" title="Bribie Island" label="Bribie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2316148" start="28085" end="28101" title="St Helena Island National Park" label="St Helena Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q7160229" start="28103" end="28114" title="Peel Island (Queensland)" label="Peel Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q5166822" start="28116" end="28135" title="Coochiemudlo Island" label="Coochiemudlo Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q7381589" start="28137" end="28151" title="Russell Island (Moreton Bay)" label="Russell Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q16893952" start="28153" end="28164" title="Lamb Island, Queensland" label="Lamb Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q6724655" start="28169" end="28183" title="Macleay Island" label="Macleay Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q2961789" start="28313" end="28333" title="Herbert Taylor Range" label="Herbert Taylor Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q5952779" start="28357" end="28371" title="Mount Coot-tha" label="Mount Coot-tha"/>
<link wikidata="Q5379361" start="28392" end="28405" title="Enoggera Hill" label="Enoggera Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1272834" start="28411" end="28439" title="D&amp;#x27;Aguilar National Park" label="D&amp;#x27;Aguilar National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5203050" start="28458" end="28478" title="D&amp;#x27;Aguilar Range" label="D&amp;#x27;Aguilar Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q14935513" start="28569" end="28579" title="Mount Nebo (Queensland)" label="Mount Nebo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5027432" start="28581" end="28594" title="Camp Mountain" label="Camp Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q6922878" start="28596" end="28610" title="Mount Pleasant, Queensland (Moreton Bay)" label="Mount Pleasant"/>
<link wikidata="Q6920927" start="28612" end="28626" title="Mount Glorious" label="Mount Glorious"/>
<link wikidata="Q6923446" start="28628" end="28640" title="Mount Samson" label="Mount Samson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6922131" start="28645" end="28654" title="Mount Mee" label="Mount Mee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2534564" start="28694" end="28707" title="Mount Gravatt" label="Mount Gravatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7824014" start="28709" end="28724" title="Toohey Mountain" label="Toohey Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q6922726" start="28726" end="28738" title="Mount Petrie" label="Mount Petrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q5758555" start="28740" end="28753" title="Highgate Hill, Queensland" label="Highgate Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q6922587" start="28755" end="28768" title="Mount Ommaney" label="Mount Ommaney"/>
<link wikidata="Q5604545" start="28770" end="28787" title="Stephens Mountain" label="Stephens Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7996218" start="28793" end="28804" title="Whites Hill" label="Whites Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q17152910" start="28911" end="28924" title="Brisbane tuff" label="Brisbane tuff"/>
<link wikidata="Q256438" start="28943" end="28953" title="ignimbrite" label="ignimbrite"/>
<link wikidata="Q6362584" start="28994" end="29015" title="Kangaroo Point Cliffs" label="Kangaroo Point Cliffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q14935456" start="29019" end="29033" title="Kangaroo Point, Queensland" label="Kangaroo Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q21904082" start="29065" end="29077" title="Petrie Bight" label="Petrie Bight"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152612" start="29182" end="29200" title="Commissariat Store, Brisbane" label="Commissariat Store"/>
<link wikidata="Q607293" start="29205" end="29228" title="Cathedral of St Stephen, Brisbane" label="Cathedral of St Stephen"/>
<link wikidata="Q37442" start="29247" end="29252" title="kerbs" label="kerbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1894392" start="29368" end="29389" title="South East Queensland" label="South East Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572569" start="29390" end="29410" title="Interim Biogeographic Regionalisation for Australia" label="biogeographic region"/>
<link wikidata="Q45669" start="29436" end="29446" title="Eucalyptus" label="Eucalyptus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439079" start="29495" end="29510" title="Moreton Bay fig" label="Moreton Bay fig"/>
<link wikidata="Q5678886" start="29525" end="29531" title="banyan" label="banyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q911072" start="29543" end="29557" title="buttress roots" label="buttress roots"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653073" start="29604" end="29621" title="Christmas lights" label="decorative lights"/>
<link wikidata="Q838818" start="29656" end="29665" title="Jacaranda mimosifolia" label="jacaranda"/>
<link wikidata="Q18" start="29696" end="29709" title="South America" label="South America"/>
<link wikidata="Q10438724" start="29842" end="29862" title="Moreton Bay chestnut" label="Moreton Bay chestnut"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813408" start="29864" end="29886" title="broad-leaved paperbark" label="broad-leaved paperbark"/>
<link wikidata="Q238486" start="29888" end="29897" title="Delonix regia" label="poinciana"/>
<link wikidata="Q108742313" start="29899" end="29918" title="weeping lilli pilli" label="weeping lilli pilli"/>
<link wikidata="Q2860589" start="29923" end="29936" title="Bangalow palm" label="Bangalow palm"/>
<link wikidata="Q905910" start="29963" end="29977" title="Brisbane River" label="Brisbane River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1947589" start="29982" end="29993" title="Moreton Bay" label="Moreton Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q4825052" start="30006" end="30014" title="Australian mangroves" label="mangrove"/>
<link wikidata="Q208253" start="30029" end="30043" title="Poinsettia" label="red poinsettia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2709100" start="30170" end="30185" title="Acacia fimbriata" label="Brisbane wattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1809222" start="30318" end="30334" title="rainbow lorikeet" label="rainbow lorikeet"/>
<link wikidata="Q340041" start="30337" end="30347" title="kookaburra" label="kookaburra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253755" start="30350" end="30355" title="galah" label="galah"/>
<link wikidata="Q667540" start="30358" end="30379" title="Australian white ibis" label="Australian white ibis"/>
<link wikidata="Q632066" start="30383" end="30405" title="Australian brushturkey" label="Australian brushturkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584645" start="30408" end="30422" title="Torresian crow" label="Torresian crow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140949" start="30425" end="30442" title="Australian magpie" label="Australian magpie"/>
<link wikidata="Q998616" start="30448" end="30459" title="noisy miner" label="noisy miner"/>
<link wikidata="Q3008546" start="30486" end="30505" title="common garden skink" label="common garden skink"/>
<link wikidata="Q24557484" start="30508" end="30531" title="Australian water dragon" label="Australian water dragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q743973" start="30534" end="30549" title="bearded dragons" label="bearded dragons"/>
<link wikidata="Q883145" start="30554" end="30574" title="Blue-tongued skink" label="blue-tongued lizards"/>
<link wikidata="Q928390" start="30576" end="30598" title="Common ringtail possum" label="Common ringtail possum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1241332" start="30604" end="30616" title="flying foxes" label="flying foxes"/>
<link wikidata="Q311337" start="30675" end="30698" title="Euploea core" label="common crow butterflies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377249" start="30700" end="30725" title="Graphium sarpedon" label="blue triangle butterflies"/>
<link wikidata="Q261092" start="30727" end="30752" title="Nephila" label="golden orb-weaver spiders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1302412" start="30757" end="30787" title="Argiope keyserlingi" label="St Andrew&amp;#x27;s Cross spiders"/>
<link wikidata="Q905910" start="30793" end="30807" title="Brisbane River" label="Brisbane River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1918226" start="30847" end="30862" title="Acanthopagrus australis" label="yellowfin bream"/>
<link wikidata="Q3544437" start="30864" end="30872" title="Flathead (fish)" label="flathead"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132480" start="30874" end="30894" title="Australasian snapper" label="Australasian snapper"/>
<link wikidata="Q190469" start="30900" end="30910" title="bull shark" label="bull shark"/>
<link wikidata="Q1947589" start="30927" end="30938" title="Moreton Bay" label="Moreton Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q129544" start="30951" end="30957" title="dugong" label="dugong"/>
<link wikidata="Q132905" start="30960" end="30974" title="humpback whale" label="humpback whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q7369" start="30977" end="30984" title="dolphin" label="dolphin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3544834" start="30987" end="30996" title="Scylla serrata" label="mud crabs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058295" start="30998" end="31011" title="Mictyris longicarpus" label="soldier crabs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3089892" start="31013" end="31028" title="Moreton Bay bug" label="Moreton Bay bug"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501235" start="31043" end="31052" title="shellfish" label="shellfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q36101" start="31066" end="31071" title="koala" label="koala"/>
<link wikidata="Q2275736" start="31080" end="31098" title="graceful tree frog" label="graceful tree frog"/>
<link wikidata="Q864320" start="31281" end="31306" title="humid subtropical climate" label="humid subtropical climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="31308" end="31337" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen climate classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q11568" start="31544" end="31550" title="Darwin, Northern Territory" label="Darwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q502375" start="32122" end="32135" title="Australia Day" label="Australia Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009253" start="32607" end="32614" title="Ipswich, Queensland" label="Ipswich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1293777" start="33502" end="33522" title="apparent temperature" label="apparent temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q4556703" start="34060" end="34073" title="1893 Brisbane flood" label="February 1893"/>
<link wikidata="Q4576018" start="34075" end="34087" title="1974 Brisbane Flood" label="January 1974"/>
<link wikidata="Q16156073" start="34111" end="34124" title="Cyclone Wanda" label="Cyclone Wanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q837833" start="34127" end="34139" title="2010–2011 Queensland floods" label="January 2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q2579076" start="34163" end="34176" title="Cyclone Tasha" label="Cyclone Tasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q111047748" start="34182" end="34195" title="2022 eastern Australia floods" label="February 2022"/>
<link wikidata="Q8092" start="34245" end="34261" title="tropical cyclone" label="tropical cyclone"/>
<link wikidata="Q978583" start="34559" end="34593" title="Brisbane central business district" label="Brisbane central business district"/>
<link wikidata="Q157217" start="34773" end="34789" title="House of Hanover" label="House of Hanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270510" start="34791" end="34803" title="Queen Street, Brisbane" label="Queen Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q9439" start="34824" end="34838" title="Queen Victoria" label="Queen Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006835" start="34871" end="34882" title="main street" label="main street"/>
<link wikidata="Q369730" start="34908" end="34923" title="pedestrian mall" label="pedestrian mall"/>
<link wikidata="Q3414016" start="34929" end="34946" title="Queen Street Mall" label="Queen Street Mall"/>
<link wikidata="Q4681790" start="34984" end="34992" title="Adelaide Street, Brisbane" label="Adelaide"/>
<link wikidata="Q4726113" start="34994" end="34999" title="Alice Street, Brisbane" label="Alice"/>
<link wikidata="Q4766688" start="35001" end="35004" title="Ann Street, Brisbane" label="Ann"/>
<link wikidata="Q5086155" start="35006" end="35015" title="Charlotte Street, Brisbane" label="Charlotte"/>
<link wikidata="Q5363569" start="35017" end="35026" title="Elizabeth Street, Brisbane" label="Elizabeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q14935485" start="35028" end="35036" title="Margaret Street, Brisbane" label="Margaret"/>
<link wikidata="Q6780785" start="35042" end="35046" title="Mary Street, Brisbane" label="Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270510" start="35064" end="35076" title="Queen Street, Brisbane" label="Queen Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q4711281" start="35132" end="35138" title="Albert Street, Brisbane" label="Albert"/>
<link wikidata="Q5345484" start="35140" end="35146" title="Edward Street, Brisbane" label="Edward"/>
<link wikidata="Q5544894" start="35148" end="35154" title="George Street, Brisbane" label="George"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018907" start="35160" end="35167" title="William Street, Brisbane" label="William"/>
<link wikidata="Q174782" start="35186" end="35193" title="Town square" label="squares"/>
<link wikidata="Q1279655" start="35202" end="35220" title="King George Square" label="King George Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q7233698" start="35222" end="35240" title="Post Office Square, Brisbane" label="Post Office Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q2819304" start="35245" end="35257" title="ANZAC Square, Brisbane" label="ANZAC Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q575759" start="35291" end="35303" title="war memorial" label="war memorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q905910" start="35457" end="35471" title="Brisbane River" label="Brisbane River"/>
<link wikidata="Q4966680" start="35499" end="35523" title="Bridges over the Brisbane River" label="bridges across the river"/>
<link wikidata="Q188507" start="36351" end="36360" title="apartment" label="apartment"/>
<link wikidata="Q6692780" start="36385" end="36393" title="mid-rise" label="mid-rise"/>
<link wikidata="Q18142" start="36398" end="36407" title="high rise" label="high rise"/>
<link wikidata="Q1307276" start="36508" end="36523" title="separate houses" label="separate houses"/>
<link wikidata="Q188507" start="36540" end="36549" title="apartment" label="apartment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202402" start="36571" end="36580" title="townhouse" label="townhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q875016" start="36583" end="36596" title="terrace house" label="terrace house"/>
<link wikidata="Q7419624" start="36602" end="36614" title="semidetached" label="semidetached"/>
<link wikidata="Q917681" start="36695" end="36715" title="City Botanic Gardens" label="City Botanic Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q5522473" start="36719" end="36732" title="Gardens Point" label="Gardens Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q7361492" start="36734" end="36754" title="Roma Street Parkland" label="Roma Street Parkland"/>
<link wikidata="Q21030032" start="36771" end="36784" title="Victoria Park, Brisbane" label="Victoria Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q7580566" start="36788" end="36799" title="Spring Hill, Queensland" label="Spring Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q5744618" start="36804" end="36811" title="Herston, Queensland" label="Herston"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492231" start="36813" end="36833" title="South Bank Parklands" label="South Bank Parklands"/>
<link wikidata="Q3560726" start="36853" end="36863" title="South Bank, Queensland" label="South Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q917672" start="36869" end="36893" title="Brisbane Botanic Gardens, Mount Coot-tha" label="Brisbane Botanic Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q5952779" start="36897" end="36911" title="Mount Coot-tha" label="Mount Coot-tha"/>
<link wikidata="Q7007567" start="36930" end="36943" title="New Farm Park" label="New Farm Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q7007563" start="36947" end="36955" title="New Farm" label="New Farm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1272834" start="37036" end="37064" title="D&amp;#x27;Aguilar National Park" label="D&amp;#x27;Aguilar National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q46169" start="37076" end="37089" title="national park" label="national park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5203050" start="37142" end="37162" title="D&amp;#x27;Aguilar Range" label="D&amp;#x27;Aguilar Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q457882" start="37168" end="37203" title="Glass House Mountains National Park" label="Glass House Mountains National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5567050" start="37260" end="37281" title="Glass House Mountains, Queensland" label="Glass House Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q828357" start="37354" end="37368" title="Sunshine Coast, Queensland" label="Sunshine Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638890" start="37374" end="37397" title="Tamborine National Park" label="Tamborine National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q3322131" start="37401" end="37419" title="Tamborine Mountain" label="Tamborine Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q5578673" start="37438" end="37459" title="Gold Coast hinterland" label="Gold Coast hinterland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6911451" start="37549" end="37572" title="Moreton Bay Marine Park" label="Moreton Bay Marine Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1947589" start="37587" end="37598" title="Moreton Bay" label="Moreton Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438372" start="37621" end="37628" title="Moreton Island" label="Moreton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546321" start="37630" end="37646" title="North Stradbroke Island" label="North Stradbroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q913347" start="37651" end="37657" title="Bribie Island" label="Bribie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3385028" start="37686" end="37714" title="Moreton Island National Park" label="Moreton Island National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1965237" start="37716" end="37749" title="Naree Budjong Djara National Park" label="Naree Budjong Djara National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q3384562" start="37758" end="37785" title="Bribie Island National Park" label="Bribie Island National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q4943584" start="37804" end="37821" title="Boondall Wetlands" label="Boondall Wetlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q4943582" start="37839" end="37847" title="Boondall" label="Boondall"/>
<link wikidata="Q4825052" start="37901" end="37910" title="Australian mangroves" label="mangroves"/>
<link wikidata="Q26226431" start="37915" end="37925" title="shorebirds" label="shorebirds"/>
<link wikidata="Q3522086" start="38066" end="38082" title="The Old Windmill, Brisbane" label="The Old Windmill"/>
<link wikidata="Q7998390" start="38086" end="38098" title="Wickham Park, Brisbane" label="Wickham Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152612" start="38193" end="38211" title="Commissariat Store, Brisbane" label="Commissariat Store"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018907" start="38215" end="38229" title="William Street, Brisbane" label="William Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q7836792" start="38481" end="38498" title="Treasury Building, Brisbane" label="Treasury Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q4968552" start="38500" end="38509" title="Brisbane City Hall" label="City Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146279" start="38511" end="38524" title="Customs House, Brisbane" label="Customs House"/>
<link wikidata="Q6484993" start="38526" end="38554" title="Land Administration Building" label="Land Administration Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q28183396" start="38556" end="38574" title="MacArthur Chambers" label="MacArthur Chambers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7750228" start="38576" end="38588" title="The Mansions, Brisbane" label="The Mansions"/>
<link wikidata="Q19876057" start="38590" end="38622" title="National Australia Bank (308 Queen Street)" label="National Australia Bank Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q567789" start="38632" end="38648" title="Federation architecture" label="Federation-style"/>
<link wikidata="Q7165643" start="38649" end="38669" title="People&amp;#x27;s Palace, Brisbane" label="People&amp;#x27;s Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q5345484" start="38700" end="38713" title="Edward Street, Brisbane" label="Edward Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q2860282" start="39287" end="39299" title="Queenslander (architecture)" label="Queenslander"/>
<link wikidata="Q693922" start="39405" end="39413" title="verandah" label="verandah"/>
<link wikidata="Q149617" start="39416" end="39422" title="gable roof" label="gabled"/>
<link wikidata="Q875016" start="39862" end="39875" title="terrace house" label="terrace house"/>
<link wikidata="Q2860282" start="39989" end="40001" title="Queenslander (architecture)" label="Queenslander"/>
<link wikidata="Q179339" start="40199" end="40233" title="List of tallest buildings in Australia" label="Australia&amp;#x27;s tallest buildings"/>
<link wikidata="Q16901856" start="40413" end="40421" title="Torbreck, Brisbane" label="Torbreck"/>
<link wikidata="Q36074" start="40487" end="40497" title="Queensland" label="Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6642192" start="40730" end="40762" title="List of tallest buildings in Brisbane" label="Brisbane&amp;#x27;s tallest building"/>
<link wikidata="Q4631224" start="40776" end="40793" title="Brisbane Skytower" label="Brisbane Skytower"/>
<link wikidata="Q85669" start="40869" end="40882" title="Harry Seidler" label="Harry Seidler"/>
<link wikidata="Q597184" start="40892" end="40906" title="Riparian Plaza" label="Riparian Plaza"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696609" start="40908" end="40932" title="One One One Eagle Street" label="One One One Eagle Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553201" start="40953" end="40965" title="LED lamp" label="LED lighting"/>
<link wikidata="Q911072" start="40981" end="40994" title="buttress root" label="buttress root"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439079" start="41003" end="41018" title="Moreton Bay fig" label="Moreton Bay fig"/>
<link wikidata="Q4596031" start="41024" end="41040" title="1 William Street, Brisbane" label="1 William Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112627" start="41066" end="41087" title="Queensland Government" label="Queensland Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q917682" start="41200" end="41216" title="City of Brisbane" label="City of Brisbane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631867" start="41218" end="41233" title="City of Ipswich" label="City of Ipswich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064985" start="41235" end="41254" title="City of Moreton Bay" label="City of Moreton Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1782552" start="41256" end="41266" title="Logan City" label="Logan City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1492782" start="41271" end="41283" title="Redland City" label="Redland City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065012" start="41305" end="41326" title="Lockyer Valley Region" label="Lockyer Valley Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065054" start="41328" end="41345" title="Scenic Rim Region" label="Scenic Rim Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065025" start="41350" end="41365" title="Somerset Region" label="Somerset Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q123347" start="41414" end="41445" title="Australian Bureau of Statistics" label="Australian Bureau of Statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3250404" start="41540" end="41558" title="List of cities in Australia by population" label="third-largest city"/>
<link wikidata="Q2659367" start="41742" end="41755" title="Immigration to Australia" label="born overseas"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="41837" end="41870" title="Foreign born#Metropolitan and Urban regions with largest foreign born populations" label="26th largest immigrant population"/>
<link wikidata="Q4675511" start="42072" end="42081" title="Sunnybank, Queensland" label="Sunnybank"/>
<link wikidata="Q7640772" start="42083" end="42098" title="Sunnybank Hills" label="Sunnybank Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q7623514" start="42100" end="42108" title="Stretton, Queensland" label="Stretton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7352080" start="42110" end="42119" title="Robertson, Queensland" label="Robertson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5018506" start="42121" end="42130" title="Calamvale" label="Calamvale"/>
<link wikidata="Q6723293" start="42132" end="42141" title="MacGregor, Queensland" label="Macgregor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5348998" start="42143" end="42160" title="Eight Mile Plains" label="Eight Mile Plains"/>
<link wikidata="Q7379721" start="42162" end="42169" title="Runcorn, Queensland" label="Runcorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7353853" start="42175" end="42184" title="Rochedale, Queensland" label="Rochedale"/>
<link wikidata="Q2037849" start="42424" end="42429" title="Inala, Queensland" label="Inala"/>
<link wikidata="Q5224213" start="42431" end="42436" title="Darra, Queensland" label="Darra"/>
<link wikidata="Q5316120" start="42438" end="42444" title="Durack, Queensland" label="Durack"/>
<link wikidata="Q8003520" start="42446" end="42455" title="Willawong" label="Willawong"/>
<link wikidata="Q7330704" start="42457" end="42466" title="Richlands, Queensland" label="Richlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q5297021" start="42472" end="42483" title="Doolandella" label="Doolandella"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088574" start="42536" end="42545" title="Chermside, Queensland" label="Chermside"/>
<link wikidata="Q170355" start="42623" end="42633" title="Indigenous Australians" label="Indigenous"/>
<link wikidata="Q12060728" start="42650" end="42672" title="Aboriginal Australians" label="Aboriginal Australians"/>
<link wikidata="Q379636" start="42677" end="42700" title="Torres Strait Islanders" label="Torres Strait Islanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q9192" start="42829" end="42837" title="Mandarin Chinese" label="Mandarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q9199" start="42846" end="42856" title="Vietnamese language" label="Vietnamese"/>
<link wikidata="Q58635" start="42865" end="42872" title="Punjabi language" label="Punjabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q9186" start="42881" end="42890" title="Cantonese" label="Cantonese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="42903" end="42910" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="43101" end="43113" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1927208" start="43169" end="43180" title="Catholic Church in Australia" label="Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q540766" start="43193" end="43204" title="Anglican Church of Australia" label="Anglicanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q978583" start="43213" end="43232" title="Brisbane&amp;#x27;s CBD" label="Brisbane&amp;#x27;s CBD"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566208" start="43261" end="43275" title="St John&amp;#x27;s Cathedral (Brisbane)" label="St John&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q607293" start="43291" end="43308" title="Cathedral of St Stephen, Brisbane" label="St Stephen&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="43387" end="43392" title="Hinduism" label="Hindu"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="43399" end="43407" title="Buddhist" label="Buddhist"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="43420" end="43426" title="Islam" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q1531726" start="43449" end="43463" title="Globalization and World Cities Research Network" label="Categorised as"/>
<link wikidata="Q208511" start="43466" end="43477" title="global city" label="global city"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070940" start="43497" end="43509" title="Asia-Pacific" label="Asia-Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079848" start="43510" end="43534" title="List of cities by GDP" label="cities with largest GDPs"/>
<link wikidata="Q44497" start="43605" end="43611" title="mining" label="mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q22687" start="43613" end="43620" title="banking" label="banking"/>
<link wikidata="Q43183" start="43622" end="43631" title="insurance" label="insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7590" start="43633" end="43647" title="transportation" label="transportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11661" start="43649" end="43671" title="information technology" label="information technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q684740" start="43673" end="43684" title="real estate" label="real estate"/>
<link wikidata="Q540912" start="43689" end="43693" title="food industry" label="food"/>
<link wikidata="Q2366028" start="43797" end="43810" title="Suncorp Group" label="Suncorp Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q727074" start="43812" end="43828" title="Virgin Australia" label="Virgin Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2783191" start="43830" end="43837" title="Aurizon" label="Aurizon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4856173" start="43839" end="43857" title="Bank of Queensland" label="Bank of Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5459202" start="43859" end="43872" title="Flight Centre" label="Flight Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q5014668" start="43874" end="43877" title="CUA (company)" label="CUA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7641661" start="43879" end="43887" title="Sunsuper" label="Sunsuper"/>
<link wikidata="Q23073802" start="43889" end="43895" title="QSuper" label="QSuper"/>
<link wikidata="Q5291198" start="43897" end="43928" title="Domino&amp;#x27;s Pizza Enterprises" label="Domino&amp;#x27;s Pizza Enterprises"/>
<link wikidata="Q19873097" start="43930" end="43954" title="Star Entertainment Group" label="Star Entertainment Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q5028003" start="43956" end="43959" title="ALS Limited" label="ALS"/>
<link wikidata="Q7692548" start="43961" end="43974" title="TechnologyOne" label="TechnologyOne"/>
<link wikidata="Q55696290" start="43976" end="43982" title="NEXTDC" label="NEXTDC"/>
<link wikidata="Q48803019" start="43984" end="44002" title="Super Retail Group" label="Super Retail Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q7008793" start="44004" end="44017" title="New Hope Coal" label="New Hope Coal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6310889" start="44019" end="44036" title="Jumbo Interactive" label="Jumbo Interactive"/>
<link wikidata="Q21178908" start="44038" end="44054" title="National Storage" label="National Storage"/>
<link wikidata="Q28224589" start="44056" end="44069" title="Collins Foods" label="Collins Foods"/>
<link wikidata="Q4937112" start="44075" end="44091" title="Boeing Australia" label="Boeing Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q44782" start="44286" end="44293" title="seaport" label="seaport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064859" start="44306" end="44322" title="Port of Brisbane" label="Port of Brisbane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1947589" start="44372" end="44383" title="Moreton Bay" label="Moreton Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130322" start="44449" end="44465" title="land reclamation" label="land reclamation"/>
<link wikidata="Q428072" start="44527" end="44544" title="Containerization" label="Container freight"/>
<link wikidata="Q19756" start="44697" end="44705" title="mangrove" label="mangrove"/>
<link wikidata="Q170321" start="44711" end="44719" title="wetlands" label="wetlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q4823605" start="44747" end="44767" title="Australia TradeCoast" label="Australia TradeCoast"/>
<link wikidata="Q45523" start="44788" end="44804" title="Brisbane Airport" label="Brisbane Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q837171" start="44959" end="44977" title="financial services" label="financial services"/>
<link wikidata="Q294217" start="45000" end="45013" title="public sector" label="public sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049706" start="45152" end="45166" title="South Brisbane" label="South Brisbane"/>
<link wikidata="Q59593" start="45168" end="45184" title="Fortitude Valley" label="Fortitude Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7580566" start="45186" end="45197" title="Spring Hill, Queensland" label="Spring Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q3314513" start="45199" end="45205" title="Milton, Queensland" label="Milton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1589649" start="45211" end="45218" title="Toowong" label="Toowong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537445" start="45275" end="45286" title="stevedoring" label="stevedoring"/>
<link wikidata="Q953045" start="45303" end="45315" title="metalworking" label="metalworking"/>
<link wikidata="Q379439" start="45320" end="45322" title="Queensland Rail" label="QR"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064859" start="45420" end="45436" title="Port of Brisbane" label="Port of Brisbane"/>
<link wikidata="Q7829124" start="45487" end="45494" title="Tourism in Brisbane" label="Tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500387" start="45616" end="45639" title="international students" label="international education"/>
<link wikidata="Q917682" start="45763" end="45779" title="City of Brisbane" label="City of Brisbane"/>
<link wikidata="Q3299260" start="45780" end="45801" title="local government area" label="local government area"/>
<link wikidata="Q126793" start="45832" end="45838" title="Retail" label="Retail"/>
<link wikidata="Q978583" start="45846" end="45849" title="Brisbane central business district" label="CBD"/>
<link wikidata="Q3414016" start="45872" end="45889" title="Queen Street Mall" label="Queen Street Mall"/>
<link wikidata="Q31374404" start="45943" end="45959" title="Shopping mall" label="Shopping centres"/>
<link wikidata="Q977046" start="45979" end="46012" title="The Myer Centre, Brisbane" label="Uptown (formerly the Myer Centre)"/>
<link wikidata="Q8026454" start="46018" end="46030" title="Wintergarden, Brisbane" label="Wintergarden"/>
<link wikidata="Q6721722" start="46032" end="46049" title="MacArthur Central" label="MacArthur Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270725" start="46054" end="46065" title="QueensPlaza" label="QueensPlaza"/>
<link wikidata="Q5345484" start="46101" end="46114" title="Edward Street, Brisbane" label="Edward Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q949715" start="46149" end="46162" title="Luxury goods" label="luxury brands"/>
<link wikidata="Q4968533" start="46205" end="46220" title="Brisbane Arcade" label="Brisbane Arcade"/>
<link wikidata="Q19879824" start="46225" end="46243" title="Tattersalls Club" label="Tattersalls Arcade"/>
<link wikidata="Q59593" start="46281" end="46297" title="Fortitude Valley" label="Fortitude Valley"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="46312" end="46324" title="Fortitude Valley, Queensland#Commercial area" label="James Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049706" start="46327" end="46341" title="South Brisbane" label="South Brisbane"/>
<link wikidata="Q2137835" start="46346" end="46354" title="West End, Queensland" label="West End"/>
<link wikidata="Q31374404" start="46452" end="46468" title="Shopping mall" label="shopping centres"/>
<link wikidata="Q6639352" start="46580" end="46610" title="List of largest shopping centres in Australia" label="among Australia&amp;#x27;s largest"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988659" start="46620" end="46639" title="Westfield Chermside" label="Westfield Chermside"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988678" start="46654" end="46674" title="Westfield Mt Gravatt" label="Westfield Mt Gravatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q14935593" start="46689" end="46708" title="Westfield Carindale" label="Westfield Carindale"/>
<link wikidata="Q6026491" start="46722" end="46751" title="Indooroopilly Shopping Centre" label="Indooroopilly Shopping Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988718" start="46765" end="46786" title="Westfield North Lakes" label="Westfield North Lakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6667076" start="46811" end="46826" title="Logan Hyperdome" label="Logan Hyperdome"/>
<link wikidata="Q76470" start="46869" end="46891" title="outlet store" label="factory outlet centres"/>
<link wikidata="Q5280270" start="46900" end="46921" title="Direct Factory Outlet" label="Direct Factory Outlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5280270" start="46926" end="46933" title="DFO Brisbane" label="Skygate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5280270" start="46938" end="46946" title="DFO Jindalee" label="Jindalee"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="46953" end="46969" title="Rocklea#Fruit and vegetable market" label="Brisbane Markets"/>
<link wikidata="Q7355472" start="46973" end="46980" title="Rocklea" label="Rocklea"/>
<link wikidata="Q7997585" start="47009" end="47026" title="wholesale markets" label="wholesale markets"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492231" start="47111" end="47131" title="South Bank Parklands" label="South Bank Parklands"/>
<link wikidata="Q19872742" start="47133" end="47144" title="Davies Park" label="Davies Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q2137835" start="47148" end="47168" title="West End, Queensland" label="West End, Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5644792" start="47200" end="47208" title="Hamilton, Queensland" label="Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270900" start="47306" end="47328" title="Queensland Art Gallery" label="Queensland Art Gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270943" start="47337" end="47369" title="Queensland Gallery of Modern Art" label="Queensland Gallery of Modern Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q130755218" start="47683" end="47706" title="Australian Cinémathèque" label="Australian Cinémathèque"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270976" start="48123" end="48156" title="Queensland Performing Arts Centre" label="Queensland Performing Arts Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q14935355" start="48169" end="48188" title="Brisbane Powerhouse" label="Brisbane Powerhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q7007563" start="48192" end="48200" title="New Farm" label="New Farm"/>
<link wikidata="Q6303766" start="48209" end="48234" title="Judith Wright Arts Centre" label="Judith Wright Arts Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q59593" start="48238" end="48254" title="Fortitude Valley" label="Fortitude Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q4968534" start="48416" end="48437" title="Brisbane Arts Theatre" label="Brisbane Arts Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7178798" start="48441" end="48455" title="Petrie Terrace" label="Petrie Terrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q6461283" start="48461" end="48485" title="La Boite Theatre Company" label="La Boite Theatre Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q19878186" start="48508" end="48526" title="Roundhouse Theatre" label="Roundhouse Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q6386669" start="48530" end="48542" title="Kelvin Grove, Queensland" label="Kelvin Grove"/>
<link wikidata="Q7857558" start="48548" end="48569" title="Twelfth Night Theatre" label="Twelfth Night Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q4950813" start="48573" end="48584" title="Bowen Hills" label="Bowen Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q6824486" start="48590" end="48608" title="Metro Arts Theatre" label="Metro Arts Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q5345484" start="48612" end="48625" title="Edward Street, Brisbane" label="Edward Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q85747240" start="48669" end="48688" title="Bille Brown Theatre" label="Bille Brown Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2137835" start="48692" end="48700" title="West End, Queensland" label="West End"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270976" start="48707" end="48740" title="Queensland Performing Arts Centre" label="Queensland Performing Arts Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q3560726" start="48751" end="48761" title="South Bank, Queensland" label="South Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270905" start="48878" end="48895" title="Queensland Ballet" label="Queensland Ballet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7096621" start="48897" end="48913" title="Opera Queensland" label="Opera Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7271022" start="48919" end="48945" title="Queensland Theatre Company" label="Queensland Theatre Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q2260574" start="48955" end="48984" title="Queensland Symphony Orchestra" label="Queensland Symphony Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q4218672" start="48990" end="49015" title="Queensland Conservatorium" label="Queensland Conservatorium"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492231" start="49155" end="49175" title="South Bank Parklands" label="South Bank Parklands"/>
<link wikidata="Q4968537" start="49397" end="49421" title="Brisbane Birralee Voices" label="Brisbane Birralee Voices"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="49594" end="49648" title="Pig City (music festival)#Pig City (book)" label="&amp;quot;Pig City: From The Saints to Savage Garden&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q59593" start="49740" end="49756" title="Fortitude Valley" label="Fortitude Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q4968564" start="49762" end="49791" title="Brisbane Entertainment Centre" label="Brisbane Entertainment Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q4943582" start="49795" end="49803" title="Boondall" label="Boondall"/>
<link wikidata="Q643328" start="49872" end="49881" title="Lang Park" label="Lang Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q133405" start="49919" end="49927" title="Bee Gees" label="Bee Gees"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026184" start="49939" end="49948" title="Redcliffe, Queensland" label="Redcliffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5184880" start="49953" end="49965" title="Cribb Island" label="Cribb Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635619" start="49968" end="49978" title="The Saints (Australian band)" label="the Saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071" start="50027" end="50036" title="punk rock" label="punk rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891138" start="50045" end="50060" title="the Go-Betweens" label="the Go-Betweens"/>
<link wikidata="Q5574726" start="50089" end="50106" title="Go Between Bridge" label="Go Between Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7580581" start="50159" end="50175" title="Spring Hill Fair" label="Spring Hill Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q493710" start="50225" end="50238" title="Savage Garden" label="Savage Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192255" start="50240" end="50252" title="Powderfinger" label="Powderfinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q4968573" start="50265" end="50288" title="Brisbane Grammar School" label="Brisbane Grammar School"/>
<link wikidata="Q866012" start="50297" end="50321" title="University of Queensland" label="University of Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q721992" start="50328" end="50341" title="the Veronicas" label="the Veronicas"/>
<link wikidata="Q705686" start="50362" end="50374" title="Albany Creek" label="Albany Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q3910242" start="50440" end="50464" title="Prehistoric Sounds" label="Brisbane (Security City)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1532854" start="50479" end="50493" title="the Stranglers" label="the Stranglers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7067935" start="50506" end="50520" title="Nuclear Device (The Wizard of Aus)" label="Nuclear Device"/>
<link wikidata="Q1528405" start="50540" end="50559" title="Joh Bjelke-Petersen" label="Joh Bjelke-Petersen"/>
<link wikidata="Q48284" start="50561" end="50573" title="Midnight Oil" label="Midnight Oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q16249265" start="50594" end="50604" title="Dreamworld (Midnight Oil song)" label="Dreamworld"/>
<link wikidata="Q7943596" start="50655" end="50669" title="Vulture Street (album)" label="Vulture Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q506430" start="50724" end="50736" title="David Malouf" label="David Malouf"/>
<link wikidata="Q4968573" start="50800" end="50823" title="Brisbane Grammar School" label="Brisbane Grammar School"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="50831" end="50843" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7027063" start="50846" end="50856" title="Nick Earls" label="Nick Earls"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634194" start="50928" end="50936" title="Red Hill, Queensland" label="Red Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q712579" start="50943" end="50952" title="Li Cunxin" label="Li Cunxin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6753571" start="50964" end="50986" title="Mao&amp;#x27;s Last Dancer (book)" label="Mao&amp;#x27;s Last Dancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q17094091" start="51090" end="51107" title="Eugene Vodolazkin" label="Eugene Vodolazkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q44536" start="51160" end="51173" title="promised land" label="promised land"/>
<link wikidata="Q2050653" start="51199" end="51226" title="State Library of Queensland" label="State Library of Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270928" start="51280" end="51306" title="Queensland Cultural Centre" label="Queensland Cultural Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q27661406" start="51347" end="51379" title="List of films shot in Brisbane" label="films have been shot in Brisbane"/>
<link wikidata="Q39071378" start="51446" end="51451" title="Bluey (TV series)" label="Bluey"/>
<link wikidata="Q104841332" start="51567" end="51581" title="outdoor dining" label="outdoor dining"/>
<link wikidata="Q234138" start="51670" end="51678" title="Japanese cuisine" label="Japanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q10876842" start="51680" end="51687" title="Chinese cuisine" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q783010" start="51689" end="51706" title="Modern Australian" label="Modern Australian"/>
<link wikidata="Q192786" start="51708" end="51715" title="Italian cuisine" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q40578" start="51717" end="51725" title="American cuisine" label="American"/>
<link wikidata="Q192087" start="51727" end="51733" title="Indian cuisine" label="Indian"/>
<link wikidata="Q826059" start="51739" end="51749" title="Vietnamese cuisine" label="Vietnamese"/>
<link wikidata="Q3089892" start="51751" end="51766" title="Moreton Bay bug" label="Moreton Bay bug"/>
<link wikidata="Q96375723" start="51889" end="51912" title="Cuisine of Brisbane" label="the city&amp;#x27;s cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q310041" start="51925" end="51939" title="macadamia nuts" label="macadamia nuts"/>
<link wikidata="Q5350454" start="52044" end="52048" title="Ekka" label="Ekka"/>
<link wikidata="Q2925642" start="52102" end="52122" title="Brisbane Showgrounds" label="Brisbane Showgrounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q4950813" start="52126" end="52137" title="Bowen Hills" label="Bowen Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q3299260" start="52233" end="52254" title="local government area" label="local government area"/>
<link wikidata="Q4968569" start="52316" end="52333" title="Brisbane Festival" label="Brisbane Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492231" start="52360" end="52380" title="South Bank Parklands" label="South Bank Parklands"/>
<link wikidata="Q978583" start="52386" end="52389" title="Brisbane central business district" label="CBD"/>
<link wikidata="Q905910" start="52425" end="52434" title="Riverfire" label="Riverfire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191276" start="52558" end="52594" title="Brisbane International Film Festival" label="Brisbane International Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q14935355" start="52865" end="52884" title="Brisbane Powerhouse" label="Brisbane Powerhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2050653" start="52907" end="52934" title="State Library of Queensland" label="State Library of Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5348941" start="53007" end="53023" title="Buddha&amp;#x27;s Birthday" label="Buddha Birth Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q17020380" start="53208" end="53231" title="Paniyiri Greek Festival" label="Paniyiri Greek Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q4966471" start="53326" end="53344" title="Bridge to Brisbane" label="Bridge to Brisbane"/>
<link wikidata="Q4778399" start="53366" end="53383" title="Anywhere Festival" label="Anywhere Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q5055276" start="53392" end="53431" title="Caxton Street Seafood and Wine Festival" label="Caxton Street Seafood and Wine Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q4968560" start="53469" end="53512" title="Brisbane Convention &amp;amp; Exhibition Centre" label="Brisbane Convention &amp;amp; Exhibition Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049706" start="53516" end="53530" title="South Brisbane" label="South Brisbane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1116438" start="53610" end="53633" title="1982 Commonwealth Games" label="1982 Commonwealth Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q3558601" start="53642" end="53661" title="2001 Goodwill Games" label="2001 Goodwill Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322777" start="53692" end="53712" title="1987 Rugby World Cup" label="1987 Rugby World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139945" start="53714" end="53736" title="1992 Cricket World Cup" label="1992 Cricket World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q8544" start="53738" end="53758" title="2000 Sydney Olympics" label="2000 Sydney Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q861018" start="53760" end="53780" title="2003 Rugby World Cup" label="2003 Rugby World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q3000722" start="53782" end="53809" title="2008 Rugby League World Cup" label="2008 Rugby League World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q876301" start="53811" end="53825" title="2015 Asian Cup" label="2015 Asian Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q3000720" start="53827" end="53854" title="2017 Rugby League World Cup" label="2017 Rugby League World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q3294383" start="53856" end="53879" title="2018 Commonwealth Games" label="2018 Commonwealth Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q19672232" start="53888" end="53915" title="2023 FIFA Women&amp;#x27;s World Cup" label="2023 Women&amp;#x27;s World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q31039462" start="53934" end="53954" title="2032 Summer Olympics" label="2032 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q107612437" start="53959" end="53982" title="2032 Summer Paralympics" label="2032 Summer Paralympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q8488" start="54010" end="54030" title="1992 Summer Olympics" label="1992 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1492" start="54043" end="54052" title="Barcelona" label="Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q264806" start="54067" end="54089" title="Brisbane International" label="Brisbane International"/>
<link wikidata="Q10962" start="54153" end="54165" title="rugby league" label="rugby league"/>
<link wikidata="Q665111" start="54176" end="54192" title="Brisbane Broncos" label="Brisbane Broncos"/>
<link wikidata="Q109278502" start="54197" end="54205" title="Dolphins (NRL)" label="Dolphins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140630" start="54223" end="54244" title="National Rugby League" label="National Rugby League"/>
<link wikidata="Q3590767" start="54270" end="54288" title="Queensland Maroons" label="Queensland Maroons"/>
<link wikidata="Q3942390" start="54306" end="54328" title="State of Origin series" label="State of Origin series"/>
<link wikidata="Q5849" start="54333" end="54344" title="rugby union" label="rugby union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368281" start="54364" end="54379" title="Queensland Reds" label="Queensland Reds"/>
<link wikidata="Q855988" start="54396" end="54407" title="Super Rugby" label="Super Rugby"/>
<link wikidata="Q50776" start="54456" end="54481" title="Australian rules football" label="Australian rules football"/>
<link wikidata="Q637601" start="54492" end="54506" title="Brisbane Lions" label="Brisbane Lions"/>
<link wikidata="Q50783" start="54524" end="54550" title="Australian Football League" label="Australian Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q219586" start="54566" end="54574" title="A-League" label="A-League"/>
<link wikidata="Q839997" start="54592" end="54608" title="Brisbane Roar FC" label="Brisbane Roar FC"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375" start="54611" end="54618" title="Cricket" label="Cricket"/>
<link wikidata="Q10967436" start="54669" end="54682" title="Brisbane Heat" label="Brisbane Heat"/>
<link wikidata="Q4905035" start="54699" end="54714" title="Big Bash League" label="Big Bash League"/>
<link wikidata="Q3590768" start="54723" end="54739" title="Queensland Bulls" label="Queensland Bulls"/>
<link wikidata="Q2470981" start="54756" end="54772" title="Sheffield Shield" label="Sheffield Shield"/>
<link wikidata="Q2990959" start="54781" end="54798" title="Ryobi One Day Cup" label="Ryobi One Day Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q5372" start="54838" end="54848" title="basketball" label="basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q2925638" start="54859" end="54875" title="Brisbane Bullets" label="Brisbane Bullets"/>
<link wikidata="Q5369" start="54879" end="54887" title="baseball" label="baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q861688" start="54898" end="54914" title="Brisbane Bandits" label="Brisbane Bandits"/>
<link wikidata="Q231200" start="54918" end="54925" title="netball" label="netball"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270942" start="54936" end="54956" title="Queensland Firebirds" label="Queensland Firebirds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455" start="54960" end="54972" title="field hockey" label="field hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q74112091" start="54983" end="54997" title="Brisbane Blaze" label="Brisbane Blaze"/>
<link wikidata="Q6094364" start="55024" end="55043" title="Brisbane Barracudas" label="Brisbane Barracudas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6094364" start="55048" end="55067" title="Queensland Breakers" label="Queensland Breakers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2462392" start="55129" end="55138" title="the Gabba" label="the Gabba"/>
<link wikidata="Q8033858" start="55171" end="55184" title="Woolloongabba" label="Woolloongabba"/>
<link wikidata="Q643328" start="55187" end="55196" title="Lang Park" label="Lang Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q3314513" start="55235" end="55241" title="Milton, Queensland" label="Milton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2881431" start="55293" end="55310" title="Ballymore Stadium" label="Ballymore Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q3414046" start="55316" end="55353" title="Queensland Sport and Athletics Centre" label="Queensland Sport and Athletics Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7539653" start="55359" end="55373" title="Sleeman Centre (Brisbane)" label="Sleeman Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7271019" start="55390" end="55409" title="Tennyson Tennis Centre" label="State Tennis Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q5325079" start="55415" end="55436" title="Eagle Farm Racecourse" label="Eagle Farm Racecourse"/>
<link wikidata="Q5297076" start="55446" end="55464" title="Doomben Racecourse" label="Doomben Racecourse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1279957" start="55568" end="55593" title="Indooroopilly, Queensland" label="Indooroopilly, Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q24190876" start="55599" end="55631" title="Brookwater Golf and Spa Resort" label="Brookwater Golf and Country Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q4975216" start="55635" end="55645" title="Brookwater" label="Brookwater"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="55647" end="55663" title="Nudgee Golf Club" label="Nudgee Golf Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q7068369" start="55667" end="55673" title="Nudgee, Queensland" label="Nudgee"/>
<link wikidata="Q6393112" start="55708" end="55715" title="Keperra" label="Keperra"/>
<link wikidata="Q16917857" start="55725" end="55751" title="Royal Queensland Golf Club" label="Royal Queensland Golf Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090857" start="55755" end="55765" title="Eagle Farm" label="Eagle Farm"/>
<link wikidata="Q3414041" start="55906" end="55923" title="Intrust Super Cup" label="Intrust Super Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q16971004" start="55925" end="55952" title="National Rugby Championship" label="National Rugby Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q3414042" start="55954" end="55978" title="Queensland Premier Rugby" label="Queensland Premier Rugby"/>
<link wikidata="Q6975026" start="55980" end="56014" title="National Premier League Queensland" label="National Premier League Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q427823" start="56016" end="56042" title="National Basketball League (Australia)" label="National Basketball League"/>
<link wikidata="Q3249565" start="56044" end="56060" title="ANZ Championship" label="ANZ Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045441" start="56062" end="56088" title="Australian Baseball League" label="Australian Baseball League"/>
<link wikidata="Q63192887" start="56090" end="56100" title="Hockey One" label="Hockey One"/>
<link wikidata="Q2949179" start="56102" end="56128" title="Australian National Water Polo League" label="National Water Polo League"/>
<link wikidata="Q5423617" start="56134" end="56142" title="F-League" label="F-League"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492231" start="56398" end="56418" title="South Bank Parklands" label="South Bank Parklands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1181159" start="56434" end="56451" title="Wheel of Brisbane" label="Wheel of Brisbane"/>
<link wikidata="Q917681" start="56458" end="56478" title="City Botanic Gardens" label="City Botanic Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q7361492" start="56480" end="56500" title="Roma Street Parkland" label="Roma Street Parkland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7007567" start="56502" end="56515" title="New Farm Park" label="New Farm Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5920894" start="56521" end="56541" title="Howard Smith Wharves" label="Howard Smith Wharves"/>
<link wikidata="Q90785057" start="56543" end="56555" title="Queen&amp;#x27;s Wharf, Brisbane" label="Queens Wharf"/>
<link wikidata="Q2784750" start="56574" end="56603" title="Teneriffe, Queensland" label="Teneriffe woolstores precinct"/>
<link wikidata="Q59593" start="56605" end="56621" title="Fortitude Valley" label="Fortitude Valley"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="56633" end="56645" title="Fortitude Valley, Queensland#Commercial area" label="James Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q5100135" start="56650" end="56659" title="Chinatown, Brisbane" label="Chinatown"/>
<link wikidata="Q2137835" start="56662" end="56670" title="West End, Queensland" label="West End"/>
<link wikidata="Q4968552" start="56672" end="56681" title="Brisbane City Hall" label="City Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1389172" start="56697" end="56715" title="Museum of Brisbane" label="Museum of Brisbane"/>
<link wikidata="Q3365548" start="56722" end="56746" title="Parliament of Queensland" label="Parliament of Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q914048" start="56752" end="56764" title="Story Bridge" label="Story Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566208" start="56783" end="56807" title="St John&amp;#x27;s Cathedral (Brisbane)" label="St John&amp;#x27;s Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q2819304" start="56809" end="56821" title="ANZAC Square, Brisbane" label="ANZAC Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270928" start="56830" end="56856" title="Queensland Cultural Centre" label="Queensland Cultural Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537684" start="56872" end="56889" title="Queensland Museum" label="Queensland Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270976" start="56891" end="56924" title="Queensland Performing Arts Centre" label="Queensland Performing Arts Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270900" start="56926" end="56948" title="Queensland Art Gallery" label="Queensland Art Gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270943" start="56954" end="56975" title="Gallery of Modern Art, Brisbane" label="Gallery of Modern Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q2050653" start="56984" end="57011" title="State Library of Queensland" label="State Library of Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6362584" start="57018" end="57039" title="Kangaroo Point Cliffs" label="Kangaroo Point Cliffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270964" start="57058" end="57084" title="Queensland Maritime Museum" label="Queensland Maritime Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q866012" start="57188" end="57212" title="University of Queensland" label="University of Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6920266" start="57245" end="57257" title="Mount Cotton" label="Mount Cotton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394271" start="57259" end="57269" title="Tangalooma" label="Tangalooma"/>
<link wikidata="Q641873" start="57289" end="57314" title="Lone Pine Koala Sanctuary" label="Lone Pine Koala Sanctuary"/>
<link wikidata="Q25182614" start="57391" end="57402" title="Fort Lytton" label="Fort Lytton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5952779" start="57408" end="57422" title="Mount Coot-tha" label="Mount Coot-tha"/>
<link wikidata="Q19875788" start="57438" end="57460" title="Mount Coot-tha Forest" label="Mount Coot-tha Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q19875790" start="57462" end="57484" title="Mount Coot-tha Lookout" label="Mount Coot-tha Lookout"/>
<link wikidata="Q917672" start="57490" end="57520" title="Mount Coot-tha Botanic Gardens" label="Mount Coot-tha Botanic Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1444706" start="57529" end="57560" title="Sir Thomas Brisbane Planetarium" label="Sir Thomas Brisbane Planetarium"/>
<link wikidata="Q905910" start="57656" end="57674" title="Brisbane Riverwalk" label="Brisbane Riverwalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q905910" start="57713" end="57727" title="Brisbane River" label="Brisbane River"/>
<link wikidata="Q14935526" start="57808" end="57816" title="Newstead, Queensland" label="Newstead"/>
<link wikidata="Q1589649" start="57821" end="57828" title="Toowong" label="Toowong"/>
<link wikidata="Q6362584" start="57871" end="57892" title="Kangaroo Point Cliffs" label="Kangaroo Point Cliffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049706" start="57901" end="57915" title="South Brisbane" label="South Brisbane"/>
<link wikidata="Q14935456" start="57920" end="57934" title="Kangaroo Point, Queensland" label="Kangaroo Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q905910" start="58073" end="58087" title="Brisbane River" label="Brisbane River"/>
<link wikidata="Q914048" start="58153" end="58165" title="Story Bridge" label="Story Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q6362584" start="58207" end="58228" title="Kangaroo Point Cliffs" label="Kangaroo Point Cliffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1947589" start="58231" end="58242" title="Moreton Bay" label="Moreton Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q6911451" start="58251" end="58262" title="Moreton Bay Marine Park" label="marine park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438372" start="58321" end="58335" title="Moreton Island" label="Moreton Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546321" start="58337" end="58360" title="North Stradbroke Island" label="North Stradbroke Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q913347" start="58365" end="58378" title="Bribie Island" label="Bribie Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394271" start="58443" end="58453" title="Tangalooma" label="Tangalooma"/>
<link wikidata="Q48642" start="58618" end="58643" title="Fort Lytton National Park" label="Fort Lytton National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q28401340" start="58656" end="58677" title="Fort Lytton Historic Military Precinct" label="colonial defence fort"/>
<link wikidata="Q7305559" start="58769" end="58788" title="Redcliffe Peninsula" label="Redcliffe Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q7501507" start="58801" end="58812" title="Shorncliffe, Queensland" label="Shorncliffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416230" start="58814" end="58822" title="Sandgate, Queensland" label="Sandgate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2683803" start="58824" end="58830" title="Wynnum" label="Wynnum"/>
<link wikidata="Q6750603" start="58832" end="58837" title="Manly, Queensland" label="Manly"/>
<link wikidata="Q14935592" start="58842" end="58858" title="Wellington Point" label="Wellington Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q219554" start="58975" end="58986" title="kitesurfing" label="kitesurfing"/>
<link wikidata="Q46169" start="59004" end="59017" title="national park" label="national park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1272834" start="59137" end="59165" title="D&amp;#x27;Aguilar National Park" label="D&amp;#x27;Aguilar National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5203050" start="59223" end="59243" title="D&amp;#x27;Aguilar Range" label="D&amp;#x27;Aguilar Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q14935513" start="59298" end="59308" title="Mount Nebo (Queensland)" label="Mount Nebo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5027432" start="59310" end="59323" title="Camp Mountain" label="Camp Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q6922878" start="59325" end="59339" title="Mount Pleasant, Queensland (Moreton Bay)" label="Mount Pleasant"/>
<link wikidata="Q6920927" start="59341" end="59355" title="Mount Glorious" label="Mount Glorious"/>
<link wikidata="Q6923446" start="59357" end="59369" title="Mount Samson" label="Mount Samson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6922131" start="59374" end="59383" title="Mount Mee" label="Mount Mee"/>
<link wikidata="Q457882" start="59389" end="59424" title="Glass House Mountains National Park" label="Glass House Mountains National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5567050" start="59481" end="59502" title="Glass House Mountains, Queensland" label="Glass House Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q828357" start="59530" end="59544" title="Sunshine Coast, Queensland" label="Sunshine Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638890" start="59550" end="59573" title="Tamborine National Park" label="Tamborine National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q3322131" start="59577" end="59595" title="Tamborine Mountain" label="Tamborine Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q5578673" start="59614" end="59635" title="Gold Coast hinterland" label="Gold Coast hinterland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438372" start="59675" end="59682" title="Moreton Island" label="Moreton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546321" start="59684" end="59700" title="North Stradbroke Island" label="North Stradbroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q913347" start="59705" end="59711" title="Bribie Island" label="Bribie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3385028" start="59753" end="59781" title="Moreton Island National Park" label="Moreton Island National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1965237" start="59783" end="59816" title="Naree Budjong Djara National Park" label="Naree Budjong Djara National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q3384562" start="59825" end="59852" title="Bribie Island National Park" label="Bribie Island National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q4943584" start="59871" end="59888" title="Boondall Wetlands" label="Boondall Wetlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q4943582" start="59906" end="59914" title="Boondall" label="Boondall"/>
<link wikidata="Q4825052" start="59929" end="59937" title="Australian mangroves" label="mangrove"/>
<link wikidata="Q140075" start="60033" end="60043" title="Gold Coast, Queensland" label="Gold Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q828357" start="60048" end="60062" title="Sunshine Coast, Queensland" label="Sunshine Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q955545" start="60278" end="60290" title="Rough Guides" label="Rough Guides"/>
<link wikidata="Q18481123" start="60804" end="60825" title="Local government in Australia" label="local government area"/>
<link wikidata="Q917682" start="60831" end="60847" title="City of Brisbane" label="City of Brisbane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1782552" start="61142" end="61152" title="Logan City" label="Logan City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064985" start="61167" end="61186" title="City of Moreton Bay" label="City of Moreton Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631867" start="61216" end="61231" title="City of Ipswich" label="City of Ipswich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1492782" start="61251" end="61263" title="Redland City" label="Redland City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065025" start="61296" end="61304" title="Somerset Region" label="Somerset"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065054" start="61306" end="61316" title="Scenic Rim Region" label="Scenic Rim"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065012" start="61321" end="61335" title="Lockyer Valley Region" label="Lockyer Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q29467089" start="61537" end="61559" title="Lord Mayor of Brisbane" label="Lord Mayor of Brisbane"/>
<link wikidata="Q4968552" start="61640" end="61658" title="Brisbane City Hall" label="Brisbane City Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q56477660" start="61678" end="61699" title="Brisbane City Council" label="Brisbane City Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q4968615" start="61813" end="61828" title="Brisbane Square" label="Brisbane Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q36074" start="61865" end="61875" title="Queensland" label="Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3365548" start="61901" end="61925" title="Parliament of Queensland" label="Parliament of Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q153825" start="61929" end="61945" title="Parliament House, Brisbane" label="Parliament House"/>
<link wikidata="Q5522473" start="61949" end="61962" title="Gardens Point" label="Gardens Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q978583" start="61970" end="61973" title="Brisbane central business district" label="CBD"/>
<link wikidata="Q2018368" start="61987" end="62007" title="Old Government House, Queensland" label="Old Government House"/>
<link wikidata="Q747133" start="62035" end="62051" title="Government House, Brisbane" label="Government House"/>
<link wikidata="Q7123321" start="62066" end="62076" title="Paddington, Queensland" label="Paddington"/>
<link wikidata="Q4596031" start="62155" end="62171" title="1 William Street, Brisbane" label="1 William Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q7644973" start="62199" end="62206" title="Supreme Court of Queensland" label="Supreme"/>
<link wikidata="Q5283303" start="62211" end="62219" title="District Court of Queensland" label="District"/>
<link wikidata="Q16899004" start="62246" end="62278" title="Queen Elizabeth II Courts of Law, Brisbane" label="Queen Elizabeth II Courts of Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q5544894" start="62282" end="62295" title="George Street, Brisbane" label="George Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q6731161" start="62307" end="62318" title="Magistrates Court of Queensland" label="Magistrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q4968590" start="62352" end="62387" title="Brisbane Magistrates Court building" label="Brisbane Magistrates Court building"/>
<link wikidata="Q5153806" start="62435" end="62458" title="Commonwealth Law Courts" label="Commonwealth Law Courts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7056435" start="62471" end="62481" title="North Quay, Brisbane" label="North Quay"/>
<link wikidata="Q781360" start="62488" end="62503" title="Australian Army" label="Australian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q5379358" start="62511" end="62528" title="Enoggera Barracks" label="Enoggera Barracks"/>
<link wikidata="Q5379357" start="62543" end="62551" title="Enoggera, Queensland" label="Enoggera"/>
<link wikidata="Q14935588" start="62572" end="62589" title="Victoria Barracks, Brisbane" label="Victoria Barracks"/>
<link wikidata="Q7178798" start="62593" end="62607" title="Petrie Terrace" label="Petrie Terrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q741691" start="62641" end="62662" title="Royal Australian Navy" label="Royal Australian Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5630483" start="62670" end="62682" title="HMAS Moreton" label="HMAS Moreton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4996408" start="62702" end="62709" title="Bulimba" label="Bulimba"/>
<link wikidata="Q823635" start="62715" end="62741" title="Royal Australian Air Force" label="Royal Australian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q955757" start="62749" end="62767" title="RAAF Base Amberley" label="RAAF Base Amberley"/>
<link wikidata="Q4741354" start="62782" end="62790" title="Amberley, Queensland" label="Amberley"/>
<link wikidata="Q4968561" start="62907" end="62935" title="Brisbane Correctional Centre" label="Brisbane Correctional Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q4968630" start="62937" end="62978" title="Brisbane Women&amp;#x27;s Correctional Centre" label="Brisbane Women&amp;#x27;s Correctional Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q4798859" start="62980" end="63013" title="Arthur Gorrie Correctional Centre" label="Arthur Gorrie Correctional Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q8030444" start="63018" end="63045" title="Wolston Correctional Centre" label="Wolston Correctional Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7958868" start="63061" end="63066" title="Wacol" label="Wacol"/>
<link wikidata="Q4937584" start="63118" end="63133" title="Boggo Road Gaol" label="Boggo Road Gaol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772834" start="63208" end="63230" title="Local government areas of Queensland" label="local government areas"/>
<link wikidata="Q917682" start="63243" end="63259" title="City of Brisbane" label="City of Brisbane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631867" start="63265" end="63280" title="City of Ipswich" label="City of Ipswich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1782552" start="63282" end="63292" title="Logan City" label="Logan City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064985" start="63298" end="63317" title="City of Moreton Bay" label="City of Moreton Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1492782" start="63322" end="63334" title="Redland City" label="Redland City"/>
<link wikidata="Q56477660" start="63419" end="63440" title="Brisbane City Council" label="Brisbane City Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195098" start="63499" end="63504" title="Ward (electoral subdivision)" label="wards"/>
<link wikidata="Q29467089" start="63530" end="63540" title="Lord Mayor of Brisbane" label="Lord Mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6518214" start="63550" end="63581" title="Queensland Legislative Assembly" label="Queensland Legislative Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q5356184" start="63627" end="63646" title="Electoral districts of Queensland" label="electoral districts"/>
<link wikidata="Q783401" start="63655" end="63679" title="Australian House of Representatives" label="House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q2713747" start="63725" end="63744" title="Divisions of the Australian House of Representatives" label="electoral divisions"/>
<link wikidata="Q844072" start="63815" end="63827" title="centre-right" label="centre-right"/>
<link wikidata="Q1822905" start="63828" end="63850" title="Liberal National Party of Queensland" label="Liberal National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q737014" start="63893" end="63904" title="centre-left" label="centre-left"/>
<link wikidata="Q216082" start="63905" end="63916" title="Australian Labor Party" label="Labor Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q164597" start="63936" end="63945" title="left-wing" label="left-wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q781486" start="63946" end="63952" title="Australian Greens" label="Greens"/>
<link wikidata="Q4685343" start="64161" end="64177" title="Adrian Schrinner" label="Adrian Schrinner"/>
<link wikidata="Q866012" start="64400" end="64424" title="University of Queensland" label="University of Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q847843" start="64491" end="64526" title="College and university rankings" label="ranks among the world&amp;#x27;s top 50"/>
<link wikidata="Q1802491" start="64545" end="64553" title="St Lucia, Queensland" label="St Lucia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5744618" start="64555" end="64562" title="Herston, Queensland" label="Herston"/>
<link wikidata="Q985983" start="64567" end="64573" title="Gatton, Queensland" label="Gatton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144750" start="64576" end="64611" title="Queensland University of Technology" label="Queensland University of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q5522473" start="64667" end="64680" title="Gardens Point" label="Gardens Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q6386669" start="64686" end="64698" title="Kelvin Grove, Queensland" label="Kelvin Grove"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202292" start="64701" end="64720" title="Griffith University" label="Griffith University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6968834" start="64744" end="64750" title="Nathan, Queensland" label="Nathan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2534564" start="64752" end="64765" title="Mount Gravatt" label="Mount Gravatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3560726" start="64767" end="64777" title="South Bank, Queensland" label="South Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q6803323" start="64782" end="64793" title="Meadowbrook, Queensland" label="Meadowbrook"/>
<link wikidata="Q978124" start="64938" end="64971" title="University of Southern Queensland" label="University of Southern Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1838932" start="64996" end="65007" title="Springfield, Queensland" label="Springfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009253" start="65012" end="65019" title="Ipswich, Queensland" label="Ipswich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423677" start="65060" end="65092" title="University of the Sunshine Coast" label="University of the Sunshine Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q2832582" start="65117" end="65123" title="Petrie, Queensland" label="Petrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q913820" start="65128" end="65138" title="Caboolture" label="Caboolture"/>
<link wikidata="Q781371" start="65203" end="65233" title="Australian Catholic University" label="Australian Catholic University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053985" start="65235" end="65264" title="Central Queensland University" label="Central Queensland University"/>
<link wikidata="Q536512" start="65269" end="65290" title="James Cook University" label="James Cook University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500387" start="65329" end="65351" title="international students" label="international students"/>
<link wikidata="Q3299260" start="65656" end="65677" title="local government area" label="local government area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070940" start="65795" end="65807" title="Asia-Pacific" label="Asia-Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q866012" start="65916" end="65950" title="Institute for Molecular Bioscience" label="Institute for Molecular Bioscience"/>
<link wikidata="Q1117048" start="65955" end="65960" title="CSIRO" label="CSIRO"/>
<link wikidata="Q866012" start="65968" end="65992" title="University of Queensland" label="University of Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6040363" start="66001" end="66046" title="Institute of Health and Biomedical Innovation" label="Institute of Health and Biomedical Innovation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144750" start="66050" end="66085" title="Queensland University of Technology" label="Queensland University of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q3274997" start="66110" end="66114" title="TAFE" label="TAFE"/>
<link wikidata="Q4968594" start="66141" end="66173" title="Brisbane North Institute of TAFE" label="Brisbane North Institute of TAFE"/>
<link wikidata="Q6825252" start="66179" end="66215" title="Metropolitan South Institute of TAFE" label="Metropolitan South Institute of TAFE"/>
<link wikidata="Q7569196" start="66225" end="66252" title="Southbank Institute" label="Southbank Institute of TAFE"/>
<link wikidata="Q4824006" start="66340" end="66378" title="Australian College of Natural Medicine" label="Australian College of Natural Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7271023" start="66384" end="66414" title="Queensland Theological College" label="Queensland Theological College"/>
<link wikidata="Q4968557" start="66420" end="66448" title="Brisbane College of Theology" label="Brisbane College of Theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q201438" start="66450" end="66463" title="SAE Institute" label="SAE Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q55612493" start="66467" end="66478" title="JMC Academy" label="JMC Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q25184250" start="66484" end="66500" title="American College (Brisbane)" label="American College"/>
<link wikidata="Q16250047" start="66510" end="66551" title="Aboriginal Centre for the Performing Arts" label="Aboriginal Centre for the Performing Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076052" start="66578" end="66588" title="pre-school" label="pre-school"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112627" start="66693" end="66714" title="Queensland Government" label="Queensland Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="66739" end="66753" title="Roman Catholic" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376824" start="66946" end="66992" title="Great Public Schools Association of Queensland" label="Great Public Schools Association of Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270945" start="67020" end="67079" title="Queensland Girls&amp;#x27; Secondary Schools Sports Association" label="Queensland Girls&amp;#x27; Secondary Schools Sports Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q7833625" start="67453" end="67462" title="TransLink (South East Queensland)" label="Translink"/>
<link wikidata="Q5574982" start="67545" end="67552" title="go card" label="go card"/>
<link wikidata="Q1894392" start="67564" end="67585" title="South East Queensland" label="South East Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142227" start="67620" end="67630" title="Fare" label="fare zones"/>
<link wikidata="Q978583" start="67659" end="67693" title="Brisbane central business district" label="Brisbane central business district"/>
<link wikidata="Q7361491" start="67967" end="67978" title="Roma Street railway station" label="Roma Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q5062143" start="67980" end="67987" title="Central railway station, Brisbane" label="Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q5472690" start="67992" end="68008" title="Fortitude Valley railway station" label="Fortitude Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6411622" start="68027" end="68045" title="King George Square busway station" label="King George Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270521" start="68047" end="68059" title="Queen Street bus station" label="Queen Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q7361493" start="68064" end="68075" title="Roma Street busway station" label="Roma Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q7056438" start="68097" end="68107" title="North Quay ferry wharf" label="North Quay"/>
<link wikidata="Q7338644" start="68109" end="68118" title="Riverside ferry wharf" label="Riverside"/>
<link wikidata="Q7265609" start="68123" end="68140" title="QUT Gardens Point ferry wharf" label="QUT Gardens Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750662" start="68250" end="68266" title="Pacific Motorway (Brisbane–Brunswick Heads)" label="Pacific Motorway"/>
<link wikidata="Q140075" start="68326" end="68336" title="Gold Coast, Queensland" label="Gold Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224" start="68341" end="68356" title="New South Wales" label="New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672297" start="68362" end="68378" title="Ipswich Motorway" label="Ipswich Motorway"/>
<link wikidata="Q224499" start="68453" end="68468" title="Western Freeway, Brisbane" label="Western Freeway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053536" start="68473" end="68491" title="Centenary Motorway" label="Centenary Motorway"/>
<link wikidata="Q991666" start="68558" end="68571" title="Bruce Highway" label="Bruce Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5625136" start="68576" end="68596" title="Gympie Arterial Road" label="Gympie Arterial Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q828357" start="68655" end="68669" title="Sunshine Coast, Queensland" label="Sunshine Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1867946" start="68699" end="68713" title="Logan Motorway" label="Logan Motorway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1495794" start="68775" end="68791" title="Gateway Motorway" label="Gateway Motorway"/>
<link wikidata="Q16939396" start="68797" end="68806" title="toll road" label="toll road"/>
<link wikidata="Q828357" start="68835" end="68849" title="Sunshine Coast, Queensland" label="Sunshine Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231090" start="68855" end="68880" title="Port of Brisbane Motorway" label="Port of Brisbane Motorway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064859" start="68915" end="68931" title="Port of Brisbane" label="Port of Brisbane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502248" start="68937" end="68954" title="Inner City Bypass, Brisbane" label="Inner City Bypass"/>
<link wikidata="Q7338488" start="68959" end="68979" title="Riverside Expressway" label="Riverside Expressway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7833601" start="69196" end="69205" title="TransApex" label="TransApex"/>
<link wikidata="Q5131179" start="69233" end="69250" title="Clem Jones Tunnel" label="Clem Jones Tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698918" start="69296" end="69315" title="Airport Link, Brisbane" label="Airport Link tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6517269" start="69342" end="69359" title="Legacy Way" label="Legacy Way tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4966680" start="69533" end="69548" title="Bridges over the Brisbane River" label="sixteen bridges"/>
<link wikidata="Q644535" start="69735" end="69760" title="Sir Leo Hielscher Bridges" label="Sir Leo Hielscher Bridges"/>
<link wikidata="Q914048" start="69766" end="69778" title="Story Bridge" label="Story Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5036600" start="69784" end="69803" title="Captain Cook Bridge, Brisbane" label="Captain Cook Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7926597" start="69809" end="69824" title="Victoria Bridge, Brisbane" label="Victoria Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q8013717" start="69830" end="69850" title="William Jolly Bridge" label="William Jolly Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5574726" start="69856" end="69873" title="Go Between Bridge" label="Go Between Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5354386" start="69879" end="69902" title="Eleanor Schonell Bridge" label="Eleanor Schonell Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565904" start="69908" end="69928" title="Walter Taylor Bridge" label="Walter Taylor Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5059070" start="69933" end="69949" title="Centenary Bridge" label="Centenary Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146922" start="69955" end="69972" title="Colleges Crossing" label="Colleges Crossing"/>
<link wikidata="Q48796815" start="69981" end="70002" title="Neville Bonner Bridge" label="Neville Bonner Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q14628963" start="70048" end="70063" title="Merivale Bridge" label="Merivale Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q4709800" start="70069" end="70082" title="Albert Bridge, Brisbane" label="Albert Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q14629072" start="70091" end="70119" title="Indooroopilly Railway Bridge" label="Indooroopilly Railway Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1279752" start="70171" end="70186" title="Goodwill Bridge" label="Goodwill Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3200544" start="70192" end="70206" title="Kurilpa Bridge" label="Kurilpa Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q6114585" start="70215" end="70232" title="Jack Pesch Bridge" label="Jack Pesch Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5912954" start="70239" end="70255" title="Houghton Highway" label="Houghton Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7693740" start="70273" end="70298" title="Ted Smout Memorial Bridge" label="Ted Smout Memorial Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q4956114" start="70326" end="70337" title="Bramble Bay" label="Bramble Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q4967574" start="70346" end="70366" title="Brighton, Queensland" label="Brighton, Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7305559" start="70375" end="70394" title="Redcliffe Peninsula" label="Redcliffe Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q5904379" start="70483" end="70500" title="Hornibrook Bridge" label="Hornibrook Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7283988" start="70543" end="70571" title="Queensland Rail City network" label="Queensland Rail City network"/>
<link wikidata="Q409266" start="70693" end="70700" title="Airport railway line, Brisbane" label="Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q4879912" start="70702" end="70711" title="Beenleigh railway line" label="Beenleigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q5015753" start="70713" end="70723" title="Caboolture railway line" label="Caboolture"/>
<link wikidata="Q5132306" start="70725" end="70734" title="Cleveland railway line" label="Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5297079" start="70736" end="70743" title="Doomben railway line" label="Doomben"/>
<link wikidata="Q5445172" start="70745" end="70756" title="Ferny Grove railway line" label="Ferny Grove"/>
<link wikidata="Q6065655" start="70758" end="70774" title="Ipswich and Rosewood railway line" label="Ipswich/Rosewood"/>
<link wikidata="Q7419371" start="70776" end="70795" title="Redcliffe Peninsula railway line" label="Redcliffe Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q7501515" start="70797" end="70808" title="Shorncliffe railway line" label="Shorncliffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7581106" start="70814" end="70825" title="Springfield railway line" label="Springfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q5420231" start="70848" end="70863" title="Exhibition railway line" label="Exhibition line"/>
<link wikidata="Q2925642" start="70901" end="70921" title="Brisbane Showgrounds" label="Brisbane Showgrounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q140075" start="71037" end="71041" title="Gold Coast, Queensland" label="Gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q828357" start="71046" end="71054" title="Sunshine Coast, Queensland" label="Sunshine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5578678" start="71114" end="71129" title="Gold Coast line" label="Gold Coast line"/>
<link wikidata="Q16927337" start="71134" end="71153" title="Sunshine Coast railway line" label="Sunshine Coast line"/>
<link wikidata="Q409266" start="71159" end="71167" title="Airport railway line, Brisbane" label="Airtrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q409266" start="71194" end="71206" title="Airport railway line, Brisbane" label="Airport line"/>
<link wikidata="Q379439" start="71235" end="71250" title="Queensland Rail" label="Queensland Rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q28224670" start="71255" end="71272" title="Airtrain Citylink" label="Airtrain Citylink"/>
<link wikidata="Q7283929" start="71452" end="71482" title="Rail electrification in Queensland" label="Electrification of the network"/>
<link wikidata="Q5188395" start="71525" end="71541" title="Cross River Rail" label="Cross River Rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q4711281" start="71663" end="71676" title="Albert Street, Brisbane" label="Albert Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q8033858" start="71692" end="71704" title="Woolloongabba" label="Wooloongabba"/>
<link wikidata="Q5002229" start="71790" end="71820" title="Busways in Brisbane" label="Brisbane&amp;#x27;s busway network"/>
<link wikidata="Q2878855" start="71842" end="71859" title="bus rapid transit" label="bus rapid transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q93786" start="71895" end="71912" title="South East Busway" label="South East Busway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7058185" start="71918" end="71933" title="Northern Busway, Brisbane" label="Northern Busway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5330026" start="71942" end="71956" title="Eastern Busway, Brisbane" label="Eastern Busway"/>
<link wikidata="Q6411622" start="71988" end="72006" title="King George Square busway station" label="King George Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270521" start="72008" end="72020" title="Queen Street bus station" label="Queen Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q7361493" start="72026" end="72037" title="Roma Street busway station" label="Roma Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q5122953" start="72189" end="72199" title="CityGlider" label="CityGlider"/>
<link wikidata="Q14935526" start="72225" end="72233" title="Newstead, Queensland" label="Newstead"/>
<link wikidata="Q2137835" start="72238" end="72246" title="West End, Queensland" label="West End"/>
<link wikidata="Q3624991" start="72259" end="72267" title="Ashgrove, Queensland" label="Ashgrove"/>
<link wikidata="Q5168050" start="72272" end="72281" title="Coorparoo" label="Coorparoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q10329213" start="72306" end="72320" title="Brisbane Metro" label="Brisbane Metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q2878855" start="72326" end="72343" title="bus rapid transit" label="bus rapid transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5348997" start="72433" end="72450" title="Eight Mile Plains busway station" label="Eight Mile Plains"/>
<link wikidata="Q7361493" start="72455" end="72466" title="Roma Street busway station" label="Roma Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q14935586" start="72472" end="72494" title="UQ Lakes busway station" label="UQ St Lucia (UQ Lakes)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7373845" start="72503" end="72543" title="Royal Brisbane and Women&amp;#x27;s Hospital" label="Royal Brisbane and Women&amp;#x27;s Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q97194713" start="72601" end="72618" title="RiverCity Ferries" label="RiverCity Ferries"/>
<link wikidata="Q905910" start="72659" end="72673" title="Brisbane River" label="Brisbane River"/>
<link wikidata="Q97194713" start="72675" end="72682" title="CityCat" label="CityCat"/>
<link wikidata="Q97194713" start="72684" end="72695" title="Cityferry" label="Cross River"/>
<link wikidata="Q97194713" start="72700" end="72710" title="CityHopper" label="CityHopper"/>
<link wikidata="Q190403" start="72758" end="72767" title="catamaran" label="catamaran"/>
<link wikidata="Q190403" start="72837" end="72846" title="catamaran" label="catamaran"/>
<link wikidata="Q905910" start="72927" end="72941" title="Brisbane River" label="Brisbane River"/>
<link wikidata="Q866012" start="72954" end="72978" title="University of Queensland" label="University of Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7059706" start="72983" end="73002" title="Northshore Hamilton ferry wharf" label="Northshore Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7896196" start="73020" end="73031" title="University of Queensland ferry wharf" label="UQ St Lucia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7985110" start="73033" end="73041" title="West End ferry wharf" label="West End"/>
<link wikidata="Q5622807" start="73043" end="73054" title="Guyatt Park ferry wharf" label="Guyatt Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q7307979" start="73056" end="73063" title="Regatta ferry wharf" label="Regatta"/>
<link wikidata="Q6861544" start="73065" end="73071" title="Milton ferry wharf" label="Milton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7056438" start="73073" end="73083" title="North Quay ferry wharf" label="North Quay"/>
<link wikidata="Q7566238" start="73085" end="73095" title="South Bank ferry wharf" label="South Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q7265609" start="73097" end="73114" title="QUT Gardens Point ferry wharf" label="QUT Gardens Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q7338644" start="73116" end="73125" title="Riverside ferry wharf" label="Riverside"/>
<link wikidata="Q7660164" start="73127" end="73140" title="Sydney Street ferry wharf" label="Sydney Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q6927249" start="73142" end="73154" title="Mowbray Park ferry wharf" label="Mowbray Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q14935524" start="73156" end="73169" title="New Farm Park ferry wharf" label="New Farm Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q14935434" start="73171" end="73180" title="Hawthorne ferry wharf" label="Hawthorne"/>
<link wikidata="Q4996413" start="73182" end="73189" title="Bulimba ferry wharf" label="Bulimba"/>
<link wikidata="Q7699716" start="73191" end="73200" title="Teneriffe ferry wharf" label="Teneriffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q14935353" start="73202" end="73214" title="Bretts Wharf" label="Bretts Wharf"/>
<link wikidata="Q4780345" start="73216" end="73227" title="Apollo Road ferry wharf" label="Apollo Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q7059706" start="73233" end="73252" title="Northshore Hamilton ferry wharf" label="Northshore Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4996413" start="73344" end="73351" title="Bulimba ferry wharf" label="Bulimba"/>
<link wikidata="Q7699716" start="73352" end="73361" title="Teneriffe ferry wharf" label="Teneriffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5883263" start="73366" end="73379" title="Holman Street ferry wharf" label="Holman Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q7338644" start="73380" end="73389" title="Riverside ferry wharf" label="Riverside"/>
<link wikidata="Q7056438" start="73467" end="73477" title="North Quay ferry wharf" label="North Quay"/>
<link wikidata="Q7660164" start="73482" end="73495" title="Sydney Street ferry wharf" label="Sydney Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q7566238" start="73509" end="73519" title="South Bank ferry wharf" label="South Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q7337716" start="73521" end="73536" title="Maritime Museum ferry wharf" label="Maritime Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7338644" start="73538" end="73547" title="Riverside ferry wharf" label="Riverside"/>
<link wikidata="Q5883263" start="73552" end="73565" title="Holman Street ferry wharf" label="Holman Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q7196169" start="73638" end="73646" title="Pinkenba" label="Pinkenba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394271" start="73650" end="73660" title="Tangalooma" label="Tangalooma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064859" start="73744" end="73760" title="Port of Brisbane" label="Port of Brisbane"/>
<link wikidata="Q905910" start="73867" end="73881" title="Brisbane River" label="Brisbane River"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="73915" end="73924" title="Brisbane River#Brisbane Riverwalk" label="Riverwalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q14935526" start="74034" end="74042" title="Newstead, Queensland" label="Newstead"/>
<link wikidata="Q1589649" start="74060" end="74067" title="Toowong" label="Toowong"/>
<link wikidata="Q45523" start="74100" end="74116" title="Brisbane Airport" label="Brisbane Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q4436703" start="74154" end="74180" title="List of the busiest airports in Australia" label="third busiest in Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q17581" start="74187" end="74201" title="Sydney Airport" label="Sydney Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q733738" start="74206" end="74223" title="Melbourne Airport" label="Melbourne Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q4811588" start="74430" end="74433" title="airline hub" label="hub"/>
<link wikidata="Q727074" start="74438" end="74454" title="Virgin Australia" label="Virgin Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q32491" start="74527" end="74533" title="Qantas" label="Qantas"/>
<link wikidata="Q767627" start="74538" end="74545" title="Jetstar" label="Jetstar"/>
<link wikidata="Q409266" start="74611" end="74623" title="Airport railway line, Brisbane" label="Airport line"/>
<link wikidata="Q978583" start="74659" end="74662" title="Brisbane central business district" label="CBD"/>
<link wikidata="Q174194" start="74665" end="74684" title="Archerfield Airport" label="Archerfield Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q7305556" start="74722" end="74739" title="Redcliffe Airport (Queensland)" label="Redcliffe Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q7305559" start="74747" end="74766" title="Redcliffe Peninsula" label="Redcliffe Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q5015748" start="74771" end="74790" title="Caboolture Airfield" label="Caboolture Airfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571929" start="74851" end="74867" title="general aviation" label="general aviation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1894392" start="74930" end="74951" title="South East Queensland" label="South East Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1175431" start="74963" end="74981" title="Gold Coast Airport" label="Gold Coast Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q4386146" start="74985" end="74996" title="Coolangatta" label="Coolangatta"/>
<link wikidata="Q903231" start="74998" end="75020" title="Sunshine Coast Airport" label="Sunshine Coast Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1531059" start="75024" end="75032" title="Marcoola" label="Marcoola"/>
<link wikidata="Q16255487" start="75038" end="75064" title="Toowoomba Wellcamp Airport" label="Toowoomba Wellcamp Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q7981187" start="75068" end="75076" title="Wellcamp" label="Wellcamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064859" start="75100" end="75116" title="Port of Brisbane" label="Port of Brisbane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1947589" start="75184" end="75195" title="Moreton Bay" label="Moreton Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q13691" start="75244" end="75261" title="artificial island" label="artificial island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130322" start="75273" end="75289" title="land reclamation" label="land reclamation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530307" start="75465" end="75475" title="Mooloolaba" label="Mooloolaba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153558" start="75546" end="75552" title="Berth (moorings)" label="berths"/>
<link wikidata="Q39804" start="75646" end="75657" title="cruise ship" label="cruise ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q7232413" start="75681" end="75695" title="Portside Wharf" label="Portside Wharf"/>
<link wikidata="Q5644792" start="75730" end="75738" title="Hamilton, Queensland" label="Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q644535" start="75821" end="75835" title="Gateway Bridge" label="Gateway Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q110517461" start="75940" end="75978" title="Brisbane International Cruise Terminal" label="Brisbane International Cruise Terminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7196169" start="75999" end="76007" title="Pinkenba" label="Pinkenba"/>
<link wikidata="Q17006271" start="76175" end="76199" title="Queensland Health" label="Queensland Health&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q7257872" start="76361" end="76376" title="public hospital" label="public hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q4284971" start="76390" end="76406" title="private hospital" label="private hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q7373845" start="76465" end="76505" title="Royal Brisbane and Women&amp;#x27;s Hospital" label="Royal Brisbane and Women&amp;#x27;s Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q7244522" start="76514" end="76541" title="Princess Alexandra Hospital, Brisbane" label="Princess Alexandra Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q7244522" start="76664" end="76691" title="Princess Alexandra Hospital, Brisbane" label="Princess Alexandra Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q18353972" start="76703" end="76747" title="Translational Research Institute (Australia)" label="Translational Research Institute (Australia)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7373845" start="76817" end="76857" title="Royal Brisbane and Women&amp;#x27;s Hospital" label="Royal Brisbane and Women&amp;#x27;s Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q7758249" start="76892" end="76919" title="The Prince Charles Hospital" label="The Prince Charles Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270916" start="77014" end="77049" title="Queensland Children&amp;#x27;s Hospital" label="Queensland Children&amp;#x27;s Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270363" start="77055" end="77090" title="Queen Elizabeth II Jubilee Hospital" label="Queen Elizabeth II Jubilee Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q6786513" start="77100" end="77114" title="Mater Group" label="Mater Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500773" start="77132" end="77157" title="General practitioner" label="general medical practices"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270899" start="77265" end="77293" title="Queensland Ambulance Service" label="Queensland Ambulance Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270940" start="77403" end="77441" title="Queensland Fire and Emergency Services" label="Queensland Fire and Emergency Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q7604698" start="77550" end="77571" title="Statutory authority" label="statutory authorities"/>
<link wikidata="Q7452585" start="77573" end="77581" title="Seqwater" label="Seqwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q7271027" start="77586" end="77601" title="Queensland Urban Utilities" label="Urban Utilities"/>
<link wikidata="Q7452585" start="77692" end="77700" title="Seqwater" label="Seqwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q7271027" start="77707" end="77722" title="Queensland Urban Utilities" label="Urban Utilities"/>
<link wikidata="Q1801107" start="77903" end="77911" title="Wivenhoe Dam" label="Wivenhoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q47004192" start="77913" end="77921" title="Lake Somerset" label="Somerset"/>
<link wikidata="Q7056334" start="77926" end="77936" title="North Pine Dam" label="North Pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6972405" start="78168" end="78195" title="National Electricity Market" label="National Electricity Market"/>
<link wikidata="Q5376841" start="78301" end="78308" title="Energex" label="Energex"/>
<link wikidata="Q7236786" start="78313" end="78333" title="Powerlink Queensland" label="Powerlink Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2356921" start="78348" end="78365" title="Electricity retailing" label="Private retailers"/>
<link wikidata="Q676081" start="78411" end="78417" title="Electricity market" label="market"/>
<link wikidata="Q40858" start="78556" end="78559" title="Natural gas" label="gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q20311412" start="78614" end="78623" title="APA Group (Australia)" label="APA Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q847931" start="78705" end="78718" title="Origin Energy" label="Origin Energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q292374" start="78723" end="78733" title="AGL Energy" label="AGL Energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q721162" start="78893" end="78900" title="Telstra" label="Telstra"/>
<link wikidata="Q865038" start="78902" end="78907" title="Optus" label="Optus"/>
<link wikidata="Q98599338" start="78913" end="78931" title="Vodafone Australia" label="Vodafone Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q39614" start="78963" end="78973" title="cemeteries" label="cemeteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q7824339" start="79055" end="79071" title="Toowong Cemetery" label="Toowong Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q4852382" start="79166" end="79183" title="Balmoral Cemetery, Brisbane" label="Balmoral Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q6706001" start="79185" end="79202" title="Lutwyche Cemetery" label="Lutwyche Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q19605679" start="79204" end="79219" title="Nudgee Cemetery" label="Nudgee Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q7069790" start="79221" end="79236" title="Nundah Cemetery" label="Nundah Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q7566408" start="79242" end="79265" title="South Brisbane Cemetery" label="South Brisbane Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095955" start="79345" end="79361" title="The Courier-Mail" label="The Courier-Mail"/>
<link wikidata="Q7767380" start="79390" end="79405" title="The Sunday Mail (Brisbane)" label="The Sunday Mail"/>
<link wikidata="Q185278" start="79427" end="79443" title="News Corporation" label="News Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478700" start="79494" end="79508" title="The Australian" label="The Australian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3307775" start="79578" end="79592" title="Brisbane Times" label="Brisbane Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q16999054" start="79659" end="79663" title="Nine Entertainment Co." label="Nine"/>
<link wikidata="Q390216" start="79711" end="79736" title="The Sydney Morning Herald" label="The Sydney Morning Herald"/>
<link wikidata="Q631893" start="79770" end="79777" title="The Age" label="The Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q1809545" start="79872" end="79899" title="Australian Financial Review" label="Australian Financial Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q7271452" start="80129" end="80155" title="Quest Community Newspapers" label="Quest Community Newspapers"/>
<link wikidata="Q914711" start="80278" end="80308" title="Transmission tower" label="television transmission towers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5952779" start="80326" end="80340" title="Mount Coot-tha" label="Mount Coot-tha"/>
<link wikidata="Q908659" start="80373" end="80378" title="Seven Network" label="Seven"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432195" start="80380" end="80384" title="Nine Network" label="Nine"/>
<link wikidata="Q767920" start="80390" end="80393" title="Network Ten" label="Ten"/>
<link wikidata="Q781365" start="80439" end="80442" title="Australian Broadcasting Corporation" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075994" start="80447" end="80450" title="Special Broadcasting Service" label="SBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q767920" start="80496" end="80501" title="10 HD" label="10 HD"/>
<link wikidata="Q7092404" start="80524" end="80531" title="10 Bold" label="10 Bold"/>
<link wikidata="Q5359746" start="80533" end="80541" title="10 Peach" label="10 Peach"/>
<link wikidata="Q97453050" start="80543" end="80551" title="10 Shake" label="10 Shake"/>
<link wikidata="Q7672232" start="80553" end="80557" title="TVSN" label="TVSN"/>
<link wikidata="Q3600480" start="80559" end="80568" title="ABC HD (Australian TV channel)" label="ABC TV HD"/>
<link wikidata="Q4650041" start="80595" end="80606" title="ABC TV Plus" label="ABC TV Plus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4650119" start="80607" end="80611" title="ABC Kids (Australia)" label="Kids"/>
<link wikidata="Q4650042" start="80613" end="80619" title="ABC ME" label="ABC ME"/>
<link wikidata="Q4650199" start="80621" end="80629" title="ABC News (TV channel)" label="ABC News"/>
<link wikidata="Q6668212" start="80631" end="80637" title="SBS HD" label="SBS HD"/>
<link wikidata="Q8035972" start="80661" end="80677" title="SBS World Movies" label="SBS World Movies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7389006" start="80679" end="80694" title="SBS Viceland HD" label="SBS Viceland HD"/>
<link wikidata="Q22079626" start="80727" end="80735" title="SBS Food" label="SBS Food"/>
<link wikidata="Q4314912" start="80737" end="80741" title="NITV" label="NITV"/>
<link wikidata="Q112629218" start="80743" end="80757" title="SBS WorldWatch" label="SBS WorldWatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q908659" start="80759" end="80762" title="7HD" label="7HD"/>
<link wikidata="Q4643793" start="80788" end="80792" title="7two" label="7two"/>
<link wikidata="Q4643923" start="80794" end="80799" title="7mate" label="7mate"/>
<link wikidata="Q23019608" start="80801" end="80806" title="7flix" label="7flix"/>
<link wikidata="Q4643923" start="80808" end="80816" title="7mate HD" label="7mate HD"/>
<link wikidata="Q22079629" start="80842" end="80852" title="Racing.com" label="Racing.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432195" start="80854" end="80857" title="9HD" label="9HD"/>
<link wikidata="Q5513159" start="80882" end="80886" title="9Gem" label="9Gem"/>
<link wikidata="Q5574515" start="80888" end="80892" title="9Go!" label="9Go!"/>
<link wikidata="Q22079623" start="80894" end="80899" title="9Life" label="9Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q5513159" start="80901" end="80908" title="9Gem HD" label="9Gem HD"/>
<link wikidata="Q96371190" start="80936" end="80941" title="9Rush" label="9Rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q4634776" start="80943" end="80953" title="31 Digital" label="31 Digital"/>
<link wikidata="Q865038" start="81015" end="81020" title="Optus" label="Optus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1976628" start="81025" end="81031" title="Foxtel" label="Foxtel"/>
<link wikidata="Q184452" start="81074" end="81079" title="Cable television" label="cable"/>
<link wikidata="Q209588" start="81084" end="81093" title="Satellite television" label="satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q4641741" start="81224" end="81242" title="ABC Radio Brisbane" label="ABC Radio Brisbane"/>
<link wikidata="Q7280922" start="81283" end="81301" title="ABC Radio National" label="ABC Radio National"/>
<link wikidata="Q4650194" start="81339" end="81352" title="ABC NewsRadio" label="ABC NewsRadio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2818999" start="81370" end="81384" title="ABC Classic FM" label="ABC Classic FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522899" start="81404" end="81412" title="Triple J" label="Triple J"/>
<link wikidata="Q3671633" start="81438" end="81447" title="SBS Radio" label="SBS Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q4638920" start="81625" end="81629" title="4KQ" label="SENQ"/>
<link wikidata="Q4638865" start="81639" end="81642" title="4BH" label="4BH"/>
<link wikidata="Q4646128" start="81659" end="81668" title="KIIS 97.3" label="KIIS 97.3"/>
<link wikidata="Q4834348" start="81676" end="81680" title="B105 FM" label="B105"/>
<link wikidata="Q14935536" start="81688" end="81698" title="Nova 106.9" label="Nova 106.9"/>
<link wikidata="Q4638933" start="81709" end="81717" title="Triple M Brisbane" label="Triple M"/>
<link wikidata="Q4646092" start="81726" end="81742" title="96five Family FM" label="96five Family FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q7281069" start="81760" end="81769" title="Radio TAB" label="Radio TAB"/>
<link wikidata="Q4638928" start="81785" end="81789" title="4MBS" label="4MBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q727694" start="81877" end="81885" title="Standard Chinese" label="Mandarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568" start="81905" end="81910" title="Hindi" label="Hindi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4633152" start="81913" end="81925" title="2ME Radio Arabic" label="Radio Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="81927" end="81933" title="Arabic" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4638895" start="81936" end="81939" title="4EB" label="4EB"/>
<link wikidata="Q4646199" start="81962" end="81969" title="98.9 FM (Brisbane)" label="98.9 FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q170355" start="81971" end="81981" title="Indigenous Australians" label="indigenous"/>
<link wikidata="Q4638973" start="81984" end="81988" title="4RPH" label="4RPH"/>
<link wikidata="Q14935567" start="82008" end="82019" title="Switch 1197" label="Switch 1197"/>
<link wikidata="Q4639006" start="82042" end="82046" title="4ZZZ" label="4ZZZ"/>
<link wikidata="Q7936171" start="82070" end="82092" title="Vision Christian Radio" label="Vision Christian Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="82094" end="82103" title="Christianity" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1257510" start="82149" end="82152" title="Digital audio broadcasting" label="DAB"/>
<link wikidata="Q1257510" start="82153" end="82166" title="digital radio" label="digital radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519" start="82225" end="82234" title="Abu Dhabi" label="Abu Dhabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q37100" start="82259" end="82267" title="Auckland" label="Auckland"/>
<link wikidata="Q11725" start="82283" end="82292" title="Chongqing" label="Chongqing"/>
<link wikidata="Q20921" start="82302" end="82309" title="Daejeon" label="Daejeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361" start="82325" end="82334" title="Hyderabad" label="Hyderabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q181557" start="82344" end="82353" title="Kaohsiung" label="Kaohsiung"/>
<link wikidata="Q48320" start="82364" end="82368" title="Kobe" label="Kobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q37951" start="82378" end="82385" title="Sapporo" label="Sapporo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5083" start="82395" end="82402" title="Seattle" label="Seattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q11025" start="82420" end="82428" title="Semarang" label="Semarang"/>
<link wikidata="Q15174" start="82442" end="82450" title="Shenzhen" label="Shenzhen"/>
<link wikidata="Q56276420" start="82475" end="82494" title="Climate of Brisbane" label="Climate of Brisbane"/>
<link wikidata="Q4801510" start="82497" end="82516" title="Culture of Brisbane" label="Culture of Brisbane"/>
<link wikidata="Q19872824" start="82519" end="82543" title="Demographics of Brisbane" label="Demographics of Brisbane"/>
<link wikidata="Q85758527" start="82546" end="82565" title="Economy of Brisbane" label="Economy of Brisbane"/>
<link wikidata="Q85850660" start="82568" end="82589" title="Geography of Brisbane" label="Geography of Brisbane"/>
<link wikidata="Q12012340" start="82592" end="82611" title="History of Brisbane" label="History of Brisbane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1309899" start="82614" end="82638" title="List of Brisbane suburbs" label="List of Brisbane suburbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q16773597" start="82641" end="82668" title="List of museums in Brisbane" label="List of museums in Brisbane"/>
<link wikidata="Q6642192" start="82671" end="82708" title="List of tallest buildings in Brisbane" label="List of tallest buildings in Brisbane"/>
<link wikidata="Q6564729" start="82711" end="82739" title="List of people from Brisbane" label="List of people from Brisbane"/>
<link wikidata="Q7579419" start="82742" end="82759" title="Sport in Brisbane" label="Sport in Brisbane"/>
<link wikidata="Q7834951" start="82762" end="82783" title="Transport in Brisbane" label="Transport in Brisbane"/>
<link wikidata="Q2050653" start="83087" end="83114" title="State Library of Queensland" label="State Library of Queensland"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="192094" wikidata="Q11134906" url="?curid=192094" title="List of prime ministers of France">
<text>The head of the government of France has been called the prime minister of France (French: &quot;Premier ministre&quot;) since 1959, when Michel Debré became the first officeholder appointed under the Fifth Republic. During earlier periods of history, the head of government of France was known by different titles. As was common in European democracies of the 1815–1958 period (the Bourbon Restoration and July Monarchy, the Second, Third, and Fourth Republic, as well as the Vichy regime), the head of government was called President of the Council of Ministers (), generally shortened to President of the council (). This should not be confused with the elected office of president of the French Republic, who, as head of state, appoints the prime minister as head of government.

==9th century – 18th century==
===Kingdom of France (843–1792)===

Under the Kingdom of France, there was no official title for the leader of the government. The chief ministers (&quot;principal ministres&quot;) of certain kings of France nonetheless led the government &quot;de facto&quot;.

==18th century – 19th century==
===French First Republic (1792–1804)===

During the First Republic, the arrangements for governance changed frequently:

* National Convention (20 September 1792 – 2 November 1795)
** with Jérôme Pétion de Villeneuve as President of the National Convention (22 September 1792 – 2 June 1793)
** with Maximilien Robespierre as President of the National Convention (4 June 1793 – 27 July 1794)
** with Jean Jacques Régis de Cambacérès as President of the National Convention (7 October 1794 – 20 April 1795)
** with Emmanuel Joseph Sieyès as President of the National Convention (20 April 1795 – 26 October 1795)
* Directory (2 November 1795 – 10 November 1799), with Paul Barras as President of the Directory
* Consulate (10 November 1799 – 18 May 1804), with Napoleon Bonaparte as First Consul of France

There was no individual head of government.

===French First Empire (1804–1815)===

As Emperor, Napoleon was both head of state and head of government.

===First Restoration (1814–1815)===

===Hundred Days (1815)===

As Emperor, Napoleon was both head of state and head of government. Upon Napoleon&#x27;s abdication, his son Napoleon II was named Emperor. This rule was nominal, and Napoleon II, then a four-year old child, remained in Austria throughout his nominal reign.

===Bourbon Restoration (1815–1830)===
====Presidents of the Council of Ministers====
===July Monarchy (1830–1848)===
====Presidents of the Council of Ministers====
;Political parties



===Second French Republic (1848–1852)===
====Presidents of the Council of Ministers====
===Second French Empire (1852–1870)===
====Cabinet Chiefs====
==19th century – 20th century==
===Third French Republic (1870–1940)===
====President of the Government of National Defense====
====Presidents of the Council of Ministers====
===French State (1940–1944)===

Until 1942, Marshal Philippe Pétain served as Chief of State and nominal President of the Council of Ministers. From 1942, Pétain remained Chief of State, but Pierre Laval was named Chief of the Government.

====Vice-Presidents of the Council of Ministers====
==== Chief of the Government ====
===Provisional Government of the French Republic (1944–1946)===
====Chairmen of the Provisional Government====
===Fourth French Republic (1946–1958)===
====Presidents of the Council of Ministers====
==20th century – 21st century==
===Fifth French Republic (since 1958)===
====Prime Ministers====
==Timeline==
===Executive Prime Ministers (1814 ― 1959)===
===Non-executive Prime Ministers (since 1959)===
==See also==
* Chief Minister of France
* History of France
* List of presidents of France
* Ministry for Europe and Foreign Affairs
* Politics of France
* President of France

==Notes==
==External links==
* List on the website of the French Prime Minister (in French)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2285706" start="4" end="8" title="Head of government" label="head"/>
<link wikidata="Q1450662" start="16" end="36" title="government of France" label="government of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587677" start="57" end="81" title="Prime Minister of France" label="prime minister of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q296386" start="138" end="150" title="Michel Debré" label="Michel Debré"/>
<link wikidata="Q200686" start="201" end="215" title="French Fifth Republic" label="Fifth Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q207162" start="383" end="402" title="Bourbon Restoration in France" label="Bourbon Restoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q58202" start="407" end="420" title="July Monarchy" label="July Monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q58326" start="426" end="432" title="French Second Republic" label="Second"/>
<link wikidata="Q70802" start="434" end="439" title="French Third Republic" label="Third"/>
<link wikidata="Q69829" start="445" end="460" title="French Fourth Republic" label="Fourth Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q69808" start="477" end="489" title="Vichy France" label="Vichy regime"/>
<link wikidata="Q11134906" start="526" end="563" title="List of prime ministers of France" label="President of the Council of Ministers"/>
<link wikidata="Q191954" start="675" end="707" title="President of France" label="president of the French Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q48352" start="717" end="730" title="head of state" label="head of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285706" start="763" end="781" title="head of government" label="head of government"/>
<link wikidata="Q70972" start="861" end="878" title="Kingdom of France" label="Kingdom of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q219825" start="1232" end="1251" title="National Convention" label="National Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q947901" start="1298" end="1325" title="Jérôme Pétion de Villeneuve" label="Jérôme Pétion de Villeneuve"/>
<link wikidata="Q3253670" start="1329" end="1365" title="List of presidents of the National Convention" label="President of the National Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q44197" start="1408" end="1430" title="Maximilien Robespierre" label="Maximilien Robespierre"/>
<link wikidata="Q290045" start="1508" end="1540" title="Jean-Jacques-Régis de Cambacérès" label="Jean Jacques Régis de Cambacérès"/>
<link wikidata="Q294344" start="1622" end="1644" title="Emmanuel Joseph Sieyès" label="Emmanuel Joseph Sieyès"/>
<link wikidata="Q219817" start="1721" end="1730" title="French Directory" label="Directory"/>
<link wikidata="Q333843" start="1774" end="1785" title="Paul Barras" label="Paul Barras"/>
<link wikidata="Q219817" start="1806" end="1815" title="French Directory" label="Directory"/>
<link wikidata="Q877619" start="1818" end="1827" title="French Consulate" label="Consulate"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="1867" end="1885" title="Napoleon" label="Napoleon Bonaparte"/>
<link wikidata="Q877619" start="1889" end="1911" title="French Consulate" label="First Consul of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="2009" end="2017" title="Napoleon" label="Napoleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="2142" end="2150" title="Napoleon" label="Napoleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q18161433" start="2203" end="2229" title="Abdication of Napoleon, 1815" label="Napoleon&amp;#x27;s abdication"/>
<link wikidata="Q7723" start="2239" end="2250" title="Napoleon II" label="Napoleon II"/>
<link wikidata="Q5721" start="2952" end="2967" title="Philippe Pétain" label="Philippe Pétain"/>
<link wikidata="Q151983" start="3091" end="3103" title="Pierre Laval" label="Pierre Laval"/>
<link wikidata="Q3403515" start="3645" end="3669" title="Chief minister of France" label="Chief Minister of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q7778" start="3672" end="3689" title="History of France" label="History of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q29580" start="3692" end="3720" title="List of presidents of France" label="List of presidents of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q789848" start="3723" end="3762" title="Ministry for Europe and Foreign Affairs (France)" label="Ministry for Europe and Foreign Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121558" start="3765" end="3783" title="Politics of France" label="Politics of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q191954" start="3786" end="3805" title="President of France" label="President of France"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="192096" wikidata="Q252848" url="?curid=192096" title="Bregenz Forest">
<text>The Bregenzerwald (, ) is one of the main regions in the state of Vorarlberg (Austria). It overlaps, but is not coterminous with, the Bregenz Forest Mountains, which belong to a range of the Northern Limestone Alps, specifically the northern flysch zone. It is the drainage basin of the Bregenzer Ach river.

== Geography==
Bregenz Forest borders the Lake Constance region in the Rhine Valley to the west, Germany and Bavaria (Lindau and Oberallgäu districts) to the north, the Kleinwalsertal valley to the northeast, the Hochtannberg region at Tannberg to the east and the Großes Walsertal valley to the south. It borders the Leiblachtal valley to the northwest and the Laternsertal valley to the southwest, which can be reached via the Furkajoch. 

Regional inhabitants often divide Bregenz Forest into two main areas, the Vorderwald (&#x27;Lower Bregenz Forest&#x27;) and Hinterwald (&#x27;Upper Bregenz Forest&#x27;). The Vorderwald, with its hills and low mountains, is closest to the Rhine valley. The taller mountains are in Hinterwald, with altitudes of up to 2,000 metres. The two regions have distinctive dialect variations.

=== Villages ===

For historical reasons, the market town of Bezau is considered the main town in Bregenz Forest, although the market town of Egg and the municipalities of Alberschwende and Andelsbuch are larger in terms of population.

Although the municipalities of Langen and Buch are located in the Lake Constance-Alpine Rhine region (Rhine Valley), they are still part of the Bregenz Forest Käsestrasse (Cheese Route), for example. 

The municipalities of Egg, Andelsbuch and Schwarzenberg are also often referred to as Mittelbregenzerwald (Mid Bregenz Forest).

The court district of Bezau does not completely coincide with the Bregenz Forest region: Alberschwende, Doren, Riefensberg and Sulzberg are subject to the court district of Bregenz, but the small Walsertal valley belongs to the Bezau court. Warth is already part of the Hochtannberg region, but is also partly included in Bregen Forest. 

Lower Bregenz Forest (&quot;Vorderer Bregenzerwald&quot;) (red)
# Alberschwende
# Doren
# Sulzberg
# Langenegg
# Krumbach
# Riefensberg
# Lingenau
# Hittisau
# Sibratsgfäll

Upper Bregenz Forest (&quot;Hinterer Bregenzerwald&quot;) (blue)
# Egg
# Andelsbuch
# Schwarzenberg
# Bezau
# Reuthe
# Bizau
# Mellau
# Schnepfau
# Au
# Damüls
# Schoppernau
# Schröcken
# Warth

=== Nature reserves ===

The Nagelfluhkette Nature Park is the first cross-border nature park between Germany and Austria and is therefore an international pilot project. It is 15,410 ha in size, comprises six Bavarian and eight Vorarlberg municipalities and forms the transition between the Allgäu and the Bregenzerwald. Nagelfluh is a conglomerate of round rocks that were compressed over 25 million years.

The Großes Walsertal Biosphere Reserve covers 19,231 ha. The biosphere reserve has been part of UNESCO since November 2000 and is Vorarlberg&#x27;s first UNESCO reserve. It strives for a sustainable economy and tourism in the region and provides a platform for discussion about sustainability, society and politics. Of about 180 farms in the reserve, about 42 percent are organic farms.

The following European protected areas are partially or completely located in Bregenz Forest: 

* Bregenzerachschlucht
* Witmoos (Langen/Bregenz)
* Fohramoos (Schwarzenberg)
* Unterargenstein (Au)
* Unter Stellerhöhe (Egg)
* Unter der Winterstaude (Egg)
* Widdersteinmähder (Warth)
* Ifen (Egg, Mittelberg, Sibratsgfäll)

* Rossbad (Krumbach)
* Hirschberg (Langen bei Bregenz)
* Farnacher Moos (Alberschwende, Bildstein)
* Kojen-Moos (Riefensberg)
* Hohe Kugel – Hoher Freschen – Mellental (Mellau and Rheinvalley villages)
* Auer Ried (Au)

== History ==
Around the year 1000, Bregenz Forest, which was still completely forested at the time, was settled and cultivated from Bregenz via the Schneiderkopf and the Lorena mountains (Buch, Bildstein, Alberschwende). The highest areas, on the other hand, were settled in the late Middle Ages by Walsers who came from the Grisons or originally from the Valais.

While the northern parts of Bregenz Forest (the courts of Alberschwende, Lingenau and Sulzberg) belonged to the lordship of Bregenz, the courts of Damüls and Innerbregenzerwald were part of the lordship of Feldkirch. This division, which took place in 1338, is the basis for the distinction between the front and rear Bregenzerwald that is still common today.

In 1390, with the sale of the county of Feldkirch, the Innerbregenzerwald and Damüls fell to Austria, followed by the courts of Lingenau and Alberschwende in 1451. The Tannberg with the Bregenzerwald communities of Schröcken and Warth became Austrian in 1453, and in 1523 the Habsburgs also acquired the court of Sulzberg. 

=== Peasant Republic ===
After 1380, especially in the Inner Bregenz Forest, the peasantry of the forest formed a self-government (so-called peasant republic), with its own free rural community, its own constitution and high - and blood jurisdiction. A Landammann, usually from the most respected families in Bregenz Forest, was elected as the head of the community. Many of the well-known names that originally came from Bregenz Forest, e.g. Feurstein, Meusburger, Metzler, are depicted with their coats of arms on the surviving Landammann board.

The Landammann was appointed by free election and his town hall stood on the Bezegg between Bezau and Andelsbuch. Today, the Bezegg-Sul, a stone pillar, is a reminder of the former town hall.

The existence of the peasant republic is confirmed in the tradition of the Capuchin priest Stanislaus Saurbeck (1595-1647): Bregenz Forest was still &quot;a long undeveloped wilderness&quot; at the beginning of the 17th century, which &quot;already had a bad reputation&quot; in the chronicles of the 16th century: 

=== Missionization ===
The chroniclers explain the &quot;(low) level of moral and religious life&quot; of the inhabitants, &quot;although they were descended from Catholic parents&quot;, with customs and traditions from &quot;pagan ancestors&quot;, which they had retained like a &quot;blatant superstition. As crude, wild and immoral as they were in their behavior, the women in particular are said to have been just as shameless and angry in their dress.&quot;

&quot;A thorough renewal and moral transformation in the whole of Bregenzerwald&quot; only took place on the initiative of Father Stanislaus: the Capuchins &quot;in their insatiable thirst for souls hurried from hut to hut, from village to village, instructing the people through conversations, Christian teachings and sermons, not resting or resting until the ice cover broke and the rough and cold minds became warm.&quot;

As a further consequence of missionization, &quot;a small Capuchin monastery was founded in the valley. On July 12, 1655, the abbot of Mehrerau, Heinrich Amberg, laid the foundation stone for the monastery building [in Bezau], and on October 22, 1656, the monastery church was consecrated by Prince-Bishop Johann von Praßberg.&quot;

The last subordination, that to Mehrerau Abbey, was dissolved in 1658 - 190 years before the peasants&#x27; liberation of 1848. 

In contrast to most farmers of the time, Bregenz Forest people were able to settle anywhere as free men. There are numerous names, especially in Swabian, that can be traced back to Bregenz Forest.

The peasant constitution was abolished during the French Wars and was not reintroduced afterwards. At the beginning of the 20th century, there were still countless alps and farms where agriculture, livestock farming and cheese production were practiced. Numerous alps are still farmed today, but fewer and fewer farmers are doing so.

Until around 1900, many children from Bregenz Forest had to go to Swabia in Baden-Württemberg (Germany) from May to October to work on farms there. This meant that their parents had one less child to feed during the summer. These children became known as the Swabian children.

A Bregenz Forest house can be seen on the reverse side of the 100 schilling banknote from 1970.

== Cheese dairy ==
Cheese-making has a long tradition in Bregenz Forest. The Celts first brought cattle breeding and alpine farming to the region. The Romans occupied the region from 15 BC. They were already practising professional alpine cheese-making and passed on the knowledge of cheese-making to the Alemanni in the 5th century, who cleared a lot of forest for pasture farming and established communal pastures (Allmenden). In the 9th century, markets were regularly held in and around Bregenz Forest during church festivals, where cheese and lard were traded. The monasteries were involved in cheese production.

From around 1594, the &quot;Schwarzenberg Market&quot; was held once a year, where cattle and cheese were traded. Until the second half of the 17th century, only sour cheese dairies (the milk was completely skimmed) were operated in Bregenz Forest, where a lot of butter could also be produced. Butter production was very important as taxes had to be paid to the authorities in the form of butter. 

After the Thirty Years&#x27; War, from around 1648, dairymen from Appenzell came to Bregenz Forest and taught the locals how to milk fat (the milk is not or only partially skimmed). Some of them leased alps and also set up dairies themselves. The spread of fat dairying is due to the fact that people in the less favorable climatic valleys had to build up durable food stocks for winter and times of need.

In the 18th century, a large proportion of alpine milk was already being processed into alpine cheese. 

At the beginning of the 18th century, there was a ban on fat dairying, which resulted in uprisings by the people of the Bregenzerwald. The farmers prevailed and thus began the upswing of Bregenz Forest hard cheese making. The production of sour cheese gradually declined. It was mostly only used for personal consumption and for sale within the region. In 1785, the first roads were built in as a strong trading activity developed. The first iron-shod wagons appeared in 1786.

Schwarzenberg has been the most important trading center for cheese in Bregenz Forest since 1816. The cuboid brick cheese and a Swiss Emmental imitation were transported in carriages to the Danube Monarchy, including Italy and Greece. The first municipal dairy was built in Au in 1830.

The second half of the 19th century was the time of the so-called &quot;cheese counts&quot;. Even back then, milk and cheese production was an important source of income for farmers. The cheese counts were a few influential cheese merchants with a monopoly position. They bought milk and cheese and took care of the marketing, while the majority of farmers lived in poverty. The most famous cheese count was Gallus Moosbrugger. To alleviate the plight of the farmers, the farmer and social reformer Franz Michael Felder (1839-1869) founded a cheese trading association and a cattle insurance company.

In 1900, an imperial and royal school for cheese-making was opened in Doren.

Since 1993, the Vorarlberg Cheese Awards have been held annually in September in Schwarzenberg. Around 100 dairies and alpine dairies compete with 170 products for the award for the best cheese in the categories of alpine cheese, mountain cheese and semi-hard cheese made from hay milk (silage-free milk).

The Bregenzerwald Cheese Route (&quot;Käsestraße&quot;)was founded in 1998. It is a cooperation of farmers and innkeepers, craftsmen and tourism in Bregenz Forest. The member businesses hope to preserve the regional cultural and natural landscape and promote the production and marketing of regional products among themselves and with each other. The KäseStraße is a project of the regional funding program LEADER II of the European Union.

To this day, Bregenz Forest is known for its cheese. More than 1,000 farms with 13,000 cows produce over 55 million kilograms of milk per year.

== Culture ==
=== Dialect ===
Until 1814, parts of the Allgäu in the north and north-west belonged to Vorarlberg. Since the entire region was settled by the Alemanni, the Lake Constance Alemannic dialect became predominant beginning in the 5th and 6th centuries. Over the centuries there was a brisk trading of goods which, with the increased extension of marriages and family networks, led to a linguistic intermingling. Especially in the &quot;Vorderwald&quot; the influence of the Allgäu dialect is particularly noticeable. By contrast, in the Mittelwald and Hinterwald regions the predominant language forms show a stronger connection with the Hofsteig region and Dornbirn. Speakers outside of the Bregenzer Wald region perceive (&quot;Wälderisch&quot;) as an idiom of its own. However, there is no uniform Vorarlbergisch dialect; there are considerable local and regional variations. The official language in Vorarlberg is, of course, High German (Hochdeutsch).

=== Bregenz Forest tracht ===
Traditional costumes (&quot;tracht&quot;) have a long history in Vorarlberg. Many valleys and villages have their own kind of garb, each with special characteristics from certain style periods. The Bregenzerwälder garb is the oldest of its kind in the Alpine region. It originated in the 15/16th century. The Bregenzerwälder tracht for women is called &quot;d&#x27;Juppô&quot; (Bavarian: &quot;Juppe&quot;).

The Bregenz Forest is the only Austrian tracht region where there is a craftswoman for every detail of the costume: milliners, seamstresses, embroiderers, weavers and goldsmiths for the belt buckles. One of the last places that still manufacture the Juppe in the traditional way is the Juppenwerkstatt Riefensberg.

=== Cuisine ===
The Bregenz Forest is well-known for its dairy products. The Vorarlberger Bergkäse is a popular product from the region.

The various regional products and creations can also be sampled on culinary hikes. These walks through Bregenz Forest are organized by the tourism associations and take visitors for breakfast and lunch through a selection of different restaurants, all of which focus on Vorarlberg products and specialities.

The KäseStraße Bregenzerwald is a theme route based on the Bregenz Forest&#x27;s traditional cheese production. Along the route, tourists can visit the Alps, alpine dairies, show dairies, the cheese cellar in Lingenau, the Alpine Dairy Museum and a beekeeping or brewery. The route was established in 1998 as an association of innkeepers, craftsmen and trading companies.

Bregenz Forest mountain cheese is a specialty known far beyond the borders of the region.

=== Architecture ===

==== The Guild of Au (Baroque period) ====
The Auer Zunft (Guild of Au) was founded in Au by Michael Beer in 1651. It is an association of builders, sculptors and carpenters. In Au-Schoppernau from 1670 to 1700, more than 90 percent of all male workers were builders. Master builders and craftsmen from the Bregenz Forest in particular, but also from other parts of today&#x27;s Vorarlberg, played a leading role in the 600 churches and monasteries that were built in the Baroque style in the 17th and 18th centuries. Members of the Guild of Au received 60 percent of the more than 700 major construction contracts awarded to Vorarlbergers.

Many important members of the Guild of Au came from the architect families Beer, Moosbrugger and Thumb.

==== Bregenzerwälderhaus ====
The Bregenzerwald house is particularly relevant for the historical architecture in the Bregenz Forest. These are built in a mixed stone-wood construction and characterize the landscape. The Bregenzerwälderhaus combines the residential building, the stable and the barn under one roof. The oldest houses of this type were built in the 15th century. In the centre of Schwarzenberg are a few well-preserved and relatively uniform Bregenzerwald houses, all built around the same time - after the great fire of 1755.

==== Modern and contemporary architecture ====
The Neue Vorarlberger Bauschule developed organically in the second half of the 20th century and always involved local craftsmen in the building process. With still recognizable typical Vorarlberg architecture, it combines tradition and modernity: clear lines, glass and local wood. Its harmonious mixture creates interesting contrasts like in half-timbered houses. Comfort and quality of life play a central role in the design of new houses in Vorarlberg. In many renovations of private homes and public buildings, local wood is preferred, which means that energy consumption can be minimised.

Well-known award-winning architectural projects are the Kunsthaus Bregenz, the vorarlberg museum in Bregenz, the Michelehof Hard and the Hotel Krone Hittisau.

In 2014, the modern architectural project was completed. When the municipality of Krumbach decided to rebuild seven bus stops in 2010, they hired seven international architects to design bus shelters. Local craftsmen executed their designs. While each stop differs in design, the bus stops are all meant to uniquely integrate architecture into the natural surroundings.

The Werkraum Bregenzerwald is an association of craftsmen in the Bregenz Forest founded in 1999. It aims at networking and supporting craft, design and technology businesses in the area. The publicly accessible place is used to present the craftsmanship, to promote building culture in cooperation with architects and to increase design competence and quality of craftsmanship with the preferred involvement of young people. The associated workshop building was designed by Peter Zumthor. The building was awarded the Austrian Builders&#x27; Prize (Österreichischer Bauherrenpreis) in 2014 and 2015.

== Museums and sights ==

The Schubertiade takes place annually in the summer in Schwarzenberg. At a Schubertiade, informal classical music is played and recited. The festival in Schwarzenberg focuses on compositions that are usually not played at larger concerts and may or may not be composed by Franz Schubert.

The Bregenzerwaldbahn (&quot;&#x27;s Wälderbähnle&quot;) is a museum railway that runs on a remaining section of the narrow-gauge railway. From 1902 to 1983, the Wälderbähnle travelled the 35.5 km long route from Bregenz to Bezau. Until October 2004, a 6.1 km route was accessible, but a section had to give way to road construction. Today, a distance of 5 km from Bezau station via Reuthe to Schwarzenberg station is available.

In 2000, the Hittisau Women&#x27;s Museum opened. It is the only museum of its kind in Austria. The museum is devoted to the display and documentation of the cultural works and stories of women, which deal with a broad variety of topics, including questions of female identity and gender roles.

The Angelika Kauffmann Museum in Schwarzenberg is dedicated to the painter Angelika Kauffmann.

Other museums of the Bregenz Forest region are the Museum of Baroque Master Builders in Au, Alpine Dairy Museum in Hittisau, the Egg Village Museum in Egg and the Franz Michael Felder museum in Schoppernau.

== Economy ==

Residents of the Bregenz Forest earn their living primarily from summer and winter tourism, agriculture and especially the wood processing industry. Many locals also commute to work in the Rhine Valley, Vorarlberg&#x27;s economic center.

=== Agriculture and Alpine transhumance ===
The Alpine transhumance or Alp farming is the basis of the traditional cheese making process in Vorarlberg. Farmers drive their livestock to where fodder is available. This means that they change stables several times a year depending on the season. In German, Alp farming is also called three-tier farming (&quot;Dreistufenwirtschaft&quot;) because the pastures are managed in three tiers. In the spring of 2011, UNESCO declared the Alp farming in the Bregenzerwald to be an intangible cultural heritage.

The milk produced is then made into a variety of dairy products like Vorarlberger Bergkäse and sold in the valley dairies according to old tradition. Through traditional agriculture, the raw material milk is produced regionally and without silos.

The agricultural quota of the Bregenzerwald, i.e. the proportion of the population that derives its main income from agriculture, is extraordinarily high compared to the state of Vorarlberg, namely 9.5 % compared to 2.4 % (as of 1991).

=== Tourism ===
Due to the great importance of tourism, the tertiary sector in the Bregenzerwald accounts for 50 %. 11.2 % of the working population works in the accommodation and catering sector. For comparison: the Vorarlberg average is 6.7 % (as of 1991).

== Gallery ==
== References ==
==External links==

*Official website of the Bregenz Forest region
*List of museums and exhibitions in the Bregenz Forest</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q252848" start="4" end="17" title="Bregenz Forest" label="Bregenzerwald"/>
<link wikidata="Q261543" start="57" end="62" title="States of Austria" label="state"/>
<link wikidata="Q38981" start="66" end="76" title="Vorarlberg" label="Vorarlberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="78" end="85" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q181311" start="134" end="158" title="Bregenz Forest Mountains" label="Bregenz Forest Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q46831" start="178" end="183" title="mountain range" label="range"/>
<link wikidata="Q4935045" start="191" end="214" title="Northern Limestone Alps" label="Northern Limestone Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q756914" start="242" end="248" title="flysch" label="flysch"/>
<link wikidata="Q166620" start="265" end="279" title="drainage basin" label="drainage basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q698586" start="287" end="300" title="Bregenzer Ach" label="Bregenzer Ach"/>
<link wikidata="Q4127" start="351" end="365" title="Lake Constance" label="Lake Constance"/>
<link wikidata="Q95747" start="380" end="392" title="Alpine Rhine" label="Rhine Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="406" end="413" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q980" start="418" end="425" title="Bavaria" label="Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q689769" start="478" end="492" title="Kleinwalsertal" label="Kleinwalsertal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1549221" start="574" end="590" title="Großwalsertal" label="Großes Walsertal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256104" start="738" end="747" title="Furkajoch" label="Furkajoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q584" start="990" end="995" title="Rhine" label="Rhine"/>
<link wikidata="Q671238" start="1197" end="1202" title="Bezau" label="Bezau"/>
<link wikidata="Q183358" start="1278" end="1281" title="Egg, Austria" label="Egg"/>
<link wikidata="Q665702" start="1308" end="1321" title="Alberschwende" label="Alberschwende"/>
<link wikidata="Q490200" start="1326" end="1336" title="Andelsbuch" label="Andelsbuch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1795471" start="1532" end="1543" title="KäseStrasse Bregenzerwald" label="Käsestrasse"/>
<link wikidata="Q695371" start="1617" end="1630" title="Schwarzenberg, Austria" label="Schwarzenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q700976" start="1808" end="1813" title="Doren" label="Doren"/>
<link wikidata="Q528236" start="1815" end="1826" title="Riefensberg" label="Riefensberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q644855" start="1831" end="1839" title="Sulzberg, Austria" label="Sulzberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q696372" start="1945" end="1950" title="Warth, Vorarlberg" label="Warth"/>
<link wikidata="Q665702" start="2109" end="2122" title="Alberschwende" label="Alberschwende"/>
<link wikidata="Q700976" start="2125" end="2130" title="Doren" label="Doren"/>
<link wikidata="Q644855" start="2133" end="2141" title="Sulzberg (Vorarlberg)" label="Sulzberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q701001" start="2144" end="2153" title="Langenegg" label="Langenegg"/>
<link wikidata="Q700966" start="2156" end="2164" title="Krumbach (Vorarlberg)" label="Krumbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q528236" start="2167" end="2178" title="Riefensberg" label="Riefensberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q700990" start="2181" end="2189" title="Lingenau" label="Lingenau"/>
<link wikidata="Q701026" start="2192" end="2200" title="Hittisau" label="Hittisau"/>
<link wikidata="Q699623" start="2203" end="2215" title="Sibratsgfäll" label="Sibratsgfäll"/>
<link wikidata="Q183358" start="2284" end="2287" title="Egg (Vorarlberg)" label="Egg"/>
<link wikidata="Q490200" start="2290" end="2300" title="Andelsbuch" label="Andelsbuch"/>
<link wikidata="Q695371" start="2303" end="2316" title="Schwarzenberg (Vorarlberg)" label="Schwarzenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q671238" start="2319" end="2324" title="Bezau" label="Bezau"/>
<link wikidata="Q700625" start="2327" end="2333" title="Reuthe" label="Reuthe"/>
<link wikidata="Q301444" start="2336" end="2341" title="Bizau" label="Bizau"/>
<link wikidata="Q693939" start="2344" end="2350" title="Mellau" label="Mellau"/>
<link wikidata="Q267980" start="2353" end="2362" title="Schnepfau" label="Schnepfau"/>
<link wikidata="Q758379" start="2365" end="2367" title="Au (Vorarlberg)" label="Au"/>
<link wikidata="Q700930" start="2370" end="2376" title="Damüls" label="Damüls"/>
<link wikidata="Q252085" start="2379" end="2390" title="Schoppernau" label="Schoppernau"/>
<link wikidata="Q535102" start="2393" end="2402" title="Schröcken" label="Schröcken"/>
<link wikidata="Q696372" start="2405" end="2410" title="Warth (Vorarlberg)" label="Warth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1260267" start="2441" end="2467" title="Nagelfluhkette Nature Park" label="Nagelfluhkette Nature Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q191704" start="2749" end="2761" title="Conglomerate (geology)" label="conglomerate"/>
<link wikidata="Q22771887" start="2826" end="2860" title="Biosphere Reserve Großes Walsertal" label="Großes Walsertal Biosphere Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="2918" end="2924" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="4037" end="4048" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q616803" start="4052" end="4059" title="Walser people" label="Walsers"/>
<link wikidata="Q11925" start="4078" end="4085" title="Grisons" label="Grisons"/>
<link wikidata="Q834" start="4109" end="4115" title="Valais" label="Valais"/>
<link wikidata="Q183104" start="4519" end="4528" title="Feldkirch, Vorarlberg" label="Feldkirch"/>
<link wikidata="Q700930" start="4557" end="4563" title="Damüls" label="Damüls"/>
<link wikidata="Q700990" start="4607" end="4615" title="Lingenau" label="Lingenau"/>
<link wikidata="Q665702" start="4620" end="4633" title="Alberschwende" label="Alberschwende"/>
<link wikidata="Q535102" start="4694" end="4703" title="Schröcken" label="Schröcken"/>
<link wikidata="Q65968" start="4755" end="4764" title="House of Habsburg" label="Habsburgs"/>
<link wikidata="Q838811" start="4885" end="4894" title="Peasant" label="peasantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q811298" start="4945" end="4961" title="peasant republic" label="peasant republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q674141" start="7119" end="7133" title="Territorial Abbey of Wettingen-Mehrerau" label="Mehrerau Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q327274" start="7362" end="7369" title="Swabian German" label="Swabian"/>
<link wikidata="Q985" start="7826" end="7843" title="Baden-Württemberg" label="Baden-Württemberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q328168" start="8009" end="8025" title="Swabian children" label="Swabian children"/>
<link wikidata="Q35966" start="8202" end="8207" title="Celts" label="Celts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1651392" start="8276" end="8282" title="Roman people" label="Romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q132990" start="8430" end="8438" title="Alemanni" label="Alemanni"/>
<link wikidata="Q2487" start="9154" end="9176" title="Thirty Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Thirty Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q688257" start="9210" end="9219" title="Appenzell" label="Appenzell"/>
<link wikidata="Q695371" start="10134" end="10147" title="Schwarzenberg, Austria" label="Schwarzenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q153136" start="10324" end="10339" title="Danube Monarchy" label="Danube Monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q88965" start="10920" end="10940" title="Franz Michael Felder" label="Franz Michael Felder"/>
<link wikidata="Q700976" start="11093" end="11098" title="Doren" label="Doren"/>
<link wikidata="Q109237299" start="11378" end="11386" title="Haymilk" label="hay milk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1795471" start="11446" end="11456" title="KäseStrasse Bregenzerwald" label="Käsestraße"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="11832" end="11846" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q169276" start="12049" end="12055" title="Allgäu" label="Allgäu"/>
<link wikidata="Q132990" start="12151" end="12159" title="Alemanni" label="Alemanni"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12642" end="12650" title="Hofsteig" label="Hofsteig"/>
<link wikidata="Q503728" start="12805" end="12819" title="Vorarlbergisch" label="Vorarlbergisch"/>
<link wikidata="Q52040" start="12934" end="12945" title="High German languages" label="High German"/>
<link wikidata="Q18752255" start="13020" end="13026" title="tracht" label="tracht"/>
<link wikidata="Q29540" start="13370" end="13378" title="Bavarian language" label="Bavarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q663375" start="13517" end="13526" title="Hatmaking" label="milliners"/>
<link wikidata="Q117443262" start="13651" end="13656" title="Juppe" label="Juppe"/>
<link wikidata="Q86301304" start="13687" end="13714" title="Juppenwerkstatt Riefensberg" label="Juppenwerkstatt Riefensberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q354743" start="13794" end="13815" title="Vorarlberger Bergkäse" label="Vorarlberger Bergkäse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1795471" start="14168" end="14192" title="KäseStrasse Bregenzerwald" label="KäseStraße Bregenzerwald"/>
<link wikidata="Q354743" start="14537" end="14567" title="Vorarlberger Bergkäse" label="Bregenz Forest mountain cheese"/>
<link wikidata="Q759191" start="14697" end="14707" title="Vorarlberg School" label="Auer Zunft"/>
<link wikidata="Q758379" start="14737" end="14739" title="Au, Vorarlberg" label="Au"/>
<link wikidata="Q252085" start="14831" end="14842" title="Schoppernau" label="Schoppernau"/>
<link wikidata="Q905196" start="15431" end="15450" title="Bregenzerwälderhaus" label="Bregenzerwald house"/>
<link wikidata="Q695371" start="15793" end="15806" title="Schwarzenberg, Austria" label="Schwarzenberg"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15992" end="16019" title="Neue Vorarlberger Bauschule" label="Neue Vorarlberger Bauschule"/>
<link wikidata="Q2533480" start="16663" end="16680" title="vorarlberg museum" label="vorarlberg museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1737" start="16684" end="16691" title="Bregenz" label="Bregenz"/>
<link wikidata="Q700966" start="16826" end="16834" title="Krumbach, Vorarlberg" label="Krumbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1671837" start="17119" end="17141" title="Werkraum Bregenzerwald" label="Werkraum Bregenzerwald"/>
<link wikidata="Q123179" start="17589" end="17602" title="Peter Zumthor" label="Peter Zumthor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2250597" start="17746" end="17758" title="Schubertiade Vorarlberg" label="Schubertiade"/>
<link wikidata="Q695371" start="17797" end="17810" title="Schwarzenberg, Austria" label="Schwarzenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q7312" start="18014" end="18028" title="Franz Schubert" label="Franz Schubert"/>
<link wikidata="Q905185" start="18035" end="18052" title="Bregenz Forest Railway" label="Bregenzerwaldbahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q420962" start="18093" end="18107" title="Heritage railway" label="museum railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112477" start="18148" end="18168" title="narrow-gauge railway" label="narrow-gauge railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q671238" start="18255" end="18260" title="Bezau" label="Bezau"/>
<link wikidata="Q700625" start="18414" end="18420" title="Reuthe" label="Reuthe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1451826" start="18474" end="18502" title="Hittisau Women&amp;#x27;s Museum" label="Hittisau Women&amp;#x27;s Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q18694541" start="18761" end="18786" title="Angelika Kauffmann Museum" label="Angelika Kauffmann Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q123098" start="18832" end="18850" title="Angelica Kauffman" label="Angelika Kauffmann"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18904" end="18937" title="Museum of Baroque Master Builders" label="Museum of Baroque Master Builders"/>
<link wikidata="Q758379" start="18941" end="18943" title="Au, Vorarlberg" label="Au"/>
<link wikidata="Q701026" start="18968" end="18976" title="Hittisau" label="Hittisau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297374" start="18982" end="19000" title="Egg Museum" label="Egg Village Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q183358" start="19004" end="19007" title="Egg, Austria" label="Egg"/>
<link wikidata="Q252085" start="19047" end="19058" title="Schoppernau" label="Schoppernau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1609891" start="19199" end="19214" title="wood processing" label="wood processing"/>
<link wikidata="Q95747" start="19265" end="19277" title="Alpine Rhine Valley" label="Rhine Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q14774083" start="19363" end="19382" title="Alpine transhumance" label="Alpine transhumance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="19773" end="19779" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q84036549" start="19835" end="19863" title="intangible cultural heritage" label="intangible cultural heritage"/>
<link wikidata="Q354743" start="19935" end="19956" title="Vorarlberger Bergkäse" label="Vorarlberger Bergkäse"/>
<link wikidata="Q213643" start="20106" end="20111" title="Silo" label="silos"/>
<link wikidata="Q55638" start="20411" end="20426" title="Tertiary sector of the economy" label="tertiary sector"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="192097" wikidata="Q698586" url="?curid=192097" title="Bregenzer Ach">
<text>The Bregenzer Ach (also: &quot;Bregenzer Ache&quot;) is the main river of the Bregenz Forest () in the Austrian state of Vorarlberg. It is a tributary to Lake Constance and the River Rhine, respectively.


==Geography==
The source of the river is above the town of Schröcken, at an altitude of about . The river is long and drains almost the entire area of the Bregenz Forest. Its mouth on Upper Lake Constance () is near Bregenz and lies east of the outflows of the rivers Dornbirner Ach and Alpine Rhine. The outflow of Lake Constance is the High Rhine.

==See also==
* Bregenz Forest Mountains
* List of rivers of Austria

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q698586" start="4" end="17" title="Bregenzer Ach" label="Bregenzer Ach"/>
<link wikidata="Q4022" start="65" end="70" title="river" label="river"/>
<link wikidata="Q252848" start="78" end="92" title="Bregenz Forest" label="Bregenz Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q261543" start="103" end="117" title="States of Austria" label="Austrian state"/>
<link wikidata="Q38981" start="121" end="131" title="Vorarlberg" label="Vorarlberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q4127" start="154" end="168" title="Lake Constance" label="Lake Constance"/>
<link wikidata="Q584" start="183" end="188" title="Rhine" label="Rhine"/>
<link wikidata="Q535102" start="265" end="274" title="Schröcken" label="Schröcken"/>
<link wikidata="Q190200" start="282" end="290" title="altitude" label="altitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q319041" start="390" end="410" title="Obersee (Lake Constance)" label="Upper Lake Constance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1737" start="422" end="429" title="Bregenz" label="Bregenz"/>
<link wikidata="Q321043" start="474" end="488" title="Dornbirner Ach" label="Dornbirner Ach"/>
<link wikidata="Q95747" start="493" end="505" title="Alpine Rhine" label="Alpine Rhine"/>
<link wikidata="Q650521" start="544" end="554" title="High Rhine" label="High Rhine"/>
<link wikidata="Q181311" start="572" end="596" title="Bregenz Forest Mountains" label="Bregenz Forest Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q701653" start="599" end="624" title="List of rivers of Austria" label="List of rivers of Austria"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="192101" wikidata="Q342712" url="?curid=192101" title="John Evelyn">
<text>John Evelyn (31 October 162027 February 1706) was an English writer, landowner, gardener, courtier and minor government official, who is now best known as a diarist. He was a founding Fellow of the Royal Society.

John Evelyn&#x27;s diary, or memoir, spanned the period of his adult life from 1640, when he was a student, to 1706, the year he died. He did not write daily at all times. The many volumes provide insight into life and events at a time before regular magazines or newspapers were published, making diaries of greater interest to modern historians than such works might have been at later periods. Evelyn&#x27;s work covers art, culture and politics, including the execution of Charles I, Oliver Cromwell&#x27;s rise and eventual natural death, the last Great Plague of London, and the Great Fire of London in 1666.

&quot;John Evelyn&#x27;s Diary&quot; was first published posthumously in 1818, but over the years was overshadowed by that of Samuel Pepys. Pepys wrote a different kind of diary, in the same era but covering a much shorter period, 1660–1669, and in much greater depth.

Among the many subjects Evelyn wrote about, gardening was an increasing obsession, and he left a huge manuscript on the subject that was not printed until 2001. He published several translations of French gardening books, and his &quot;Sylva, or A Discourse of Forest-Trees&quot; (1664) was highly influential in its plea to landowners to plant trees, of which he believed the country to be dangerously short. Sections from his main manuscript were added to editions of this, and also published separately.

==Biography==

Born into a family whose wealth was largely founded on gunpowder production, John Evelyn was born in Wotton, Surrey, and grew up living with his grandparents in Lewes, Sussex. While living in Lewes, in Southover Grange, he was educated at Lewes Old Grammar School, refusing to be sent to Eton College. After this he was educated at Balliol College, Oxford, and at the Middle Temple. In London, he witnessed important events such as the trials and executions of William Howard, 1st Viscount Stafford, and Thomas Wentworth, Earl of Strafford.

In 1640 his father died, and in July 1641 he crossed to Holland. He was enrolled as a volunteer, and then encamped before Genep, on the Waal river, but his military experience was limited to six days of camp life, during which, however, he took his turn at &quot;trailing a pike&quot;. He returned in the autumn to find England on the verge of civil war. Having briefly joined the Royalist army and arrived too late for the Royalist victory at the Battle of Brentford in 1642, he spent some time improving his brother&#x27;s property at Wotton, but then went abroad to avoid further involvement in the English Civil War.

In October 1644 Evelyn visited the Roman ruins in Fréjus, Provence, before travelling on to Italy. He attended anatomy lectures in Padua in 1646 and sent the Evelyn Tables back to London. These are thought to be the oldest surviving anatomical preparations in Europe; Evelyn later gave them to the Royal Society, and they are now in the Hunterian Museum. In 1644, Evelyn visited the English College at Rome, where Catholic priests were trained for service in England. In the Veneto he renewed his acquaintance with the famous art collector Thomas Howard, 21st Earl of Arundel, and toured the art collections of Venice with Arundel&#x27;s grandson and heir, later Duke of Norfolk. He acquired an ancient Egyptian stela and sent a sketch back to Rome, which was published by Father Kircher, SJ, in Kircher&#x27;s &quot;Oedipus Aegyptiacus&quot; (1650), albeit without acknowledgement to Evelyn.

In Florence, he commissioned the John Evelyn Cabinet (1644–46), an elaborate ebony cabinet with pietra dura and gilt-bronze panels, which is now in the Victoria and Albert Museum. It was in his London house at his death, then returned to Wotton, and is very likely the &quot;ebony cabinet&quot; in which his diaries were later found.

In 1647 Evelyn married Mary Browne, daughter of Sir Richard Browne, the English ambassador in Paris. During the next few years he travelled back and forth between France and England, corresponding with Browne in the royalist interest, including a meeting with Charles I in 1647.

During the Commonwealth of England period, Evelyn desired to maintain using the Church of England&#x27;s Anglican practices. Among these was worship according to the &quot;Book of Common Prayer&quot;. Though prayer book had been outlawed and replaced by the &quot;Directory for Public Worship&quot;, Evelyn was able to find and worship at prayer book services, including in London. At one such service–held on Christmas Day, 1657–Evelyn reported that Parliamentarians &quot;held their muskets against us as we came up to receive the Sacred Elements&quot;. Evelyn would also recount regular usage of the prayer book&#x27;s offices and its calendar with his family inside their home.

In 1651 he became convinced that the royalist cause was hopeless, and decided to return to England. The following year, the couple settled in Deptford (present-day south-east London). Their house, Sayes Court (adjacent to the naval dockyard), was purchased by Evelyn from his father-in-law in 1653; Evelyn soon began to transform the gardens. In 1671, he encountered master wood-worker Grinling Gibbons (who was renting a cottage on the Sayes Court estate) and introduced him to Sir Christopher Wren. There is now an electoral ward called Evelyn in Deptford, London Borough of Lewisham. He remained a royalist, had refused employment from the government of the Commonwealth, and had maintained a cipher correspondence with Charles II; in 1659 he published an &quot;Apology for the Royal Party&quot;.

===After the Restoration===
It was after the Restoration that Evelyn&#x27;s career really took off, and he enjoyed unbroken court favour until his death. He never held any important political office, although he filled many useful and minor posts. In 1660, he was a member of the group that founded the Royal Society. The following year, he wrote the &quot;Fumifugium&quot; (or &quot;The Inconveniencie of the Aer and Smoak of London Dissipated&quot;), a pamphlet on the growing air pollution problem in London. He was commissioner for improving the streets and buildings of London, for examining into the affairs of charitable foundations, commissioner of the Royal Mint, and of foreign plantations. During the Second Anglo-Dutch War, beginning 28 October 1664, Evelyn served as one of four commissioners on the Sick and Hurt Board (others included Sir William D&#x27;Oyly and Sir Thomas Clifford), staying at his post during the Great Plague in 1665. He found it impossible to secure sufficient money for the proper discharge of his functions, and in 1688 he was still petitioning for payment of his accounts in this business. He briefly acted as one of the commissioners of the privy seal. In 1695 he was entrusted with the office of treasurer of Greenwich hospital for retired sailors, and laid the first stone of the new building on 30 June 1696.

He was known for his knowledge of trees, and had a friend and correspondent, Philip Dumaresq, who &quot;devoted most of his time to gardening, fruit, and tree culture.&quot; Evelyn&#x27;s treatise, &quot;Sylva, or A Discourse of Forest-Trees&quot; (1664), was written as an encouragement to landowners to plant trees to provide timber for England&#x27;s burgeoning navy. Further editions appeared in his lifetime (1670 and 1679), with the fourth edition (1706) appearing just after his death and featuring the engraving of Evelyn shown on this page (below) even though it had been made more than 50 years prior by Robert Nanteuil in 1651 in Paris. Various other editions appeared in the 18th and 19th centuries and feature an inaccurate portrait of Evelyn made by Francesco Bartolozzi.
Evelyn had some training as a draftsman and artist, and created several etchings. Most of his published work, produced in the form of drawings to be engraved by others, was to illustrate his own work.
Following the Great Fire in 1666, closely described in his diaries, Evelyn presented the first of several plans (Christopher Wren produced another) for the rebuilding of London, all of which were rejected by Charles II largely due to the complexities of land ownership in the city. He took an interest in the rebuilding of St Paul&#x27;s Cathedral by Wren (with Gibbons&#x27; artistry a notable addition). Evelyn&#x27;s interest in gardens even led him to design pleasure gardens, such as those at Euston Hall.

Evelyn was a prolific author and produced books on subjects as diverse as theology, numismatics, politics, horticulture, architecture and vegetarianism, and he cultivated links with contemporaries across the spectrum of Stuart political and cultural life. In September 1671 he travelled with the Royal court of Charles II to Norwich where he called upon Sir Thomas Browne. Like Browne and Pepys, Evelyn was a lifelong bibliophile, and by his death his library is known to have comprised 3,859 books and 822 pamphlets, his personal manuscripts, and correspondence with noble figures among England and France. It would be called the John Evelyn Archives and placed in the British Library. Included in this would be his diaries broken down into four volumes with over half a million words. Many were uniformly bound in a French taste and bear his motto &quot;Omnia explorate; meliora retinete&quot; (&quot;explore everything; keep the better&quot;) from I Thessalonians 5, 21.

His daughter, Mary Evelyn (1665–1685), has been acknowledged as the pseudonymous author of the book &quot;Mundus Muliebris&quot; of 1690. &quot;Mundus Muliebris: or, The Ladies Dressing Room Unlock&#x27;d and Her Toilette Spread. In Burlesque. Together with the Fop-Dictionary, Compiled for the Use of the Fair Sex&quot; is a satirical guide in verse to Francophile fashion and terminology, and its authorship is often jointly credited to John Evelyn, who seems to have edited the work for press after his daughter&#x27;s death.

In 1694 Evelyn moved back to Wotton, Surrey, as his elder brother, George, had no living sons available to inherit the estate. Evelyn inherited the estate and the family seat Wotton House on the death of his brother in 1699. Sayes Court was made available for rent. Its most notable tenant was Russian Tsar Peter the Great, who lived there for three months in 1698 (and did great damage to both house and grounds). The house no longer exists, but a public park of the same name can be found off Evelyn Street.
Evelyn died in 1706 at his house in Dover Street, London. Wotton House and estate were inherited by his grandson John (1682–1763) later Sir John Evelyn, Bt.
==Family==

John and Mary Evelyn had eight children: 
* Richard (1652–1658)
* John Standsfield (1653–1654)
* John (the younger) (1655–1699)
* George (1657–1658)
* Richard II (1664)
* Mary (1665–1685)
* Elizabeth (1667–1685) 
* Susanna (1669–1754). Only Susanna outlived her parents.

Mary Evelyn died in 1709, three years after her husband. Both are buried in the Evelyn Chapel in St John&#x27;s Church, Wotton.

Evelyn&#x27;s epitaph (original spelling) reads:

Here lies the Body of JOHN EVELYN Esq of this place, second son of RICHARD EVELYN Esq who having served the Publick in several employments of which that Commissioner of the Privy Seal in the reign of King James the 2nd was most Honourable: and perpetuated his fame by far more lasting Monuments than those of Stone, or Brass: his Learned and useful works, fell asleep the 27th day of February 1705/6 being the 86th Year of his age in full hope of a glorious resurrection thro faith in Jesus Christ. Living in an age of extraordinary events, and revolutions he learnt (as himself asserted) this truth which pursuant to his intention is here declared. That all is vanity which is not honest and that there&#x27;s no solid Wisdom but in real piety.
Of five Sons and three Daughters borne to him from his most vertuous and excellent Wife MARY sole daughter, and heiress of Sir RICHARD BROWNE of Sayes Court near Deptford in Kent onely one Daughter SUSANNA married to WILLIAM DRAPER Esq of Adscomb in this County survived him – the two others dying in the flower of their age, and all the sons very young except one nam&#x27;d John who deceased 24 March 1698/9 in the 45th year of his age, leaving one son JOHN and one daughter ELIZABETH.

Wotton House and estate passed down to Evelyn&#x27;s great-great-grandson Sir Frederick Evelyn, 3rd Bt (1733–1812). The baronetcy next passed to Frederick Evelyn&#x27;s cousins, Sir John Evelyn, 4th Bt (1757–1833), and Sir Hugh Evelyn, 5th Bt (1769–1848). Both these two were of unsound mind and the estate was therefore left to a remote cousin descended from the diarist&#x27;s grandfather&#x27;s first marriage, in whose family it remains to this day though they no longer occupy the house. The title died out in 1848. However, there are many living descendants of John Evelyn through his daughter Susanna, Mrs William Draper, and his granddaughter Elizabeth, Mrs Simon Harcourt. There are many descendants of John Evelyn&#x27;s great-great-grandson, Charles Evelyn Jnr, through his daughter Susanna Prideaux (Evelyn) Wright living in New Zealand. Charles Evelyn Jnr was also the father of Sir John Evelyn, 4th Bt, and the last baronet, Sir Hugh Evelyn, 5th Bt.

In 1992 the skulls of John and Mary were stolen by persons unknown who hacked into the stone sarcophagi on the chapel floor and tore open the coffins. They have not been recovered.

==Works==

&quot;John Evelyn&#x27;s Diary&quot; remained unpublished as a manuscript until 1818. It is in a quarto volume containing 700 pages, covering the years between 1641 and 1697, and is continued in a smaller book – which brings the narrative down to within three weeks of its author&#x27;s death. Despite entries going back to 1641, Evelyn only actually started writing his diary much later, relying on almanacs and accounts of other people for many of the previous events. A selection from this was edited by William Bray, with the permission of the Evelyn family, in 1818, under the title of &quot;Memoirs illustrative of the Life and Writings of John Evelyn, comprising his Diary from 1641 to 1705/6, and a Selection of his Familiar Letters&quot;. Other editions followed, including those of H. B. Wheatley (1879) and Austin Dobson (3 vols, 1906). The modern edition is by Guy de la Bédoyère, who has also edited Evelyn&#x27;s correspondence with Samuel Pepys.

Evelyn&#x27;s active mind produced many other works, and although many of these have been overshadowed by the famous &quot;Diary&quot; they are of considerable interest. They include:

*&quot;Of Liberty and Servitude&quot; ... (1649), a translation from the French of François de la Mothe le Vayer, Evelyn&#x27;s own copy of which contains a note that he was &quot;like to be call&#x27;d in question by the Rebells for this booke&quot;;
*&quot;The State of France, as it stood in the IXth year of ... Louis XIII&quot; (1652), a pamphlet drawn up from personal observations about the royal family, the court, the officials, the military forces, the institutions and customs of France;
*&quot;An Essay on the First Book of T. Lucretius Carus de Rerum Natura&quot;. Interpreted and made English verse by J. Evelyn (1656); to his translation, Evelyn attached a commentary based on the writings of Gassendi and other philosophical atomists ;
*&quot;The Golden Book of St John Chrysostom, concerning the Education of Children. Translated out of the Greek by J. E.&quot; (printed 1658, dated 1659);
*&quot;The French Gardener: Instructing How to Cultivate all sorts of Fruit-Trees, and Herbs for the Garden&quot; (1658), translated from the French of Nicolas de Bonnefons;
*&quot;A Character of England, As it was lately presented in a Letter to a Nobleman of France&quot; (1659), a satire describing the customs of the country as they would appear to a foreign observer, reprinted in Somers&#x27; &quot;Tracts&quot; (ed. Scott, 1812), and in the &quot;Harleian Miscellany&quot; (ed. Park, 1813);
*&quot;The Late Newes, or Message from Bruxels Unmasked, and his Majesty Vindicated&quot; ... (1660), in answer to a libellous pamphlet on Charles I by Marchamont Nedham;
*&quot;Fumifugium: or The Inconvenience of the Aer and Smoak of London Dissipated&quot; (1661), in which he suggested that sweet-smelling trees should be planted in London to purify the air;
*&quot;Instructions Concerning Erecting of a Library&quot; ... (1661), from the French of Gabriel Naudé;
*&quot;Tyrannus or the Mode, in a Discourse of Sumptuary Laws&quot; (1661);
*&quot;Sculptura: or the History, and Art of Chalcography and Engraving in Copper...&quot; (1662); this contains the first account of &quot;A new manner of Engraving, or &quot;Mezzo Tinto&quot;, communicated by his Highnesse Prince Rupert to the Author of this Treatise&quot;. In fact many think Rupert, who had played a part in the invention or perfecting of mezzotint, wrote or co-wrote this part. The frontispiece &quot;invented&quot; (designed) by Evelyn demonstrates his limitations as an artist of the figure, unless he was badly let down by his engraver.
*&quot;Sylva, or a Discourse of Forest Trees and the Propagation of Timber in His Majesties Dominions to which is annexed Pomona ... Also Kalendarium Hortense&quot; ... (1664); the best known of his books; a plea for reafforestation aimed at landowners;
*&quot;A Parallel of the Antient Architecture with the Modern&quot; (1664), from the French of Roland Fréart, to which was added &quot;an Account of Architects and Architecture&quot; from Evelyn&#x27;s own pen ;
*&quot;An Idea of the Perfection of Painting: Demonstrated From the Principles of Art, and by Examples&quot; (1668), a translation of another work by Roland Fréart;
*&quot;The History of the three late famous Imposters, viz. Padre Ottomano, Mahomed Bei, and Sabatei Sevi&quot; ... (1669);
*&quot;Navigation and Commerce, in which his Majesties title to the Dominion of the Sea is asserted against the Novel and later Pretenders&quot; (1674), which is a preface to a projected history of the Dutch wars undertaken at the request of Charles II., but countermanded on the conclusion of peace;
*&quot;A Philosophical Discourse of Earth&quot; ... (1676), a treatise on horticulture, better known by its later title of &quot;Terra&quot;
*&quot;The Compleat Gardener&quot; (1693), from the French of J. de la Quintinie;
*&quot;Numismata. A Discourse of Medals, Antient and Modern... To which is added a Disgression concerning Physiognomy&quot; (1697);
*&quot;Acetaria: A Discourse of Sallets...&quot; (1699), the first recorded book on salads.

Some of these were reprinted in &quot;The Miscellaneous Writings of John Evelyn&quot;, edited (1825) by William Upcott.

Evelyn&#x27;s friendship with Margaret Blagge, afterwards Mrs Godolphin, is recorded in the diary, when he says he designed &quot;to consecrate her worthy life to posterity&quot;. This he effectually did in a little masterpiece of religious biography which remained in manuscript in the possession of the Harcourt family until it was edited by Samuel Wilberforce, bishop of Oxford, as the &quot;Life of Mrs Godolphin&quot; (1847), reprinted in the &quot;King&#x27;s Classics&quot; (1904). The picture of Mistress Blagge&#x27;s saintly life at court is heightened in interest when read in connexion with the scandalous memoirs of the comte de Gramont, or contemporary political satires on the court.

Numerous other papers and letters of Evelyn on scientific subjects and matters of public interest are preserved, including a collection of private and official letters and papers (1642–1712) by, or addressed to, Sir Richard Browne and his son-in-law, now held by the British Library (Add MSS 15857 and 15858).

The most influential of his books in his lifetime, long before the &quot;Diary&quot; was known, was &quot;Sylva&quot;. Evelyn believed that the country was being rapidly depleted of wood by industries such as glass factories and iron furnaces, while no attempt was being made to replace the damage by planting. In &quot;Sylva&quot;, Evelyn pleaded for afforestation and asserted in his preface to the king that he had induced landowners to plant millions of trees. It was a valuable work on arboriculture containing many engravings of trees and their foliage to assist with identification.

He spent much of his later life working on the enormous &quot;Elysium Britannicum&quot;, covering all aspects of gardening. This was never completed, and was finally published in 2001, from his 1,000-page manuscript now in the British Library (Add MS 78432). Parts of it were published as he began to realize the main task would never be completed. These included &quot;Kalendarium Hortense, or The Gardener&#x27;s Almanac&quot; – a monthly list of tasks for the gardener, &quot;Pomona&quot; on apples, and &quot;Acetaria&quot; on &quot;sallets&quot; (salad plants).

==Legacy==

In 1977 and 1978 in eight auctions at Christie&#x27;s, a major surviving portion of Evelyn&#x27;s library was sold and dispersed. The British Library holds a large archive of Evelyn&#x27;s personal papers including the manuscript of his Diary. The Victoria and Albert Museum has in its collection a cabinet owned by Evelyn which is thought to have housed his diaries. In 2006, a new biography by Gillian Darley, based on full access to the archive, was published. In 2011 a campaign was started to restore John Evelyn&#x27;s garden in Deptford. William Arthur Evelyn was a descendant.

Things named for Evelyn include:
* Evelyn, London, an electoral ward of the London Borough of Lewisham covering Deptford where John Evelyn lived.
* Evelyn College for Women, the short-lived co-ordinate college of Princeton University, USA
* A house at Addey and Stanhope School in London, England
* Crabtree &amp; Evelyn, the skincare company
* Evelyn, the gossip column of Oxford student newspaper &quot;Cherwell&quot;
* Evelyn Street, a road in Deptford
* John Evelyn Primary School on the corner of Rolt Street, Deptford.
* The John Evelyn public house on Evelyn Street in Deptford (as featured in the BBC Television&#x27;s &quot;The Tower&quot;)
* The Evelyn community garden, Windlass Place, Deptford
* The Evelyn Street Baths, also known as the Clyde Street baths and Library, the baths opened in 1928 and served the Deptford community until around 1988.

==References==
==Sources==
* John Evelyn, ed. Guy de la Bédoyère (1997), &quot;Particular Friends: The Correspondence of Samuel Pepys and John Evelyn&quot;, Boydell and Brewer, 
* John Evelyn, ed. Guy de la Bédoyère (1995), &quot;The Writings of John Evelyn&quot;, Boydell and Brewer, (full annotated texts of several of Evelyn&#x27;s books and tracts; the only modern collected edition)
* John Evelyn, &quot;The Diary of John Evelyn (excerpts)&quot;
* John Evelyn, &quot;Diaries and Correspondence&quot;, Vol 1 – Vol 2 – Vol 3 – Vol 4 – edited by William Bray. London: George Bell and Sons, 1882.
* 
*1961. Report of the Medical Officer of Health for Deptford Borough 
* John Evelyn, fellow of the Royal society: author of &quot;Sylva&quot; (1933), Ponsonby, Arthur, William Heinemann Ltd., London

==External links==

* 
* The History of the Evelyn Family by Helen Evelyn, London 1915
* 
* The John Evelyn archives at the British Library
* Who was John Evelyn? by Guy de la Bédoyère
* London&#x27;s Lost Garden about John Evelyn&#x27;s gardens, especially Sayes Court.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q342712" start="0" end="11" title="John Evelyn" label="John Evelyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q758780" start="80" end="88" title="gardener" label="gardener"/>
<link wikidata="Q185598" start="157" end="164" title="diary" label="diarist"/>
<link wikidata="Q123885" start="198" end="211" title="Royal Society" label="Royal Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q6232040" start="214" end="238" title="John Evelyn&amp;#x27;s Diary" label="John Evelyn&amp;#x27;s diary"/>
<link wikidata="Q112983" start="243" end="249" title="memoir" label="memoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q65088700" start="678" end="700" title="execution of Charles I" label="execution of Charles I"/>
<link wikidata="Q44279" start="702" end="717" title="Oliver Cromwell" label="Oliver Cromwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q917048" start="767" end="789" title="Great Plague of London" label="Great Plague of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q164679" start="799" end="819" title="Great Fire of London" label="Great Fire of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q6232040" start="836" end="860" title="John Evelyn&amp;#x27;s Diary" label="John Evelyn&amp;#x27;s Diary"/>
<link wikidata="Q106143" start="956" end="968" title="Samuel Pepys" label="Samuel Pepys"/>
<link wikidata="Q17040291" start="1336" end="1373" title="Sylva, or A Discourse of Forest-Trees and the Propagation of Timber" label="Sylva, or A Discourse of Forest-Trees"/>
<link wikidata="Q12861" start="1678" end="1687" title="gunpowder" label="gunpowder"/>
<link wikidata="Q2656219" start="1724" end="1738" title="Wotton, Surrey" label="Wotton, Surrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q246884" start="1784" end="1797" title="Lewes" label="Lewes, Sussex"/>
<link wikidata="Q6536131" start="1862" end="1886" title="Lewes Old Grammar School" label="Lewes Old Grammar School"/>
<link wikidata="Q192088" start="1911" end="1923" title="Eton College" label="Eton College"/>
<link wikidata="Q805285" start="1955" end="1978" title="Balliol College, Oxford" label="Balliol College, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q925942" start="1991" end="2004" title="Middle Temple" label="Middle Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q423078" start="2084" end="2121" title="William Howard, 1st Viscount Stafford" label="William Howard, 1st Viscount Stafford"/>
<link wikidata="Q336091" start="2127" end="2162" title="Thomas Wentworth, 1st Earl of Strafford" label="Thomas Wentworth, Earl of Strafford"/>
<link wikidata="Q102911" start="2221" end="2228" title="Holland" label="Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q216171" start="2301" end="2311" title="Waal (river)" label="Waal river"/>
<link wikidata="Q2284765" start="2546" end="2554" title="Cavalier" label="Royalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q4870548" start="2613" end="2632" title="Battle of Brentford (1642)" label="Battle of Brentford"/>
<link wikidata="Q80330" start="2767" end="2784" title="English Civil War" label="English Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q215155" start="2837" end="2843" title="Fréjus" label="Fréjus"/>
<link wikidata="Q617" start="2918" end="2923" title="Padua" label="Padua"/>
<link wikidata="Q5416481" start="2945" end="2958" title="Evelyn Tables" label="Evelyn Tables"/>
<link wikidata="Q1465387" start="3124" end="3140" title="Hunterian Museum" label="Hunterian Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q981752" start="3170" end="3185" title="English College, Rome" label="English College"/>
<link wikidata="Q166517" start="3327" end="3362" title="Thomas Howard, 21st Earl of Arundel" label="Thomas Howard, 21st Earl of Arundel"/>
<link wikidata="Q641" start="3398" end="3404" title="Venice" label="Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q336670" start="3410" end="3442" title="Henry Howard, 6th Duke of Norfolk" label="Arundel&amp;#x27;s grandson and heir"/>
<link wikidata="Q521109" start="3450" end="3465" title="Duke of Norfolk" label="Duke of Norfolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q76738" start="3560" end="3578" title="Athanasius Kircher" label="Father Kircher, SJ"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044" start="3684" end="3692" title="Florence" label="Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q6232037" start="3714" end="3733" title="John Evelyn Cabinet" label="John Evelyn Cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q156005" start="3758" end="3763" title="ebony" label="ebony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044853" start="3777" end="3788" title="pietra dura" label="pietra dura"/>
<link wikidata="Q213322" start="3833" end="3859" title="Victoria and Albert Museum" label="Victoria and Albert Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q18759359" start="4039" end="4050" title="Mary Evelyn" label="Mary Browne"/>
<link wikidata="Q7528545" start="4064" end="4082" title="Sir Richard Browne, 1st Baronet, of Deptford" label="Sir Richard Browne"/>
<link wikidata="Q81506" start="4276" end="4285" title="Charles I of England" label="Charles I"/>
<link wikidata="Q330362" start="4307" end="4330" title="Commonwealth of England" label="Commonwealth of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q82708" start="4376" end="4393" title="Church of England" label="Church of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423963" start="4401" end="4409" title="Anglicanism" label="Anglican"/>
<link wikidata="Q115857954" start="4468" end="4489" title="Book of Common Prayer (1604)" label="Book of Common Prayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5280720" start="4560" end="4588" title="Directory for Public Worship" label="Directory for Public Worship"/>
<link wikidata="Q19809" start="4706" end="4719" title="Christmas Day" label="Christmas Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130553" start="4747" end="4763" title="Roundhead" label="Parliamentarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q66086" start="4829" end="4844" title="Eucharist" label="Sacred Elements"/>
<link wikidata="Q51617" start="4934" end="4942" title="liturgical calendar" label="calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2308650" start="5121" end="5129" title="Deptford" label="Deptford"/>
<link wikidata="Q7429217" start="5176" end="5187" title="Sayes Court" label="Sayes Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q5260949" start="5205" end="5219" title="Deptford Dockyard" label="naval dockyard"/>
<link wikidata="Q610462" start="5365" end="5381" title="Grinling Gibbons" label="Grinling Gibbons"/>
<link wikidata="Q170373" start="5462" end="5478" title="Christopher Wren" label="Christopher Wren"/>
<link wikidata="Q5416278" start="5496" end="5524" title="Evelyn (ward)" label="electoral ward called Evelyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2308650" start="5528" end="5564" title="Deptford" label="Deptford, London Borough of Lewisham"/>
<link wikidata="Q122553" start="5702" end="5712" title="Charles II of England" label="Charles II"/>
<link wikidata="Q846848" start="5825" end="5836" title="English Restoration" label="Restoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q123885" start="6083" end="6096" title="Royal Society" label="Royal Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q5508560" start="6137" end="6147" title="Fumifugium" label="Fumifugium"/>
<link wikidata="Q951830" start="6441" end="6451" title="Royal Mint" label="Royal Mint"/>
<link wikidata="Q916495" start="6492" end="6514" title="Second Anglo-Dutch War" label="Second Anglo-Dutch War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7507591" start="6593" end="6612" title="Sick and Hurt Board" label="Sick and Hurt Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q5203173" start="6630" end="6653" title="D&amp;#x27;Oyly baronets" label="Sir William D&amp;#x27;Oyly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296770" start="6658" end="6677" title="Thomas Clifford, 1st Baron Clifford of Chudleigh" label="Sir Thomas Clifford"/>
<link wikidata="Q917048" start="6711" end="6723" title="Great Plague of London" label="Great Plague"/>
<link wikidata="Q116609284" start="6961" end="6971" title="Privy Seal of England" label="privy seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q15137935" start="7030" end="7048" title="Greenwich Hospital, London" label="Greenwich hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q38112" start="7154" end="7172" title="silvology" label="knowledge of trees"/>
<link wikidata="Q7183475" start="7210" end="7225" title="Philip Dumaresq" label="Philip Dumaresq"/>
<link wikidata="Q17040291" start="7337" end="7374" title="Sylva, or A Discourse of Forest-Trees and the Propagation of Timber" label="Sylva, or A Discourse of Forest-Trees"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356084" start="7747" end="7762" title="Robert Nanteuil" label="Robert Nanteuil"/>
<link wikidata="Q734889" start="7897" end="7917" title="Francesco Bartolozzi" label="Francesco Bartolozzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q186986" start="7991" end="7998" title="etching" label="etching"/>
<link wikidata="Q164679" start="8134" end="8144" title="Great Fire of London" label="Great Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6232040" start="8175" end="8186" title="John Evelyn&amp;#x27;s Diary" label="his diaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q170373" start="8233" end="8249" title="Christopher Wren" label="Christopher Wren"/>
<link wikidata="Q173882" start="8443" end="8467" title="St Paul&amp;#x27;s Cathedral" label="St Paul&amp;#x27;s Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q5414364" start="8618" end="8629" title="Euston Hall" label="Euston Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q48803" start="8739" end="8751" title="horticulture" label="horticulture"/>
<link wikidata="Q12271" start="8753" end="8765" title="architecture" label="architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q83364" start="8770" end="8783" title="vegetarianism" label="vegetarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q122553" start="8943" end="8953" title="Charles II of England" label="Charles II"/>
<link wikidata="Q130191" start="8957" end="8964" title="Norwich" label="Norwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q313925" start="8990" end="9003" title="Thomas Browne" label="Thomas Browne"/>
<link wikidata="Q214719" start="9050" end="9061" title="bibliophile" label="bibliophile"/>
<link wikidata="Q2656219" start="10166" end="10180" title="Wotton, Surrey" label="Wotton, Surrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q8037335" start="10312" end="10324" title="Wotton House, Surrey" label="Wotton House"/>
<link wikidata="Q44356" start="10439" end="10443" title="Tsar" label="Tsar"/>
<link wikidata="Q8479" start="10444" end="10459" title="Peter the Great" label="Peter the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q5302523" start="10683" end="10695" title="Dover Street" label="Dover Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q7527766" start="10760" end="10764" title="Sir John Evelyn, 1st Baronet of Wotton" label="John"/>
<link wikidata="Q68164067" start="10913" end="10931" title="John Evelyn the Younger" label="John (the younger)"/>
<link wikidata="Q124304142" start="10987" end="10991" title="Mary Evelyn (British poet)" label="Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q5497737" start="12576" end="12604" title="Sir Frederick Evelyn, 3rd Baronet" label="Sir Frederick Evelyn, 3rd Bt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7527768" start="12680" end="12703" title="Sir John Evelyn, 4th Baronet" label="Sir John Evelyn, 4th Bt"/>
<link wikidata="Q16200294" start="12721" end="12744" title="Sir Hugh Evelyn, 5th Baronet" label="Sir Hugh Evelyn, 5th Bt"/>
<link wikidata="Q48634" start="13560" end="13570" title="sarcophagus" label="sarcophagi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6232040" start="13666" end="13690" title="John Evelyn&amp;#x27;s Diary" label="John Evelyn&amp;#x27;s Diary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2122442" start="13757" end="13763" title="quarto" label="quarto"/>
<link wikidata="Q8005877" start="14167" end="14179" title="William Bray (antiquary)" label="William Bray"/>
<link wikidata="Q4823058" start="14478" end="14491" title="Austin Dobson" label="Austin Dobson"/>
<link wikidata="Q10566547" start="14533" end="14551" title="Guy de la Bédoyère" label="Guy de la Bédoyère"/>
<link wikidata="Q106143" start="14607" end="14619" title="Samuel Pepys" label="Samuel Pepys"/>
<link wikidata="Q1451251" start="14890" end="14919" title="François de la Mothe le Vayer" label="François de la Mothe le Vayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q43706" start="15588" end="15603" title="John Chrysostom" label="John Chrysostom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2855776" start="16100" end="16112" title="John Somers, 1st Baron Somers" label="Somers&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3289688" start="16364" end="16381" title="Marchamont Nedham" label="Marchamont Nedham"/>
<link wikidata="Q5508560" start="16390" end="16464" title="Fumifugium" label="Fumifugium: or The Inconvenience of the Aer and Smoak of London Dissipated"/>
<link wikidata="Q710176" start="16664" end="16677" title="Gabriel Naudé" label="Gabriel Naudé"/>
<link wikidata="Q731980" start="16931" end="16942" title="Mezzotint" label="Mezzo Tinto"/>
<link wikidata="Q76930" start="16980" end="16993" title="Rupert of the Rhine" label="Prince Rupert"/>
<link wikidata="Q583866" start="17159" end="17171" title="Book frontispiece" label="frontispiece"/>
<link wikidata="Q17040291" start="17324" end="17475" title="Sylva, or A Discourse of Forest-Trees and the Propagation of Timber" label="Sylva, or a Discourse of Forest Trees and the Propagation of Timber in His Majesties Dominions to which is annexed Pomona ... Also Kalendarium Hortense"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739285" start="17666" end="17679" title="Roland Fréart" label="Roland Fréart"/>
<link wikidata="Q299215" start="18041" end="18053" title="Sabbatai Zevi" label="Sabatei Sevi"/>
<link wikidata="Q122553" start="18314" end="18324" title="Charles II of England" label="Charles II"/>
<link wikidata="Q8019624" start="18925" end="18939" title="William Upcott" label="William Upcott"/>
<link wikidata="Q17355219" start="18972" end="18987" title="Margaret Godolphin" label="Margaret Blagge"/>
<link wikidata="Q984399" start="19286" end="19304" title="Samuel Wilberforce" label="Samuel Wilberforce"/>
<link wikidata="Q321690" start="19575" end="19591" title="Philibert de Gramont" label="comte de Gramont"/>
<link wikidata="Q7528545" start="19854" end="19872" title="Sir Richard Browne, 1st Baronet, of Deptford" label="Sir Richard Browne"/>
<link wikidata="Q23308" start="19909" end="19924" title="British Library" label="British Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q23308" start="20771" end="20786" title="British Library" label="British Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q503176" start="21162" end="21177" title="Christie&amp;#x27;s" label="Christie&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q23308" start="21258" end="21273" title="British Library" label="British Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q213322" start="21372" end="21398" title="Victoria and Albert Museum" label="Victoria and Albert Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q6232037" start="21421" end="21430" title="John Evelyn&amp;#x27;s cabinet" label="a cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q16026316" start="21669" end="21690" title="William Arthur Evelyn" label="William Arthur Evelyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5416278" start="21745" end="21759" title="Evelyn, London" label="Evelyn, London"/>
<link wikidata="Q5416300" start="21858" end="21882" title="Evelyn College for Women" label="Evelyn College for Women"/>
<link wikidata="Q21578" start="21923" end="21943" title="Princeton University" label="Princeton University"/>
<link wikidata="Q4681059" start="21962" end="21987" title="Addey and Stanhope School" label="Addey and Stanhope School"/>
<link wikidata="Q981903" start="22009" end="22030" title="Crabtree &amp;amp; Evelyn" label="Crabtree &amp;amp; Evelyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092652" start="22115" end="22123" title="Cherwell (newspaper)" label="Cherwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2308650" start="22157" end="22165" title="Deptford" label="Deptford"/>
<link wikidata="Q212198" start="22253" end="22265" title="public house" label="public house"/>
<link wikidata="Q336479" start="23322" end="23338" title="Arthur Ponsonby, 1st Baron Ponsonby of Shulbrede" label="Ponsonby, Arthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q23308" start="23496" end="23511" title="British Library" label="British Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q10566547" start="23538" end="23556" title="Guy de la Bédoyère" label="Guy de la Bédoyère"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="192103" wikidata="Q207868" url="?curid=192103" title="Thai National Anthem">
<text>The Thai National Anthem, also simply referred to as the National Anthem, is the national anthem of Thailand. It was officially adopted in its current form on 10 December 1939. It replaced &quot;Sansoen Phra Barami&quot; as the civilian anthem in 1932 (the latter is still used as the royal anthem of Thailand). The melody was composed by Phra Chenduriyang (Peter Feit), and the official lyrics were written by Luang Saranupraphan.

Prior to 1939, when Thailand was then known as &quot;Siam&quot;, two different lyrical versions were used—each one by different authors.

==Periodization==
==Historical background==
===Before 1932===
Before 1932, Sansoen Phra Barami (the Royal Anthem) was used as the national anthem of Siam.

===After 1932===

The anthem was composed a few days after the revolution of 1932 in the tune vaguely similar to the national anthem of Poland, Poland Is Not Yet Lost, and was first broadcast in July 1932. The original lyrics were by Khun Wichitmatra.

===Original lyrics===

The original lyrics were penned by Khun Wichitmatra under the title &quot;Phlēng chāt Sayām&quot; (). It was briefly in use from 1932 to 1934, when the lyrics were modified by Chan Khamwilai.

===First national anthem competition===
In 1934, Thai government launched competitions for the official national anthem, for both melody and lyrics. Changwang Tua Phathayakoson (จางวางทั่ว พัทยโกศล) composed a tune in a traditional style called &quot;Phleng Maha Nimit&quot;, but Phra Chenduriyang&#x27;s melody was selected because it sounded more modern.

===Second national anthem competition===
After that, in the competition for the lyrics with Phra Chenduriyang&#x27;s music, the original words by Khun Wichitmatra took first prize. They were in use until 1939, with a minor edit and an additional version written by second prize winner Chan Khamvilai (ฉันท์ ขำวิไล) adopted in 1934.

===Pre–1939 lyrics===
The lyrics to &quot;Phlēng chāt Sayām&quot; were changed by Chan Khamwilai, whose version was in use until 1939 when the name of Siam was officially changed to &quot;Thailand&quot;.


===Thai Cultural Revolution===
In 1939, when the name of the country was changed from Siam to Thailand, a competition was launched to create new lyrics, with those by Luang Saranupraphan winning. Thai prime minister Plaek Phibunsongkhram ordered the anthem to be played every day at 08:00 and 18:00 (8 AM and 6 PM), and ordered the populace to stand up to show respect for the nation. Nowadays, the morning and evening anthems correspond to the hoisting and lowering of the national flags in public areas (e.g. schools, workplaces, public buildings), respectively; hence, the anthem is broadcast by both radio and television channels twice per day from 1980&#x27;s.

==Current official version==

===Current usages===
According to the practice dates from 1939s during the Plaek Phibunsongkhram era and The Flag Act of 1979, Thais must stop what they are doing and stand at attention to pay homage to the anthem played by all Thai media outlets, twice a day, at 08:00 and again at 18:00. Students in school stand in front of the raised flag and sing the national anthem at 08:00 every school day, while those who do not observe the custom by standing in silence during the anthem are subject to a fine of up to 2,000 baht and not more than one year in prison. At present, there is no longer any compulsion to stand upright and respect the national flag. But most people choose to stand upright and respect the national flag voluntarily.

==See also==
* &quot;Sansoen Phra Barami&quot;, the Thai national anthem officially used before 1932, and still used as the country&#x27;s royal anthem.
* Thaification

==Notes==

==References==
==External links==
* Recordings of the National and Royal Anthem of Thailand and others honor musics from Thai Government Public Relations Department
* Thailand: &quot;Phleng Chat Thai&quot; - Audio of the national anthem of Thailand, with information and lyrics
* เพลงชาติไทย (Thai National Anthem)
* English lyrics to the Thai National Anthem
* A website dedicated to information on Thai National Anthem (Thai Language)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q207868" start="4" end="24" title="Thai National Anthem" label="Thai National Anthem"/>
<link wikidata="Q207868" start="57" end="72" title="Thai National Anthem" label="National Anthem"/>
<link wikidata="Q23691" start="81" end="96" title="national anthem" label="national anthem"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="100" end="108" title="Thailand" label="Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065112" start="195" end="214" title="Sansoen Phra Barami" label="Sansoen Phra Barami"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137588" start="285" end="297" title="royal anthem" label="royal anthem"/>
<link wikidata="Q78455" start="339" end="356" title="Phra Chenduriyang" label="Phra Chenduriyang"/>
<link wikidata="Q6641967" start="411" end="430" title="Luang Saranupraphan" label="Luang Saranupraphan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065112" start="646" end="665" title="Sansoen Phra Barami" label="Sansoen Phra Barami"/>
<link wikidata="Q2120252" start="790" end="808" title="Siamese revolution of 1932" label="revolution of 1932"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="863" end="869" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q482988" start="871" end="893" title="Poland Is Not Yet Lost" label="Poland Is Not Yet Lost"/>
<link wikidata="Q6402986" start="961" end="977" title="Khun Wichitmatra" label="Khun Wichitmatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="2179" end="2183" title="Siam" label="Siam"/>
<link wikidata="Q6641967" start="2260" end="2279" title="Luang Saranupraphan" label="Luang Saranupraphan"/>
<link wikidata="Q12376089" start="2289" end="2308" title="Prime Minister of Thailand" label="Thai prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q152777" start="2309" end="2330" title="Plaek Phibunsongkhram" label="Plaek Phibunsongkhram"/>
<link wikidata="Q152777" start="2865" end="2886" title="Plaek Phibunsongkhram" label="Plaek Phibunsongkhram"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065112" start="3551" end="3570" title="Sansoen Phra Barami" label="Sansoen Phra Barami"/>
<link wikidata="Q1849805" start="3685" end="3697" title="Thaification" label="Thaification"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="192106" wikidata="Q3605047" url="?curid=192106" title="Adam Pulchrae Mulieris">
<text>Adam Pulchrae Mulieris, also called Adam de Puteorumvilla ( 1225) was a Paris master who studied under Peter of Lamballe, who flourished in the first half of the 13th century. Little is known of his life. He has been described as one of the “metaphysicians of light” (Robert Grosseteste was another). He was a contemporary of William of Auvergne, and his works are cited by Richard de Fournival, Gerard of Abbeville and Thomas Aquinas. The origin of his name is unknown.

The only book seriously attributed to him is &quot;Memoriale Rerum Difficilium&quot;, also known as &quot;De Intelligentiis&quot;. This was originally attributed to Witelo. It was published as Adam&#x27;s in 1908 but in the 1930s the question of this attribution was re-opened.

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3605047" start="0" end="22" title="Adam Pulchrae Mulieris" label="Adam Pulchrae Mulieris"/>
<link wikidata="Q3605047" start="36" end="57" title="Adam Pulchrae Mulieris" label="Adam de Puteorumvilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="72" end="77" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="103" end="120" title="Peter of Lamballe" label="Peter of Lamballe"/>
<link wikidata="Q256541" start="268" end="286" title="Robert Grosseteste" label="Robert Grosseteste"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347826" start="326" end="345" title="William of Auvergne" label="William of Auvergne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2121581" start="374" end="394" title="Richard de Fournival" label="Richard de Fournival"/>
<link wikidata="Q3124396" start="396" end="415" title="Gerard of Abbeville" label="Gerard of Abbeville"/>
<link wikidata="Q9438" start="420" end="434" title="Thomas Aquinas" label="Thomas Aquinas"/>
<link wikidata="Q710858" start="637" end="643" title="Witelo" label="Witelo"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="192110" wikidata="Q3258965" url="?curid=192110" title="London Inner Ring Road">
<text>The London Inner Ring Road, or Ring Road as signposted, is a route with an average diameter of formed from a number of major roads that encircle Central London. The ring road forms the boundary of the London congestion charge zone, although the ring road itself is not part of the zone.

Starting at the northernmost point and moving clockwise, the roads defining the boundary are Pentonville Road, City Road, Old Street, Great Eastern Street, Commercial Street, Mansell Street, Tower Bridge, Tower Bridge Road, New Kent Road, the Elephant &amp; Castle, Kennington Lane, the roads that constitute the Vauxhall Cross one-way system and Vauxhall Bridge, Vauxhall Bridge Road, the roads that constitute the Victoria one-way system, Grosvenor Place, Park Lane, Edgware Road, Old Marylebone Road, Marylebone Road and Euston Road.

The route is described as the &quot;Inner&quot; Ring Road because there are two further sets of roads that have been described as London ring roads. The North and South Circular Roads together form the second ring road around London, averaging in diameter. The M25 motorway is the outermost road encircling the metropolis, at an average diameter of .

==History==
Plans for an Inner Ring Road were put forward by Patrick Abercrombie in the 1940s, in the County of London Plan.

==Constituent roads==
The route is signed as &quot;Ring Road&quot; and is made up of the following:
===Historic New Road===

Construction of the New Road from Paddington to Islington began in 1756 to relieve congestion in the built-up area of London. At that time the districts of Marylebone, Fitzrovia and Bloomsbury were on the northern edge of the city, and only the southern parts of them had been built up. The New Road ran through the fields to the north of these three neighbourhoods.

The road is now one of the busiest main roads in the city. It runs from Edgware Road in the west to Angel, in the east. After being renamed in 1857, the western section between Edgware Road and Great Portland Street is known as Marylebone Road, the central section between Great Portland Street and King&#x27;s Cross is known as Euston Road, and the eastern section from King&#x27;s Cross to The Angel is called Pentonville Road.

City Road was constructed in 1761 to continue the route eastwards to the northern edge of the City of London.

=== Pentonville Road ===

Pentonville Road runs west to east from Kings Cross to City Road.
By far the greater portion of the road is in the London Borough of Islington but a small part near Kings Cross is in the London Borough of Camden, including an entrance to King&#x27;s Cross St Pancras Underground station at the former King&#x27;s Cross Thameslink station. It acquired its present name in 1857.

There are several halls of residence located on Pentonville Road, these being Dinwiddy House (SOAS), Paul Robeson House and Nido Student Living. There are two green spaces along the road – Joseph Grimaldi Park and Claremont Square, the latter however is not open to the public.

This street is distinguished by the &quot;set back&quot; housing lines originally intended to provide an atmosphere of spaciousness along the thoroughfare. It is one of the locations on the UK version of the Monopoly board game, which features areas native to London.

Pentonville Road is one of the many London place names mentioned in the song &quot;Transmetropolitan&quot; by The Pogues. 

===Mansell Street===

Mansell Street is a short road, part of the A1210 route (though sometimes shown as being the A1211), which for most of its length marks the boundary between the City of London and the London Borough of Tower Hamlets, though the southernmost part is entirely in Tower Hamlets. It runs from Aldgate southwards to the Tower of London. The northern part, north of the junction with Goodmans Yard and Prescot Street, has one way northbound traffic, while the southern part has one way southbound traffic.

===Tower Bridge Road===
Tower Bridge Road is a road in Bermondsey in the London Borough of Southwark, UK, that runs north to south, and connects the Bricklayers Arms roundabout and flyover at its southern end (New Kent Road and Old Kent Road) to Tower Bridge and across the River Thames at its northern end. It also links to Long Lane.

The road has an abundance of antique (or junk) shops along part of its length. There is also Bermondsey Square which holds an &#x27;antique&#x27; market every Friday morning, usually known as &quot;Bermondsey Market&quot;, though officially as &quot;New Caledonian Market&quot;.

Towards its southern end are a collection of shops, pubs and takeaways.

===Kennington Lane===
Kennington Lane is an A-road (classified A3204) running between the Elephant &amp; Castle to the east and Vauxhall to the west.

Starting at the Elephant, Kennington Lane splits off from the A3 by means of a Y-junction, where Newington Butts becomes Kennington Park Road. Heading in a southwesterly direction, the road then crosses the A23 Kennington Road, before reaching the Vauxhall one-way system, where the A3036 Albert Embankment and Wandsworth Road, A202 Vauxhall Bridge, Durham Street and Harleyford Road, A203 South Lambeth Road, and A3205 Nine Elms Lane all converge.

===Vauxhall Bridge Road===
Vauxhall Bridge Road runs south-east to north-west from Vauxhall Cross, over the River Thames to Victoria station. At the southernmost point the road runs past the headquarters of MI6. The section immediately after Vauxhall Bridge north of the Thames is called Bessborough Gardens and is home to the Embassy of Lithuania. Further along is the Embassy of Mauritania.

===Victoria one-way system===

Victoria one-way system lies in front of Victoria Station. Clockwise, it includes Lower Grosvenor Place, Bressenden Place, and west end of Victoria Street.

==See also==
*County of London Plan
*London Ringways
*North Circular
*South Circular
*M25 motorway
* Garden Ring in Moscow

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3258965" start="4" end="26" title="London Inner Ring Road" label="London Inner Ring Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q3258965" start="31" end="40" title="London Inner Ring Road" label="Ring Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q34442" start="125" end="130" title="Road" label="roads"/>
<link wikidata="Q2354215" start="145" end="159" title="Central London" label="Central London"/>
<link wikidata="Q510662" start="165" end="174" title="ring road" label="ring road"/>
<link wikidata="Q371759" start="201" end="225" title="London congestion charge" label="London congestion charge"/>
<link wikidata="Q16726164" start="334" end="343" title="clockwise" label="clockwise"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="381" end="397" title="#Pentonville Road" label="Pentonville Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q5123401" start="399" end="408" title="City Road" label="City Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q122903" start="410" end="420" title="Old Street" label="Old Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027127" start="422" end="442" title="Shoreditch" label="Great Eastern Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q5122150" start="444" end="461" title="Commercial Street (London)" label="Commercial Street"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="463" end="477" title="#Mansell Street" label="Mansell Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q83125" start="479" end="491" title="Tower Bridge" label="Tower Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="493" end="510" title="#Tower Bridge Road" label="Tower Bridge Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q7009649" start="512" end="525" title="New Kent Road" label="New Kent Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q2716414" start="531" end="552" title="Elephant and Castle" label="Elephant &amp;amp; Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3258965" start="554" end="569" title="Kennington Lane" label="Kennington Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q146747" start="601" end="615" title="Vauxhall Cross" label="Vauxhall Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142134" start="635" end="650" title="Vauxhall Bridge" label="Vauxhall Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="652" end="672" title="#Vauxhall Bridge Road" label="Vauxhall Bridge Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q124000" start="704" end="712" title="Victoria, London" label="Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q378991" start="746" end="755" title="Park Lane (road)" label="Park Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q3047586" start="757" end="769" title="Edgware Road (London)" label="Edgware Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365199" start="792" end="807" title="Marylebone Road" label="Marylebone Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308692" start="812" end="823" title="Euston Road" label="Euston Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q1800584" start="979" end="984" title="A406 road" label="North"/>
<link wikidata="Q4574872" start="989" end="1003" title="A205 road" label="South Circular"/>
<link wikidata="Q19872" start="1087" end="1099" title="M25 motorway" label="M25 motorway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2295334" start="1239" end="1258" title="Patrick Abercrombie" label="Patrick Abercrombie"/>
<link wikidata="Q5177884" start="1280" end="1301" title="County of London Plan" label="County of London Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7011271" start="1449" end="1457" title="New Road (eighteenth century north London turnpike road)" label="New Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q124230" start="1463" end="1473" title="Paddington" label="Paddington"/>
<link wikidata="Q125163" start="1477" end="1486" title="Islington" label="Islington"/>
<link wikidata="Q123634" start="1585" end="1595" title="Marylebone" label="Marylebone"/>
<link wikidata="Q121663" start="1597" end="1606" title="Fitzrovia" label="Fitzrovia"/>
<link wikidata="Q150120" start="1611" end="1621" title="Bloomsbury" label="Bloomsbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q3047586" start="1869" end="1881" title="Edgware Road" label="Edgware Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q122527" start="1897" end="1902" title="Angel, London" label="Angel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4968916" start="1991" end="2012" title="Great Portland Street" label="Great Portland Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365199" start="2025" end="2040" title="Marylebone Road" label="Marylebone Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q219867" start="2096" end="2113" title="London King&amp;#x27;s Cross railway station" label="King&amp;#x27;s Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308692" start="2126" end="2137" title="Euston Road" label="Euston Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q15711564" start="2209" end="2225" title="Pentonville Road" label="Pentonville Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q5123401" start="2228" end="2237" title="City Road" label="City Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q23311" start="2322" end="2336" title="City of London" label="City of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q2153507" start="2405" end="2416" title="King&amp;#x27;s Cross, London" label="Kings Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q5123401" start="2420" end="2429" title="City Road" label="City Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q205817" start="2480" end="2507" title="London Borough of Islington" label="London Borough of Islington"/>
<link wikidata="Q202088" start="2552" end="2576" title="London Borough of Camden" label="London Borough of Camden"/>
<link wikidata="Q826120" start="2603" end="2651" title="King&amp;#x27;s Cross St Pancras tube station" label="King&amp;#x27;s Cross St Pancras Underground station"/>
<link wikidata="Q801010" start="2666" end="2702" title="King&amp;#x27;s Cross Thameslink railway station" label="King&amp;#x27;s Cross Thameslink station"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2821" end="2835" title="Dinwiddy House" label="Dinwiddy House"/>
<link wikidata="Q220144" start="2837" end="2841" title="SOAS" label="SOAS"/>
<link wikidata="Q220144" start="2844" end="2862" title="Paul Robeson House (London)" label="Paul Robeson House"/>
<link wikidata="Q16892969" start="2932" end="2952" title="Joseph Grimaldi Park" label="Joseph Grimaldi Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q16258488" start="2957" end="2973" title="Claremont Square" label="Claremont Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q17243" start="3230" end="3249" title="Monopoly (game)" label="Monopoly board game"/>
<link wikidata="Q48304" start="3401" end="3411" title="The Pogues" label="The Pogues"/>
<link wikidata="Q23311" start="3598" end="3612" title="City of London" label="City of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q208152" start="3621" end="3652" title="London Borough of Tower Hamlets" label="London Borough of Tower Hamlets"/>
<link wikidata="Q28846021" start="3726" end="3733" title="Aldgate" label="Aldgate"/>
<link wikidata="Q62378" start="3752" end="3767" title="Tower of London" label="Tower of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q34442" start="3985" end="3989" title="road" label="road"/>
<link wikidata="Q822040" start="3993" end="4003" title="Bermondsey" label="Bermondsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="4011" end="4017" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q730706" start="4029" end="4038" title="London Borough of Southwark" label="Southwark"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="4040" end="4042" title="United Kingdom" label="UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q4966021" start="4087" end="4103" title="Bricklayers Arms" label="Bricklayers Arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1525" start="4104" end="4114" title="roundabout" label="roundabout"/>
<link wikidata="Q7009649" start="4148" end="4161" title="New Kent Road" label="New Kent Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q14820036" start="4166" end="4179" title="Old Kent Road" label="Old Kent Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q83125" start="4184" end="4196" title="Tower Bridge" label="Tower Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q19686" start="4212" end="4224" title="River Thames" label="River Thames"/>
<link wikidata="Q15030877" start="4263" end="4272" title="Long Lane, Southwark" label="Long Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q4892592" start="4473" end="4490" title="Bermondsey Market" label="Bermondsey Market"/>
<link wikidata="Q387692" start="4672" end="4678" title="Great Britain road numbering scheme" label="A-road"/>
<link wikidata="Q2716414" start="4718" end="4739" title="Elephant &amp;amp; Castle" label="Elephant &amp;amp; Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q146747" start="4756" end="4764" title="Vauxhall" label="Vauxhall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577223" start="4841" end="4843" title="A3 road" label="A3"/>
<link wikidata="Q4388272" start="4858" end="4868" title="3-way junction" label="Y-junction"/>
<link wikidata="Q15030884" start="4876" end="4891" title="Newington Butts" label="Newington Butts"/>
<link wikidata="Q6390917" start="4900" end="4920" title="Kennington Park Road" label="Kennington Park Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q2337479" start="4986" end="4989" title="A23 road" label="A23"/>
<link wikidata="Q6390920" start="4990" end="5005" title="Kennington Road" label="Kennington Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q4649114" start="5062" end="5067" title="A3036 road" label="A3036"/>
<link wikidata="Q2831157" start="5068" end="5085" title="Albert Embankment" label="Albert Embankment"/>
<link wikidata="Q4648990" start="5107" end="5111" title="A202 road" label="A202"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142134" start="5112" end="5127" title="Vauxhall Bridge" label="Vauxhall Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5129" end="5142" title="Durham Street" label="Durham Street"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5147" end="5162" title="Harleyford Road" label="Harleyford Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q4648992" start="5164" end="5168" title="A203 road" label="A203"/>
<link wikidata="Q4648992" start="5169" end="5187" title="South Lambeth Road" label="South Lambeth Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q4660970" start="5193" end="5198" title="A3205 road" label="A3205"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5199" end="5213" title="Nine Elms Lane" label="Nine Elms Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q146747" start="5312" end="5326" title="Vauxhall Cross" label="Vauxhall Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q19686" start="5337" end="5349" title="River Thames" label="River Thames"/>
<link wikidata="Q985210" start="5353" end="5369" title="Victoria Station (London)" label="Victoria station"/>
<link wikidata="Q184560" start="5436" end="5439" title="MI6" label="MI6"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142134" start="5471" end="5486" title="Vauxhall Bridge" label="Vauxhall Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q16891016" start="5556" end="5576" title="Embassy of Lithuania, London" label="Embassy of Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q111963189" start="5599" end="5620" title="Embassy of Mauritania, London" label="Embassy of Mauritania"/>
<link wikidata="Q124000" start="5695" end="5703" title="Victoria, London" label="Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q3117082" start="5736" end="5757" title="Lower Grosvenor Place" label="Lower Grosvenor Place"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5759" end="5775" title="Bressenden Place" label="Bressenden Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q124000" start="5793" end="5808" title="Victoria Street, London" label="Victoria Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q5177884" start="5825" end="5846" title="County of London Plan" label="County of London Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6670693" start="5848" end="5863" title="London Ringways" label="London Ringways"/>
<link wikidata="Q1800584" start="5865" end="5879" title="North Circular Road, London" label="North Circular"/>
<link wikidata="Q4574872" start="5881" end="5895" title="South Circular Road, London" label="South Circular"/>
<link wikidata="Q19872" start="5897" end="5909" title="London Orbital motorway" label="M25 motorway"/>
<link wikidata="Q961888" start="5912" end="5923" title="Garden Ring" label="Garden Ring"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="192111" wikidata="Q540868" url="?curid=192111" title="Genesis Nomad">
<text>The Genesis Nomad, also known as Sega Nomad, is a handheld game console manufactured by Sega and released in North America in October 1995. The Nomad is a portable variation of the Sega Genesis home video game console (known as the Mega Drive outside North America). It could also be used with a television set via a video port. It was based on the Mega Jet, a portable version of the home console designed for use on airline flights in Japan.

The Nomad was the last handheld console released by Sega. Released late in the Genesis era, it had a short lifespan. It was sold exclusively in North America, and uses regional lockout. Sega&#x27;s focus on the Sega Saturn left the Nomad under-supported, and it was incompatible with several Genesis peripherals, including the Power Base Converter, the Sega CD, and the 32X. About 1 million units of the Nomad were sold, and it is considered a commercial failure.

==History==

The Sega Genesis was Sega&#x27;s entry into the 16-bit era of video game consoles. In Japan, Sega released the Mega Jet, a portable version of the Mega Drive for use on Japan Airlines flights. The Mega Jet requires a connection to a television screen and a power source, and so outside of airline flights can only be used in cars equipped with a television set and cigarette lighter receptacle. On planes, the Mega Jet was connected into armrest monitors. It had a limited consumer release in Japanese department stores in 1994, but did not see success.
Planning to release a new handheld console to succeed the Game Gear, Sega originally intended to produce a system with a touchscreen interface two years before the Game.com handheld by Tiger Electronics. However, touchscreen technology was expensive at the time, so Sega instead released the Genesis Nomad, a handheld version of the Genesis. The development codename was &quot;Project Venus&quot;. Sega hoped to capitalize on the Genesis&#x27;s popularity in North America. At the time, the Genesis Nomad was the only handheld console that could connect to a television.

The Nomad was released in October 1995 in North America only. The release was five years into the market span of the Genesis, with an existing library of more than 500 Genesis games. While Sega Technical Institute&#x27;s &quot;The Ooze&quot; was originally planned as a launch game, it was not included. According to former Sega of America research and development head Joe Miller, the Nomad was not intended to replace the Game Gear, and Sega had few plans for the new handheld. Sega was supporting five different consoles: Saturn, Genesis, Game Gear, Pico, and the Master System, as well as the Sega CD and 32X add-ons. In Japan, the Mega Drive had never been successful and the Saturn was more successful than Sony&#x27;s PlayStation, so Sega Enterprises CEO Hayao Nakayama decided to focus on the Saturn, resulting in the end of support for the Genesis and Genesis-based products. Additionally, the Game Boy, Nintendo&#x27;s handheld console that had been dominant in the market, became even more dominant with the release of &quot;Pokémon Red&quot; and &quot;Blue&quot;. This meant the Nomad was not successful. By 1999, the Nomad was being sold at less than a third of its original price.

==Technical specifications==
Similar to the Genesis and the Mega Jet, the Nomad&#x27;s main CPU is a Motorola 68000. Possessing similar memory, graphics, and sound capabilities, the Nomad is nearly identical to the full-size console; the only variation is that it is completely self-sufficient. The Nomad has a 3.25 inch diagonal backlit color LCD screen and an A/V output that allows the Nomad to be played on a television screen. Design elements of the handheld were made similar to the Game Gear, but included six buttons for full compatibility with later Genesis releases. Also included were a red power switch, headphone jack, volume dial, and separate controller input for multiplayer games. The controller port functions as player 2, so single-player games cannot be played with a Genesis controller. The Nomad can be powered by an AC adapter, a battery recharger known as the Genesis Nomad PowerBack, or six AA batteries, which provide a battery life of two to three hours.

The Nomad is fully compatible with several Genesis peripherals, including the Sega Activator, Team Play Adaptor, Mega Mouse, and the Sega Channel and XBAND network add-ons. However, the Nomad is not compatible with the Power Base Converter, Sega CD, or 32X. This means the Nomad can only play Genesis games, whereas the standard Genesis can also play Master System, Sega CD, and 32X games with the respective add-ons.

==Game library==

The Nomad does not have its own game library, but instead plays Genesis games. At the time of its launch, the Nomad had over 500 games available for play. However, no pack-in game was included. The Nomad can boot unlicensed, homebrew, and bootleg games made for the Genesis. Some earlier third-party games have compatibility issues when played on the Nomad, but can be successfully played through the use of a Game Genie. Likewise, due to its lack of compatibility with any of the Genesis&#x27; add-ons, it is unable to play any games for the Master System, Sega CD, or 32X. The Nomad employs two different regional lockout methods, physical and software, but methods have been found to bypass these.

== Reception and legacy ==
Reviewing the Nomad shortly after launch, &quot;Game Players&quot; considered the price of $179 &quot;a bit steep&quot;, but said it was the best portable system on the market, and recommended it over the stock Genesis since it could play all the same games in a portable format. In a 1997 year-end review, a team of four &quot;Electronic Gaming Monthly&quot; editors gave the Nomad scores of 8.0, 6.5, 7.0, and 7.5. They praised its support for the entire Genesis library, but criticized its hefty battery usage and noted that despite a recent price drop, it was still expensive enough to discourage interested consumers. While they generally complimented the screen display, they remarked that its small size makes it difficult to play certain games. Sushi-X declared the Nomad the best portable gaming system then on the market, while his three co-reviewers had more misgivings, saying it has merits but might not be a worthwhile buy. However, in their first 1996 review, reviewers from &quot;Electronics Gaming Monthly&quot; noted that the screen suffers from display motion blur, particularly during fast scrolling.

Blake Snow of &quot;GamePro&quot; listed the Nomad as fifth on his list of the &quot;10 Worst-Selling Handhelds of All Time&quot;, criticizing its poor timing into the market, inadequate advertising, and poor battery life. Scott Alan Marriott of Allgame placed more than simply timing into reasons for the Nomad&#x27;s lack of sales, stating, &quot;The reason for the Nomad&#x27;s failure may have very well been a combination of poor timing, company mistrust and the relatively high cost of the machine (without a pack-in). Genesis owners were too skittish to invest in another 16-bit system.&quot; Stuart Hunt of &quot;Retro Gamer&quot;, however, praised the Nomad, saying in a retrospective that Nomad was &quot;the first true 16-bit handheld&quot; and declared it the best variant of the Genesis. He noted the collectability of the Nomad, due to its low production, and stated, &quot;Had Sega cottoned on to the concept of the Nomad before the Mega Drive 2, and rolled it out as a true successor to the Mega Drive ... then perhaps Sega may have succeeded in its original goal to prolong the life of the Mega Drive in the U.S.&quot; In 2017 a mod was developed to allow the Nomad to receiver power using USB devices.

==See also==

* VMU
* Comparison of handheld game consoles

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q540868" start="4" end="17" title="Genesis Nomad" label="Genesis Nomad"/>
<link wikidata="Q540868" start="33" end="43" title="Genesis Nomad" label="Sega Nomad"/>
<link wikidata="Q941818" start="50" end="71" title="handheld game console" label="handheld game console"/>
<link wikidata="Q122741" start="88" end="92" title="Sega" label="Sega"/>
<link wikidata="Q10676" start="181" end="193" title="Sega Genesis" label="Sega Genesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q17589470" start="194" end="217" title="home video game console" label="home video game console"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="251" end="264" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q289" start="296" end="306" title="television" label="television"/>
<link wikidata="Q540868" start="349" end="357" title="Genesis Nomad" label="Mega Jet"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="589" end="602" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351306" start="613" end="629" title="regional lockout" label="regional lockout"/>
<link wikidata="Q200912" start="656" end="667" title="Sega Saturn" label="Sega Saturn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047516" start="798" end="805" title="Sega CD" label="Sega CD"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063978" start="815" end="818" title="32X" label="32X"/>
<link wikidata="Q6612014" start="889" end="907" title="List of commercial failures in video games" label="commercial failure"/>
<link wikidata="Q10676" start="927" end="939" title="Sega Genesis" label="Sega Genesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q129585" start="971" end="1004" title="History of video game consoles (fourth generation)" label="16-bit era of video game consoles"/>
<link wikidata="Q213140" start="1092" end="1106" title="Japan Airlines" label="Japan Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q199326" start="1288" end="1316" title="cigarette lighter receptacle" label="cigarette lighter receptacle"/>
<link wikidata="Q751719" start="1535" end="1544" title="Game Gear" label="Game Gear"/>
<link wikidata="Q165970" start="1598" end="1609" title="touchscreen" label="touchscreen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2498396" start="1641" end="1649" title="Game.com" label="Game.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q119267" start="1662" end="1679" title="Tiger Electronics" label="Tiger Electronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7879236" start="2238" end="2262" title="Sega Technical Institute" label="Sega Technical Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q2562085" start="2276" end="2284" title="The Ooze" label="The Ooze"/>
<link wikidata="Q200912" start="2574" end="2580" title="Sega Saturn" label="Saturn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374482" start="2602" end="2606" title="Sega Pico" label="Pico"/>
<link wikidata="Q209868" start="2616" end="2629" title="Master System" label="Master System"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047516" start="2646" end="2653" title="Sega CD" label="Sega CD"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063978" start="2658" end="2661" title="32X" label="32X"/>
<link wikidata="Q10677" start="2774" end="2785" title="PlayStation (console)" label="PlayStation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5686016" start="2811" end="2825" title="Hayao Nakayama" label="Hayao Nakayama"/>
<link wikidata="Q186437" start="2952" end="2960" title="Game Boy" label="Game Boy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8093" start="2962" end="2970" title="Nintendo" label="Nintendo"/>
<link wikidata="Q637137" start="3079" end="3123" title="Pokémon Red and Blue" label="&amp;quot;Pokémon Red&amp;quot; and &amp;quot;Blue&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300" start="3337" end="3340" title="central processing unit" label="CPU"/>
<link wikidata="Q667808" start="3346" end="3360" title="Motorola 68000" label="Motorola 68000"/>
<link wikidata="Q218593" start="3561" end="3565" title="inch" label="inch"/>
<link wikidata="Q83341" start="3589" end="3599" title="Liquid-crystal display" label="LCD screen"/>
<link wikidata="Q758901" start="3607" end="3610" title="audiovisual" label="A/V"/>
<link wikidata="Q751719" start="3734" end="3743" title="Game Gear" label="Game Gear"/>
<link wikidata="Q124164" start="4084" end="4086" title="alternating current" label="AC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195592" start="4161" end="4173" title="AA battery" label="AA batteries"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4279" end="4290" title="Sega Genesis#Peripherals" label="peripherals"/>
<link wikidata="Q7446143" start="4361" end="4373" title="Sega Channel" label="Sega Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q8041689" start="4378" end="4383" title="XBAND" label="XBAND"/>
<link wikidata="Q598205" start="4890" end="4898" title="Homebrew (video games)" label="homebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q2566257" start="5075" end="5085" title="Game Genie" label="Game Genie"/>
<link wikidata="Q209868" start="5208" end="5221" title="Master System" label="Master System"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047516" start="5223" end="5230" title="Sega CD" label="Sega CD"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063978" start="5235" end="5238" title="32X" label="32X"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351306" start="5272" end="5288" title="regional lockout" label="regional lockout"/>
<link wikidata="Q5519886" start="5442" end="5454" title="Game Players" label="Game Players"/>
<link wikidata="Q793981" start="5722" end="5747" title="Electronic Gaming Monthly" label="Electronic Gaming Monthly"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282641" start="6458" end="6477" title="display motion blur" label="display motion blur"/>
<link wikidata="Q181319" start="6504" end="6513" title="scrolling" label="scrolling"/>
<link wikidata="Q315718" start="6536" end="6543" title="GamePro" label="GamePro"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118540" start="6762" end="6769" title="Allgame" label="Allgame"/>
<link wikidata="Q3021204" start="7137" end="7148" title="Retro Gamer" label="Retro Gamer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7293" end="7315" title="Sega Genesis#Variations" label="variant of the Genesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540152" start="7753" end="7756" title="VMU" label="VMU"/>
<link wikidata="Q10297309" start="7759" end="7795" title="Comparison of handheld game consoles" label="Comparison of handheld game consoles"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="192115" wikidata="Q60539" url="?curid=192115" title="Horst Buchholz">
<text>Horst Werner Buchholz (4 December 1933 – 3 March 2003) was a German actor who appeared in more than 60 feature films from 1951 to 2002. During his youth, he was sometimes called &quot;the German James Dean&quot;. He is perhaps best known in English-speaking countries for his roles as Chico in &quot;The Magnificent Seven&quot; (1960), as a communist in Billy Wilder&#x27;s &quot;One, Two, Three&quot; (1961), and as Dr. Lessing in &quot;Life Is Beautiful&quot; (1997).

== Early life ==
Horst Buchholz was born in Berlin, the son of Maria Hasenkamp. He never knew his biological father, but took the surname of his stepfather Hugo Buchholz, a shoemaker, whom his mother married in 1938. His half-sister Heidi, born in 1941, gave him the nickname Hotte, which he kept for the rest of his life.

During World War II, he was evacuated to Silesia, and at the end of the war, he found himself in a foster home in Czechoslovakia. He returned to Berlin as soon as he could.

Buchholz barely finished his schooling before seeking theater work, first appearing on stage in 1949. He soon left his childhood home in East Berlin to work in West Berlin. He established himself in the theater, notably the Schiller Theater, and on radio.

== Early film career ==
Buchholz expanded into film work by doing foreign-language voice dubbing, for example Lampwick in &quot;Pinocchio&quot; and Ben Cooper in &quot;Johnny Guitar&quot;.

In 1951 he started getting small, uncredited on-screen parts in films like &quot;Warum?&quot; (1951) and &quot;Adventure in Berlin&quot; (1952).

He had a larger role in &quot;Marianne of My Youth&quot; (1954), directed by Julien Duvivier and was in a TV movie &quot;Die Schule der Väter&quot;. He was in &quot;Sky Without Stars&quot; (1955) from Helmut Käutner and &quot;Regine&quot; (1956).

== Stardom ==

His youthful good looks next brought him a part in &quot;Die Halbstarken&quot; (1956), which made him a teen favorite in Germany; an English-dubbed version was released in the US as &quot;Teenage Wolfpack&quot;, with Buchholz billed as Henry Bookholt and promoted as a new James Dean.

He was in &quot;King in Shadow&quot; (1957) then &quot;The Girl and the Legend&quot; (1957) with Romy Schneider. Full-fledged stardom resulted from &quot;Confessions of Felix Krull&quot; (1957), in which he played the lead of a narcissistic high-class conman; it was directed by Kurt Hoffmann and based on the novel by Thomas Mann. He made another with Schneider, &quot;Monpti&quot; (1957), aka &quot;Love from Paris&quot;.

That year he starred in &quot;Two Worlds&quot; (1958), &quot;Wet Asphalt&quot; (1958), and &quot;Auferstehung&quot; (1958) aka &quot;Resurrection&quot;.

== English-language films ==

Buchholz began appearing in English-language films in 1959, when he co-starred in the British production &quot;Tiger Bay&quot; with Hayley Mills. It was a notable success. In her autobiography, Mills revealed she had a schoolgirl crush on Buchholz during the filming of &quot;Tiger Bay&quot; and was saddened when the cast threw him an engagement party.

He returned to Germany for &quot;Ship of the Dead&quot; (1959), then accepted an offer from Hollywood to play a young aspiring gunslinger in &quot;The Magnificent Seven&quot; (1960), a remake of Akira Kurosawa&#x27;s &quot;Seven Samurai&quot; (1954) in which he would play the role originally portrayed by Toshiro Mifune in the Japanese version. Arriving in the U.S. with time to spare before filming began, Buchholz lingered in New York and appeared on Broadway in a short-lived adaptation of &quot;Cheri&quot; (1959) and then continued westward.

After &quot;The Magnificent Seven&quot;, which went on to become a classic, Buchholz played in the romantic drama &quot;Fanny&quot; (1961) with Leslie Caron and Maurice Chevalier, and the Berlin-set comedy &quot;One, Two, Three&quot; (1961), directed by Billy Wilder and starring James Cagney. Though filmed in Mexico, France and Germany respectively, these were Hollywood productions and Buchholz had begun a period of residence in Los Angeles. He proved to be popular with American audiences, but several missed opportunities thwarted the upward trajectory of his career and it began to stall. Filming schedule conflicts prevented him from accepting the offered roles of Tony in &quot;West Side Story&quot; (1961) and Sherif Ali in &quot;Lawrence of Arabia&quot; (1962), a part that eventually went to Omar Sharif.

Instead he played the lead in &quot;Nine Hours to Rama&quot; (1963) for Twentieth Century Fox and &quot;The Empty Canvas&quot; (1963), shot in Italy with Bette Davis. He returned to Broadway to appear in &quot;Andorra&quot; (1963), which had a short run.

== International star ==
On the advice of his agent, like many other actors who were asked, he turned down the starring role in &quot;A Fistful of Dollars&quot; (1964). He was in &quot;Marco the Magnificent&quot; (1965) with Anthony Quinn; &quot;That Man in Istanbul&quot; (1965), a Eurospy film; &quot;Johnny Banco&quot; (1967), a comedy with Yves Allégret; and &quot;Young Rebel&quot; (1967), a biopic of Miguel de Cervantes with Gina Lollobrigida. He guest starred on &quot;The Danny Thomas Hour&quot; (1968).

Buchholz starred in &quot;Astragal&quot; (1969), &quot;How, When and with Whom&quot; (1969), &quot;The Dove Must Not Fly&quot; (1970), and &quot;The Saviour&quot; (1971). He returned to Hollywood lead roles briefly with &quot;The Great Waltz&quot; (1971) playing Johann Strauss.

Buchholz starred in &quot;...But Johnny!&quot; (1973), and &quot;The Catamount Killing&quot; (1974). He appeared on German television in shows like &quot;Die Klempner kommen&quot; (1976).

== Supporting actor ==
Buchholz moved to supporting roles in films like &quot;The Savage Bees&quot; (1976), &quot;Raid on Entebbe&quot; (1976), &quot;Dead of Night&quot; (1977), and &quot;The Amazing Captain Nemo&quot; (1978). He guest starred on episodes of &quot;Logan&#x27;s Run&quot;, &quot;Fantasy Island&quot;, &quot;Charlie&#x27;s Angels&quot;, and &quot;How the West Was Won&quot; and had the lead in &quot;Women in Hospital&quot; (1977) and a role in &quot;The French Atlantic Affair &quot; (1979).

Buchholz was in &quot;From Hell to Victory&quot; (1979), and &quot;Avalanche Express&quot; (1979). He had the co lead in &quot;Berlin Tunnel 21&quot; (1981) and was top billed in &quot;Aphrodite&quot; (1981). He guest starred several times on &quot;Derrick&quot; and had a supporting part in &quot;Sahara&quot; (1983).

== Later career ==
Buchholz focused on Germany: &quot;Funkeln im Auge&quot; (1984), and &quot;&quot; (1984). He went to Hollywood for parts in &quot;Code Name: Emerald&quot; (1985) and &quot;Crossings&quot; (1986).

Buchholz&#x27;s credits include &quot;Affari di famiglia&quot; (1986), &quot;Die Fräulein von damals&quot; (1986), and &quot;Der Schatz im Niemandsland&quot; (1987). He had the lead in &quot;And the Violins Stopped Playing&quot; (1989) and supporting role in &quot;Escape from Paradise&quot; (1990).

Buchholz turned up in &quot;&quot; (1992), &quot;Touch and Die &quot; (1992), &quot;Faraway, So Close!&quot; (1993), &quot;The Cave of the Golden Rose 4&quot; (1995), &quot;Tödliches Erbe&quot; (1995), &quot;Der Clan der Anna Voss&quot; (1995), &quot;Maître Da Costa&quot;, and &quot;The Firebird&quot; (1997). He portrayed Dr. Lessing in Roberto Benigni&#x27;s &quot;Life Is Beautiful&quot; (1997).

He was in &quot;Geisterstunde – Fahrstuhl ins Jenseits&quot; (1997), &quot;Der kleine Unterschied&quot; (1997), &quot;Dunckel&quot; (1998) and &quot;Der kleine Unterschied&quot; (1998), and voiced Fa Zhou in the German dub of &quot;Mulan&quot;. He returned to America for &quot;Voyage of Terror&quot; (1998).

Buchholz&#x27;s last performances include &quot;Kinderraub in Rio – Eine Mutter schlägt zurück&quot; (1998), &quot;Heller als der Mond&quot; (2000), &quot;The Enemy&quot; (2001), &quot;Der Club der grünen Witwen&quot; (2001), &quot;Traumfrau mit Verspätung&quot; (2001), &quot;&quot; (2001), &quot;Abschnitt 40&quot; (2001), &quot;Atlantic Affairs&quot; (2002) and &quot;In der Mitte eines Lebens&quot; (2003).

== Personal life and death ==
In 1958, Buchholz married French actress Myriam Bru and they had two children: son Christopher, an actor, and daughter Beatrice.

Buchholz explained in a 2000 interview that he and Myriam had a stable and enduring arrangement, with her life centered in Paris and his in Berlin, the city that he loved. In the same interview Buchholz discussed his bisexuality. Their son Christopher Buchholz, also an actor, produced a feature-length documentary &quot;Horst Buchholz ... Mein Papa&quot; (2005) which considered Buchholz&#x27;s sexuality, as part of a wider exploration of his life. His sexuality had not been publicly known in the 1960s when he had played lead roles in English-language movies.

Buchholz died unexpectedly at the age of 69 on 3 March 2003 at Charité from pneumonia that developed after an operation for a hip fracture. Berlin was the city to which his loyalty was consistent, and he was buried there in the Friedhof Heerstraße.

== Selected filmography ==

* &quot;All Clues Lead to Berlin&quot; (1952), as Young Man at the Radio Tower (uncredited)
* &quot;Marianne of My Youth&quot; (1955), as Vincent Loringer (German version only)
* &quot;Sky Without Stars&quot; (1955), as Mischa Bjelkin
* &quot;Regine&quot; (1956), as Karl Winter
* &quot;Teenage Wolfpack&quot; (1956), as Freddy Borchert
* &quot;King in Shadow&quot; (1957), as King Christian
* &quot;The Girl and the Legend&quot; (1957), as Tom
* &quot;Confessions of Felix Krull&quot; (1957), as Felix Krull
* &quot;Love From Paris&quot; (1957), as Monpti (as a young man)
* &quot;A Piece of Heaven&quot; (1957), as Cabriolet-Driver (uncredited)
* &quot;&quot; (1958), as Mecky Berger
* &quot;Nasser Asphalt&quot; (1958), as Greg Bachmann
* &quot;Resurrection&quot; (1958), as Nechljudoff
* &quot;Tiger Bay&quot; (1959), as Korchinsky
* &quot;The Death Ship&quot; (1959), as Philip Gale
* &quot;The Magnificent Seven&quot; (1960), as Chico
* &quot;Fanny&quot; (1961), as Marius
* &quot;One, Two, Three&quot; (1961), as Otto Ludwig Piffl
* &quot;Nine Hours to Rama&quot; (1963), as Nathuram Godse
* &quot;The Empty Canvas&quot; (1963), as Dino
* &quot;Marco the Magnificent&quot; (1965), as Marco Polo
* &quot;That Man in Istanbul&quot; (1965), as Tony Mecenas
* &quot;Johnny Banco&quot; (1967), as Johnny Banco
* &quot;Cervantes&quot; (1967, in the title role), as Miguel De Cervantes
* &quot;L&#x27;Astragale&quot; (1968), as Julien
* &quot;Come, quando, perché&quot; (1969), as Alberto
* &quot;&quot; (1970), as Pablo Vallajo
* &quot;Le Sauveur&quot; (1971), as Claude
* &quot;The Great Waltz&quot; (1972), as Johann Strauss Jr.
* &quot;&quot; (1973), as Jonny
* &quot;Welcome Stranger&quot; (1973)
* &quot;&quot; (1974), as Mark Kalvin
* &quot;Derrick&quot;
** Season 3, Episode 11: &quot;Das Superding&quot; (1976), as Gerke
** Season 5, Episode 8: &quot;Solo für Margarete&quot; (1978), as Alexis
** Season 7, Episode 8: &quot;Auf einem Gutshof&quot; (1980), as Richard Schulte
** Season 10, Episode 2: &quot;Die Tote in der Isar&quot; (1983), as Arthur Dissmann
* &quot;Raid on Entebbe&quot; (1976, TV Movie), as Wilfried Böse
* &quot;Dead of Night&quot; (1977, TV Movie), as Michael
* &quot;Women in Hospital&quot; (1977), as Dr. Schumann
* &quot;Logan&#x27;s Run&quot; Season 1, Episode 3: &quot;Capture&quot; (1977), as James Borden
* &quot;The Return of Captain Nemo&quot; (1978), as King Tibor
* &quot;Charlie&#x27;s Angels&quot; Season 3, Episode 3: Angel Come Home (1978), as Paul Ferrino
* &quot;The French Atlantic Affair&quot; (1979), as Dr. Chabot
* &quot;From Hell to Victory&quot; (1979), as Jürgen Dietrich
* &quot;Avalanche Express&quot; (1979), as Julian Scholten
* &quot;Berlin Tunnel 21&quot; (1981), as Emerich Weber
* &quot;Aphrodite&quot; (1982), as Harry Laird
* &quot;Sahara&quot; (1983), as Von Glessing
* &quot;&quot; (1984), as Robert Feldmann
* &quot;Code Name: Emerald&quot; (1985), as Walter Hoffman
* &quot;And the Violins Stopped Playing&quot; (1988), as Dymitr Mirga
* &quot;Réquiem por Granada&quot; (1990), as Muley Hacén
* &quot;&quot; (1992), as Ernst Leichmann
* &quot;Faraway, So Close!&quot; (1993), as Tony Baker
* &quot;Fantaghirò 4&quot; (1994), as Darken
* &quot;Ptak ohnivak&quot; (1997), as King Jorgen
* &quot;Life Is Beautiful&quot; (1997), as Dottor Lessing
* &quot;Mulan&quot; (1998) (German Dub)
* &quot;Heller als der Mond&quot; (2000), as First Guest
* &quot;The Enemy&quot; (2001), as Dr. George Ashton
* &quot;&quot; (2002), as Professor Svedenborg
== Dubbing roles ==
* Lampwick – &quot;Pinocchio&quot; (1951 dub)

== References ==
== External links ==
* 
* Horst Buchholz at the German Dubbing Card Index</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q60539" start="0" end="21" title="Horst Buchholz" label="Horst Werner Buchholz"/>
<link wikidata="Q83359" start="195" end="205" title="James Dean" label="James Dean"/>
<link wikidata="Q19069" start="300" end="321" title="The Magnificent Seven" label="The Magnificent Seven"/>
<link wikidata="Q51547" start="354" end="366" title="Billy Wilder" label="Billy Wilder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283810" start="380" end="395" title="One, Two, Three" label="One, Two, Three"/>
<link wikidata="Q19355" start="438" end="455" title="Life Is Beautiful" label="Life Is Beautiful"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="802" end="814" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q81720" start="836" end="843" title="Silesia" label="Silesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q33946" start="909" end="923" title="Czechoslovakia" label="Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q56037" start="1106" end="1117" title="East Berlin" label="East Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q56036" start="1129" end="1140" title="West Berlin" label="West Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q32487" start="1193" end="1209" title="Schiller Theater" label="Schiller Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q187657" start="1309" end="1322" title="Dubbing (filmmaking)" label="voice dubbing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4341553" start="1354" end="1363" title="Pinocchio (1940 film)" label="Pinocchio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2895379" start="1374" end="1384" title="Ben Cooper" label="Ben Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q59318" start="1394" end="1407" title="Johnny Guitar" label="Johnny Guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q24905376" start="1527" end="1546" title="Adventure in Berlin" label="Adventure in Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3291348" start="1592" end="1612" title="Marianne of My Youth" label="Marianne of My Youth"/>
<link wikidata="Q453683" start="1639" end="1654" title="Julien Duvivier" label="Julien Duvivier"/>
<link wikidata="Q385197" start="1727" end="1744" title="Sky Without Stars" label="Sky Without Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q69171" start="1763" end="1777" title="Helmut Käutner" label="Helmut Käutner"/>
<link wikidata="Q3455492" start="1788" end="1794" title="Regine (1956 film)" label="Regine"/>
<link wikidata="Q875197" start="1882" end="1897" title="Die Halbstarken" label="Die Halbstarken"/>
<link wikidata="Q875197" start="2013" end="2029" title="Teenage Wolfpack" label="Teenage Wolfpack"/>
<link wikidata="Q83359" start="2098" end="2108" title="James Dean" label="James Dean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1614480" start="2127" end="2141" title="King in Shadow" label="King in Shadow"/>
<link wikidata="Q328932" start="2166" end="2189" title="The Girl and the Legend" label="The Girl and the Legend"/>
<link wikidata="Q78469" start="2208" end="2222" title="Romy Schneider" label="Romy Schneider"/>
<link wikidata="Q815014" start="2265" end="2291" title="Confessions of Felix Krull (film)" label="Confessions of Felix Krull"/>
<link wikidata="Q77890" start="2390" end="2403" title="Kurt Hoffmann" label="Kurt Hoffmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q137052" start="2417" end="2426" title="Confessions of Felix Krull" label="the novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q37030" start="2430" end="2441" title="Thomas Mann" label="Thomas Mann"/>
<link wikidata="Q636093" start="2481" end="2487" title="Monpti" label="Monpti"/>
<link wikidata="Q318154" start="2597" end="2608" title="Wet Asphalt" label="Wet Asphalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3458097" start="2633" end="2645" title="Auferstehung (film)" label="Auferstehung"/>
<link wikidata="Q1702545" start="2831" end="2840" title="Tiger Bay (1959 film)" label="Tiger Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q237805" start="2852" end="2864" title="Hayley Mills" label="Hayley Mills"/>
<link wikidata="Q3234051" start="3108" end="3124" title="Ship of the Dead" label="Ship of the Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q19069" start="3222" end="3243" title="The Magnificent Seven" label="The Magnificent Seven"/>
<link wikidata="Q31235" start="3260" end="3266" title="remake" label="remake"/>
<link wikidata="Q8006" start="3270" end="3284" title="Akira Kurosawa" label="Akira Kurosawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q189540" start="3298" end="3311" title="Seven Samurai" label="Seven Samurai"/>
<link wikidata="Q37001" start="3381" end="3395" title="Toshiro Mifune" label="Toshiro Mifune"/>
<link wikidata="Q1612826" start="3575" end="3580" title="Chéri (novel)" label="Cheri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395728" start="3744" end="3749" title="Fanny (1961 film)" label="Fanny"/>
<link wikidata="Q230023" start="3768" end="3780" title="Leslie Caron" label="Leslie Caron"/>
<link wikidata="Q106001" start="3785" end="3802" title="Maurice Chevalier" label="Maurice Chevalier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283810" start="3836" end="3851" title="One, Two, Three" label="One, Two, Three"/>
<link wikidata="Q51547" start="3878" end="3890" title="Billy Wilder" label="Billy Wilder"/>
<link wikidata="Q94041" start="3904" end="3916" title="James Cagney" label="James Cagney"/>
<link wikidata="Q273704" start="4311" end="4326" title="West Side Story (1961 film)" label="West Side Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q228186" start="4364" end="4382" title="Lawrence of Arabia (film)" label="Lawrence of Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q170515" start="4428" end="4439" title="Omar Sharif" label="Omar Sharif"/>
<link wikidata="Q1855824" start="4478" end="4496" title="Nine Hours to Rama" label="Nine Hours to Rama"/>
<link wikidata="Q434841" start="4514" end="4535" title="Twentieth Century Fox" label="Twentieth Century Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q3203143" start="4546" end="4562" title="The Empty Canvas" label="The Empty Canvas"/>
<link wikidata="Q71206" start="4596" end="4607" title="Bette Davis" label="Bette Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q76479" start="4832" end="4852" title="A Fistful of Dollars" label="A Fistful of Dollars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638303" start="4883" end="4904" title="Marco the Magnificent" label="Marco the Magnificent"/>
<link wikidata="Q83484" start="4923" end="4936" title="Anthony Quinn" label="Anthony Quinn"/>
<link wikidata="Q3203617" start="4944" end="4964" title="That Man in Istanbul" label="That Man in Istanbul"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182856" start="5001" end="5013" title="Johnny Banco" label="Johnny Banco"/>
<link wikidata="Q945227" start="5042" end="5055" title="Yves Allégret" label="Yves Allégret"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056389" start="5067" end="5078" title="Young Rebel" label="Young Rebel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5682" start="5105" end="5124" title="Miguel de Cervantes" label="Miguel de Cervantes"/>
<link wikidata="Q56009" start="5130" end="5147" title="Gina Lollobrigida" label="Gina Lollobrigida"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125371" start="5175" end="5196" title="The Danny Thomas Hour" label="The Danny Thomas Hour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1651787" start="5267" end="5290" title="How, When and with Whom" label="How, When and with Whom"/>
<link wikidata="Q3226939" start="5357" end="5368" title="Le Sauveur" label="The Saviour"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737977" start="5438" end="5453" title="The Great Waltz (1972 film)" label="The Great Waltz"/>
<link wikidata="Q83309" start="5475" end="5489" title="Johann Strauss II" label="Johann Strauss"/>
<link wikidata="Q3637429" start="5759" end="5774" title="The Savage Bees" label="The Savage Bees"/>
<link wikidata="Q2305094" start="5795" end="5810" title="Raid on Entebbe (film)" label="Raid on Entebbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3704223" start="5831" end="5844" title="Dead of Night (1977 film)" label="Dead of Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q2261577" start="5869" end="5893" title="The Amazing Captain Nemo" label="The Amazing Captain Nemo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3205038" start="5946" end="5962" title="Logan&amp;#x27;s Run (TV series)" label="Logan&amp;#x27;s Run"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395913" start="5976" end="5990" title="Fantasy Island" label="Fantasy Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q617274" start="6004" end="6025" title="Charlie&amp;#x27;s Angels" label="Charlie&amp;#x27;s Angels"/>
<link wikidata="Q527569" start="6043" end="6063" title="How the West Was Won (TV series)" label="How the West Was Won"/>
<link wikidata="Q18624246" start="6096" end="6113" title="Women in Hospital" label="Women in Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q2522244" start="6147" end="6173" title="The French Atlantic Affair" label="The French Atlantic Affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q3020377" start="6212" end="6232" title="From Hell to Victory" label="From Hell to Victory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506746" start="6257" end="6274" title="Avalanche Express" label="Avalanche Express"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6317" end="6333" title="Berlin Tunnel 21" label="Berlin Tunnel 21"/>
<link wikidata="Q2858260" start="6375" end="6384" title="Aphrodite (film)" label="Aphrodite"/>
<link wikidata="Q511224" start="6439" end="6446" title="Derrick (TV series)" label="Derrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1573413" start="6488" end="6494" title="Sahara (1983 film)" label="Sahara"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6564" end="6579" title="Funkeln im Auge" label="Funkeln im Auge"/>
<link wikidata="" start="6659" end="6677" title="Code Name: Emerald" label="Code Name: Emerald"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6701" end="6710" title="Crossings (film)" label="Crossings"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6764" end="6782" title="Affari di famiglia" label="Affari di famiglia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6803" end="6826" title="Die Fräulein von damals" label="Die Fräulein von damals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196657" start="6851" end="6877" title="Der Schatz im Niemandsland" label="Der Schatz im Niemandsland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4753446" start="6917" end="6948" title="And the Violins Stopped Playing" label="And the Violins Stopped Playing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5397025" start="6991" end="7011" title="Escape from Paradise" label="Escape from Paradise"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7076" end="7089" title="Touch and Die" label="Touch and Die"/>
<link wikidata="Q657477" start="7111" end="7129" title="Faraway, So Close!" label="Faraway, So Close!"/>
<link wikidata="Q1528860" start="7150" end="7179" title="The Cave of the Golden Rose 4" label="The Cave of the Golden Rose 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q844790" start="7311" end="7323" title="The Firebird" label="The Firebird"/>
<link wikidata="Q23301" start="7366" end="7381" title="Roberto Benigni" label="Roberto Benigni"/>
<link wikidata="Q19355" start="7395" end="7412" title="Life Is Beautiful" label="Life Is Beautiful"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7577" end="7599" title="Der kleine Unterschied" label="Der kleine Unterschied"/>
<link wikidata="Q537407" start="7660" end="7665" title="Mulan (1998 film)" label="Mulan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7942412" start="7706" end="7722" title="Voyage of Terror" label="Voyage of Terror"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7893" end="7902" title="The Enemy (2001 film)" label="The Enemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q332104" start="8036" end="8048" title="Abschnitt 40" label="Abschnitt 40"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8069" end="8085" title="Atlantic Affairs" label="Atlantic Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q536113" start="8221" end="8231" title="Myriam Bru" label="Myriam Bru"/>
<link wikidata="Q114152" start="8263" end="8274" title="Christopher Buchholz" label="Christopher"/>
<link wikidata="Q162684" start="8938" end="8945" title="Charité" label="Charité"/>
<link wikidata="Q176298" start="9103" end="9122" title="Friedhof Heerstraße" label="Friedhof Heerstraße"/>
<link wikidata="Q24905376" start="9161" end="9185" title="All Clues Lead to Berlin" label="All Clues Lead to Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3291348" start="9253" end="9273" title="Marianne of My Youth" label="Marianne of My Youth"/>
<link wikidata="Q385197" start="9338" end="9355" title="Sky Without Stars" label="Sky Without Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q3455492" start="9396" end="9402" title="Regine (1956 film)" label="Regine"/>
<link wikidata="Q875197" start="9440" end="9456" title="Teenage Wolfpack" label="Teenage Wolfpack"/>
<link wikidata="Q1614480" start="9498" end="9512" title="King in Shadow" label="King in Shadow"/>
<link wikidata="Q156572" start="9530" end="9544" title="Christian VII of Denmark" label="King Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q328932" start="9553" end="9576" title="The Girl and the Legend" label="The Girl and the Legend"/>
<link wikidata="Q815014" start="9606" end="9632" title="Confessions of Felix Krull (film)" label="Confessions of Felix Krull"/>
<link wikidata="Q137052" start="9650" end="9661" title="Felix Krull" label="Felix Krull"/>
<link wikidata="Q636093" start="9670" end="9685" title="Love From Paris" label="Love From Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q926259" start="9735" end="9752" title="A Piece of Heaven" label="A Piece of Heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q318154" start="9847" end="9861" title="Nasser Asphalt" label="Nasser Asphalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3458097" start="9901" end="9913" title="Resurrection (1958 film)" label="Resurrection"/>
<link wikidata="Q1702545" start="9951" end="9960" title="Tiger Bay (1959 film)" label="Tiger Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q3234051" start="9997" end="10011" title="The Death Ship (1959 film)" label="The Death Ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q19069" start="10049" end="10070" title="The Magnificent Seven" label="The Magnificent Seven"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395728" start="10102" end="10107" title="Fanny (1961 film)" label="Fanny"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283810" start="10140" end="10155" title="One, Two, Three" label="One, Two, Three"/>
<link wikidata="Q1855824" start="10199" end="10217" title="Nine Hours to Rama" label="Nine Hours to Rama"/>
<link wikidata="Q312553" start="10235" end="10249" title="Nathuram Godse" label="Nathuram Godse"/>
<link wikidata="Q3203143" start="10258" end="10274" title="The Empty Canvas" label="The Empty Canvas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638303" start="10305" end="10326" title="Marco the Magnificent" label="Marco the Magnificent"/>
<link wikidata="Q6101" start="10344" end="10354" title="Marco Polo" label="Marco Polo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3203617" start="10363" end="10383" title="That Man in Istanbul" label="That Man in Istanbul"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182856" start="10422" end="10434" title="Johnny Banco" label="Johnny Banco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056389" start="10473" end="10482" title="Cervantes (film)" label="Cervantes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5682" start="10519" end="10538" title="Miguel De Cervantes" label="Miguel De Cervantes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3202485" start="10547" end="10563" title="L&amp;#x27;Astragale (1968 film)" label="L&amp;#x27;Astragale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1651787" start="10596" end="10616" title="Come, quando, perché" label="Come, quando, perché"/>
<link wikidata="Q3226939" start="10690" end="10700" title="Le Sauveur" label="Le Sauveur"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737977" start="10733" end="10748" title="The Great Waltz (1972 film)" label="The Great Waltz"/>
<link wikidata="Q83309" start="10766" end="10784" title="Johann Strauss Jr." label="Johann Strauss Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q5009004" start="10825" end="10841" title="CBC Drama &amp;#x27;73" label="Welcome Stranger"/>
<link wikidata="Q511224" start="10901" end="10908" title="Derrick (TV series)" label="Derrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q2305094" start="11230" end="11245" title="Raid on Entebbe (film)" label="Raid on Entebbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q78424" start="11273" end="11286" title="Wilfried Böse" label="Wilfried Böse"/>
<link wikidata="Q3704223" start="11295" end="11308" title="Dead of Night (1977 film)" label="Dead of Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q18624246" start="11352" end="11369" title="Women in Hospital" label="Women in Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q3205038" start="11408" end="11424" title="Logan&amp;#x27;s Run (TV series)" label="Logan&amp;#x27;s Run"/>
<link wikidata="Q2261577" start="11504" end="11530" title="The Return of Captain Nemo" label="The Return of Captain Nemo"/>
<link wikidata="Q617274" start="11567" end="11588" title="Charlie&amp;#x27;s Angels" label="Charlie&amp;#x27;s Angels"/>
<link wikidata="Q2522244" start="11664" end="11690" title="The French Atlantic Affair" label="The French Atlantic Affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q3020377" start="11727" end="11747" title="From Hell to Victory" label="From Hell to Victory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506746" start="11789" end="11806" title="Avalanche Express" label="Avalanche Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q2858260" start="11904" end="11913" title="Aphrodite (film)" label="Aphrodite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1573413" start="11951" end="11957" title="Sahara (1983 film)" label="Sahara"/>
<link wikidata="" start="12038" end="12056" title="Code Name: Emerald" label="Code Name: Emerald"/>
<link wikidata="Q4753446" start="12097" end="12128" title="And the Violins Stopped Playing" label="And the Violins Stopped Playing"/>
<link wikidata="Q6114680" start="12167" end="12186" title="Réquiem por Granada" label="Réquiem por Granada"/>
<link wikidata="Q657477" start="12266" end="12284" title="Faraway, So Close!" label="Faraway, So Close!"/>
<link wikidata="Q1528860" start="12321" end="12333" title="Fantaghirò 4" label="Fantaghirò 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q19355" start="12416" end="12433" title="Life Is Beautiful" label="Life Is Beautiful"/>
<link wikidata="Q537407" start="12474" end="12479" title="Mulan (1998 film)" label="Mulan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3838768" start="12685" end="12693" title="Candlewick (character)" label="Lampwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q4341553" start="12702" end="12711" title="Pinocchio (1940 film)" label="Pinocchio"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="192116" wikidata="Q1497616" url="?curid=192116" title="Gediminas' Tower">
<text>Gediminas&#x27; Tower () is the remaining part of the Upper Castle on top of the Gediminas Hill in Vilnius, Lithuania. It has a viewing platform that offers scenic views of Vilnius Old Town and Vilnius Central Business District.

== History ==
The first wooden fortifications were built by Gediminas, Grand Duke of Lithuania (–1341). The first brick castle was completed in 1409 by Grand Duke Vytautas. The three-floor tower was rebuilt in 1933 by Polish architect Jan Borowski. Some remnants of the old castle have been restored, guided by archaeological research.

The hilltop can be reached on foot or by lift. The tower houses a museum exhibiting archaeological findings from the hill and the surrounding areas. This building is three stories tall and is made of decades-old bricks. The museum has models of Vilnius castles from the 14th to the 17th centuries, armament, and iconographic material of the Old Vilnius.

Gediminas&#x27; Tower is an important state and historic symbol of the city of Vilnius and of Lithuania itself. It was depicted on the former national currency, the litas, and is mentioned in numerous Lithuanian patriotic poems and folk songs. The flag of Lithuania was re-hoisted atop the tower on 7 October 1988, during the independence restoration movement.

A reconstruction of the Royal Palace of Lithuania was completed in 2009, and is located near the base of the hill upon which the tower stands.

==Legend==

Long ago, the Lithuanian Grand Duke Gediminas was hunting in the woods of Šventaragis Valley. The hunt was successful, and Duke Gediminas brought down a wild bull on a hilltop; but he grew weary in his limbs, and so the duke retired and spent the night there. Now Gediminas had a dream that, up on top of the same hill where he had been hunting that day, stood a great wolf made of iron, and it was howling as loudly as if it were a hundred wolves.

The Duke asked the court magician Lizdeika to explain his dream to him. He interpreted it thus: this was an omen indicating that he should build a city in this place, which would later become known around the world and would become the magnificent capital city of Lithuania.

Gediminas, obeying the will of the gods, began to build the future capital city, and a castle in the centre of it. The city was named Vilnius after the nearby river Vilnia. Gediminas&#x27; Tower is the only surviving part of that castle built by Gediminas.

==See also==
* Three Crosses
* Pilies Street
* Cathedral Square, Vilnius
* Gothic architecture in Lithuania
* Gediminas&#x27; Cap

==References==

==External links==
* Visit the exposition of Gediminas tower
* Photo history of the tower</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1497616" start="0" end="21" title="Gediminas&amp;#x27; Tower" label="Gediminas&amp;#x27; Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q6598101" start="54" end="66" title="Upper Castle (Vilnius)" label="Upper Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q9283406" start="81" end="95" title="Gediminas Hill" label="Gediminas Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q216" start="99" end="106" title="Vilnius" label="Vilnius"/>
<link wikidata="Q445649" start="173" end="189" title="Vilnius Old Town" label="Vilnius Old Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q16465406" start="194" end="227" title="Vilnius Central Business District" label="Vilnius Central Business District"/>
<link wikidata="Q244852" start="290" end="299" title="Gediminas" label="Gediminas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2639920" start="301" end="324" title="Grand Duke of Lithuania" label="Grand Duke of Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q218186" start="393" end="401" title="Vytautas" label="Vytautas"/>
<link wikidata="Q12655083" start="608" end="612" title="Gediminas Hill Lift" label="lift"/>
<link wikidata="Q445649" start="908" end="919" title="Vilnius Old Town" label="Old Vilnius"/>
<link wikidata="Q25627" start="1087" end="1092" title="Lithuanian litas" label="litas"/>
<link wikidata="Q81477" start="1170" end="1187" title="flag of Lithuania" label="flag of Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q2823577" start="1248" end="1272" title="Act of the Re-Establishment of the State of Lithuania" label="independence restoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284847" start="1308" end="1333" title="Palace of the Grand Dukes of Lithuania" label="Royal Palace of Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q244852" start="1476" end="1485" title="Gediminas" label="Gediminas"/>
<link wikidata="Q12680256" start="1514" end="1532" title="Šventaragis Valley" label="Šventaragis Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q4261405" start="1924" end="1932" title="Lizdeika" label="Lizdeika"/>
<link wikidata="Q37" start="2154" end="2163" title="Lithuania" label="Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q216" start="2300" end="2307" title="Vilnius" label="Vilnius"/>
<link wikidata="Q661684" start="2331" end="2337" title="Vilnia River" label="Vilnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q83238" start="2439" end="2452" title="Three Crosses" label="Three Crosses"/>
<link wikidata="Q1988894" start="2455" end="2468" title="Pilies Street" label="Pilies Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q1988837" start="2471" end="2496" title="Cathedral Square, Vilnius" label="Cathedral Square, Vilnius"/>
<link wikidata="Q21856457" start="2499" end="2531" title="Gothic architecture in Lithuania" label="Gothic architecture in Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q12655084" start="2534" end="2553" title="Gediminas&amp;#x27; Cap" label="Gediminas&amp;#x27; Cap"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="192123" wikidata="Q3532100" url="?curid=192123" title="Index of accounting articles">
<text>This page is an index of accounting topics.


==A==
Accounting ethics - Accounting information system - Accounting research - Activity-Based Costing - Assets

==B==
Balance sheet
- Big Four auditors
- Bond
- Bookkeeping
- Book value

==C==
Cash-basis accounting
- Cash-basis versus accrual-basis accounting
- Cash flow statement
- Certified General Accountant
- Certified Management Accountants
- Certified Public Accountant
- Chartered accountant
- Chart of accounts
- Common stock
- Comprehensive income
- Construction accounting
- Convention of conservatism
- Convention of disclosure
- Cost accounting
- Cost of capital
- Cost of goods sold
- Creative accounting
- Credit
- Credit note
- Current asset
- Current liability

==D==
Debitcapital reserve
- Debit note
- Debt
- Deficit (disambiguation)
- Depreciation
- Diluted earnings per share
- Dividend
- Double-entry bookkeeping system
- Dual aspect

==E==
E-accounting
- EBIT
- EBITDA
- Earnings per share
- Engagement Letter
- Entity concept
- Environmental accounting
- Expense
- Equity
- Equivalent Annual Cost

==F==
Financial Accounting Standards Board
- Financial accountancy
- Financial audit
- Financial reports
- Financial statements
- Fixed assets
- Fixed assets management
- Forensic accounting
- Fraud deterrence
- Free cash flow
- Fund accounting

==G==
Gain
- General ledger
- Generally Accepted Accounting Principles
- Going concern
- Goodwill
- Governmental Accounting Standards Board

==H==
Historical cost - History of accounting

==I==
Income
- Income statement
- Institute of Chartered Accountants in England and Wales
- Institute of Chartered Accountants of Scotland
- Institute of Management Accountants
- Intangible asset
- Interest
- Internal audit
- International Accounting Standards Board
- International Accounting Standards Committee
- International Accounting Standards
- International Federation of Accountants
- International Financial Reporting Standards
- Inventory
- Investment
- Invoices
- Indian Accounting Standards

==J==
Job costing
- Journal

==L==
Lean accounting
- Ledger
- Liability
- Long-term asset
- Long-term liabilities
- Loss on sale of residential property

==M==
Maker-checker
- Management accounting
- Management Assertions
- Mark-to-market accounting
- Matching principle
- Materiality
- Money measurement concept
- Mortgage loan

==N==
Negative assurance
- Net income
- Notes to the Financial Statements - net worth

==O==
OBERAC
- One-for-one checking
- Online Accounting
- Operating expense
- Ownership equity

==P==
Payroll
- Petty cash
- Philosophy of Accounting
- Preferred stock
- P/E ratio
- Positive accounting
- Positive assurance
- PricewaterhouseCoopers
- Profit and loss account
- Pro-forma amount
- Production accounting
- Project accounting

==R==
Retained earnings
- Revenue
- Revenue recognition

==S==
Sales journal
- Security
- Social accounting
- Spreadsheet
- Statement of changes in equity
- Statutory accounting principles
- Stock option
- Stock split
- Stock
- Shareholder
- Shareholders&#x27; equity
- South African Institute of Chartered Accountants
- Sunk cost

==T==
Three lines of defence
- Throughput accounting
- Trade credit
- Treasury stock
- Trial balance

==U==
UK generally accepted accounting principles
- Unified Ledger Accounting
- U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission
- US generally accepted accounting principles
- Work sheet
- Write off

==See also==
* Outline of accounting
* Outline of business
* Outline of economics
* Outline of management
* Outline of marketing
* Outline of production
* Index of auditing-related articles</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3532100" start="16" end="42" title="Index of accounting articles" label="index of accounting topics"/>
<link wikidata="Q4672788" start="52" end="69" title="Accounting ethics" label="Accounting ethics"/>
<link wikidata="Q4672792" start="72" end="101" title="Accounting information system" label="Accounting information system"/>
<link wikidata="Q15995649" start="104" end="123" title="Accounting research" label="Accounting research"/>
<link wikidata="Q754331" start="126" end="148" title="Activity-based costing" label="Activity-Based Costing"/>
<link wikidata="Q46737" start="151" end="157" title="Assets" label="Assets"/>
<link wikidata="Q46834" start="165" end="178" title="Balance sheet" label="Balance sheet"/>
<link wikidata="Q26788" start="181" end="198" title="Big Four auditors" label="Big Four auditors"/>
<link wikidata="Q11693" start="201" end="205" title="Bond (finance)" label="Bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q3707847" start="208" end="219" title="Bookkeeping" label="Bookkeeping"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761731" start="222" end="232" title="Book value" label="Book value"/>
<link wikidata="Q1308430" start="240" end="261" title="Cash-basis accounting" label="Cash-basis accounting"/>
<link wikidata="Q832927" start="264" end="306" title="Cash-basis versus accrual-basis accounting" label="Cash-basis versus accrual-basis accounting"/>
<link wikidata="Q460184" start="309" end="328" title="Cash flow statement" label="Cash flow statement"/>
<link wikidata="Q5065177" start="331" end="359" title="Certified General Accountant" label="Certified General Accountant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2946927" start="362" end="393" title="Certified Management Accountant" label="Certified Management Accountant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056337" start="397" end="424" title="Certified Public Accountant" label="Certified Public Accountant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108818" start="427" end="447" title="Chartered accountant" label="Chartered accountant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406649" start="450" end="467" title="Chart of accounts" label="Chart of accounts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1081659" start="470" end="482" title="Common stock" label="Common stock"/>
<link wikidata="Q5157006" start="485" end="505" title="Comprehensive income" label="Comprehensive income"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164439" start="508" end="531" title="Construction accounting" label="Construction accounting"/>
<link wikidata="Q5166278" start="534" end="560" title="Convention of conservatism" label="Convention of conservatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q16341422" start="563" end="587" title="Convention of disclosure" label="Convention of disclosure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077518" start="590" end="605" title="Cost accounting" label="Cost accounting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479274" start="608" end="623" title="Cost of capital" label="Cost of capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q12154181" start="626" end="644" title="Cost of goods sold" label="Cost of goods sold"/>
<link wikidata="Q2308363" start="647" end="666" title="Creative accounting" label="Creative accounting"/>
<link wikidata="Q182076" start="669" end="675" title="credit (finance)" label="Credit"/>
<link wikidata="Q317955" start="678" end="689" title="Credit note" label="Credit note"/>
<link wikidata="Q730884" start="692" end="705" title="Current asset" label="Current asset"/>
<link wikidata="Q2353682" start="708" end="725" title="Current liability" label="Current liability"/>
<link wikidata="Q1120961" start="733" end="738" title="Debit" label="Debit"/>
<link wikidata="Q815288" start="756" end="766" title="Debit note" label="Debit note"/>
<link wikidata="Q3196867" start="769" end="773" title="Debt" label="Debt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2682765" start="776" end="800" title="Deficit (disambiguation)" label="Deficit (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q114403" start="803" end="815" title="Depreciation" label="Depreciation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134378" start="818" end="844" title="Diluted EPS" label="Diluted earnings per share"/>
<link wikidata="Q181201" start="847" end="855" title="Dividend" label="Dividend"/>
<link wikidata="Q192803" start="858" end="889" title="Double-entry bookkeeping system" label="Double-entry bookkeeping system"/>
<link wikidata="Q192803" start="892" end="903" title="Dual aspect" label="Dual aspect"/>
<link wikidata="Q5321484" start="911" end="923" title="E-accounting" label="E-accounting"/>
<link wikidata="Q720862" start="926" end="930" title="Earnings before interest and taxes" label="EBIT"/>
<link wikidata="Q5322573" start="933" end="939" title="EBITDA" label="EBITDA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134378" start="942" end="960" title="Earnings per share" label="Earnings per share"/>
<link wikidata="Q5377420" start="963" end="980" title="Engagement Letter" label="Engagement Letter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5380559" start="983" end="997" title="Entity concept" label="Entity concept"/>
<link wikidata="Q12366845" start="1000" end="1024" title="Environmental accounting" label="Environmental accounting"/>
<link wikidata="Q13516686" start="1027" end="1034" title="Expense" label="Expense"/>
<link wikidata="Q827451" start="1037" end="1043" title="Ownership equity" label="Equity"/>
<link wikidata="Q372799" start="1046" end="1068" title="Equivalent Annual Cost" label="Equivalent Annual Cost"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416161" start="1076" end="1112" title="Financial Accounting Standards Board" label="Financial Accounting Standards Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q949180" start="1115" end="1136" title="Financial accountancy" label="Financial accountancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q740419" start="1139" end="1154" title="Financial audit" label="Financial audit"/>
<link wikidata="Q192907" start="1157" end="1174" title="Financial reports" label="Financial reports"/>
<link wikidata="Q192907" start="1177" end="1197" title="Financial statements" label="Financial statements"/>
<link wikidata="Q955421" start="1200" end="1212" title="Fixed assets" label="Fixed assets"/>
<link wikidata="Q557739" start="1215" end="1238" title="Fixed assets management" label="Fixed assets management"/>
<link wikidata="Q2663158" start="1241" end="1260" title="Forensic accounting" label="Forensic accounting"/>
<link wikidata="Q5493916" start="1263" end="1279" title="Fraud deterrence" label="Fraud deterrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q9297784" start="1282" end="1296" title="Free cash flow" label="Free cash flow"/>
<link wikidata="Q5508878" start="1299" end="1314" title="Fund accounting" label="Fund accounting"/>
<link wikidata="Q4165229" start="1322" end="1326" title="Gain (accounting)" label="Gain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1977520" start="1329" end="1343" title="General ledger" label="General ledger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779838" start="1346" end="1386" title="Generally Accepted Accounting Principles" label="Generally Accepted Accounting Principles"/>
<link wikidata="Q565043" start="1389" end="1402" title="Going concern" label="Going concern"/>
<link wikidata="Q157499" start="1405" end="1413" title="Goodwill (accounting)" label="Goodwill"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589435" start="1416" end="1455" title="Governmental Accounting Standards Board" label="Governmental Accounting Standards Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q362098" start="1463" end="1478" title="Historical cost" label="Historical cost"/>
<link wikidata="Q3137179" start="1481" end="1502" title="History of accounting" label="History of accounting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527264" start="1510" end="1516" title="Income" label="Income"/>
<link wikidata="Q243460" start="1519" end="1535" title="Income statement" label="Income statement"/>
<link wikidata="Q6040044" start="1538" end="1593" title="Institute of Chartered Accountants in England and Wales" label="Institute of Chartered Accountants in England and Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q6040071" start="1596" end="1642" title="Institute of Chartered Accountants of Scotland" label="Institute of Chartered Accountants of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3152803" start="1645" end="1680" title="Institute of Management Accountants" label="Institute of Management Accountants"/>
<link wikidata="Q427581" start="1683" end="1699" title="Intangible asset" label="Intangible asset"/>
<link wikidata="Q170924" start="1702" end="1710" title="Interest" label="Interest"/>
<link wikidata="Q6452684" start="1713" end="1727" title="Internal audit" label="Internal audit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142430" start="1730" end="1770" title="International Accounting Standards Board" label="International Accounting Standards Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258876" start="1773" end="1817" title="International Accounting Standards Committee" label="International Accounting Standards Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q176831" start="1820" end="1854" title="International Accounting Standards" label="International Accounting Standards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1601925" start="1857" end="1896" title="International Federation of Accountants" label="International Federation of Accountants"/>
<link wikidata="Q176831" start="1899" end="1942" title="International Financial Reporting Standards" label="International Financial Reporting Standards"/>
<link wikidata="Q815410" start="1945" end="1954" title="Inventory" label="Inventory"/>
<link wikidata="Q4290" start="1957" end="1967" title="Investment" label="Investment"/>
<link wikidata="Q190581" start="1970" end="1977" title="Invoice" label="Invoice"/>
<link wikidata="Q6019786" start="1981" end="2008" title="Indian Accounting Standards" label="Indian Accounting Standards"/>
<link wikidata="Q6206709" start="2016" end="2027" title="Job costing" label="Job costing"/>
<link wikidata="Q608971" start="2030" end="2037" title="Journal (accounting)" label="Journal"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2045" end="2060" title="Lean accounting" label="Lean accounting"/>
<link wikidata="Q2732056" start="2063" end="2069" title="Ledger" label="Ledger"/>
<link wikidata="Q96776939" start="2072" end="2081" title="Liability (accounting)" label="Liability"/>
<link wikidata="Q955421" start="2084" end="2099" title="Long-term asset" label="Long-term asset"/>
<link wikidata="Q854024" start="2102" end="2123" title="Long-term liabilities" label="Long-term liabilities"/>
<link wikidata="Q17114907" start="2126" end="2162" title="Loss on sale of residential property" label="Loss on sale of residential property"/>
<link wikidata="Q6739274" start="2170" end="2183" title="Maker-checker" label="Maker-checker"/>
<link wikidata="Q2990807" start="2186" end="2207" title="Management accounting" label="Management accounting"/>
<link wikidata="Q17139352" start="2210" end="2231" title="Management Assertions" label="Management Assertions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1900567" start="2234" end="2259" title="Mark-to-market accounting" label="Mark-to-market accounting"/>
<link wikidata="Q4388479" start="2262" end="2280" title="Matching principle" label="Matching principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003682" start="2283" end="2294" title="Materiality (auditing)" label="Materiality"/>
<link wikidata="Q6899272" start="2297" end="2322" title="Money measurement concept" label="Money measurement concept"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210094" start="2325" end="2338" title="Mortgage loan" label="Mortgage loan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6987192" start="2346" end="2364" title="Negative assurance" label="Negative assurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q570938" start="2367" end="2377" title="Net income" label="Net income"/>
<link wikidata="Q192907" start="2380" end="2413" title="Notes to the Financial Statements" label="Notes to the Financial Statements"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933764" start="2416" end="2425" title="net worth" label="net worth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7072311" start="2433" end="2439" title="OBERAC" label="OBERAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7092310" start="2442" end="2462" title="One-for-one checking" label="One-for-one checking"/>
<link wikidata="Q5321484" start="2465" end="2482" title="Online Accounting" label="Online Accounting"/>
<link wikidata="Q831940" start="2485" end="2502" title="Operating expense" label="Operating expense"/>
<link wikidata="Q827451" start="2505" end="2521" title="Ownership equity" label="Ownership equity"/>
<link wikidata="Q59434791" start="2529" end="2536" title="Payroll" label="Payroll"/>
<link wikidata="Q3523818" start="2539" end="2549" title="Petty cash" label="Petty cash"/>
<link wikidata="Q7186255" start="2552" end="2576" title="Philosophy of Accounting" label="Philosophy of Accounting"/>
<link wikidata="Q622588" start="2579" end="2594" title="Preferred stock" label="Preferred stock"/>
<link wikidata="Q127473" start="2597" end="2606" title="P/E ratio" label="P/E ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7233247" start="2609" end="2628" title="Positive accounting" label="Positive accounting"/>
<link wikidata="Q7233254" start="2631" end="2649" title="Positive assurance" label="Positive assurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q488048" start="2652" end="2674" title="PricewaterhouseCoopers" label="PricewaterhouseCoopers"/>
<link wikidata="Q243460" start="2677" end="2700" title="Profit and loss account" label="Profit and loss account"/>
<link wikidata="Q2481549" start="2703" end="2719" title="Pro-forma amount" label="Pro-forma amount"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771203" start="2722" end="2743" title="Production accounting" label="Production accounting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771203" start="2746" end="2764" title="Project accounting" label="Project accounting"/>
<link wikidata="Q240691" start="2772" end="2789" title="Retained earnings" label="Retained earnings"/>
<link wikidata="Q850210" start="2792" end="2799" title="Revenue" label="Revenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q2146785" start="2802" end="2821" title="Revenue recognition" label="Revenue recognition"/>
<link wikidata="Q7404317" start="2829" end="2842" title="Sales journal" label="Sales journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q169489" start="2845" end="2853" title="security (finance)" label="Security"/>
<link wikidata="Q2990825" start="2856" end="2873" title="Social accounting" label="Social accounting"/>
<link wikidata="Q183197" start="2876" end="2887" title="Spreadsheet" label="Spreadsheet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186451" start="2890" end="2920" title="Statement of changes in equity" label="Statement of changes in equity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7604695" start="2923" end="2954" title="Statutory accounting principles" label="Statutory accounting principles"/>
<link wikidata="Q187860" start="2957" end="2969" title="Stock option" label="Stock option"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154798" start="2972" end="2983" title="Stock split" label="Stock split"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196314" start="2986" end="2991" title="Stock" label="Stock"/>
<link wikidata="Q381136" start="2994" end="3005" title="Shareholder" label="Shareholder"/>
<link wikidata="Q827451" start="3008" end="3033" title="Shareholders&amp;#x27; equity" label="Shareholders&amp;#x27; equity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7565707" start="3036" end="3084" title="South African Institute of Chartered Accountants" label="South African Institute of Chartered Accountants"/>
<link wikidata="Q958242" start="3087" end="3096" title="Sunk cost" label="Sunk cost"/>
<link wikidata="Q6452684" start="3104" end="3126" title="Three lines of defence" label="Three lines of defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q7798507" start="3129" end="3150" title="Throughput accounting" label="Throughput accounting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780900" start="3153" end="3165" title="Trade credit" label="Trade credit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516464" start="3168" end="3182" title="Treasury stock" label="Treasury stock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192485" start="3185" end="3198" title="Trial balance" label="Trial balance"/>
<link wikidata="Q16981746" start="3206" end="3249" title="UK generally accepted accounting principles" label="UK generally accepted accounting principles"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3252" end="3277" title="Unified Ledger Accounting" label="Unified Ledger Accounting"/>
<link wikidata="Q953944" start="3280" end="3319" title="U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission" label="U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q650978" start="3322" end="3365" title="US generally accepted accounting principles" label="US generally accepted accounting principles"/>
<link wikidata="Q259432" start="3368" end="3378" title="Work sheet" label="Work sheet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5551716" start="3381" end="3390" title="Write off" label="Write off"/>
<link wikidata="Q65088962" start="3407" end="3428" title="Outline of accounting" label="Outline of accounting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1817462" start="3431" end="3450" title="Outline of business" label="Outline of business"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112613" start="3453" end="3473" title="Outline of economics" label="Outline of economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q118904544" start="3476" end="3497" title="Outline of management" label="Outline of management"/>
<link wikidata="Q3276378" start="3500" end="3520" title="Outline of marketing" label="Outline of marketing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112706" start="3523" end="3544" title="Outline of production" label="Outline of production"/>
<link wikidata="Q6018816" start="3547" end="3581" title="Index of auditing-related articles" label="Index of auditing-related articles"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="192127" wikidata="Q3318563" url="?curid=192127" title="Postmodern art">
<text>Postmodern art is a body of art movements that sought to contradict some aspects of modernism or some aspects that emerged or developed in its aftermath. In general, movements such as intermedia, installation art, conceptual art and multimedia, particularly involving video are described as postmodern.

There are several characteristics which lend art to being postmodern; these include bricolage, the use of text prominently as the central artistic element, collage, simplification, appropriation, performance art, the recycling of past styles and themes in a modern-day context, as well as the break-up of the barrier between fine and high arts and low art and popular culture.

==Use of the term==
The predominant term for art produced since the 1950s is &quot;contemporary art&quot;. Not all art labeled as contemporary art is postmodern, and the broader term encompasses both artists who continue to work in modernist and late modernist traditions, as well as artists who reject postmodernism for other reasons. Arthur Danto argues &quot;contemporary&quot; is the broader term, and postmodern objects represent a &quot;subsector&quot; of the contemporary movement. Some postmodern artists have made more distinctive breaks from the ideas of modern art and there is no consensus as to what is &quot;late-modern&quot; and what is &quot;post-modern.&quot; Ideas rejected by the modern aesthetic have been re-established. In painting, postmodernism reintroduced representation. Some critics argue much of the current &quot;postmodern&quot; art, the latest avant-gardism, should still classify as modern art.

As well as describing certain tendencies of contemporary art, postmodern has also been used to denote a phase of modern art. Defenders of modernism, such as Clement Greenberg, as well as radical opponents of modernism, such as Félix Guattari, who calls it modernism&#x27;s &quot;last gasp,&quot; have adopted this position. The neo-conservative Hilton Kramer describes postmodernism as &quot;a creation of modernism at the end of its tether.&quot; Jean-François Lyotard, in Fredric Jameson&#x27;s analysis, does not hold there is a postmodern stage radically different from the period of high modernism; instead, postmodern discontent with this or that high modernist style is part of the experimentation of high modernism, giving birth to new modernisms. In the context of aesthetics and art, Jean-François Lyotard is a major philosopher of postmodernism.

Many critics hold postmodern art emerges from modern art. Suggested dates for the shift from modern to postmodern include 1914 in Europe, and 1962 or 1968 in America. James Elkins, commenting on discussions about the exact date of the transition from modernism to postmodernism, compares it to the discussion in the 1960s about the exact span of mannerism and whether it should begin directly after the High Renaissance or later in the century. He makes the point these debates go on all the time with respect to art movements and periods, which is not to say they are not important. The close of the period of postmodern art has been dated to the end of the 1980s, when the word postmodernism lost much of its critical resonance, and art practices began to address the impact of globalization and new media.

Jean Baudrillard has had a significant influence on postmodern-inspired art and emphasised the possibilities of new forms of creativity. The artist Peter Halley describes his day-glo colours as &quot;hyperrealization of real color&quot;, and acknowledges Baudrillard as an influence. Baudrillard himself, since 1984, was fairly consistent in his view that contemporary art, and postmodern art in particular, was inferior to the modernist art of the post World War II period, while Jean-François Lyotard praised Contemporary painting and remarked on its evolution from Modern art. Major women artists in the Twentieth Century are associated with postmodern art since much theoretical articulation of their work emerged from French psychoanalysis and feminist theory that is strongly related to post modern philosophy.

American Marxist philosopher Fredric Jameson argues the condition of life and production will be reflected in all activity, including the making of art.
As with all uses of the term postmodern, there are critics of its application. Kirk Varnedoe, for instance, stated that there is no such thing as postmodernism, and that the possibilities of modernism have not yet been exhausted. Though the usage of the term as a kind of shorthand to designate the work of certain Post-war &quot;schools&quot; employing relatively specific material and generic techniques has become conventional since the early to mid-1980s, the theoretical underpinnings of Postmodernism as an epochal or epistemic division are still very much in controversy.

== Characteristics ==
Postmodernism describes movements which both arise from, and react against or reject, trends in modernism. General citations for specific trends of modernism are formal purity, medium specificity, art for art&#x27;s sake, authenticity, universality, originality and revolutionary or reactionary tendency, i.e. the avant-garde. However, paradox is probably the most important modernist idea against which postmodernism reacts. Paradox was central to the modernist enterprise, which Manet introduced. Manet&#x27;s various violations of representational art brought to prominence the supposed mutual exclusiveness of reality and representation, design and representation, abstraction and reality, and so on. The incorporation of paradox was highly stimulating from Manet to the conceptualists.

The status of the avant-garde is controversial: many institutions argue being visionary, forward-looking, cutting-edge, and progressive are crucial to the mission of art in the present, and therefore postmodern art contradicts the value of &quot;art of our times&quot;. Postmodernism rejects the notion of advancement or progress in art per se, and thus aims to overturn the &quot;myth of the avant-garde&quot;. Rosalind Krauss was one of the important enunciators of the view that avant-gardism was over, and the new artistic era is post-liberal and post-progress. Griselda Pollock studied and confronted the avant-garde and modern art in a series of groundbreaking books, reviewing modern art at the same time as redefining postmodern art.

One characteristic of postmodern art is its conflation of high and low culture through the use of industrial materials and pop culture imagery. The use of low forms of art were a part of modernist experimentation as well, as documented in Kirk Varnedoe and Adam Gopnik&#x27;s 1990–91 show &quot;High and Low: Popular Culture and Modern Art&quot; at New York&#x27;s Museum of Modern Art, an exhibition that was universally panned at the time as the only event that could bring Douglas Crimp and Hilton Kramer together in a chorus of scorn. Postmodern art is noted for the way in which it blurs the distinctions between what is perceived as fine or high art and what is generally seen as low or kitsch art. While this concept of &quot;blurring&quot; or &quot;fusing&quot; high art with low art had been experimented during modernism, it only ever became fully endorsed after the advent of the postmodern era. Postmodernism introduced elements of commercialism, kitsch and a general camp aesthetic within its artistic context; postmodernism takes styles from past periods, such as Gothicism, the Renaissance and the Baroque, and mixes them so as to ignore their original use in their corresponding artistic movement. Such elements are common characteristics of what defines postmodern art. Art Spiegelman, when discussing his selection of a specific style for &quot;Maus&quot;, described a postmodernist&#x27;s ability to develop a wide &quot;palette&quot; of varying styles that they can draw from at will, where their predecessors would instead focus on improving and maintaining a single &quot;trademark&quot; style.

Fredric Jameson suggests postmodern works abjure any claim to spontaneity and directness of expression, making use instead of pastiche and discontinuity. Against this definition, Art and Language&#x27;s Charles Harrison and Paul Wood maintained pastiche and discontinuity are endemic to modernist art, and are deployed effectively by modern artists such as Manet and Picasso.

One compact definition is postmodernism rejects modernism&#x27;s grand narratives of artistic direction, eradicating the boundaries between high and low forms of art, and disrupting genre&#x27;s conventions with collision, collage, and fragmentation. Postmodern art holds all stances are unstable and insincere, and therefore irony, parody, and humor are the only positions critique or revision cannot overturn. &quot;Pluralism and diversity&quot; are other defining features.

==Avant-garde precursors==
Radical movements and trends regarded as influential and potentially as precursors to postmodernism emerged around World War I and particularly in its aftermath. With the introduction of the use of industrial artifacts in art and techniques such as collage, avant-garde movements such as Cubism, Dada and Surrealism questioned the nature and value of art. New artforms, such as cinema and the rise of reproduction, influenced these movements as a means of creating artworks. The ignition point for the definition of modernism, Clement Greenberg&#x27;s essay, &quot;Avant-Garde and Kitsch&quot;, first published in &quot;Partisan Review&quot; in 1939, defends the avant-garde in the face of popular culture. Later, Peter Bürger would make a distinction between the historical avant-garde and modernism, and critics such as Krauss, Huyssen, and Douglas Crimp, following Bürger, identified the historical avant-garde as a precursor to postmodernism. Krauss, for example, describes Pablo Picasso&#x27;s use of collage as an avant-garde practice anticipating postmodern art with its emphasis on language at the expense of autobiography. Another point of view is avant-garde and modernist artists used similar strategies and postmodernism repudiates both.

===Dada===
In the early 20th century, Marcel Duchamp exhibited a urinal as a sculpture. His point was to have people look at the urinal as if it were a work of art just because he said it was a work of art. He referred to his work as &quot;Readymades&quot;. The &quot;Fountain&quot; was a urinal signed with the pseudonym R. Mutt, which shocked the art world in 1917. This and Duchamp&#x27;s other works are generally labelled as Dada. Duchamp can be seen as a precursor to conceptual art. Some critics question calling Duchamp—whose obsession with paradox is well known—postmodernist on the grounds he eschews any specific medium, since paradox is not medium-specific, although it arose first in Manet&#x27;s paintings.

Dadaism can be viewed as part of the modernist propensity to challenge established styles and forms, along with Surrealism, Futurism and Abstract Expressionism. From a chronological point of view, Dada is located solidly within modernism, however a number of critics hold it anticipates postmodernism, while others, such as Ihab Hassan and Steven Connor, consider it a possible changeover point between modernism and postmodernism. For example, according to McEvilly, postmodernism begins with realizing one no longer believes in the myth of progress, and Duchamp sensed this in 1914 when he changed from a modernist practice to a postmodernist one, &quot;abjuring aesthetic delectation, transcendent ambition, and tour de force demonstrations of formal agility in favor of aesthetic indifference, acknowledgement of the ordinary world, and the found object or readymade.&quot;

==Radical movements in modern art==
In general, Pop Art and Minimalism began as modernist movements: a paradigm shift and philosophical split between formalism and anti-formalism in the early 1970s caused those movements to be viewed by some as precursors or transitional postmodern art. Other modern movements cited as influential to postmodern art are conceptual art and the use of techniques such as assemblage, montage, bricolage, and appropriation.

===Jackson Pollock and abstract expressionism===

During the late 1940s and early 1950s, Pollock&#x27;s radical approach to painting revolutionized the potential for all Contemporary art following him. Pollock realized the journey toward making a work of art was as important as the work of art itself. Like Pablo Picasso&#x27;s innovative reinventions of painting and sculpture near the turn of the century via Cubism and constructed sculpture, Pollock redefined artmaking during the mid-century. Pollock&#x27;s move from easel painting and conventionality liberated his contemporaneous artists and following artists. They realized Pollock&#x27;s process — working on the floor, unstretched raw canvas, from all four sides, using artist materials, industrial materials, imagery, non-imagery, throwing linear skeins of paint, dripping, drawing, staining, brushing - blasted artmaking beyond prior boundaries. Abstract expressionism expanded and developed the definitions and possibilities artists had available for the creation of new works of art. In a sense, the innovations of Jackson Pollock, Willem de Kooning, Franz Kline, Mark Rothko, Philip Guston, Hans Hofmann, Clyfford Still, Barnett Newman, Ad Reinhardt and others, opened the floodgates to the diversity and scope of following artworks.

===After abstract expressionism===

In abstract painting during the 1950s and 1960s several new directions like Hard-edge painting and other forms of Geometric abstraction like the work of Frank Stella popped up, as a reaction against the subjectivism of Abstract expressionism began to appear in artist studios and in radical avant-garde circles. Clement Greenberg became the voice of &quot;Post-painterly abstraction;&quot; by curating an influential exhibition of new painting touring important art museums throughout the United States in 1964. Color field painting, Hard-edge painting and Lyrical Abstraction emerged as radical new directions.

By the late 1960s, Postminimalism, Process Art and Arte Povera also emerged as revolutionary concepts and movements encompassing painting and sculpture, via Lyrical Abstraction and the Postminimalist movement, and in early Conceptual Art. Process art as inspired by Pollock enabled artists to experiment with and make use of a diverse encyclopedia of style, content, material, placement, sense of time, and plastic and real space. Nancy Graves, Ronald Davis, Howard Hodgkin, Larry Poons, Jannis Kounellis, Brice Marden, Bruce Nauman, Richard Tuttle, Alan Saret, Walter Darby Bannard, Lynda Benglis, Dan Christensen, Larry Zox, Ronnie Landfield, Eva Hesse, Keith Sonnier, Richard Serra, Sam Gilliam, Mario Merz, Peter Reginato, Lee Lozano, were some of the younger artists emerging during the era of late modernism spawning the heyday of the art of the late 1960s.

===Performance art and happenings===

During the late 1950s and 1960s, artists with a wide range of interests began pushing the boundaries of Contemporary art. Yves Klein in France, and Carolee Schneemann, Yayoi Kusama, Charlotte Moorman, and Yoko Ono in New York City were pioneers of performance based works of art. Groups like The Living Theater with Julian Beck and Judith Malina collaborated with sculptors and painters creating environments; radically changing the relationship between audience and performer especially in their piece &quot;Paradise Now&quot;. The Judson Dance Theater located at the Judson Memorial Church, New York, and the Judson dancers, notably Yvonne Rainer, Trisha Brown, Elaine Summers, Sally Gross, Simonne Forti, Deborah Hay, Lucinda Childs, Steve Paxton and others collaborated with artists Robert Morris, Robert Whitman, John Cage, Robert Rauschenberg, and engineers like Billy Klüver. These performances were often designed to be the creation of a new art form, combining sculpture, dance, and music or sound, often with audience participation. The reductive philosophies of minimalism, spontaneous improvisation, and expressivity of Abstract expressionism characterized the works.

During the same period — the late 1950s through the mid-1960s - various avant-garde artists created Happenings. Happenings were mysterious and often spontaneous and unscripted gatherings of artists and their friends and relatives in varied specified locations. Often incorporating exercises in absurdity, physical exercise, costumes, spontaneous nudity, and various random and seemingly disconnected acts. Allan Kaprow, Joseph Beuys, Nam June Paik, Wolf Vostell, Claes Oldenburg, Jim Dine, Red Grooms, and Robert Whitman among others were notable creators of Happenings.

===Assemblage art===

Related to Abstract expressionism was the emergence of combined manufactured items — with artist materials, moving away from previous conventions of painting and sculpture. The work of Robert Rauschenberg, whose &quot;combines&quot; in the 1950s were forerunners of Pop Art and Installation art, and made use of the assemblage of large physical objects, including stuffed animals, birds and commercial photography, exemplified this art trend.

Leo Steinberg uses the term postmodernism in 1969 to describe Rauschenberg&#x27;s &quot;flatbed&quot; picture plane, containing a range of cultural images and artifacts that had not been compatible with the pictorial field of premodernist and modernist painting. Craig Owens goes further, identifying the significance of Rauschenberg&#x27;s work not as a representation of, in Steinberg&#x27;s view, &quot;the shift from nature to culture&quot;, but as a demonstration of the impossibility of accepting their opposition.

Steven Best and Douglas Kellner identify Rauschenberg and Jasper Johns as part of the transitional phase, influenced by Marcel Duchamp, between modernism and postmodernism. These artists used images of ordinary objects, or the objects themselves, in their work, while retaining the abstraction and painterly gestures of high modernism.

Anselm Kiefer also uses elements of assemblage in his works, and on one occasion, featured the bow of a fishing boat in a painting.

===Pop art===

Lawrence Alloway used the term &quot;Pop art&quot; to describe paintings celebrating consumerism of the post World War II era. This movement rejected Abstract expressionism and its focus on the hermeneutic and psychological interior, in favor of art which depicted, and often celebrated, material consumer culture, advertising, and iconography of the mass production age. The early works of David Hockney and the works of Richard Hamilton, John McHale, and Eduardo Paolozzi were considered seminal examples in the movement. While later American examples include the bulk of the careers of Andy Warhol and Roy Lichtenstein and his use of Benday dots, a technique used in commercial reproduction. There is a clear connection between the radical works of Duchamp, the rebellious Dadaist — with a sense of humor; and Pop Artists like Claes Oldenburg, Andy Warhol, Roy Lichtenstein and the others.

Thomas McEvilly, agreeing with Dave Hickey, says U.S postmodernism in the visual arts began with the first exhibitions of Pop art in 1962, &quot;though it took about twenty years before postmodernism became a dominant attitude in the visual arts.&quot; Fredric Jameson, too, considers pop art to be postmodern.

One way Pop art is postmodern is it breaks down what Andreas Huyssen calls the &quot;Great Divide&quot; between high art and popular culture. Postmodernism emerges from a &quot;generational refusal of the categorical certainties of high modernism.&quot;

===Fluxus===
Fluxus was named and loosely organized in 1962 by George Maciunas (1931–78), a Lithuanian-born American artist. Fluxus traces its beginnings to John Cage&#x27;s 1957 to 1959 Experimental Composition classes at the New School for Social Research in New York City. Many of his students were artists working in other media with little or no background in music. Cage&#x27;s students included Fluxus founding members Jackson Mac Low, Al Hansen, George Brecht and Dick Higgins.
In 1962 in Germany Fluxus started with the: FLUXUS Internationale Festspiele Neuester Musik in Wiesbaden with, George Maciunas, Joseph Beuys, Wolf Vostell, Nam June Paik and others. And in 1963 with the: Festum Fluxorum Fluxus in Düsseldorf with George Maciunas, Wolf Vostell, Joseph Beuys, Dick Higgins, Nam June Paik, Ben Patterson, Emmett Williams and others.

Fluxus encouraged a do it yourself aesthetic, and valued simplicity over complexity. Like Dada before it, Fluxus included a strong current of anti-commercialism and an anti-art sensibility, disparaging the conventional market-driven art world in favor of an artist-centered creative practice. Fluxus artists preferred to work with whatever materials were at hand, and either created their own work or collaborated in the creation process with their colleagues.

Fluxus can be viewed as part of the first phase of postmodernism, along with Rauschenberg, Johns, Warhol and the Situationist International. Andreas Huyssen criticises attempts to claim Fluxus for postmodernism as, &quot;either the master-code of postmodernism or the ultimately unrepresentable art movement – as it were, postmodernism&#x27;s sublime.&quot; Instead he sees Fluxus as a major Neo-Dadaist phenomenon within the avant-garde tradition. It did not represent a major advance in the development of artistic strategies, though it did express a rebellion against, &quot;the administered culture of the 1950s, in which a moderate, domesticated modernism served as ideological prop to the Cold War.&quot;

===Minimalism===
By the early 1960s, Minimalism emerged as an abstract movement in art (with roots in geometric abstraction via Malevich, the Bauhaus and Mondrian) which rejected the idea of relational, and subjective painting, the complexity of Abstract expressionist surfaces, and the emotional zeitgeist and polemics present in the arena of Action painting. Minimalism argued extreme simplicity could capture the sublime representation art requires. Associated with painters such as Frank Stella, minimalism in painting, as opposed to other areas, is a modernist movement and depending on the context can be construed as a precursor to the postmodern movement.

Hal Foster, in his essay &quot;The Crux of Minimalism&quot;, examines the extent to which Donald Judd and Robert Morris both acknowledge and exceed Greenbergian modernism in their published definitions of minimalism. He argues minimalism is not a &quot;dead end&quot; of modernism, but a &quot;paradigm shift toward postmodern practices that continue to be elaborated today.&quot;

===Postminimalism===
Robert Pincus-Witten coined the term Post-minimalism in 1977 to describe minimalist derived art which had content and contextual overtones minimalism rejected. His use of the term covered the period 1966 – 1976 and applied to the work of Eva Hesse, Keith Sonnier, Richard Serra and new work by former minimalists Robert Smithson, Robert Morris, Sol LeWitt, and Barry Le Va, and others. Process art and anti-form art are other terms describing this work, which the space it occupies and the process by which it is made determines.

Rosalind Krauss argues by 1968 artists such as Morris, LeWitt, Smithson and Serra had &quot;entered a situation the logical conditions of which can no longer be described as modernist.&quot; The expansion of the category of sculpture to include land art and architecture, &quot;brought about the shift into postmodernism.&quot;

Minimalists like Donald Judd, Dan Flavin, Carl Andre, Agnes Martin, John McCracken and others continued to produce their late modernist paintings and sculpture for the remainder of their careers.

==Movements==

===Conceptual art===
Conceptual art is sometimes labelled as postmodern because it is expressly involved in deconstruction of what makes a work of art, &quot;art&quot;. Conceptual art, because it is often designed to confront, or attack notions held by many of the people who view it, is regarded with particular controversy.

Precursors to conceptual art include the work of Duchamp, John Cage&#x27;s 4&#x27; 33&quot;, in which the music is said to be &quot;the sounds of the environment that the listeners hear while it is performed,&quot; and Rauschenberg&#x27;s &quot;Erased De Kooning Drawing&quot;. Many conceptual works take the position that art is created by the viewer viewing an object or act as art, not from the intrinsic qualities of the work itself. Thus, because &quot;Fountain&quot; was exhibited, it was a sculpture.

===Figurative painting===
Some currents of post-war figurative painting have been analyzed as postmodern. The Italian painter Carlo Maria Mariani was described as a postmodernist by American critics. According to Charles Jencks, Mariani&#x27;s group portrait &quot;The Constellation of Leo&quot; (1980–1981), which depicts people from Italy&#x27;s art world with references to mythology and art history, came to define a trope of postmodern art: &quot;an ironic comment on a comment on a comment which signals the distance; a new myth thrice removed from its originating ritual&quot;.

===Installation art===

An important series of movements in art which have consistently been described as postmodern involved installation art and creation of artifacts that are conceptual in nature. One example being the signs of Jenny Holzer which use the devices of art to convey specific messages, such as &quot;Protect Me From What I Want&quot;. Installation Art has been important in determining the spaces selected for museums of contemporary art in order to be able to hold the large works which are composed of vast collages of manufactured and found objects. These installations and collages are often electrified, with moving parts and lights.

They are often designed to create environmental effects, as Christo and Jeanne-Claude&#x27;s &quot;Iron Curtain, Wall of 240 Oil Barrels, Blocking Rue Visconti, Paris, June 1962&quot; which was a poetic response to the Berlin Wall built in 1961.

===Lowbrow art===

Lowbrow is a widespread populist art movement with origins in the underground comix world, punk music, hot-rod street culture, and other California subcultures. It is also often known by the name pop surrealism. Lowbrow art highlights a central theme in postmodernism in that the distinction between &quot;high&quot; and &quot;low&quot; art are no longer recognized.

===Performance art===
===Digital art===
Digital art is a general term for a range of artistic works and practices that use digital technology as an essential part of the creative and/or presentation process. The impact of digital technology has transformed activities such as painting, drawing, sculpture and music/sound art, while new forms, such as net art, digital installation art, and virtual reality, have become recognized artistic practices.

Leading art theorists and historians in this field include Christiane Paul, Frank Popper, Christine Buci-Glucksmann, Dominique Moulon, Robert C. Morgan, Roy Ascott, Catherine Perret, Margot Lovejoy, Edmond Couchot, Fred Forest and Edward A. Shanken.

===Intermedia and multi-media===
Another trend in art which has been associated with the term postmodern is the use of a number of different media together. Intermedia, a term coined by Dick Higgins and meant to convey new artforms along the lines of Fluxus, Concrete Poetry, Found objects, Performance art, and Computer art. Higgins was the publisher of the Something Else Press, a Concrete poet, married to artist Alison Knowles and an admirer of Marcel Duchamp. Ihab Hassan includes, &quot;Intermedia, the fusion of forms, the confusion of realms,&quot; in his list of the characteristics of postmodern art. One of the most common forms of &quot;multi-media art&quot; is the use of video-tape and CRT monitors, termed Video art. While the theory of combining multiple arts into one art is quite old, and has been revived periodically, the postmodern manifestation is often in combination with performance art, where the dramatic subtext is removed, and what is left is the specific statements of the artist in question or the conceptual statement of their action.
Higgin&#x27;s conception of Intermedia is connected to the growth of multimedia digital practice such as immersive virtual reality, digital art and computer art.

===Telematic Art===

Telematic art is a descriptive of art projects using computer mediated telecommunications networks as their medium. Telematic art challenges the traditional relationship between active viewing subjects and passive art objects by creating interactive, behavioural contexts for remote aesthetic encounters. Roy Ascott sees the telematic art form as the transformation of the viewer into an active participator of creating the artwork which remains in process throughout its duration. Ascott has been at the forefront of the theory and practice of telematic art since 1978 when he went online for the first time, organizing different collaborative online projects.

===Appropriation art and neo-conceptual art===
In his 1980 essay &quot;The Allegorical Impulse: Toward a Theory of Postmodernism,&quot; Craig Owens identifies the re-emergence of an allegorical impulse as characteristic of postmodern art. This impulse can be seen in the appropriation art of artists such as Sherrie Levine and Robert Longo because, &quot;Allegorical imagery is appropriated imagery.&quot; Appropriation art debunks modernist notions of artistic genius and originality and is more ambivalent and contradictory than modern art, simultaneously installing and subverting ideologies, &quot;being both critical and complicit.&quot;

===Neo-expressionism and painting===

The return to the traditional art forms of sculpture and painting in the late 1970s and early 1980s seen in the work of Neo-expressionist artists such as Georg Baselitz and Julian Schnabel has been described as a postmodern tendency, and one of the first coherent movements to emerge in the postmodern era. Its strong links with the commercial art market has raised questions, however, both about its status as a postmodern movement and the definition of postmodernism itself. Hal Foster states that neo-expressionism was complicit with the conservative cultural politics of the Reagan-Bush era in the U.S. Félix Guattari disregards the &quot;large promotional operations dubbed &#x27;neo-expressionism&#x27; in Germany,&quot; (an example of a &quot;fad that maintains itself by means of publicity&quot;) as a too easy way for him &quot;to demonstrate that postmodernism is nothing but the last gasp of modernism.&quot; These critiques of neo-expressionism reveal that money and public relations really sustained contemporary art world credibility in America during the same period that conceptual artists, and practices of women artists including painters and feminist theorists like Griselda Pollock, were systematically reevaluating modern art. Brian Massumi claims that Deleuze and Guattari open the horizon of new definitions of Beauty in postmodern art. For Jean-François Lyotard, it was painting of the artists Valerio Adami, Daniel Buren, Marcel Duchamp, Bracha Ettinger, and Barnett Newman that, after the avant-garde&#x27;s time and the painting of Paul Cézanne and Wassily Kandinsky, was the vehicle for new ideas of the in contemporary art.

===Institutional critique===
Critiques on the institutions of art (principally museums and galleries) are made in the work of Andrea Fraser, Michael Asher, Marcel Broodthaers, Daniel Buren and Hans Haacke.

==See also==

* Anti-art
* Anti-anti-art
* Artificial intelligence art
* Classificatory disputes about art
* Cyborg art
* Electronic art
* Experiments in Art and Technology
* Gaze
* Late Modernism
* Modern art
* Modernist project
* Neo-minimalism
* Net.art
* New European Painting
* New Media art
* Post-conceptual
* Superflat
* Superstroke
* Remodernism
* Irving Sandler
* Virtual art
==Sources==
* &quot;The Triumph of Modernism&quot;: The Art World, 1985–2005, Hilton Kramer, 2006, 
* &quot;Pictures of Nothing: Abstract Art since Pollock&quot; (A.W. Mellon Lectures in the Fine Arts), Kirk Varnedoe, 2003
* &quot;Art of the Postmodern Era&quot;: From the Late 1960s to the Early 1990s, Irving Sandler
* &quot;Postmodernism (Movements in Modern Art)&quot; Eleanor Heartney
* &quot;Sculpture in the Age of Doubt&quot; Thomas McEvilley 1999

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3318563" start="0" end="14" title="Postmodern art" label="Postmodern art"/>
<link wikidata="Q878985" start="84" end="93" title="modernism" label="modernism"/>
<link wikidata="Q358151" start="184" end="194" title="intermedia" label="intermedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q212431" start="196" end="212" title="installation art" label="installation art"/>
<link wikidata="Q203209" start="214" end="228" title="conceptual art" label="conceptual art"/>
<link wikidata="Q131765" start="233" end="243" title="multimedia" label="multimedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q47783" start="291" end="301" title="Postmodernism" label="postmodern"/>
<link wikidata="Q913510" start="388" end="397" title="bricolage" label="bricolage"/>
<link wikidata="Q170593" start="460" end="467" title="collage" label="collage"/>
<link wikidata="Q128115" start="469" end="483" title="abstract art" label="simplification"/>
<link wikidata="Q123305" start="485" end="498" title="appropriation art" label="appropriation"/>
<link wikidata="Q213156" start="500" end="515" title="performance art" label="performance art"/>
<link wikidata="Q219625" start="629" end="633" title="fine arts" label="fine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479257" start="638" end="647" title="high culture" label="high arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q6630264" start="652" end="659" title="low culture" label="low art"/>
<link wikidata="Q131265" start="664" end="679" title="popular culture" label="popular culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q186030" start="765" end="781" title="contemporary art" label="contemporary art"/>
<link wikidata="Q4346302" start="928" end="942" title="Late modernity" label="late modernist"/>
<link wikidata="Q365129" start="1018" end="1030" title="Arthur Danto" label="Arthur Danto"/>
<link wikidata="Q38166" start="1724" end="1734" title="modern art" label="modern art"/>
<link wikidata="Q434813" start="1768" end="1785" title="Clement Greenberg" label="Clement Greenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q352465" start="1838" end="1852" title="Félix Guattari" label="Félix Guattari"/>
<link wikidata="Q5764634" start="1956" end="1969" title="Hilton Kramer" label="Hilton Kramer"/>
<link wikidata="Q193257" start="2059" end="2080" title="Jean-François Lyotard" label="Jean-François Lyotard"/>
<link wikidata="Q347362" start="2085" end="2100" title="Fredric Jameson" label="Fredric Jameson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5757610" start="2199" end="2213" title="high modernism" label="high modernism"/>
<link wikidata="Q35986" start="2385" end="2395" title="aesthetics" label="aesthetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q735" start="2400" end="2403" title="art" label="art"/>
<link wikidata="Q10305071" start="2636" end="2648" title="James Elkins (art critic)" label="James Elkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q131808" start="2815" end="2824" title="mannerism" label="mannerism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474884" start="2872" end="2888" title="High Renaissance" label="High Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7181" start="3249" end="3262" title="globalization" label="globalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q683794" start="3267" end="3276" title="new media" label="new media"/>
<link wikidata="Q182847" start="3279" end="3295" title="Jean Baudrillard" label="Jean Baudrillard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642699" start="3427" end="3439" title="Peter Halley" label="Peter Halley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1451575" start="3865" end="3878" title="women artists" label="women artists"/>
<link wikidata="Q4810748" start="4028" end="4043" title="feminist theory" label="feminist theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q347362" start="4126" end="4141" title="Fredric Jameson" label="Fredric Jameson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6415540" start="4329" end="4342" title="Kirk Varnedoe" label="Kirk Varnedoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q878985" start="4948" end="4957" title="modernism" label="modernism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6807173" start="5029" end="5047" title="medium specificity" label="medium specificity"/>
<link wikidata="Q772046" start="5049" end="5072" title="art for art&amp;#x27;s sake" label="art for art&amp;#x27;s sake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780299" start="5074" end="5086" title="Authenticity (art)" label="authenticity"/>
<link wikidata="Q875797" start="5088" end="5100" title="Universality (philosophy)" label="universality"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914681" start="5102" end="5113" title="originality" label="originality"/>
<link wikidata="Q102932" start="5166" end="5177" title="avant-garde" label="avant-garde"/>
<link wikidata="Q40599" start="5333" end="5338" title="Manet" label="Manet"/>
<link wikidata="Q102932" start="6037" end="6048" title="avant-garde" label="avant-garde"/>
<link wikidata="Q431963" start="6056" end="6071" title="Rosalind Krauss" label="Rosalind Krauss"/>
<link wikidata="Q3108719" start="6210" end="6226" title="Griselda Pollock" label="Griselda Pollock"/>
<link wikidata="Q6415540" start="6626" end="6639" title="Kirk Varnedoe" label="Kirk Varnedoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3275728" start="6644" end="6655" title="Adam Gopnik" label="Adam Gopnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q188740" start="6752" end="6772" title="Museum of Modern Art" label="Museum of Modern Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q2677363" start="6863" end="6876" title="Douglas Crimp" label="Douglas Crimp"/>
<link wikidata="Q5764634" start="6881" end="6894" title="Hilton Kramer" label="Hilton Kramer"/>
<link wikidata="Q857784" start="7367" end="7371" title="camp (style)" label="camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q46825" start="7465" end="7474" title="Gothic art" label="Gothicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="7480" end="7491" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q37853" start="7500" end="7507" title="Baroque" label="Baroque"/>
<link wikidata="Q325945" start="7674" end="7688" title="Art Spiegelman" label="Art Spiegelman"/>
<link wikidata="Q59696" start="7750" end="7754" title="Maus" label="Maus"/>
<link wikidata="Q347362" start="8005" end="8020" title="Fredric Jameson" label="Fredric Jameson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5593" start="8372" end="8379" title="Picasso" label="Picasso"/>
<link wikidata="Q2359754" start="8447" end="8463" title="metanarrative" label="grand narratives"/>
<link wikidata="Q131361" start="8708" end="8713" title="irony" label="irony"/>
<link wikidata="Q170539" start="8715" end="8721" title="parody" label="parody"/>
<link wikidata="Q35874" start="8727" end="8732" title="humor" label="humor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143847" start="8756" end="8764" title="Art criticism" label="critique"/>
<link wikidata="Q874803" start="8768" end="8776" title="Historical revisionism" label="revision"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="9002" end="9013" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q170593" start="9136" end="9143" title="collage" label="collage"/>
<link wikidata="Q102932" start="9145" end="9156" title="avant-garde" label="avant-garde"/>
<link wikidata="Q42934" start="9175" end="9181" title="Cubism" label="Cubism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6034" start="9183" end="9187" title="Dada" label="Dada"/>
<link wikidata="Q39427" start="9192" end="9202" title="Surrealism" label="Surrealism"/>
<link wikidata="Q11990" start="9288" end="9300" title="reproduction" label="reproduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q434813" start="9414" end="9431" title="Clement Greenberg" label="Clement Greenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q952540" start="9452" end="9474" title="Avant-Garde and Kitsch" label="Avant-Garde and Kitsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930723" start="9507" end="9522" title="Partisan Review" label="Partisan Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q5593" start="9865" end="9878" title="Pablo Picasso" label="Pablo Picasso"/>
<link wikidata="Q5912" start="10176" end="10190" title="Marcel Duchamp" label="Marcel Duchamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q17000713" start="10378" end="10388" title="Readymades of Marcel Duchamp" label="Readymades"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206847" start="10406" end="10414" title="Fountain (Duchamp)" label="Fountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q6034" start="10568" end="10572" title="Dada" label="Dada"/>
<link wikidata="Q203209" start="10612" end="10626" title="conceptual art" label="conceptual art"/>
<link wikidata="Q483372" start="10687" end="10694" title="paradox" label="paradox"/>
<link wikidata="Q6034" start="10860" end="10867" title="Dadaism" label="Dadaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q39427" start="10972" end="10982" title="Surrealism" label="Surrealism"/>
<link wikidata="Q131221" start="10984" end="10992" title="Futurism" label="Futurism"/>
<link wikidata="Q836229" start="11184" end="11195" title="Ihab Hassan" label="Ihab Hassan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7614579" start="11200" end="11213" title="Steven Connor" label="Steven Connor"/>
<link wikidata="Q134147" start="11787" end="11794" title="Pop Art" label="Pop Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q173436" start="11799" end="11809" title="Minimalism" label="Minimalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q689971" start="11842" end="11856" title="paradigm shift" label="paradigm shift"/>
<link wikidata="Q3363772" start="11889" end="11898" title="Formalism (art)" label="formalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q203209" start="12093" end="12107" title="conceptual art" label="conceptual art"/>
<link wikidata="Q262343" start="12142" end="12152" title="Assemblage (art)" label="assemblage"/>
<link wikidata="Q828107" start="12154" end="12161" title="Photomontage" label="montage"/>
<link wikidata="Q913510" start="12163" end="12172" title="bricolage" label="bricolage"/>
<link wikidata="Q123305" start="12178" end="12191" title="Appropriation (art)" label="appropriation"/>
<link wikidata="Q37571" start="12283" end="12290" title="Jackson Pollock" label="Pollock"/>
<link wikidata="Q186030" start="12364" end="12380" title="Contemporary art" label="Contemporary art"/>
<link wikidata="Q5593" start="12502" end="12515" title="Pablo Picasso" label="Pablo Picasso"/>
<link wikidata="Q42934" start="12606" end="12612" title="Cubism" label="Cubism"/>
<link wikidata="Q177725" start="13103" end="13125" title="Abstract expressionism" label="Abstract expressionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q132305" start="13291" end="13308" title="Willem de Kooning" label="Willem de Kooning"/>
<link wikidata="Q374492" start="13310" end="13321" title="Franz Kline" label="Franz Kline"/>
<link wikidata="Q160149" start="13323" end="13334" title="Mark Rothko" label="Mark Rothko"/>
<link wikidata="Q701952" start="13336" end="13349" title="Philip Guston" label="Philip Guston"/>
<link wikidata="Q215461" start="13351" end="13363" title="Hans Hofmann" label="Hans Hofmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q700336" start="13365" end="13379" title="Clyfford Still" label="Clyfford Still"/>
<link wikidata="Q374504" start="13381" end="13395" title="Barnett Newman" label="Barnett Newman"/>
<link wikidata="Q345569" start="13397" end="13409" title="Ad Reinhardt" label="Ad Reinhardt"/>
<link wikidata="Q128115" start="13534" end="13551" title="Abstract art" label="abstract painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q369418" start="13607" end="13625" title="Hard-edge painting" label="Hard-edge painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q2316866" start="13645" end="13666" title="Geometric abstraction" label="Geometric abstraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q375268" start="13684" end="13696" title="Frank Stella" label="Frank Stella"/>
<link wikidata="Q102932" start="13822" end="13833" title="avant-garde" label="avant-garde"/>
<link wikidata="Q434813" start="13843" end="13860" title="Clement Greenberg" label="Clement Greenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="14020" end="14033" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164982" start="14043" end="14063" title="Color field painting" label="Color field painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q369418" start="14065" end="14083" title="Hard-edge painting" label="Hard-edge painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147263" start="14088" end="14107" title="Lyrical Abstraction" label="Lyrical Abstraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q2394116" start="14163" end="14177" title="Postminimalism" label="Postminimalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q545851" start="14179" end="14190" title="Process Art" label="Process Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q576913" start="14195" end="14206" title="Arte Povera" label="Arte Povera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147263" start="14301" end="14320" title="Lyrical Abstraction" label="Lyrical Abstraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q2394116" start="14329" end="14343" title="Postminimalist" label="Postminimalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q203209" start="14367" end="14381" title="Conceptual Art" label="Conceptual Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q541831" start="14575" end="14587" title="Nancy Graves" label="Nancy Graves"/>
<link wikidata="Q1674836" start="14589" end="14601" title="Ronald Davis" label="Ronald Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q950746" start="14603" end="14617" title="Howard Hodgkin" label="Howard Hodgkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q327862" start="14619" end="14630" title="Larry Poons" label="Larry Poons"/>
<link wikidata="Q472557" start="14632" end="14648" title="Jannis Kounellis" label="Jannis Kounellis"/>
<link wikidata="Q475416" start="14650" end="14662" title="Brice Marden" label="Brice Marden"/>
<link wikidata="Q168665" start="14664" end="14676" title="Bruce Nauman" label="Bruce Nauman"/>
<link wikidata="Q836743" start="14678" end="14692" title="Richard Tuttle" label="Richard Tuttle"/>
<link wikidata="Q16106789" start="14694" end="14704" title="Alan Saret" label="Alan Saret"/>
<link wikidata="Q7964647" start="14706" end="14726" title="Walter Darby Bannard" label="Walter Darby Bannard"/>
<link wikidata="Q538986" start="14728" end="14741" title="Lynda Benglis" label="Lynda Benglis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5213254" start="14743" end="14758" title="Dan Christensen" label="Dan Christensen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6491348" start="14760" end="14769" title="Larry Zox" label="Larry Zox"/>
<link wikidata="Q7365903" start="14771" end="14787" title="Ronnie Landfield" label="Ronnie Landfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q215457" start="14789" end="14798" title="Eva Hesse" label="Eva Hesse"/>
<link wikidata="Q327520" start="14800" end="14813" title="Keith Sonnier" label="Keith Sonnier"/>
<link wikidata="Q321245" start="14815" end="14828" title="Richard Serra" label="Richard Serra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2216478" start="14830" end="14841" title="Sam Gilliam" label="Sam Gilliam"/>
<link wikidata="Q698877" start="14843" end="14853" title="Mario Merz" label="Mario Merz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7176557" start="14855" end="14869" title="Peter Reginato" label="Peter Reginato"/>
<link wikidata="Q530367" start="14871" end="14881" title="Lee Lozano" label="Lee Lozano"/>
<link wikidata="Q17165854" start="14943" end="14957" title="Late Modernism" label="late modernism"/>
<link wikidata="Q186030" start="15151" end="15167" title="Contemporary art" label="Contemporary art"/>
<link wikidata="Q154335" start="15169" end="15179" title="Yves Klein" label="Yves Klein"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="15183" end="15189" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q299662" start="15195" end="15213" title="Carolee Schneemann" label="Carolee Schneemann"/>
<link wikidata="Q231121" start="15215" end="15227" title="Yayoi Kusama" label="Yayoi Kusama"/>
<link wikidata="Q451188" start="15229" end="15246" title="Charlotte Moorman" label="Charlotte Moorman"/>
<link wikidata="Q117012" start="15252" end="15260" title="Yoko Ono" label="Yoko Ono"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="15264" end="15277" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202416" start="15343" end="15357" title="Living Theater" label="Living Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332885" start="15363" end="15374" title="Julian Beck" label="Julian Beck"/>
<link wikidata="Q213844" start="15379" end="15392" title="Judith Malina" label="Judith Malina"/>
<link wikidata="Q773147" start="15580" end="15600" title="Judson Dance Theater" label="Judson Dance Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q3111397" start="15616" end="15638" title="Judson Memorial Church" label="Judson Memorial Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="15640" end="15648" title="New York City" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q452238" start="15682" end="15695" title="Yvonne Rainer" label="Yvonne Rainer"/>
<link wikidata="Q460833" start="15697" end="15709" title="Trisha Brown" label="Trisha Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324831" start="15711" end="15725" title="Elaine Summers" label="Elaine Summers"/>
<link wikidata="Q20737914" start="15727" end="15738" title="Sally Gross (choreographer)" label="Sally Gross"/>
<link wikidata="Q5248262" start="15755" end="15766" title="Deborah Hay" label="Deborah Hay"/>
<link wikidata="Q438806" start="15768" end="15782" title="Lucinda Childs" label="Lucinda Childs"/>
<link wikidata="Q596292" start="15784" end="15796" title="Steve Paxton" label="Steve Paxton"/>
<link wikidata="Q465168" start="15834" end="15847" title="Robert Morris (artist)" label="Robert Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q7351025" start="15849" end="15863" title="Robert Whitman" label="Robert Whitman"/>
<link wikidata="Q180727" start="15865" end="15874" title="John Cage" label="John Cage"/>
<link wikidata="Q164358" start="15876" end="15895" title="Robert Rauschenberg" label="Robert Rauschenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q4912866" start="15916" end="15928" title="Billy Klüver" label="Billy Klüver"/>
<link wikidata="Q173436" start="16120" end="16130" title="minimalism" label="minimalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q177725" start="16179" end="16201" title="Abstract expressionism" label="Abstract expressionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q102932" start="16300" end="16311" title="avant-garde" label="avant-garde"/>
<link wikidata="Q108874" start="16328" end="16338" title="Happenings" label="Happenings"/>
<link wikidata="Q10791" start="16574" end="16580" title="nudity" label="nudity"/>
<link wikidata="Q366380" start="16634" end="16646" title="Allan Kaprow" label="Allan Kaprow"/>
<link wikidata="Q153965" start="16648" end="16660" title="Joseph Beuys" label="Joseph Beuys"/>
<link wikidata="Q158056" start="16662" end="16675" title="Nam June Paik" label="Nam June Paik"/>
<link wikidata="Q326226" start="16677" end="16689" title="Wolf Vostell" label="Wolf Vostell"/>
<link wikidata="Q156731" start="16691" end="16706" title="Claes Oldenburg" label="Claes Oldenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q531234" start="16708" end="16716" title="Jim Dine" label="Jim Dine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3422714" start="16718" end="16728" title="Red Grooms" label="Red Grooms"/>
<link wikidata="Q7351025" start="16734" end="16748" title="Robert Whitman" label="Robert Whitman"/>
<link wikidata="Q177725" start="16833" end="16855" title="Abstract expressionism" label="Abstract expressionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q164358" start="17007" end="17026" title="Robert Rauschenberg" label="Robert Rauschenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q212431" start="17100" end="17116" title="Installation art" label="Installation art"/>
<link wikidata="Q11633" start="17213" end="17235" title="commercial photography" label="commercial photography"/>
<link wikidata="Q457739" start="17266" end="17279" title="Leo Steinberg" label="Leo Steinberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q3696463" start="17529" end="17540" title="Craig Owens (critic)" label="Craig Owens"/>
<link wikidata="Q2023078" start="17788" end="17799" title="Steven Best" label="Steven Best"/>
<link wikidata="Q5301680" start="17804" end="17819" title="Douglas Kellner" label="Douglas Kellner"/>
<link wikidata="Q155057" start="17846" end="17858" title="Jasper Johns" label="Jasper Johns"/>
<link wikidata="Q5912" start="17908" end="17922" title="Marcel Duchamp" label="Marcel Duchamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q170344" start="18125" end="18138" title="Anselm Kiefer" label="Anselm Kiefer"/>
<link wikidata="Q957215" start="18273" end="18289" title="Lawrence Alloway" label="Lawrence Alloway"/>
<link wikidata="Q89640" start="18358" end="18369" title="consumerism" label="consumerism"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="18382" end="18394" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q177725" start="18423" end="18445" title="Abstract expressionism" label="Abstract expressionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q159907" start="18664" end="18677" title="David Hockney" label="David Hockney"/>
<link wikidata="Q159465" start="18695" end="18711" title="Richard Hamilton (artist)" label="Richard Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6247874" start="18713" end="18724" title="John McHale (artist)" label="John McHale"/>
<link wikidata="Q165397" start="18730" end="18746" title="Eduardo Paolozzi" label="Eduardo Paolozzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5603" start="18862" end="18873" title="Andy Warhol" label="Andy Warhol"/>
<link wikidata="Q151679" start="18878" end="18894" title="Roy Lichtenstein" label="Roy Lichtenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q439395" start="18910" end="18921" title="Benday dots" label="Benday dots"/>
<link wikidata="Q5912" start="19025" end="19032" title="Duchamp" label="Duchamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q6034" start="19049" end="19053" title="Dada" label="Dada"/>
<link wikidata="Q134147" start="19086" end="19093" title="Pop Art" label="Pop Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q156731" start="19103" end="19118" title="Claes Oldenburg" label="Claes Oldenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q5603" start="19120" end="19131" title="Andy Warhol" label="Andy Warhol"/>
<link wikidata="Q151679" start="19133" end="19149" title="Roy Lichtenstein" label="Roy Lichtenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q5228949" start="19198" end="19209" title="Dave Hickey" label="Dave Hickey"/>
<link wikidata="Q347362" start="19420" end="19435" title="Fredric Jameson" label="Fredric Jameson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4755464" start="19532" end="19547" title="Andreas Huyssen" label="Andreas Huyssen"/>
<link wikidata="Q455931" start="19797" end="19812" title="George Maciunas" label="George Maciunas"/>
<link wikidata="Q180727" start="19891" end="19900" title="John Cage" label="John Cage"/>
<link wikidata="Q27988140" start="19961" end="19991" title="New School for Social Research" label="New School for Social Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q6117237" start="20160" end="20175" title="Jackson Mac Low" label="Jackson Mac Low"/>
<link wikidata="Q2636085" start="20177" end="20186" title="Al Hansen" label="Al Hansen"/>
<link wikidata="Q686321" start="20188" end="20201" title="George Brecht" label="George Brecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209700" start="20206" end="20218" title="Dick Higgins" label="Dick Higgins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1721" start="20315" end="20324" title="Wiesbaden" label="Wiesbaden"/>
<link wikidata="Q455931" start="20331" end="20346" title="George Maciunas" label="George Maciunas"/>
<link wikidata="Q153965" start="20348" end="20360" title="Joseph Beuys" label="Joseph Beuys"/>
<link wikidata="Q326226" start="20362" end="20374" title="Wolf Vostell" label="Wolf Vostell"/>
<link wikidata="Q158056" start="20376" end="20389" title="Nam June Paik" label="Nam June Paik"/>
<link wikidata="Q1718" start="20450" end="20460" title="Düsseldorf" label="Düsseldorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q455931" start="20466" end="20481" title="George Maciunas" label="George Maciunas"/>
<link wikidata="Q326226" start="20483" end="20495" title="Wolf Vostell" label="Wolf Vostell"/>
<link wikidata="Q153965" start="20497" end="20509" title="Joseph Beuys" label="Joseph Beuys"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209700" start="20511" end="20523" title="Dick Higgins" label="Dick Higgins"/>
<link wikidata="Q158056" start="20525" end="20538" title="Nam June Paik" label="Nam June Paik"/>
<link wikidata="Q817643" start="20540" end="20553" title="Ben Patterson" label="Ben Patterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q719185" start="20555" end="20570" title="Emmett Williams" label="Emmett Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q6034" start="20674" end="20678" title="Dada" label="Dada"/>
<link wikidata="Q610106" start="20752" end="20760" title="anti-art" label="anti-art"/>
<link wikidata="Q850181" start="21159" end="21185" title="Situationist International" label="Situationist International"/>
<link wikidata="Q4755464" start="21187" end="21202" title="Andreas Huyssen" label="Andreas Huyssen"/>
<link wikidata="Q935292" start="21438" end="21446" title="Neo-Dada" label="Neo-Dada"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="21741" end="21749" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q173436" start="21795" end="21805" title="Minimalism" label="Minimalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2316866" start="21860" end="21881" title="geometric abstraction" label="geometric abstraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q130777" start="21886" end="21894" title="Kazimir Malevich" label="Malevich"/>
<link wikidata="Q124354" start="21900" end="21907" title="Bauhaus" label="Bauhaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q151803" start="21912" end="21920" title="Piet Mondrian" label="Mondrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q177725" start="22004" end="22026" title="Abstract expressionist" label="Abstract expressionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q217213" start="22102" end="22117" title="Action painting" label="Action painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q173436" start="22119" end="22129" title="Minimalism" label="Minimalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q375268" start="22244" end="22256" title="Frank Stella" label="Frank Stella"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570107" start="22423" end="22433" title="Hal Foster (art critic)" label="Hal Foster"/>
<link wikidata="Q250293" start="22513" end="22524" title="Donald Judd" label="Donald Judd"/>
<link wikidata="Q465168" start="22529" end="22542" title="Robert Morris (artist)" label="Robert Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q16097289" start="22826" end="22846" title="Robert Pincus-Witten" label="Robert Pincus-Witten"/>
<link wikidata="Q2394116" start="22863" end="22878" title="Post-minimalism" label="Post-minimalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q215457" start="23064" end="23073" title="Eva Hesse" label="Eva Hesse"/>
<link wikidata="Q327520" start="23075" end="23088" title="Keith Sonnier" label="Keith Sonnier"/>
<link wikidata="Q321245" start="23090" end="23103" title="Richard Serra" label="Richard Serra"/>
<link wikidata="Q328341" start="23139" end="23154" title="Robert Smithson" label="Robert Smithson"/>
<link wikidata="Q465168" start="23156" end="23169" title="Robert Morris (artist)" label="Robert Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q168587" start="23171" end="23181" title="Sol LeWitt" label="Sol LeWitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q545851" start="23212" end="23223" title="Process art" label="Process art"/>
<link wikidata="Q431963" start="23357" end="23372" title="Rosalind Krauss" label="Rosalind Krauss"/>
<link wikidata="Q326478" start="23602" end="23610" title="land art" label="land art"/>
<link wikidata="Q12271" start="23615" end="23627" title="architecture" label="architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q250293" start="23703" end="23714" title="Donald Judd" label="Donald Judd"/>
<link wikidata="Q504395" start="23716" end="23726" title="Dan Flavin" label="Dan Flavin"/>
<link wikidata="Q315348" start="23728" end="23738" title="Carl Andre" label="Carl Andre"/>
<link wikidata="Q275610" start="23740" end="23752" title="Agnes Martin" label="Agnes Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q947075" start="23754" end="23768" title="John McCracken (artist)" label="John McCracken"/>
<link wikidata="Q878985" start="23812" end="23821" title="modernist" label="modernist"/>
<link wikidata="Q180348" start="24006" end="24020" title="deconstruction" label="deconstruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q180727" start="24283" end="24292" title="John Cage" label="John Cage"/>
<link wikidata="Q12030" start="24300" end="24316" title="4&amp;#x27; 33&amp;quot;" label="4&amp;#x27; 33&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q17143206" start="24470" end="24495" title="Erased De Kooning Drawing" label="Erased De Kooning Drawing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206847" start="24683" end="24691" title="Fountain (Duchamp)" label="Fountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1622217" start="24786" end="24805" title="Figurative art" label="figurative painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q3659581" start="24860" end="24879" title="Carlo Maria Mariani" label="Carlo Maria Mariani"/>
<link wikidata="Q354634" start="24947" end="24961" title="Charles Jencks" label="Charles Jencks"/>
<link wikidata="Q123384316" start="24999" end="25023" title="The Constellation of Leo" label="The Constellation of Leo"/>
<link wikidata="Q212431" start="25446" end="25462" title="installation art" label="installation art"/>
<link wikidata="Q270388" start="25551" end="25563" title="Jenny Holzer" label="Jenny Holzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q170593" start="25913" end="25920" title="collage" label="collage"/>
<link wikidata="Q158477" start="26036" end="26061" title="Christo and Jeanne-Claude" label="Christo and Jeanne-Claude"/>
<link wikidata="Q1630727" start="26345" end="26352" title="Hot rod" label="hot-rod"/>
<link wikidata="Q11629" start="26886" end="26894" title="painting" label="painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q93184" start="26896" end="26903" title="drawing" label="drawing"/>
<link wikidata="Q11634" start="26905" end="26914" title="sculpture" label="sculpture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1744327" start="26925" end="26934" title="sound art" label="sound art"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569950" start="26961" end="26968" title="net art" label="net art"/>
<link wikidata="Q212431" start="26978" end="26994" title="installation art" label="installation art"/>
<link wikidata="Q170519" start="27000" end="27015" title="virtual reality" label="virtual reality"/>
<link wikidata="Q69108" start="27120" end="27135" title="Christiane Paul" label="Christiane Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q3082774" start="27137" end="27149" title="Frank Popper" label="Frank Popper"/>
<link wikidata="Q384688" start="27151" end="27176" title="Christine Buci-Glucksmann" label="Christine Buci-Glucksmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q5291159" start="27178" end="27194" title="Dominique Moulon" label="Dominique Moulon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7342636" start="27196" end="27212" title="Robert C. Morgan" label="Robert C. Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3445740" start="27214" end="27224" title="Roy Ascott" label="Roy Ascott"/>
<link wikidata="Q2942032" start="27226" end="27242" title="Catherine Perret" label="Catherine Perret"/>
<link wikidata="Q6760685" start="27244" end="27258" title="Margot Lovejoy" label="Margot Lovejoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q950610" start="27260" end="27274" title="Edmond Couchot" label="Edmond Couchot"/>
<link wikidata="Q3086831" start="27276" end="27287" title="Fred Forest" label="Fred Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q5341479" start="27292" end="27309" title="Edward A. Shanken" label="Edward A. Shanken"/>
<link wikidata="Q358151" start="27469" end="27479" title="Intermedia" label="Intermedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209700" start="27498" end="27510" title="Dick Higgins" label="Dick Higgins"/>
<link wikidata="Q108908" start="27563" end="27569" title="Fluxus" label="Fluxus"/>
<link wikidata="Q596594" start="27571" end="27586" title="Concrete Poetry" label="Concrete Poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q572916" start="27588" end="27601" title="Found objects" label="Found objects"/>
<link wikidata="Q213156" start="27603" end="27618" title="Performance art" label="Performance art"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376265" start="27624" end="27636" title="Computer art" label="Computer art"/>
<link wikidata="Q2299703" start="27671" end="27691" title="Something Else Press" label="Something Else Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q596594" start="27695" end="27708" title="Concrete poet" label="Concrete poet"/>
<link wikidata="Q243078" start="27728" end="27742" title="Alison Knowles" label="Alison Knowles"/>
<link wikidata="Q5912" start="27761" end="27775" title="Marcel Duchamp" label="Marcel Duchamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q836229" start="27777" end="27788" title="Ihab Hassan" label="Ihab Hassan"/>
<link wikidata="Q682010" start="28033" end="28042" title="Video art" label="Video art"/>
<link wikidata="Q213156" start="28208" end="28223" title="performance art" label="performance art"/>
<link wikidata="Q131765" start="28448" end="28458" title="multimedia" label="multimedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1660060" start="28484" end="28509" title="immersive virtual reality" label="immersive virtual reality"/>
<link wikidata="Q860372" start="28511" end="28522" title="digital art" label="digital art"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376265" start="28527" end="28539" title="computer art" label="computer art"/>
<link wikidata="Q3445740" start="28868" end="28878" title="Roy Ascott" label="Roy Ascott"/>
<link wikidata="Q3696463" start="29362" end="29373" title="Craig Owens (critic)" label="Craig Owens"/>
<link wikidata="Q18535" start="29408" end="29419" title="allegorical" label="allegorical"/>
<link wikidata="Q123305" start="29497" end="29514" title="appropriation art" label="appropriation art"/>
<link wikidata="Q319569" start="29534" end="29548" title="Sherrie Levine" label="Sherrie Levine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250139" start="29553" end="29565" title="Robert Longo" label="Robert Longo"/>
<link wikidata="Q11629" start="29965" end="29973" title="painting" label="painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q589655" start="30028" end="30045" title="Neo-expressionism" label="Neo-expressionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q164775" start="30062" end="30076" title="Georg Baselitz" label="Georg Baselitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q345379" start="30081" end="30096" title="Julian Schnabel" label="Julian Schnabel"/>
<link wikidata="Q352465" start="30515" end="30529" title="Félix Guattari" label="Félix Guattari"/>
<link wikidata="Q1451575" start="31032" end="31045" title="women artists" label="women artists"/>
<link wikidata="Q3108719" start="31093" end="31109" title="Griselda Pollock" label="Griselda Pollock"/>
<link wikidata="Q912704" start="31156" end="31169" title="Brian Massumi" label="Brian Massumi"/>
<link wikidata="Q184226" start="31182" end="31189" title="Deleuze" label="Deleuze"/>
<link wikidata="Q352465" start="31194" end="31202" title="Guattari" label="Guattari"/>
<link wikidata="Q7242" start="31242" end="31248" title="Beauty" label="Beauty"/>
<link wikidata="Q562139" start="31326" end="31339" title="Valerio Adami" label="Valerio Adami"/>
<link wikidata="Q593621" start="31341" end="31353" title="Daniel Buren" label="Daniel Buren"/>
<link wikidata="Q5912" start="31355" end="31369" title="Marcel Duchamp" label="Marcel Duchamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q516614" start="31371" end="31386" title="Bracha Ettinger" label="Bracha Ettinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q374504" start="31392" end="31406" title="Barnett Newman" label="Barnett Newman"/>
<link wikidata="Q35548" start="31467" end="31479" title="Paul Cézanne" label="Paul Cézanne"/>
<link wikidata="Q61064" start="31484" end="31501" title="Wassily Kandinsky" label="Wassily Kandinsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q273205" start="31688" end="31701" title="Andrea Fraser" label="Andrea Fraser"/>
<link wikidata="Q325112" start="31703" end="31716" title="Michael Asher (artist)" label="Michael Asher"/>
<link wikidata="Q834926" start="31718" end="31736" title="Marcel Broodthaers" label="Marcel Broodthaers"/>
<link wikidata="Q593621" start="31738" end="31750" title="Daniel Buren" label="Daniel Buren"/>
<link wikidata="Q657647" start="31755" end="31766" title="Hans Haacke" label="Hans Haacke"/>
<link wikidata="Q610106" start="31785" end="31793" title="Anti-art" label="Anti-art"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351977" start="31796" end="31809" title="Anti-anti-art" label="Anti-anti-art"/>
<link wikidata="Q65066631" start="31812" end="31839" title="Artificial intelligence art" label="Artificial intelligence art"/>
<link wikidata="Q2976552" start="31842" end="31875" title="Classificatory disputes about art" label="Classificatory disputes about art"/>
<link wikidata="Q22082112" start="31878" end="31888" title="Cyborg art" label="Cyborg art"/>
<link wikidata="Q5358332" start="31891" end="31905" title="Electronic art" label="Electronic art"/>
<link wikidata="Q5421183" start="31908" end="31941" title="Experiments in Art and Technology" label="Experiments in Art and Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q14467155" start="31944" end="31948" title="Gaze" label="Gaze"/>
<link wikidata="Q17165854" start="31951" end="31965" title="Late Modernism" label="Late Modernism"/>
<link wikidata="Q38166" start="31968" end="31978" title="Modern art" label="Modern art"/>
<link wikidata="Q878985" start="31981" end="31998" title="Modernist project" label="Modernist project"/>
<link wikidata="Q66317259" start="32001" end="32015" title="Neo-minimalism" label="Neo-minimalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2553758" start="32018" end="32025" title="Net.art" label="Net.art"/>
<link wikidata="Q7007522" start="32028" end="32049" title="New European Painting" label="New European Painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q378604" start="32052" end="32065" title="New Media art" label="New Media art"/>
<link wikidata="Q17153088" start="32068" end="32083" title="Post-conceptual" label="Post-conceptual"/>
<link wikidata="Q1444581" start="32086" end="32095" title="Superflat" label="Superflat"/>
<link wikidata="Q7644251" start="32098" end="32109" title="Superstroke" label="Superstroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q7312050" start="32112" end="32123" title="Remodernism" label="Remodernism"/>
<link wikidata="Q15233979" start="32126" end="32140" title="Irving Sandler" label="Irving Sandler"/>
<link wikidata="Q7935068" start="32143" end="32154" title="Virtual art" label="Virtual art"/>
<link wikidata="Q5764634" start="32233" end="32246" title="Hilton Kramer" label="Hilton Kramer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6415540" start="32358" end="32371" title="Kirk Varnedoe" label="Kirk Varnedoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q15233979" start="32459" end="32473" title="Irving Sandler" label="Irving Sandler"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="192128" wikidata="Q281108" url="?curid=192128" title="Naïve art">
<text>Naïve art is usually defined as visual art that is created by a person who lacks the formal education and training that a professional artist undergoes (in anatomy, art history, technique, perspective, ways of seeing). When this aesthetic is emulated by a trained artist, the result is sometimes called &quot;primitivism&quot;, &quot;pseudo-naïve art&quot;, or &quot;faux naïve art&quot;.

Unlike folk art, naïve art does not necessarily derive from a distinct popular cultural context or tradition; indeed, at least in the advanced economies and since the Printing Revolution, awareness of the local fine art tradition has been inescapable, as it diffused through popular prints and other media. Naïve artists are aware of &quot;fine art&quot; conventions such as graphical perspective and compositional conventions, but are unable to fully use them, or choose not to. By contrast, outsider art (&quot;art brut&quot;) denotes works from a similar context but which have only minimal contact with the mainstream art world.

Naïve art is recognized, and often imitated, for its childlike simplicity and frankness. Paintings of this kind typically have a flat rendering style with a rudimentary expression of perspective. One particularly influential painter of &quot;naïve art&quot; was Henri Rousseau (1844–1910), a French Post-Impressionist who was discovered by Pablo Picasso.

The definition of the term, and its &quot;borders&quot; with neighbouring terms such as folk art and outsider art, has been a matter of some controversy. Naïve art is a term usually used for the forms of fine art, such as paintings and sculptures, made by a self-taught artist, while objects with a practical use come under folk art. But this distinction has been disputed. Another term that may be used, especially of paintings and architecture, is &quot;provincial&quot;, essentially used for work by artists who had received some conventional training, but whose work unintentionally falls short of metropolitan or court standards.

==Characteristics==

Naïve art is often seen as outsider art that is by someone without formal (or little) training or degree. While this was true before the twentieth century, there are now academies for naïve art. Naïve art is now a fully recognized art genre, represented in art galleries worldwide.

The characteristics of naïve art have an awkward relationship to the formal qualities of painting, especially not respecting the three rules of the perspective (such as defined by the &quot;Progressive Painters of the Renaissance&quot;):
# Decrease of the size of objects proportionally with distance,
# Muting of colors with distance,
# Decrease of the precision of details with distance,
The results are:
# Effects of perspective geometrically erroneous (awkward aspect of the works, children&#x27;s drawings look, or medieval painting look, but the comparison stops there)
# Strong use of pattern, unrefined color on all the plans of the composition, without enfeeblement in the background,
# An equal accuracy brought to details, including those of the background which should be shaded off.
Simplicity rather than subtlety are all supposed markers of naïve art. It has, however, become such a popular and recognizable style that many examples could be called &quot;pseudo-naïve&quot;.

Whereas naïve art ideally describes the work of an artist who did not receive formal education in an art school or academy, for example Henri Rousseau or Alfred Wallis, &#x27;pseudo naïve&#x27; or &#x27;faux naïve&#x27; art describes the work of an artist working in a more imitative or self-conscious mode and whose work can be seen as more imitative than original.

Strict naïvety is unlikely to be found in contemporary artists, given the expansion of Autodidactism as a form of education in modern times. Naïve categorizations are not always welcome by living artists, but this is likely to change as dignifying signals are known. Museums devoted to naïve art now exist in Kecskemét, Hungary; Kovačica, Serbia; Riga, Latvia; Jaén, Spain; Rio de Janeiro, Brazil; Vicq and Paris, France. Examples of English-speaking living artists who acknowledge their naïve style are: Gary Bunt, Lyle Carbajal, Gabe Langholtz, Gigi Mills, Barbara Olsen, Paine Proffitt, and Alain Thomas.

&quot;Primitive art&quot; is another term often applied to art by those without formal training, but is historically more often applied to work from certain cultures that have been judged socially or technologically &quot;primitive&quot; by Western academia, such as Native American, subsaharan African or Pacific Island art (see Tribal art). This is distinguished from the self-conscious, &quot;primitive&quot; inspired movement primitivism. Another term related to (but not completely synonymous with) naïve art is folk art.

The terms &quot;naïvism&quot; and &quot;primitivism&quot; also exist, and are usually applied to professional painters working in the style of naïve art (like Paul Gauguin, Mikhail Larionov, and Paul Klee).

==Term==
In 1870, in his poem &quot;Au Cabaret-Vert, 5 heures du soir&quot;, Arthur Rimbaud uses the word &quot;naïf&quot; to designate “clumsy” pictorial representations: &quot;“I contemplated the very naive subjects of the tapestry”&quot;, which is perhaps the case of the origin of the &quot;naïf&quot; employment by Guillaume Apollinaire some time later.

== Movements ==
Nobody knows exactly when the first naive artists appeared on the scene, as from the first manifestations of art right up to the days of the &quot;Modern Classic&quot;, naive artists quite unconsciously bequeathed us unmistakable signs of their creative activity. At all events, naive art can be regarded as having occupied an &quot;official&quot; position in the annals of twentieth-century art since – at the very latest – the publication of the &quot;Der Blaue Reiter&quot;, an almanac in 1912. Wassily Kandinsky and Franz Marc, who brought out the almanac, presented 6 reproductions of paintings by &quot;le Douanier&#x27; Rousseau (Henri Rousseau)&quot;, comparing them with other pictorial examples. However, most experts agree that the year that naive art was &quot;discovered&quot; was 1885, when the painter Paul Signac became aware of the talents of Henri Rousseau and set about organizing exhibitions of his work in a number of prestigious galleries.

===The Sacred Heart painters===
German art collector and critic Wilhelm Uhde is known as the principal organiser of the first Naïve Art exhibition, which took place in Paris in 1928. The participants were Henri Rousseau, André Bauchant, Camille Bombois, Séraphine Louis and Louis Vivin, known collectively as the Sacred Heart painters.

=== Hlebine School ===
A term applied to Croatian naive painters working in or around the village of Hlebine, near the Hungarian border, from about 1930. At this time, according to the &quot;World Encyclopedia of Naive Art&quot; (1984), the village amounted to little more than &#x27;a few muddy winding streets and one-storey houses&#x27;, but it produced such a remarkable crop of artists that it became virtually synonymous with Yugoslav naive painting.

Hlebine is a small picturesque municipality in the north of Croatia that in 1920s became a setting against which a group of self-taught peasants began to develop a unique and somewhat revolutionary style of painting. This was instigated by leading intellectuals of the time such as the poet Antun Gustav Matoš and the biggest name in Croatian literature, Miroslav Krleža, who called for an individual national artistic style that would be independent from Western influences. These ideas were picked up by a celebrated artist from Hlebine – Krsto Hegedušić and he went on to found the Hlebine School of Art in 1930 in search of national “rural artistic expression”.

Ivan Generalić was the first master of the Hlebine School, and the first to develop a distinctive personal style, achieving a high standard in his art.

After the Second World War, the next generation of Hlebine painters tended to focus more on stylized depictions of country life taken from imagination. Generalić continued to be the dominant figure, and encouraged younger artists, including his son Josip Generalić.

The Hlebine school became a worldwide phenomenon with the 1952 Venice Biennale and exhibitions in Brazil and Brussels.

Some of the best known naive artists are Dragan Gaži, Ivan Generalić, Maria Prymachenko, Josip Generalić, Krsto Hegedušić, Mijo Kovačić, Ivan Lacković-Croata, Franjo Mraz, Ivan Večenaj and Mirko Virius.

== Artists ==
==Museums and galleries==

* Croatian Museum of Naïve Art, Zagreb, Croatia
* Musée international d&#x27;Art naïf Anatole Jakovsky, Nice, France
* Musée d&#x27;Art Naïf – Max Fourny, Paris, France
* International Museum of Naive Art, Vicq, France
* Museum of Bad Art, Massachusetts
* National Folk Decorative Art Museum, Kyiv, Ukraine
* Zander Collection, Cologne, Germany

==See also==
*Autodidacticism
*Anatole Jakovsky
*Chicago Imagists
*Neo-primitivism
*Véronique Filozof

==References==
== Further reading ==

* Walker, John. &quot;Naive Art&quot;. &quot;Glossary of Art, Architecture &amp; Design since 1945&quot;, 3rd. ed. (archived link, April 11, 2012)
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q281108" start="0" end="9" title="Naïve art" label="Naïve art"/>
<link wikidata="Q36649" start="32" end="42" title="Visual arts" label="visual art"/>
<link wikidata="Q50637" start="165" end="176" title="art history" label="art history"/>
<link wikidata="Q1900281" start="189" end="200" title="Perspective (graphical)" label="perspective"/>
<link wikidata="Q848365" start="309" end="320" title="primitivism" label="primitivism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153484" start="397" end="405" title="folk art" label="folk art"/>
<link wikidata="Q11034" start="557" end="576" title="printing" label="Printing Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q219625" start="601" end="609" title="fine art" label="fine art"/>
<link wikidata="Q10489441" start="665" end="678" title="popular print" label="popular print"/>
<link wikidata="Q1900281" start="765" end="786" title="graphical perspective" label="graphical perspective"/>
<link wikidata="Q594150" start="883" end="895" title="outsider art" label="outsider art"/>
<link wikidata="Q259326" start="1158" end="1167" title="Artistic rendering" label="rendering"/>
<link wikidata="Q1792644" start="1168" end="1173" title="Style (visual arts)" label="style"/>
<link wikidata="Q156386" start="1286" end="1300" title="Henri Rousseau" label="Henri Rousseau"/>
<link wikidata="Q166713" start="1323" end="1341" title="Post-Impressionist" label="Post-Impressionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5593" start="1364" end="1377" title="Pablo Picasso" label="Pablo Picasso"/>
<link wikidata="Q594150" start="2064" end="2076" title="outsider art" label="outsider art"/>
<link wikidata="Q383092" start="2207" end="2216" title="Art school" label="academies"/>
<link wikidata="Q383092" start="3412" end="3422" title="art school" label="art school"/>
<link wikidata="Q162633" start="3426" end="3433" title="academy" label="academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3354650" start="3465" end="3478" title="Alfred Wallis" label="Alfred Wallis"/>
<link wikidata="Q207650" start="3766" end="3779" title="Autodidactism" label="Autodidactism"/>
<link wikidata="Q171357" start="3988" end="3997" title="Kecskemét" label="Kecskemét"/>
<link wikidata="Q771826" start="4008" end="4016" title="Kovačica" label="Kovačica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773" start="4026" end="4030" title="Riga" label="Riga"/>
<link wikidata="Q15681" start="4040" end="4044" title="Jaén, Spain" label="Jaén"/>
<link wikidata="Q8678" start="4053" end="4067" title="Rio de Janeiro" label="Rio de Janeiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q3330611" start="4077" end="4081" title="Musée d&amp;#x27;art naïf de Vicq en Île-de-France" label="Vicq"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="4086" end="4091" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q2864736" start="4618" end="4628" title="Tribal art" label="Tribal art"/>
<link wikidata="Q848365" start="4718" end="4729" title="primitivism (art)" label="primitivism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153484" start="4805" end="4813" title="folk art" label="folk art"/>
<link wikidata="Q37693" start="4975" end="4987" title="Paul Gauguin" label="Paul Gauguin"/>
<link wikidata="Q38785" start="4989" end="5005" title="Mikhail Larionov" label="Mikhail Larionov"/>
<link wikidata="Q44007" start="5011" end="5020" title="Paul Klee" label="Paul Klee"/>
<link wikidata="Q493" start="5101" end="5115" title="Arthur Rimbaud" label="Arthur Rimbaud"/>
<link wikidata="Q133855" start="5344" end="5365" title="Guillaume Apollinaire" label="Guillaume Apollinaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q117035" start="5854" end="5870" title="Der Blaue Reiter" label="Der Blaue Reiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q61064" start="5898" end="5915" title="Wassily Kandinsky" label="Wassily Kandinsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q44054" start="5920" end="5930" title="Franz Marc" label="Franz Marc"/>
<link wikidata="Q151573" start="6217" end="6228" title="Paul Signac" label="Paul Signac"/>
<link wikidata="Q69574" start="6427" end="6439" title="Wilhelm Uhde" label="Wilhelm Uhde"/>
<link wikidata="Q156386" start="6568" end="6582" title="Henri Rousseau" label="Henri Rousseau"/>
<link wikidata="Q516924" start="6584" end="6598" title="André Bauchant" label="André Bauchant"/>
<link wikidata="Q683264" start="6600" end="6615" title="Camille Bombois" label="Camille Bombois"/>
<link wikidata="Q235165" start="6617" end="6632" title="Séraphine Louis" label="Séraphine Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1563526" start="6637" end="6648" title="Louis Vivin" label="Louis Vivin"/>
<link wikidata="Q257842" start="6801" end="6808" title="Hlebine" label="Hlebine"/>
<link wikidata="Q36704" start="7132" end="7140" title="Yugoslavia" label="Yugoslav"/>
<link wikidata="Q257842" start="7158" end="7165" title="Hlebine" label="Hlebine"/>
<link wikidata="Q610015" start="7449" end="7467" title="Antun Gustav Matoš" label="Antun Gustav Matoš"/>
<link wikidata="Q325428" start="7513" end="7528" title="Miroslav Krleža" label="Miroslav Krleža"/>
<link wikidata="Q81317" start="7699" end="7714" title="Krsto Hegedušić" label="Krsto Hegedušić"/>
<link wikidata="Q965675" start="7825" end="7839" title="Ivan Generalić" label="Ivan Generalić"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251645" start="8227" end="8242" title="Josip Generalić" label="Josip Generalić"/>
<link wikidata="Q4021632" start="8303" end="8323" title="1952 Venice Biennale" label="1952 Venice Biennale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1563390" start="8406" end="8417" title="Dragan Gaži" label="Dragan Gaži"/>
<link wikidata="Q965675" start="8419" end="8433" title="Ivan Generalić" label="Ivan Generalić"/>
<link wikidata="Q2639482" start="8435" end="8452" title="Maria Prymachenko" label="Maria Prymachenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251645" start="8454" end="8469" title="Josip Generalić" label="Josip Generalić"/>
<link wikidata="Q81317" start="8471" end="8486" title="Krsto Hegedušić" label="Krsto Hegedušić"/>
<link wikidata="Q6845485" start="8488" end="8500" title="Mijo Kovačić" label="Mijo Kovačić"/>
<link wikidata="Q6096770" start="8502" end="8522" title="Ivan Lacković-Croata" label="Ivan Lacković-Croata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1563333" start="8524" end="8535" title="Franjo Mraz" label="Franjo Mraz"/>
<link wikidata="Q6097729" start="8537" end="8549" title="Ivan Večenaj" label="Ivan Večenaj"/>
<link wikidata="Q1938329" start="8554" end="8566" title="Mirko Virius" label="Mirko Virius"/>
<link wikidata="Q5187140" start="8612" end="8640" title="Croatian Museum of Naïve Art" label="Croatian Museum of Naïve Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435" start="8642" end="8648" title="Zagreb" label="Zagreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q3330613" start="8660" end="8712" title="Musée international d&amp;#x27;Art naïf Anatole Jakovsky" label="Musée international d&amp;#x27;Art naïf Anatole Jakovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q33959" start="8714" end="8718" title="Nice" label="Nice"/>
<link wikidata="Q3126070" start="8729" end="8763" title="Musée d&amp;#x27;Art Naïf – Max Fourny" label="Musée d&amp;#x27;Art Naïf – Max Fourny"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="8765" end="8770" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q3330611" start="8781" end="8814" title="International Museum of Naive Art" label="International Museum of Naive Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q274651" start="8816" end="8820" title="Vicq, Yvelines" label="Vicq"/>
<link wikidata="Q11643" start="8831" end="8848" title="Museum of Bad Art" label="Museum of Bad Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139126" start="8866" end="8901" title="National Folk Decorative Art Museum" label="National Folk Decorative Art Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1899" start="8903" end="8907" title="Kyiv" label="Kyiv"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="8909" end="8916" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8919" end="8936" title="Zander Collection" label="Zander Collection"/>
<link wikidata="Q365" start="8938" end="8945" title="Cologne" label="Cologne"/>
<link wikidata="Q207650" start="8970" end="8985" title="Autodidacticism" label="Autodidacticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q766031" start="8987" end="9003" title="Anatole Jakovsky" label="Anatole Jakovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q5095653" start="9005" end="9021" title="Chicago Imagists" label="Chicago Imagists"/>
<link wikidata="Q848365" start="9023" end="9038" title="Neo-primitivism" label="Neo-primitivism"/>
<link wikidata="Q122858" start="9040" end="9057" title="Véronique Filozof" label="Véronique Filozof"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="192129" wikidata="Q395937" url="?curid=192129" title="Agram">
<text>Agram may refer to:

==Places==
* Agram (Croatia), the historic German name for Zagreb, Croatia
* Agram Township, Morrison County, Minnesota, U.S. 
* Agram, the Kanuri and Toubou name for the town of Fachi
* Agram mountain range, in northeastern Niger; see Fachi

==Other==
* Agram (card game)
* Agram 2000, a submachine gun from Croatia

==See also==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q395937" start="0" end="5" title="Agram" label="Agram"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435" start="34" end="49" title="Agram (Croatia)" label="Agram (Croatia)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1894869" start="98" end="140" title="Agram Township, Morrison County, Minnesota" label="Agram Township, Morrison County, Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q992127" start="200" end="205" title="Fachi" label="Fachi"/>
<link wikidata="Q992127" start="257" end="262" title="Fachi" label="Fachi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4693730" start="276" end="293" title="Agram (card game)" label="Agram (card game)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2455508" start="296" end="306" title="Agram 2000" label="Agram 2000"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="192130" wikidata="Q355631" url="?curid=192130" title="James Carter">
<text>[[Jimmy Carter]] (1924–2024) served as the 39th president of the United States from 1977 to 1981.

James, Jim, or Jimmy Carter may also refer to:

==Arts and entertainment==
* James Carter (engraver) (1798–1855), English engraver
* James A. Carter (1902–?), British art director
* James Carter (singer) (1925–2003), American singer for James Carter and the Prisoners
* Jimmy Carter (singer) (born 1932), American singer for The Blind Boys of Alabama
* Jim Carter (actor) (born 1948), English actor
* James Carter (musician) (born 1969), American jazz saxophonist and flautist
* James L. Carter, American film and television cinematographer
* James Carter, a character in the &quot;Rush Hour&quot; film series, portrayed by Chris Tucker

==Politics and law==
* James G. Carter (1795–1849), American state legislator and education reformer
* James Carter (judge) (1805–1878), British jurist in Canada
* James P. T. Carter (1822–1869), American military officer and politician in Arizona Territory
* James C. Carter (1827–1905), American lawyer
* James Garneth Carter (1877–1949), American diplomat
* James Earl Carter Sr. (1894–1953), American businessman and politician; father of US president Jimmy Carter
* James Marshall Carter (1904–1979), United States federal judge
* J. P. Carter (James Pratt Carter, 1915–2000), American military officer and mayor of Madison, North Carolina
* James H. Carter (1935–2016), justice of the Iowa Supreme Court
* James Y. Carter, Illinois politician

== Sports ==
* James Carter (footballer) (fl. 1900), English footballer
* James Carter (coach) (1911–2012), American basketball coach
* Jimmy Carter (boxer) (1923–1994), American boxer
* Jim Carter (baseball) (1928–2000), American Negro league baseball player
* Jim Carter (American football) (1948–2023), American football player
* James Carter (swimmer) (born 1957), British swimmer
* Jim Carter (golfer) (born 1961), American golfer
* James Carter (basketball) (born 1964), Puerto Rican basketball player
* Jimmy Carter (footballer) (born 1965), English footballer
* James Carter (hurdler) (born 1978), American hurdler

==Others==
* Jim Carter (pseudoscientist), amateur physicist whose theories have been controversial

==Other uses==
* USS &quot;Jimmy Carter&quot;, a US Navy submarine

==See also==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q355631" start="0" end="16" title="James Carter" label="[[Jimmy Carter]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q355631" start="99" end="104" title="James Carter" label="James"/>
<link wikidata="Q355631" start="106" end="109" title="James Carter" label="Jim"/>
<link wikidata="Q355631" start="114" end="126" title="James Carter" label="Jimmy Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q16066243" start="176" end="199" title="James Carter (engraver)" label="James Carter (engraver)"/>
<link wikidata="Q19975685" start="232" end="247" title="James A. Carter" label="James A. Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5604112" start="281" end="302" title="James Carter (singer)" label="James Carter (singer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092670" start="369" end="390" title="Jimmy Carter (singer)" label="Jimmy Carter (singer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q976829" start="452" end="470" title="Jim Carter (actor)" label="Jim Carter (actor)"/>
<link wikidata="Q650006" start="500" end="523" title="James Carter (musician)" label="James Carter (musician)"/>
<link wikidata="Q25350175" start="578" end="593" title="James L. Carter" label="James L. Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7380709" start="675" end="708" title="Rush Hour (franchise)" label="&amp;quot;Rush Hour&amp;quot; film series"/>
<link wikidata="Q6134336" start="760" end="775" title="James G. Carter" label="James G. Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q6131098" start="840" end="860" title="James Carter (judge)" label="James Carter (judge)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1680944" start="901" end="919" title="James P. T. Carter" label="James P. T. Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q16031169" start="997" end="1012" title="James C. Carter" label="James C. Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q95685921" start="1044" end="1064" title="James Garneth Carter" label="James Garneth Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q6133272" start="1098" end="1119" title="James Earl Carter Sr." label="James Earl Carter Sr."/>
<link wikidata="Q6138951" start="1208" end="1229" title="James Marshall Carter" label="James Marshall Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q87418233" start="1273" end="1285" title="J. P. Carter" label="J. P. Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q19560203" start="1384" end="1399" title="James H. Carter" label="James H. Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q120970443" start="1449" end="1464" title="James Y. Carter" label="James Y. Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q27981527" start="1502" end="1527" title="James Carter (footballer)" label="James Carter (footballer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6131095" start="1561" end="1581" title="James Carter (coach)" label="James Carter (coach)"/>
<link wikidata="Q44135" start="1623" end="1643" title="Jimmy Carter (boxer)" label="Jimmy Carter (boxer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q105043772" start="1674" end="1695" title="Jim Carter (baseball)" label="Jim Carter (baseball)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6194077" start="1749" end="1779" title="Jim Carter (American football)" label="Jim Carter (American football)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6131101" start="1820" end="1842" title="James Carter (swimmer)" label="James Carter (swimmer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6194083" start="1874" end="1893" title="Jim Carter (golfer)" label="Jim Carter (golfer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q674159" start="1925" end="1950" title="James Carter (basketball)" label="James Carter (basketball)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6199776" start="1997" end="2022" title="Jimmy Carter (footballer)" label="Jimmy Carter (footballer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q942948" start="2057" end="2079" title="James Carter (hurdler)" label="James Carter (hurdler)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6194079" start="2124" end="2152" title="Jim Carter (pseudoscientist)" label="Jim Carter (pseudoscientist)"/>
<link wikidata="Q378465" start="2229" end="2257" title="USS Jimmy Carter" label="USS &amp;quot;Jimmy Carter&amp;quot;"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="192134" wikidata="Q2383532" url="?curid=192134" title="TACAMO">
<text>TACAMO (Take Charge And Move Out) is a United States military system of survivable communications links designed to be used in nuclear warfare to maintain communications between the decision-makers (the National Command Authority) and the triad of strategic nuclear weapon delivery systems. Its primary mission is serving as a signals relay, where it receives orders from a command plane such as Operation Looking Glass, and verifies and retransmits their Emergency Action Messages (EAMs) to US strategic forces. As it is a dedicated communications post, it features the ability to communicate on virtually every radio frequency band from very low frequency (VLF) up through super high frequency (SHF) using a variety of modulations, encryptions and networks, minimizing the likelihood an emergency message will be jammed by an enemy. This airborne communications capability largely replaced the land-based extremely low frequency (ELF) broadcast sites which became vulnerable to nuclear strike.

==Components==
The current TACAMO system comprises several components. The main part is the airborne portion, the U.S. Navy&#x27;s Strategic Communications Wing One (STRATCOMWING 1), a U.S. Strategic Command (USSTRATCOM) organization based at Tinker Air Force Base, Oklahoma. STRATCOMWING 1 consists of three fleet air reconnaissance squadrons (VQ-3, VQ-4, and VQ-7) equipped with Boeing IDS E-6B Mercury TACAMO aircraft. As well as the main operating base at Tinker, there are a west coast alert base at Travis AFB, California, and an east coast alert base at NAS Patuxent River, Maryland.

==History==

The acronym was coined in 1961 and the first aircraft modified for TACAMO testing was a Lockheed KC-130 Hercules which in 1962 was fitted with a VLF transmitter and trailing wire antenna to test communications with the fleet ballistic missile submarines (see communication with submarines).

The Naval Air Development Center developed the required technique of &quot;stalling&quot; the trailing antenna to achieve the long vertical antenna needed. The VLF system is currently known as VERDIN (VERy low frequency Digital Information Network). The program was expanded in 1966 using modified C-130s designated Lockheed EC-130G/Q carrying a VLF system built by Collins Radio Company.

The first two squadrons were established in 1968: VQ-4 initially operated from Naval Air Station Patuxent River, Maryland and VQ-3 was initially formed at NAS Barbers Point, Hawaii before moving to Naval Air Station Agana, Guam, but later returned to NAS Barbers Point. The system known as TACAMO (from &quot;take charge and move out&quot;) has been operationally deployed in 1969. TACAMO consisted of twelve Lockheed EC-130Q aircraft equipped with VLF transmitters using long trailing wire antennas. VLF system was repeatedly upgraded to improve signal strength.

By 1971, TACAMO IV incorporated a 200 kW transmitter and dual antenna. Actual transmission power and capabilities remain classified. Airborne ELF was tested but considered infeasible. The aircraft were upgraded to the E-6 Mercury beginning in 1990, and the E-6A was upgraded to the dual-role E-6B from 1998. With the introduction of the E-6, the Navy also stood up a Fleet Replacement Squadron (FRS), VQ-7, to provide initial training for new Naval Aviators, Naval Flight Officers and enlisted Naval Aircrewmen, and recurrent training for former TACAMO crewmembers returning to aircraft for second and third tours. 

The E-6 aircraft is based on the Boeing 707. The wings were redesigned to meet new wing-loading characteristics; the tail was redesigned after a catastrophic failure of the vertical stabilizer during flight tests. The cockpit was copied from the Boeing 737NG commercial airliner, and the landing gear was modified to handle the added weight. Larger fuel tanks were installed and the fuselage was extensively modified to accommodate the 31 antennas, including the trailing wire antenna and reel assembly. After the upgrade to the E-6B, the TACAMO aircraft—with the addition of an Airborne Launch Control System (ALCS)—took over the EC-135 Looking Glass mission formerly conducted by the USAF 55th Wing at Offutt AFB, Nebraska.

In early 1991 TACAMO planes, which have been in the air nonstop for nearly three decades, were transferred to &quot;interim ground alert&quot; and their flights continued on a &quot;random basis&quot; off the US east and west coasts.

In December 2020 (Fiscal Year 2021), the US Navy announced that it awarded a contract to Lockheed Martin for the purchase the C-130-J30 Hercules as testbed for the TACAMO mission The aircraft selection represents a return to the C-130 platform by the Navy, which for years used the EC-130Q (an older variant despite the higher letter) for the TACAMO mission from 1963 until 1993.

In October 2024 the Navy announced that the new C-130-J30 based TACAMO mission aircraft will be designated E-130J. It will replace the currently operational E-6 Mercury in the near future.

==See also==
*Boeing E-4
*Survivable Low Frequency Communications System (SLFCS)
*Ground Wave Emergency Network (GWEN)
*Minimum Essential Emergency Communications Network (MEECN)
*Emergency Rocket Communications System (ERCS)

== References ==
==External links==
* Strategic Communications Wing ONE website
* USSTRATCOM ABNCP Fact Sheet
* &quot;Old TACAMO&quot; Veterans website
* TACAMO Community Veterans website
* 2017 &quot;Popular Mechanics&quot; article on TACAMO</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2383532" start="0" end="6" title="TACAMO" label="TACAMO"/>
<link wikidata="Q11211" start="39" end="61" title="United States military" label="United States military"/>
<link wikidata="Q201424" start="127" end="142" title="nuclear warfare" label="nuclear warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q458048" start="203" end="229" title="National Command Authority (United States)" label="National Command Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q2731619" start="239" end="244" title="Nuclear triad" label="triad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359863" start="248" end="272" title="strategic nuclear weapon" label="strategic nuclear weapon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3555170" start="273" end="281" title="nuclear weapons delivery" label="delivery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1869702" start="396" end="419" title="Operation Looking Glass" label="Operation Looking Glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335440" start="456" end="480" title="Emergency Action Message" label="Emergency Action Message"/>
<link wikidata="Q549933" start="639" end="657" title="very low frequency" label="very low frequency"/>
<link wikidata="Q189899" start="675" end="695" title="super high frequency" label="super high frequency"/>
<link wikidata="Q141090" start="734" end="744" title="encryption" label="encryption"/>
<link wikidata="Q741979" start="907" end="930" title="extremely low frequency" label="extremely low frequency"/>
<link wikidata="Q19868212" start="1128" end="1161" title="Strategic Communications Wing One" label="Strategic Communications Wing One"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999664" start="1240" end="1261" title="Tinker Air Force Base" label="Tinker Air Force Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649" start="1263" end="1271" title="Oklahoma" label="Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q20715130" start="1342" end="1346" title="Fleet Air Reconnaissance Squadron 3 (United States Navy)" label="VQ-3"/>
<link wikidata="Q20715131" start="1348" end="1352" title="Fleet Air Reconnaissance Squadron 4 (United States Navy)" label="VQ-4"/>
<link wikidata="Q795324" start="1378" end="1388" title="Boeing Integrated Defense Systems" label="Boeing IDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q604916" start="1389" end="1401" title="E-6B Mercury" label="E-6B Mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q3497425" start="1502" end="1512" title="Travis AFB" label="Travis AFB"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972204" start="1558" end="1576" title="NAS Patuxent River" label="NAS Patuxent River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1867545" start="1699" end="1714" title="KC-130 Hercules" label="KC-130 Hercules"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1767" end="1788" title="trailing wire antenna" label="trailing wire antenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q683570" start="1827" end="1854" title="ballistic missile submarine" label="ballistic missile submarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2379628" start="1861" end="1890" title="communication with submarines" label="communication with submarines"/>
<link wikidata="Q182027" start="2192" end="2197" title="C-130" label="C-130"/>
<link wikidata="Q2573675" start="2219" end="2225" title="EC-130" label="EC-130"/>
<link wikidata="Q461210" start="2260" end="2281" title="Collins Radio Company" label="Collins Radio Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q679165" start="2298" end="2307" title="Squadron (aviation)" label="squadrons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972204" start="2363" end="2395" title="Naval Air Station Patuxent River" label="Naval Air Station Patuxent River"/>
<link wikidata="Q3015575" start="2439" end="2456" title="NAS Barbers Point" label="NAS Barbers Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q3015976" start="2482" end="2505" title="Naval Air Station Agana" label="Naval Air Station Agana"/>
<link wikidata="Q604916" start="3067" end="3078" title="E-6 Mercury" label="E-6 Mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898464" start="3292" end="3305" title="Naval Aviator" label="Naval Aviator"/>
<link wikidata="Q6981815" start="3308" end="3328" title="Naval Flight Officer" label="Naval Flight Officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6394" start="3499" end="3509" title="Boeing 707" label="Boeing 707"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084919" start="3712" end="3724" title="Boeing 737NG" label="Boeing 737NG"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698445" start="4045" end="4075" title="Airborne Launch Control System" label="Airborne Launch Control System"/>
<link wikidata="Q645248" start="4097" end="4103" title="Boeing EC-135" label="EC-135"/>
<link wikidata="Q1869702" start="4104" end="4117" title="Looking Glass (airplane)" label="Looking Glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q4640674" start="4157" end="4166" title="55th Wing" label="55th Wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q626985" start="4170" end="4180" title="Offutt AFB" label="Offutt AFB"/>
<link wikidata="Q191891" start="4446" end="4457" title="Fiscal year" label="Fiscal Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q7240" start="4517" end="4532" title="Lockheed Martin" label="Lockheed Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187536" start="4554" end="4563" title="C-130J" label="C-130-J30"/>
<link wikidata="Q2383532" start="4592" end="4598" title="TACAMO" label="TACAMO"/>
<link wikidata="Q182027" start="4657" end="4662" title="Lockheed C-130 Hercules" label="C-130"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187536" start="4857" end="4866" title="C-130J" label="C-130-J30"/>
<link wikidata="Q123431021" start="4916" end="4922" title="Lockheed E-130J" label="E-130J"/>
<link wikidata="Q604916" start="4966" end="4977" title="E-6 Mercury" label="E-6 Mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q499179" start="5013" end="5023" title="Boeing E-4" label="Boeing E-4"/>
<link wikidata="Q7647156" start="5025" end="5071" title="Survivable Low Frequency Communications System" label="Survivable Low Frequency Communications System"/>
<link wikidata="Q7647156" start="5073" end="5078" title="Survivable Low Frequency Communications System" label="SLFCS"/>
<link wikidata="Q4652890" start="5081" end="5110" title="Ground Wave Emergency Network" label="Ground Wave Emergency Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q4652890" start="5112" end="5116" title="Ground Wave Emergency Network" label="GWEN"/>
<link wikidata="Q6865408" start="5119" end="5169" title="Minimum Essential Emergency Communications Network" label="Minimum Essential Emergency Communications Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q6865408" start="5171" end="5176" title="Minimum Essential Emergency Communications Network" label="MEECN"/>
<link wikidata="Q4652832" start="5179" end="5217" title="Emergency Rocket Communications System" label="Emergency Rocket Communications System"/>
<link wikidata="Q4652832" start="5219" end="5223" title="Emergency Rocket Communications System" label="ERCS"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="192137" wikidata="Q152318" url="?curid=192137" title="Svetlana Savitskaya">
<text>Svetlana Yevgenyevna Savitskaya (; born 8 August 1948) is a Russian former aviator and Soviet cosmonaut who flew aboard Soyuz T-7 in 1982, becoming the second woman in space. On her 1984 Soyuz T-12 mission she became the first woman to fly to space twice, and the first woman to perform a spacewalk.

She set several FAI world records as a pilot.

==Early life and early career==
Svetlana Savitskaya was born in a privileged family. Her father, Yevgeny Savitsky, was a highly decorated fighter pilot during the Second World War, which later brought him to the position of Deputy Commander-in-Chief of Soviet Air Defense. Her mother was a Moscow Communist party leader.

Without the knowledge of her parents, Savitskaya began parachuting at the age of 16. Her father realized her secret extracurricular activity upon the discovery of a parachute knife in his daughter&#x27;s school bag. After his discovery, he further promoted this tendency. On her seventeenth birthday she already had 450 parachute jumps. Over the next year, she led record stratosphere jumps from 13,800 m and 14,250 m. Over the course of her flying experience, Savitskaya achieved three world record jumps from the stratosphere and 15 world record jumps from jet planes.

After graduating in 1966, she enrolled in the Moscow Aviation Institute (MAI), where she also took flight lessons. In 1971 she was licensed as a flight instructor. After graduating from the MAI in 1972, she trained as a test pilot at the Fedotov Test Pilot School, graduating in 1976. In May 1978 she went to work for the aircraft manufacturer Yakovlev, as a test pilot. In her flight experience, she became the first woman to reach 2,683 km/h in a MiG-25 aircraft. An experienced and highly educated female in the Soviet Space Program, Savitskaya was reportedly an extremely serious, unbending, and steely woman. While she and Valentina Tereshkova were both chosen for missions into space due to Soviet propaganda purposes, Savitskaya was much more trained and experienced in aeronautics whereas Tereshkova was chosen as a political stunt.

Between 1969 and 1977 she was a member of the Soviet national team for aerobatics. At the FAI World Aerobatic Championships in July 1970 at Hullavington, she flew a Yak-18 and won the world championship together with an all-female team. At this particular Championship in the United Kingdom, a journalist for the British Press nicknamed Savitskaya &quot;Miss Sensation&quot;. At the 1972 World Championships in Salon-de-Provence she placed third; in 1976 in Kiev with a Yak-50, fifth.

== Soviet space program ==

In 1979, Savitskaya participated in the selection process for the second group of female cosmonauts. On 30 June 1980, she was officially admitted to the cosmonaut group. Of the nine women selected, Savitskaya was the only test pilot. The groups&#x27; training was announced during French Air force officer and astronaut Jean-Loup Chretien&#x27;s space mission. She passed her exams on 24 February 1982.

=== First flight: Soyuz T-7 / T-5 ===
In December 1981, Savitskaya prepared for her first space flight, a short-term flight to the space station Salyut 7. She held the position of research cosmonaut on this mission. The mission of this second visiting expedition of the Salyut 7 was to prove the Soviet superiority to America by flying another woman into space and to replace the Soyuz T-5 spacecraft, which the crew would use for their return, with a new vehicle.

The commander of this mission was Leonid Popov, with his third flight; it was flight engineer Alexander Serebrov&#x27;s first flight.

The launch of Soyuz T-7 took place on 19 August 1982. This made Savitskaya the second woman in space, 19 years after Valentina Tereshkova. During the journey, Savitskaya claimed to have tied herself down to prevent from being carried into another compartment of the craft due to the loss of gravity. The three cosmonauts docked with the space station the following day, where they were welcomed by Anatoly Berezovoy and Valentin Lebedev. This was the first time a space station had a mixed-gender crew. Savitskaya was assigned the orbital module of Soyuz T-7 as a private area, but slept as well as the men in the space station. On 27 August 1982, Popov, Savitskaya, and Serebrov returned to Earth in Soyuz T-5. The total duration of the mission was 7 days, 21 hours, and 52 minutes.

=== Second flight: Soyuz T-12 ===
In December 1983 she was assigned to her second flight, including an extravehicular activity, or EVA, three weeks after American astronaut Kathy Sullivan&#x27;s flight and EVA assignment were made public. The timing of her mission would become one of her last triumphs to further the Soviet propaganda agenda in performing the first woman&#x27;s spacewalk ahead of the Americans. Savitskaya was chosen above other female cosmonauts due to her extensive flight experience and physical ability to perform the necessary operations in a heavy, bulky space suit for multiple hours. Savitskaya participated in this mission under the title of flight engineer.

Again, it was to be a short-term mission to Salyut 7, this time bringing tools to the station so that the third resident crew, the Salyut 7 EO-3, could repair a fuel line.

On 17 July 1984, Savitskaya launched aboard Soyuz T-12, together with Commander Vladimir Dzhanibekov and research cosmonaut Igor Volk. On 25 July 1984, Savitskaya became the first woman to spacewalk, conducting EVA outside the Salyut 7 space station for 3 hours and 35 minutes, during which she cut and welded metals in space along with her colleague Vladimir Dzhanibekov. The importance of their mission was to test the Universal Hand Tool or &quot;Universalny Rabochy Instrument&quot; (URI). This tool created at the Paton Institute in Kiev, Ukraine could be used to cut, solder, weld, and braze in space. During the EVA, Savitskaya performed a total of 6 cuts of titanium and stainless steel, 2 coatings of anodized aluminum, 6 tests of tin and lead solder, and test cuts of a 0.5 mm titanium sample. Of the 57 Soviet/Russian spacewalkers through 2010, she is the only woman, and as of April 2020 is still the only Soviet/Russian woman to walk in space. The return to Earth took place on 29 July 1984.

Savitskaya&#x27;s and Dzhanibekov&#x27;s training and tests allowed for Dzhanibekov to direct two members of the Salyut 7 crew, Kizim and Solovyov, who had performed multiple EVA&#x27;s to repair the ship, in the techniques to operate the URI in order to fully repair the fuel line. The total duration of their mission lasted 11 days, 19 hours, and 14 minutes.

=== Possible third spaceflight ===
Upon returning to Earth, Savitskaya was assigned as the commander of an all-female Soyuz crew to Salyut 7 in commemoration of International Women&#x27;s Day. She was chosen for this duty because she was the only experienced female cosmonaut still on active duty at the time. She was set to command Yekaterina Ivanova and Yelena Dobrokvashina, two younger female cosmonauts. In February 1985, however, the radio contact with Salyut 7 was lost; the space station was rescued by the Soyuz T-13 mission in the summer of 1985. When the next mission had to be stopped in November 1985, due to an illness of the commander Vladimir Vasyutin, the women&#x27;s flight was finally canceled. In addition, after two unsuccessful flights in 1983, Soyuz T-8 and Soyuz T-10-1, not enough Soyuz spacecraft were available. Later it would have been possible to fly with a Soyuz-TM to the space station Mir. However, this plan was not pursued due to Savitskaya&#x27;s pregnancy and birth of her son in 1986.

== Biography ==
Savitskaya is married and has one child, a son Konstantin born on 7 November 1986. In February 1986, she graduated from the Bauman Moscow Higher Technical School. From 1983 to 1994 Savitskaya held a position of Deputy Head of NPO Energia.

A committed communist, Savitskaya was elected as a people&#x27;s deputy of the USSR from 1989 and a people&#x27;s deputy of Russia in 1990, a position she held until 1992. She did not welcome the collapse of the Soviet Union, noting that her parents would live a &quot;second death&quot; were they to see Russia as it was.

Savitskaya retired in 1993 from the Russian Air Force with the rank of Major. In 1994/95 she worked as an assistant professor in Economics and Investment at the Moscow State Aviation Institute. In 1996, she was elected a deputy of the State Duma representing the Communist Party of the Russian Federation, and has been re-elected four times since then. She presently serves as Deputy Chair of the Committee on Defence, and is also a member of the Coordination council presidium of the National Patriotic Union.

== FAI World Records ==
==Honours and awards==
* Hero of the Soviet Union, twice (1982, 1984)
* Orders of Lenin, twice (1982, 1984)
* Order of the Badge of Honour (1976)
* Medal &quot;For Merit in Space Exploration&quot; (12 April 2011) – for great achievements in the field of research, development and utilization of outer space, many years of honest work, public activities
* Pilot-Cosmonaut of the USSR
* Honoured Master of Sports
* Gold Medal and 18 degrees FAI
* 16 gold medals, sports of the USSR
* Special medal for the women&#x27;s world record stay in space
* Honorary Citizen of Baikonur (1982)

Savitskaya was one of five cosmonauts selected to raise the Russian flag at the Sochi 2014 Winter Olympics opening ceremony.

The asteroid 4118 Sveta is named after her.

== See also ==
*List of female spacefarers
*List of female Heroes of the Soviet Union

==References==
==External links==
* Interview shortly before her 1995 election to the State Duma 
* 2010 interview with The Voice of Russia radio website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q152318" start="0" end="31" title="Svetlana Savitskaya" label="Svetlana Yevgenyevna Savitskaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q11631" start="94" end="103" title="astronaut" label="cosmonaut"/>
<link wikidata="Q653395" start="120" end="129" title="Soyuz T-7" label="Soyuz T-7"/>
<link wikidata="Q787254" start="187" end="197" title="Soyuz T-12" label="Soyuz T-12"/>
<link wikidata="Q182020" start="289" end="298" title="spacewalk" label="spacewalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q214130" start="317" end="320" title="Fédération Aéronautique Internationale" label="FAI"/>
<link wikidata="Q523332" start="445" end="461" title="Yevgeny Savitsky" label="Yevgeny Savitsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q631009" start="601" end="619" title="Soviet Air Defence Forces" label="Soviet Air Defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q1477039" start="1042" end="1060" title="Space diving" label="stratosphere jumps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1719898" start="1288" end="1313" title="Moscow Aviation Institute" label="Moscow Aviation Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q55149460" start="1480" end="1505" title="Fedotov Test Pilot School" label="Fedotov Test Pilot School"/>
<link wikidata="Q333780" start="1586" end="1594" title="Yakovlev" label="Yakovlev"/>
<link wikidata="Q849730" start="1757" end="1777" title="Soviet space program" label="Soviet Space Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q44371" start="1870" end="1890" title="Valentina Tereshkova" label="Valentina Tereshkova"/>
<link wikidata="Q3063011" start="2174" end="2207" title="FAI World Aerobatic Championships" label="FAI World Aerobatic Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q7275397" start="2224" end="2236" title="Hullavington Airfield" label="Hullavington"/>
<link wikidata="Q507476" start="2249" end="2255" title="Yakovlev Yak-18" label="Yak-18"/>
<link wikidata="Q232567" start="2495" end="2512" title="Salon-de-Provence" label="Salon-de-Provence"/>
<link wikidata="Q508308" start="2554" end="2560" title="Yakovlev Yak-50 (1975)" label="Yak-50"/>
<link wikidata="Q434205" start="2918" end="2936" title="Jean-Loup Chrétien" label="Jean-Loup Chretien"/>
<link wikidata="Q904503" start="3147" end="3155" title="Salyut 7" label="Salyut 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q433046" start="3502" end="3514" title="Leonid Popov" label="Leonid Popov"/>
<link wikidata="Q362819" start="3562" end="3580" title="Aleksandr Serebrov" label="Alexander Serebrov"/>
<link wikidata="Q44371" start="3720" end="3740" title="Valentina Tereshkova" label="Valentina Tereshkova"/>
<link wikidata="Q465724" start="4001" end="4018" title="Anatoly Berezovoy" label="Anatoly Berezovoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q535157" start="4023" end="4039" title="Valentin Lebedev" label="Valentin Lebedev"/>
<link wikidata="Q464166" start="4561" end="4575" title="Kathryn D. Sullivan" label="Kathy Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5207" end="5220" title="Salyut 7#Resident Crew" label="Salyut 7 EO-3"/>
<link wikidata="Q787254" start="5293" end="5303" title="Soyuz T-12" label="Soyuz T-12"/>
<link wikidata="Q466513" start="5329" end="5349" title="Vladimir Dzhanibekov" label="Vladimir Dzhanibekov"/>
<link wikidata="Q280301" start="5373" end="5382" title="Igor Volk" label="Igor Volk"/>
<link wikidata="Q182020" start="5438" end="5447" title="Extravehicular activity" label="spacewalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q904503" start="5476" end="5484" title="Salyut 7" label="Salyut 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q466513" start="5600" end="5620" title="Vladimir Dzhanibekov" label="Vladimir Dzhanibekov"/>
<link wikidata="Q6640263" start="6060" end="6090" title="List of spacewalkers" label="57 Soviet/Russian spacewalkers"/>
<link wikidata="Q38964" start="6778" end="6808" title="International Women&amp;#x27;s Day" label="International Women&amp;#x27;s Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q903412" start="7132" end="7142" title="Soyuz T-13" label="Soyuz T-13"/>
<link wikidata="Q708689" start="7267" end="7284" title="Vladimir Vasyutin" label="Vladimir Vasyutin"/>
<link wikidata="Q780047" start="7385" end="7394" title="Soyuz T-8" label="Soyuz T-8"/>
<link wikidata="Q847047" start="7399" end="7411" title="Soyuz 7K-ST No. 16L" label="Soyuz T-10-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q2705481" start="7505" end="7513" title="Soyuz-TM" label="Soyuz-TM"/>
<link wikidata="Q48604" start="7535" end="7538" title="Mir" label="Mir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472245" start="7781" end="7818" title="Bauman Moscow State Technical University" label="Bauman Moscow Higher Technical School"/>
<link wikidata="Q763402" start="7883" end="7894" title="Energia (corporation)" label="NPO Energia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5167679" start="8093" end="8121" title="Dissolution of the Soviet Union" label="collapse of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q209833" start="8257" end="8274" title="Russian Air Force" label="Russian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q715641" start="8456" end="8466" title="State Duma" label="State Duma"/>
<link wikidata="Q192187" start="8484" end="8525" title="Communist Party of the Russian Federation" label="Communist Party of the Russian Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q178473" start="8782" end="8806" title="Hero of the Soviet Union" label="Hero of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q185493" start="8829" end="8844" title="Orders of Lenin" label="Orders of Lenin"/>
<link wikidata="Q960966" start="8867" end="8895" title="Order of the Badge of Honour" label="Order of the Badge of Honour"/>
<link wikidata="Q2567963" start="8905" end="8953" title="Medal &amp;quot;For Merit in Space Exploration&amp;quot;" label="Medal &amp;quot;For Merit in Space Exploration&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428575" start="9112" end="9139" title="Pilot-Cosmonaut of the USSR" label="Pilot-Cosmonaut of the USSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q1978208" start="9142" end="9167" title="Unified Sports Classification System of the USSR and Russia" label="Honoured Master of Sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q9678" start="9426" end="9446" title="2014 Winter Olympics" label="2014 Winter Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q152687" start="9479" end="9489" title="4118 Sveta" label="4118 Sveta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1958552" start="9527" end="9553" title="List of female spacefarers" label="List of female spacefarers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4433748" start="9555" end="9596" title="List of female Heroes of the Soviet Union" label="List of female Heroes of the Soviet Union"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="192138" wikidata="Q499429" url="?curid=192138" title="Aure Municipality">
<text>Aure is a municipality in Møre og Romsdal county, Norway. It is part of the region of Nordmøre. The administrative centre is the village of Aure. Other villages in Aure include Gullstein, Stemshaug, Todalen, Tjeldbergodden, Arasvika, Vågosen, and Tømmervåg. Aure has one of the largest wooden churches in Norway, Aure Church.

The municipality is the 179th largest by area out of the 357 municipalities in Norway. Aure Municipality is the 218th most populous municipality in Norway with a population of 3,408. The municipality&#x27;s population density is and its population has decreased by 4.7% over the previous 10-year period.

==General information==

The municipality was established on 1 January 1838 (see formannskapsdistrikt law). On 1 January 1894, the southern district of Aure (population: 942) was separated to form the new Valsøyfjord Municipality. Then on 1 July 1914, the northeastern district of Aure (population: 851) was separated to form the new Stemshaug Municipality.

During the 1960s, there were many municipal mergers across Norway due to the work of the Schei Committee. On 1 January 1965, Stemshaug Municipality (population: 877), the part of Valsøyfjord Municipality on the island of Ertvågsøya (population: 141), and the part of Tustna Municipality on the island of Ertvågsøya (population: 85) were all merged into Aure Municipality. On 1 January 1976, the district of Aure located south of the Vinjefjorden (population: 158) was merged into the neighboring Halsa Municipality. On 1 January 2006, Tustna Municipality was merged into Aure Municipality.

===Name===
The municipality (originally the parish) is named after the old &quot;Aure&quot; farm () since the first Aure Church was built there. The name is the plural form of which means &quot;gravel&quot; or &quot;mud&quot;.

===Coat of arms===
The original coat of arms was granted on 22 March 1991 and it was in use until 1 January 2006 when Tustna Municipality and Aure Municipality merged to form a new, larger Aure Municipality. The official blazon is &quot;Gules, two addorsed eagle heads erased Or&quot; (). This means the arms have a red field (background) and the charge is two heads of a sea eagle facing opposite directions. The charge has a tincture of Or which means it is commonly colored yellow, but if it is made out of metal, then gold is used. The design was chosen since there is a large population of these birds in the municipality. The arms were designed by Even Skoglund. The municipal flag has the same design as the coat of arms.

A new coat of arms was granted on 21 December 2005, just before the merger of the municipalities of Tustna and Aure so that it could be used starting on 1 January 2006 when the two municipalities were merged. It was decided to combine the arms of the two municipalities by using the charge from the old arms of Tustna and the colors from the old arms of Aure. The official blazon is &quot;Azure, a klippfisk argent&quot; (). This means the arms have a blue field (background) and the charge is a klippfisk which is a split and salted dried fish, usually cod. Traditionally, the fish was spread out on a rock to sun dry which gives the klippfisk its symmetrical shape (as opposed to the stockfish). The charge has a tincture of argent which means it is commonly colored white, but if it is made out of metal, then silver is used. The design was chosen since the klippfisk industry was pioneered in the Tustna area starting in the 1690s. The arms were designed by Jarle Skuseth. The municipal flag has the same design as the coat of arms.

===Churches===
The Church of Norway has three parishes () within Aure Municipality. It is part of the Ytre Nordmøre prosti (deanery) in the Diocese of Møre.

==Geography==

The municipality includes many islands as well as some parts of the mainland. Islands of Aure include Ertvågsøya, Grisvågøya, Rottøya, Ruøya, Skardsøya, Solskjelsøya, Stabblandet, and Tustna. The Vinjefjorden, Arasvikfjord, and Edøyfjorden surround the municipality. Several bridges connect the islands including the Mjosund Bridge, Aursund Bridge, and Dromnessund Bridge. The highest point in the municipality is the tall mountain Innerbergsalen.

==Government==
Aure Municipality is responsible for primary education (through 10th grade), outpatient health services, senior citizen services, welfare and other social services, zoning, economic development, and municipal roads and utilities. The municipality is governed by a municipal council of directly elected representatives. The mayor is indirectly elected by a vote of the municipal council. The municipality is under the jurisdiction of the Møre og Romsdal District Court and the Frostating Court of Appeal.

===Municipal council===
The municipal council () of Aure is made up of 19 representatives that are elected to four year terms. The tables below show the current and historical composition of the council by political party.









===Mayors===
The mayor () of Aure is the political leader of the municipality and the chairperson of the municipal council. Here is a list of people who have held this position:

* 1838–1841: Caspar Karhs Lossius
* 1842–1843: Johannes Ivarson Høgset
* 1844–1845: Lars Ivarson Våg 
* 1846–1849: Caspar Karhs Lossius 
* 1850–1851: Johannes Ivarson Høgset
* 1852–1853: Anders Arntson Todal 
* 1854–1855: Lars Ivarson Våg 
* 1856–1857: Johan Chr. H. Buschmann 
* 1858–1861: Marcus Hegge Lossius 
* 1862–1867: Lars Ivarson Våg 
* 1868–1869: Lars S. Vingsnes, Sr.
* 1870–1871: Augustinius P. Todal
* 1872–1873: Jon Danielsen Espvik 
* 1874–1875: Olaus Larsson Talgø 
* 1876–1883: Arnt Arntson Todal 
* 1883–1889: Ole Ulfsnes (V)
* 1889–1895: Tølløv T. Todal (V)
* 1895–1898: Ole Jonsson Ertvåg (V)
* 1898–1904: Tølløv T. Todal (V)
* 1904–1907: Ole Jonsson Ertvåg (V)
* 1907–1916: Peder P. Todal (LL)
* 1916–1922: Sivert Ødegaard (V)
* 1922–1928: Anders L. Todal (LL)
* 1929–1940: Jakob A. Todal (LL)
* 1941–1942: Anders L. Todal (V)
* 1942–1945: Lars Vingsnes, Jr. (NS)
* 1946–1951: Arne Slætta (V)
* 1951–1957: Sivert Todal (V)
* 1957–1959: Øyvind Barlaup (Bp)
* 1959–1964: Ola Eines (V)
* 1965–1967: Sivert Haltbakk (Ap)
* 1967–1971: Johannes J. Vaag (Sp)
* 1971–1973: Bodolf Hareide (H)
* 1973–1975: Johannes J. Vaag (Sp)
* 1975–1979: Lars F. Berg (V)
* 1979–1983: Hans Kiplesund (Sp)
* 1983–1985: Lars F. Berg (V)
* 1985–2005: Knut Baardset (H)
* 2006–2007: Hans G. Lauritzen (Ap)
* 2007–2019: Ingunn Oldervik Golmen (Sp)
* 2019–present: Hanne Berit Brekken (Ap)
==Economy==
Agriculture and aquaculture employ 13.6% of the workforce, mostly within dairy farming, fishing, and fish farming. Manufacturing industry and construction employ 25.5%, where the most important industries are the shipyards in Mjosundet and the natural gas processing plant in Tjeldbergodden, as well as the Tjeldbergodden Reserve Power Station. A liquefied natural gas (LNG) pipeline from the Heidrun oil field terminates here. The remaining 60.5% work in the service industry.

==Notable people==
* Paul Vighals (1886 in Aure – 1962), a sport shooter who competed at the 1912 Summer Olympics
* Sivert Todal (1904 in Aure – 1988), a politician who was Mayor of Aure Municipality from 1951–1957
* Kristofer Leirdal (1915 in Aure – 2010), a sculptor and art educator

==References==
==External links==
*Municipal fact sheet from Statistics Norway </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q499429" start="0" end="4" title="Aure Municipality" label="Aure"/>
<link wikidata="Q5803752" start="10" end="22" title="List of municipalities of Norway" label="municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q50627" start="26" end="41" title="Møre og Romsdal" label="Møre og Romsdal"/>
<link wikidata="Q192299" start="42" end="48" title="Counties of Norway" label="county"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="50" end="56" title="Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q379158" start="76" end="82" title="Districts of Norway" label="region"/>
<link wikidata="Q683934" start="86" end="94" title="Nordmøre" label="Nordmøre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1306755" start="100" end="121" title="administrative centre" label="administrative centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q10858551" start="129" end="144" title="Aure (village)" label="village of Aure"/>
<link wikidata="Q10858553" start="177" end="186" title="Gullstein" label="Gullstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q6514536" start="188" end="197" title="Stemshaug" label="Stemshaug"/>
<link wikidata="Q7812128" start="199" end="206" title="Todalen" label="Todalen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4579429" start="208" end="222" title="Tjeldbergodden" label="Tjeldbergodden"/>
<link wikidata="Q11958650" start="224" end="232" title="Arasvika" label="Arasvika"/>
<link wikidata="Q30594030" start="234" end="241" title="Vågosen" label="Vågosen"/>
<link wikidata="Q15077580" start="247" end="256" title="Tømmervåg" label="Tømmervåg"/>
<link wikidata="Q10862367" start="313" end="324" title="Aure Church" label="Aure Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="534" end="552" title="population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q899491" start="713" end="733" title="formannskapsdistrikt" label="formannskapsdistrikt"/>
<link wikidata="Q12719320" start="837" end="861" title="Valsøyfjord Municipality" label="Valsøyfjord Municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q63002977" start="966" end="988" title="Stemshaug Municipality" label="Stemshaug Municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q17017886" start="1080" end="1095" title="Schei Committee" label="Schei Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q63002977" start="1116" end="1138" title="Stemshaug Municipality" label="Stemshaug Municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q12719320" start="1170" end="1194" title="Valsøyfjord Municipality" label="Valsøyfjord Municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q3353860" start="1212" end="1222" title="Ertvågsøya" label="Ertvågsøya"/>
<link wikidata="Q56243583" start="1258" end="1277" title="Tustna Municipality" label="Tustna Municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q4586142" start="1424" end="1436" title="Vinjefjorden" label="Vinjefjorden"/>
<link wikidata="Q488247" start="1487" end="1505" title="Halsa Municipality" label="Halsa Municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q56243583" start="1526" end="1545" title="Tustna Municipality" label="Tustna Municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478645" start="1626" end="1632" title="prestegjeld" label="parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q10858551" start="1663" end="1667" title="Aure (village)" label="Aure"/>
<link wikidata="Q10862367" start="1698" end="1709" title="Aure Church" label="Aure Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q146786" start="1743" end="1749" title="plural" label="plural"/>
<link wikidata="Q133833" start="1776" end="1782" title="gravel" label="gravel"/>
<link wikidata="Q14659" start="1842" end="1854" title="coat of arms" label="coat of arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q56243583" start="1928" end="1947" title="Tustna Municipality" label="Tustna Municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q120083528" start="2031" end="2037" title="blazon" label="blazon"/>
<link wikidata="Q858055" start="2047" end="2052" title="Gules" label="Gules"/>
<link wikidata="Q1243409" start="2058" end="2066" title="addorsed" label="addorsed"/>
<link wikidata="Q15824240" start="2079" end="2085" title="Erasure (heraldry)" label="erased"/>
<link wikidata="Q430099" start="2086" end="2088" title="Or (heraldry)" label="Or"/>
<link wikidata="Q372254" start="2130" end="2135" title="field (heraldry)" label="field"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424805" start="2157" end="2163" title="charge (heraldry)" label="charge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253080" start="2182" end="2191" title="sea eagle" label="sea eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3404720" start="2237" end="2245" title="tincture (heraldry)" label="tincture"/>
<link wikidata="Q430099" start="2249" end="2251" title="Or (heraldry)" label="Or"/>
<link wikidata="Q14659" start="2546" end="2558" title="coat of arms" label="coat of arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q120083528" start="2913" end="2919" title="blazon" label="blazon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785501" start="2929" end="2934" title="Azure (heraldry)" label="Azure"/>
<link wikidata="Q2428509" start="2938" end="2947" title="klippfisk" label="klippfisk"/>
<link wikidata="Q936472" start="2948" end="2954" title="argent" label="argent"/>
<link wikidata="Q372254" start="2997" end="3002" title="field (heraldry)" label="field"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424805" start="3024" end="3030" title="charge (heraldry)" label="charge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2428509" start="3036" end="3045" title="klippfisk" label="klippfisk"/>
<link wikidata="Q13194939" start="3094" end="3097" title="cod" label="cod"/>
<link wikidata="Q213725" start="3226" end="3235" title="stockfish" label="stockfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q3404720" start="3255" end="3263" title="tincture (heraldry)" label="tincture"/>
<link wikidata="Q936472" start="3267" end="3273" title="argent" label="argent"/>
<link wikidata="Q666860" start="3597" end="3613" title="Church of Norway" label="Church of Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q11984490" start="3680" end="3700" title="Ytre Nordmøre prosti" label="Ytre Nordmøre prosti"/>
<link wikidata="Q385337" start="3702" end="3709" title="deanery" label="deanery"/>
<link wikidata="Q3028602" start="3718" end="3733" title="Diocese of Møre" label="Diocese of Møre"/>
<link wikidata="Q3353860" start="3853" end="3863" title="Ertvågsøya" label="Ertvågsøya"/>
<link wikidata="Q10816732" start="3865" end="3875" title="Grisvågøya" label="Grisvågøya"/>
<link wikidata="Q7370697" start="3877" end="3884" title="Rottøya" label="Rottøya"/>
<link wikidata="Q12718082" start="3886" end="3891" title="Ruøya" label="Ruøya"/>
<link wikidata="Q4574919" start="3893" end="3902" title="Skardsøya" label="Skardsøya"/>
<link wikidata="Q4587250" start="3904" end="3916" title="Solskjelsøya" label="Solskjelsøya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1769648" start="3918" end="3929" title="Stabblandet" label="Stabblandet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641842" start="3935" end="3941" title="Tustna (island)" label="Tustna"/>
<link wikidata="Q4586142" start="3947" end="3959" title="Vinjefjorden" label="Vinjefjorden"/>
<link wikidata="Q4586253" start="3961" end="3973" title="Arasvikfjord" label="Arasvikfjord"/>
<link wikidata="Q10775999" start="3979" end="3990" title="Edøyfjorden" label="Edøyfjorden"/>
<link wikidata="Q4585750" start="4068" end="4082" title="Mjosund Bridge" label="Mjosund Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3355880" start="4084" end="4098" title="Aursund Bridge" label="Aursund Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5308289" start="4104" end="4122" title="Dromnessund Bridge" label="Dromnessund Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q975085" start="4252" end="4269" title="primary education" label="primary education"/>
<link wikidata="Q31207" start="4303" end="4318" title="Health care" label="health services"/>
<link wikidata="Q191089" start="4320" end="4334" title="old age" label="senior citizen"/>
<link wikidata="Q12002092" start="4345" end="4352" title="welfare spending" label="welfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q205398" start="4363" end="4378" title="Social work" label="social services"/>
<link wikidata="Q702232" start="4380" end="4386" title="zoning" label="zoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q4530482" start="4388" end="4408" title="economic development" label="economic development"/>
<link wikidata="Q34442" start="4424" end="4428" title="road" label="road"/>
<link wikidata="Q701632" start="4479" end="4496" title="Municipal council (Norway)" label="municipal council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196727" start="4500" end="4516" title="Direct election" label="directly elected"/>
<link wikidata="Q30185" start="4538" end="4543" title="mayor" label="mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q877353" start="4547" end="4565" title="Indirect election" label="indirectly elected"/>
<link wikidata="Q105554543" start="4652" end="4682" title="Møre og Romsdal District Court" label="Møre og Romsdal District Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q4249343" start="4691" end="4717" title="Frostating Court of Appeal" label="Frostating Court of Appeal"/>
<link wikidata="Q701632" start="4748" end="4765" title="Municipal council (Norway)" label="municipal council"/>
<link wikidata="Q7278" start="4936" end="4941" title="Political party" label="party"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4969" end="4974" title="Mayor#Scandinavia" label="mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q500190" start="5672" end="5673" title="Liberal Party (Norway)" label="V"/>
<link wikidata="Q500190" start="5705" end="5706" title="Liberal Party (Norway)" label="V"/>
<link wikidata="Q500190" start="5741" end="5742" title="Liberal Party (Norway)" label="V"/>
<link wikidata="Q500190" start="5774" end="5775" title="Liberal Party (Norway)" label="V"/>
<link wikidata="Q500190" start="5810" end="5811" title="Liberal Party (Norway)" label="V"/>
<link wikidata="Q20553417" start="5842" end="5844" title="Bygdeliste" label="LL"/>
<link wikidata="Q500190" start="5876" end="5877" title="Liberal Party (Norway)" label="V"/>
<link wikidata="Q20553417" start="5909" end="5911" title="Bygdeliste" label="LL"/>
<link wikidata="Q20553417" start="5942" end="5944" title="Bygdeliste" label="LL"/>
<link wikidata="Q500190" start="5976" end="5977" title="Liberal Party (Norway)" label="V"/>
<link wikidata="Q167189" start="6012" end="6014" title="Nasjonal Samling" label="NS"/>
<link wikidata="Q500190" start="6042" end="6043" title="Liberal Party (Norway)" label="V"/>
<link wikidata="Q7532476" start="6058" end="6070" title="Sivert Todal" label="Sivert Todal"/>
<link wikidata="Q500190" start="6072" end="6073" title="Liberal Party (Norway)" label="V"/>
<link wikidata="Q493685" start="6104" end="6106" title="Centre Party (Norway)" label="Bp"/>
<link wikidata="Q500190" start="6132" end="6133" title="Liberal Party (Norway)" label="V"/>
<link wikidata="Q190219" start="6165" end="6167" title="Labour Party (Norway)" label="Ap"/>
<link wikidata="Q493685" start="6200" end="6202" title="Centre Party (Norway)" label="Sp"/>
<link wikidata="Q16104677" start="6217" end="6231" title="Bodolf Hareide" label="Bodolf Hareide"/>
<link wikidata="Q586364" start="6233" end="6234" title="Conservative Party (Norway)" label="H"/>
<link wikidata="Q493685" start="6267" end="6269" title="Centre Party (Norway)" label="Sp"/>
<link wikidata="Q500190" start="6298" end="6299" title="Liberal Party (Norway)" label="V"/>
<link wikidata="Q493685" start="6330" end="6332" title="Centre Party (Norway)" label="Sp"/>
<link wikidata="Q500190" start="6361" end="6362" title="Liberal Party (Norway)" label="V"/>
<link wikidata="Q586364" start="6392" end="6393" title="Conservative Party (Norway)" label="H"/>
<link wikidata="Q190219" start="6427" end="6429" title="Labour Party (Norway)" label="Ap"/>
<link wikidata="Q493685" start="6468" end="6470" title="Centre Party (Norway)" label="Sp"/>
<link wikidata="Q190219" start="6509" end="6511" title="Labour Party (Norway)" label="Ap"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="6525" end="6536" title="Agriculture" label="Agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q188989" start="6541" end="6552" title="aquaculture" label="aquaculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q14096331" start="6598" end="6611" title="dairy farming" label="dairy farming"/>
<link wikidata="Q14373" start="6613" end="6620" title="fishing" label="fishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q209894" start="6626" end="6638" title="fish farming" label="fish farming"/>
<link wikidata="Q190928" start="6738" end="6746" title="shipyard" label="shipyard"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6751" end="6760" title="Mjosundet" label="Mjosundet"/>
<link wikidata="Q40858" start="6769" end="6780" title="natural gas" label="natural gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4579429" start="6801" end="6815" title="Tjeldbergodden" label="Tjeldbergodden"/>
<link wikidata="Q7810606" start="6832" end="6868" title="Tjeldbergodden Reserve Power Station" label="Tjeldbergodden Reserve Power Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q358333" start="6872" end="6893" title="liquefied natural gas" label="liquefied natural gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1801811" start="6918" end="6935" title="Heidrun oil field" label="Heidrun oil field"/>
<link wikidata="Q16000433" start="7025" end="7037" title="Paul Vighals" label="Paul Vighals"/>
<link wikidata="Q8118" start="7097" end="7117" title="1912 Summer Olympics" label="1912 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7532476" start="7120" end="7132" title="Sivert Todal" label="Sivert Todal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3356018" start="7221" end="7238" title="Kristofer Leirdal" label="Kristofer Leirdal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2367019" start="7352" end="7369" title="Statistics Norway" label="Statistics Norway"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="192141" wikidata="Q863506" url="?curid=192141" title="Distributed hash table">
<text>A distributed hash table (DHT) is a distributed system that provides a lookup service similar to a hash table. Key–value pairs are stored in a DHT, and any participating node can efficiently retrieve the value associated with a given key. The main advantage of a DHT is that nodes can be added or removed with minimum work around re-distributing keys. &quot;Keys&quot; are unique identifiers which map to particular &quot;values&quot;, which in turn can be anything from addresses, to documents, to arbitrary data. Responsibility for maintaining the mapping from keys to values is distributed among the nodes, in such a way that a change in the set of participants causes a minimal amount of disruption. This allows a DHT to scale to extremely large numbers of nodes and to handle continual node arrivals, departures, and failures.

DHTs form an infrastructure that can be used to build more complex services, such as anycast, cooperative web caching, distributed file systems, domain name services, instant messaging, multicast, and also peer-to-peer file sharing and content distribution systems. Notable distributed networks that use DHTs include BitTorrent&#x27;s distributed tracker, the Kad network, the Storm botnet, the Tox instant messenger, Freenet, the YaCy search engine, and the InterPlanetary File System.

== History ==
DHT research was originally motivated, in part, by peer-to-peer (P2P) systems such as Freenet, Gnutella, BitTorrent and Napster, which took advantage of resources distributed across the Internet to provide a single useful application. In particular, they took advantage of increased bandwidth and hard disk capacity to provide a file-sharing service.

These systems differed in how they located the data offered by their peers. Napster, the first large-scale P2P content delivery system, required a central index server: each node, upon joining, would send a list of locally held files to the server, which would perform searches and refer the queries to the nodes that held the results. This central component left the system vulnerable to attacks and lawsuits.

Gnutella and similar networks moved to a query flooding model in essence, each search would result in a message being broadcast to every machine in the network. While avoiding a single point of failure, this method was significantly less efficient than Napster. Later versions of Gnutella clients moved to a dynamic querying model which vastly improved efficiency.

Freenet is fully distributed, but employs a heuristic key-based routing in which each file is associated with a key, and files with similar keys tend to cluster on a similar set of nodes. Queries are likely to be routed through the network to such a cluster without needing to visit many peers. However, Freenet does not guarantee that data will be found.

Distributed hash tables use a more structured key-based routing in order to attain both the decentralization of Freenet and Gnutella, and the efficiency and guaranteed results of Napster. One drawback is that, like Freenet, DHTs only directly support exact-match search, rather than keyword search, although Freenet&#x27;s routing algorithm can be generalized to any key type where a closeness operation can be defined.

In 2001, four systems—CAN, Chord, Pastry, and Tapestry—ignited DHTs as a popular research topic. 
A project called the Infrastructure for Resilient Internet Systems (Iris) was funded by a $12 million grant from the United States National Science Foundation in 2002.
Researchers included Sylvia Ratnasamy, Ion Stoica, Hari Balakrishnan and Scott Shenker.
Outside academia, DHT technology has been adopted as a component of BitTorrent and in PlanetLab projects such as the Coral Content Distribution Network.

== Properties ==
DHTs characteristically emphasize the following properties:

* Autonomy and decentralization: The nodes collectively form the system without any central coordination.
* Fault tolerance: The system should be reliable (in some sense) even with nodes continuously joining, leaving, and failing.
* Scalability: The system should function efficiently even with thousands or millions of nodes.

A key technique used to achieve these goals is that any one node needs to coordinate with only a few other nodes in the systemmost commonly, O(log &quot;n&quot;) of the &quot;n&quot; participants (see below)so that only a limited amount of work needs to be done for each change in membership.

Some DHT designs seek to be secure against malicious participants and to allow participants to remain anonymous, though this is less common than in many other peer-to-peer (especially file sharing) systems; see anonymous P2P.

== Structure ==
The structure of a DHT can be decomposed into several main components. The foundation is an abstract keyspace, such as the set of 160-bit strings. A keyspace partitioning scheme splits ownership of this keyspace among the participating nodes. An overlay network then connects the nodes, allowing them to find the owner of any given key in the keyspace.

Once these components are in place, a typical use of the DHT for storage and retrieval might proceed as follows. Suppose the keyspace is the set of 160-bit strings. To index a file with given and in the DHT, the SHA-1 hash of is generated, producing a 160-bit key , and a message is sent to any node participating in the DHT. The message is forwarded from node to node through the overlay network until it reaches the single node responsible for key as specified by the keyspace partitioning. That node then stores the key and the data. Any other client can then retrieve the contents of the file by again hashing to produce and asking any DHT node to find the data associated with with a message . The message will again be routed through the overlay to the node responsible for , which will reply with the stored .

The keyspace partitioning and overlay network components are described below with the goal of capturing the principal ideas common to most DHTs; many designs differ in the details.

=== Keyspace partitioning ===
Most DHTs use some variant of consistent hashing or rendezvous hashing to map keys to nodes. The two algorithms appear to have been devised independently and simultaneously to solve the distributed hash table problem.

Both consistent hashing and rendezvous hashing have the essential property that removal or addition of one node changes only the set of keys owned by the nodes with adjacent IDs, and leaves all other nodes unaffected. Contrast this with a traditional hash table in which addition or removal of one bucket causes nearly the entire keyspace to be remapped. Since any change in ownership typically corresponds to bandwidth-intensive movement of objects stored in the DHT from one node to another, minimizing such reorganization is required to efficiently support high rates of churn (node arrival and failure).

==== Consistent hashing ====
Consistent hashing employs a function formula_1 that defines an abstract notion of the distance between the keys formula_2 and formula_3, which is unrelated to geographical distance or network latency. Each node is assigned a single key called its &quot;identifier&quot; (ID). A node with ID formula_4 owns all the keys formula_5 for which formula_4 is the closest ID, measured according to formula_7.

For example, the Chord DHT uses consistent hashing, which treats nodes as points on a circle, and formula_1 is the distance traveling clockwise around the circle from formula_2 to formula_3. Thus, the circular keyspace is split into contiguous segments whose endpoints are the node identifiers. If formula_11 and formula_12 are two adjacent IDs, with a shorter clockwise distance from formula_11 to formula_12, then the node with ID formula_12 owns all the keys that fall between formula_11 and formula_12.

==== Rendezvous hashing ====
In rendezvous hashing, also called highest random weight (HRW) hashing, all clients use the same hash function formula_18 (chosen ahead of time) to associate a key to one of the &quot;n&quot; available servers.
Each client has the same list of identifiers , one for each server.
Given some key &quot;k&quot;, a client computes &quot;n&quot; hash weights .
The client associates that key with the server corresponding to the highest hash weight for that key.
A server with ID formula_19 owns all the keys formula_5 for which the hash weight formula_21 is higher than the hash weight of any other node for that key.

==== Locality-preserving hashing ====
Locality-preserving hashing ensures that similar keys are assigned to similar objects. This can enable a more efficient execution of range queries, however, in contrast to using consistent hashing, there is no more assurance that the keys (and thus the load) is uniformly randomly distributed over the key space and the participating peers. DHT protocols such as Self-Chord and Oscar address such issues. Self-Chord decouples object keys from peer IDs and sorts keys along the ring with a statistical approach based on the swarm intelligence paradigm. Sorting ensures that similar keys are stored by neighbour nodes and that discovery procedures, including range queries, can be performed in logarithmic time. Oscar constructs a navigable small-world network based on random walk sampling also assuring logarithmic search time.

=== Overlay network ===
Each node maintains a set of links to other nodes (its &quot;neighbors&quot; or routing table). Together, these links form the overlay network. A node picks its neighbors according to a certain structure, called the network&#x27;s topology.

All DHT topologies share some variant of the most essential property: for any key , each node either has a node ID that owns or has a link to a node whose node ID is &quot;closer&quot; to , in terms of the keyspace distance defined above. It is then easy to route a message to the owner of any key using the following greedy algorithm (that is not necessarily globally optimal): at each step, forward the message to the neighbor whose ID is closest to . When there is no such neighbor, then we must have arrived at the closest node, which is the owner of as defined above. This style of routing is sometimes called key-based routing.

Beyond basic routing correctness, two important constraints on the topology are to guarantee that the maximum number of hops in any route (route length) is low, so that requests complete quickly; and that the maximum number of neighbors of any node (maximum node degree) is low, so that maintenance overhead is not excessive. Of course, having shorter routes requires higher maximum degree. Some common choices for maximum degree and route length are as follows, where is the number of nodes in the DHT, using Big O notation:

The most common choice, formula_22 degree/route length, is not optimal in terms of degree/route length tradeoff, but such topologies typically allow more flexibility in choice of neighbors. Many DHTs use that flexibility to pick neighbors that are close in terms of latency in the physical underlying network. In general, all DHTs construct navigable small-world network topologies, which trade-off route length vs. network degree.

Maximum route length is closely related to diameter: the maximum number of hops in any shortest path between nodes. Clearly, the network&#x27;s worst case route length is at least as large as its diameter, so DHTs are limited by the degree/diameter tradeoff that is fundamental in graph theory. Route length can be greater than diameter, since the greedy routing algorithm may not find shortest paths.

=== Algorithms for overlay networks ===
Aside from routing, there exist many algorithms that exploit the structure of the overlay network for sending a message to all nodes, or a subset of nodes, in a DHT. These algorithms are used by applications to do overlay multicast, range queries, or to collect statistics. Two systems that are based on this approach are Structella, which implements flooding and random walks on a Pastry overlay, and DQ-DHT, which implements a dynamic querying search algorithm over a Chord network.

== Security ==

Because of the decentralization, fault tolerance, and scalability of DHTs, they are inherently more resilient against a hostile attacker than a centralized system.

Open systems for distributed data storage that are robust against massive hostile attackers are feasible.

A DHT system that is carefully designed to have Byzantine fault tolerance can defend against a security weakness, known as the Sybil attack, which affects most current DHT designs. Whanau is a DHT designed to be resistant to Sybil attacks.

Petar Maymounkov, one of the original authors of Kademlia, has proposed a way to circumvent the weakness to the Sybil attack by incorporating social trust relationships into the system design. The new system, codenamed Tonika or also known by its domain name as 5ttt, is based on an algorithm design known as &quot;electric routing&quot; and co-authored with the mathematician Jonathan Kelner. Maymounkov has now undertaken a comprehensive implementation effort of this new system. However, research into effective defences against Sybil attacks is generally considered an open question, and wide variety of potential defences are proposed every year in top security research conferences.

== Implementations ==
Most notable differences encountered in practical instances of DHT implementations include at least the following:
* The address space is a parameter of DHT. Several real-world DHTs use 128-bit or 160-bit key space.
* Some real-world DHTs use hash functions other than SHA-1.
* In the real world the key could be a hash of a file&#x27;s &quot;content&quot; rather than a hash of a file&#x27;s &quot;name&quot; to provide content-addressable storage, so that renaming of the file does not prevent users from finding it.
* Some DHTs may also publish objects of different types. For example, key could be the node and associated data could describe how to contact this node. This allows publication-of-presence information and often used in IM applications, etc. In the simplest case, is just a random number that is directly used as key (so in a 160-bit DHT will be a 160-bit number, usually randomly chosen). In some DHTs, publishing of nodes&#x27; IDs is also used to optimize DHT operations.
* Redundancy can be added to improve reliability. The key pair can be stored in more than one node corresponding to the key. Usually, rather than selecting just one node, real world DHT algorithms select suitable nodes, with being an implementation-specific parameter of the DHT. In some DHT designs, nodes agree to handle a certain keyspace range, the size of which may be chosen dynamically, rather than hard-coded.
* Some advanced DHTs like Kademlia perform iterative lookups through the DHT first in order to select a set of suitable nodes and send messages only to those nodes, thus drastically reducing useless traffic, since published messages are only sent to nodes that seem suitable for storing the key ; and iterative lookups cover just a small set of nodes rather than the entire DHT, reducing useless forwarding. In such DHTs, forwarding of messages may only occur as part of a self-healing algorithm: if a target node receives a message, but believes that is out of its handled range and a closer node (in terms of DHT keyspace) is known, the message is forwarded to that node. Otherwise, data are indexed locally. This leads to a somewhat self-balancing DHT behavior. Of course, such an algorithm requires nodes to publish their presence data in the DHT so the iterative lookups can be performed.
* Since on most machines sending messages is much more expensive than local hash table accesses, it makes sense to bundle many messages concerning a particular node into a single batch. Assuming each node has a local batch consisting of at most operations, the bundling procedure is as follows. Each node first sorts its local batch by the identifier of the node responsible for the operation. Using bucket sort, this can be done in , where is the number of nodes in the DHT. When there are multiple operations addressing the same key within one batch, the batch is condensed before being sent out. For example, multiple lookups of the same key can be reduced to one or multiple increments can be reduced to a single add operation. This reduction can be implemented with the help of a temporary local hash table. Finally, the operations are sent to the respective nodes.

== Examples ==

=== DHT protocols and implementations ===
* Apache Cassandra
* BATON Overlay
* Mainline DHT – standard DHT used by BitTorrent (based on Kademlia as provided by Khashmir)
*Content addressable network (CAN)
* Chord
* Koorde
* Kademlia
* Pastry
* P-Grid
* Riak
* ScyllaDB
* Tapestry
* TomP2P
* Voldemort

=== Applications using DHTs ===

* BTDigg: BitTorrent DHT search engine
* Codeen: web caching
* Freenet: a censorship-resistant anonymous network
* GlusterFS: a distributed file system used for storage virtualization
* GNUnet: Freenet-like distribution network including a DHT implementation
* I2P: An open-source anonymous peer-to-peer network
* I2P-Bote: serverless secure anonymous email
* IPFS: A content-addressable, peer-to-peer hypermedia distribution protocol
* JXTA: open-source P2P platform
* LBRY: A blockchain-based content sharing protocol which uses a Kademlia-influenced DHT system for content distribution
* Oracle Coherence: an in-memory data grid built on top of a Java DHT implementation
* Perfect Dark: a peer-to-peer file-sharing application from Japan
* Retroshare: a Friend-to-friend network
* Jami: a privacy-preserving voice, video and chat communication platform, based on a Kademlia-like DHT
* Tox: an instant messaging system intended to function as a Skype replacement
* Twister: a microblogging peer-to-peer platform
* YaCy: a distributed search engine

== See also ==

* Couchbase Server: a persistent, replicated, clustered distributed object storage system compatible with memcached protocol.
* Memcached: a high-performance, distributed memory object caching system.
* Prefix hash tree: sophisticated querying over DHTs.
* Merkle tree: tree having every non-leaf node labelled with the hash of the labels of its children nodes.
* Most distributed data stores employ some form of DHT for lookup.
* Skip graphs are an efficient data structure for implementing DHTs.

== References ==
== External links ==
* Distributed Hash Tables, Part 1 by Brandon Wiley.
* Distributed Hash Tables links Carles Pairot&#x27;s Page on DHT and P2P research
* kademlia.scs.cs.nyu.edu Archive.org snapshots of kademlia.scs.cs.nyu.edu
* covering unstructured and structured decentralized overlay networks including DHTs (Chord, Pastry, Tapestry and others).
* Mainline DHT Measurement at Department of Computer Science, University of Helsinki, Finland.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q863506" start="2" end="24" title="Distributed hash table" label="distributed hash table"/>
<link wikidata="Q863506" start="26" end="29" title="Distributed hash table" label="DHT"/>
<link wikidata="Q180634" start="36" end="54" title="Distributed computing" label="distributed system"/>
<link wikidata="Q207440" start="99" end="109" title="hash table" label="hash table"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818718" start="111" end="125" title="Key–value pair" label="Key–value pair"/>
<link wikidata="Q173106" start="170" end="174" title="node (networking)" label="node"/>
<link wikidata="Q694975" start="485" end="494" title="Electronic document" label="documents"/>
<link wikidata="Q494756" start="509" end="513" title="Data (computing)" label="data"/>
<link wikidata="Q727490" start="725" end="730" title="scale (computing)" label="scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q613897" start="918" end="925" title="anycast" label="anycast"/>
<link wikidata="Q991293" start="939" end="950" title="Web cache" label="web caching"/>
<link wikidata="Q1103464" start="952" end="975" title="distributed file system" label="distributed file system"/>
<link wikidata="Q8767" start="978" end="998" title="Domain name system" label="domain name services"/>
<link wikidata="Q58199" start="1000" end="1017" title="instant messaging" label="instant messaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q899288" start="1019" end="1028" title="multicast" label="multicast"/>
<link wikidata="Q2373485" start="1039" end="1064" title="peer-to-peer file sharing" label="peer-to-peer file sharing"/>
<link wikidata="Q269415" start="1069" end="1089" title="content distribution" label="content distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q133862" start="1150" end="1160" title="BitTorrent (protocol)" label="BitTorrent"/>
<link wikidata="Q2620547" start="1193" end="1204" title="Kad network" label="Kad network"/>
<link wikidata="Q531094" start="1210" end="1222" title="Storm botnet" label="Storm botnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q15989676" start="1228" end="1249" title="Tox (protocol)" label="Tox instant messenger"/>
<link wikidata="Q540" start="1251" end="1258" title="Freenet" label="Freenet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759675" start="1264" end="1268" title="YaCy" label="YaCy"/>
<link wikidata="Q21422344" start="1292" end="1318" title="InterPlanetary File System" label="InterPlanetary File System"/>
<link wikidata="Q161410" start="1386" end="1398" title="peer-to-peer" label="peer-to-peer"/>
<link wikidata="Q540" start="1421" end="1428" title="Freenet" label="Freenet"/>
<link wikidata="Q49667" start="1430" end="1438" title="Gnutella" label="Gnutella"/>
<link wikidata="Q133862" start="1440" end="1450" title="BitTorrent" label="BitTorrent"/>
<link wikidata="Q275141" start="1455" end="1462" title="Napster" label="Napster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1576430" start="1618" end="1627" title="Bandwidth (computing)" label="bandwidth"/>
<link wikidata="Q4439" start="1632" end="1641" title="hard disk" label="hard disk"/>
<link wikidata="Q7271384" start="2140" end="2154" title="query flooding" label="query flooding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363179" start="2277" end="2300" title="single point of failure" label="single point of failure"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2407" end="2423" title="dynamic querying" label="dynamic querying"/>
<link wikidata="Q1981968" start="2509" end="2518" title="Heuristic (computer science)" label="heuristic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6397992" start="2519" end="2536" title="key-based routing" label="key-based routing"/>
<link wikidata="Q22725" start="3145" end="3162" title="routing algorithm" label="routing algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q3408069" start="3265" end="3268" title="Content addressable network" label="CAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076368" start="3270" end="3275" title="Chord (peer-to-peer)" label="Chord"/>
<link wikidata="Q733318" start="3277" end="3283" title="Pastry (DHT)" label="Pastry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3515447" start="3289" end="3297" title="Tapestry (DHT)" label="Tapestry"/>
<link wikidata="Q304878" start="3472" end="3499" title="National Science Foundation" label="National Science Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q22915109" start="3530" end="3546" title="Sylvia Ratnasamy" label="Sylvia Ratnasamy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12730959" start="3548" end="3558" title="Ion Stoica" label="Ion Stoica"/>
<link wikidata="Q5657108" start="3560" end="3577" title="Hari Balakrishnan" label="Hari Balakrishnan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7437240" start="3582" end="3595" title="Scott Shenker" label="Scott Shenker"/>
<link wikidata="Q851973" start="3683" end="3692" title="PlanetLab" label="PlanetLab"/>
<link wikidata="Q5249081" start="3831" end="3860" title="Decentralized computing" label="Autonomy and decentralization"/>
<link wikidata="Q3140932" start="3937" end="3952" title="Fault tolerance" label="Fault tolerance"/>
<link wikidata="Q727490" start="4062" end="4073" title="scale (computing)" label="Scalability"/>
<link wikidata="Q269878" start="4298" end="4299" title="Big O notation" label="O"/>
<link wikidata="Q7444868" start="4479" end="4485" title="Secure communication" label="secure"/>
<link wikidata="Q308859" start="4553" end="4562" title="Anonymity" label="anonymous"/>
<link wikidata="Q22666" start="4635" end="4647" title="file sharing" label="file sharing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2544432" start="4662" end="4675" title="anonymous P2P" label="anonymous P2P"/>
<link wikidata="Q6398414" start="4795" end="4803" title="Keyspace (distributed data store)" label="keyspace"/>
<link wikidata="Q184754" start="4832" end="4838" title="string (computer science)" label="string"/>
<link wikidata="Q255215" start="4852" end="4864" title="Partition (database)" label="partitioning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331985" start="4940" end="4955" title="overlay network" label="overlay network"/>
<link wikidata="Q13414952" start="5260" end="5265" title="SHA-1" label="SHA-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757218" start="6108" end="6126" title="consistent hashing" label="consistent hashing"/>
<link wikidata="Q17148857" start="6130" end="6148" title="rendezvous hashing" label="rendezvous hashing"/>
<link wikidata="Q207440" start="6548" end="6558" title="hash table" label="hash table"/>
<link wikidata="Q336142" start="6871" end="6876" title="Churn rate" label="churn"/>
<link wikidata="Q436417" start="7120" end="7135" title="network latency" label="network latency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076368" start="7355" end="7364" title="Chord (peer-to-peer)" label="Chord DHT"/>
<link wikidata="Q863960" start="9051" end="9069" title="swarm intelligence" label="swarm intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q7292680" start="9185" end="9198" title="Range query (data structures)" label="range queries"/>
<link wikidata="Q840026" start="9267" end="9286" title="small-world network" label="small-world network"/>
<link wikidata="Q856741" start="9296" end="9307" title="random walk" label="random walk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172466" start="9410" end="9414" title="Data link" label="link"/>
<link wikidata="Q290066" start="9461" end="9474" title="routing table" label="routing table"/>
<link wikidata="Q145490" start="9597" end="9620" title="network topology" label="network&amp;#x27;s topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q504353" start="9941" end="9957" title="greedy algorithm" label="greedy algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q6397992" start="10238" end="10255" title="key-based routing" label="key-based routing"/>
<link wikidata="Q13091219" start="10378" end="10382" title="Hop (networking)" label="hops"/>
<link wikidata="Q383444" start="10521" end="10527" title="Degree (graph theory)" label="degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q166507" start="10633" end="10647" title="maximum degree" label="maximum degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q269878" start="10768" end="10782" title="Big O notation" label="Big O notation"/>
<link wikidata="Q65556227" start="11261" end="11269" title="Diameter (graph theory)" label="diameter"/>
<link wikidata="Q131476" start="11499" end="11511" title="graph theory" label="graph theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331985" start="11875" end="11892" title="overlay multicast" label="overlay multicast"/>
<link wikidata="Q339678" start="12345" end="12369" title="distributed data storage" label="distributed data storage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353446" start="12483" end="12508" title="Byzantine fault tolerance" label="Byzantine fault tolerance"/>
<link wikidata="Q4470796" start="12562" end="12574" title="Sybil attack" label="Sybil attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q961691" start="12725" end="12733" title="Kademlia" label="Kademlia"/>
<link wikidata="Q13414952" start="13657" end="13662" title="SHA-1" label="SHA-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128613" start="13809" end="13836" title="content-addressable storage" label="content-addressable storage"/>
<link wikidata="Q961691" start="14825" end="14833" title="Kademlia" label="Kademlia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6787153" start="16093" end="16104" title="bucket sort" label="bucket sort"/>
<link wikidata="Q616639" start="16625" end="16641" title="Apache Cassandra" label="Apache Cassandra"/>
<link wikidata="Q4834686" start="16644" end="16657" title="BATON Overlay" label="BATON Overlay"/>
<link wikidata="Q17068178" start="16660" end="16672" title="Mainline DHT" label="Mainline DHT"/>
<link wikidata="Q961691" start="16717" end="16725" title="Kademlia" label="Kademlia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3408069" start="16752" end="16779" title="Content addressable network" label="Content addressable network"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076368" start="16788" end="16793" title="Chord (DHT)" label="Chord"/>
<link wikidata="Q6430747" start="16796" end="16802" title="Koorde" label="Koorde"/>
<link wikidata="Q961691" start="16805" end="16813" title="Kademlia" label="Kademlia"/>
<link wikidata="Q733318" start="16816" end="16822" title="Pastry (DHT)" label="Pastry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7116897" start="16825" end="16831" title="P-Grid" label="P-Grid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2328712" start="16834" end="16838" title="Riak" label="Riak"/>
<link wikidata="Q28957065" start="16841" end="16849" title="ScyllaDB" label="ScyllaDB"/>
<link wikidata="Q3515447" start="16852" end="16860" title="Tapestry (DHT)" label="Tapestry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7814715" start="16863" end="16869" title="TomP2P" label="TomP2P"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029086" start="16872" end="16881" title="Voldemort (distributed data store)" label="Voldemort"/>
<link wikidata="Q4836698" start="16918" end="16924" title="BTDigg" label="BTDigg"/>
<link wikidata="Q5137529" start="16957" end="16963" title="Codeen" label="Codeen"/>
<link wikidata="Q540" start="16979" end="16986" title="Freenet" label="Freenet"/>
<link wikidata="Q12014467" start="17031" end="17040" title="GlusterFS" label="GlusterFS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1007056" start="17102" end="17108" title="GNUnet" label="GNUnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q565283" start="17177" end="17180" title="I2P" label="I2P"/>
<link wikidata="Q565283" start="17230" end="17238" title="I2P" label="I2P-Bote"/>
<link wikidata="Q21422344" start="17276" end="17280" title="InterPlanetary File System" label="IPFS"/>
<link wikidata="Q685739" start="17353" end="17357" title="JXTA" label="JXTA"/>
<link wikidata="Q105104818" start="17386" end="17390" title="LBRY" label="LBRY"/>
<link wikidata="Q961691" start="17449" end="17457" title="Kademlia" label="Kademlia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5362605" start="17507" end="17523" title="Oracle Coherence" label="Oracle Coherence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1734019" start="17592" end="17604" title="Perfect Dark (P2P)" label="Perfect Dark"/>
<link wikidata="Q161410" start="17608" end="17620" title="peer-to-peer" label="peer-to-peer"/>
<link wikidata="Q22666" start="17621" end="17633" title="file-sharing" label="file-sharing"/>
<link wikidata="Q279182" start="17659" end="17669" title="Retroshare" label="Retroshare"/>
<link wikidata="Q285582" start="17673" end="17689" title="Friend-to-friend" label="Friend-to-friend"/>
<link wikidata="Q3459508" start="17700" end="17704" title="Jami (software)" label="Jami"/>
<link wikidata="Q15989676" start="17804" end="17807" title="Tox (protocol)" label="Tox"/>
<link wikidata="Q58199" start="17812" end="17829" title="instant messaging" label="instant messaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q40984" start="17863" end="17868" title="Skype" label="Skype"/>
<link wikidata="Q15635576" start="17883" end="17890" title="Twister (software)" label="Twister"/>
<link wikidata="Q92438" start="17894" end="17907" title="microblogging" label="microblogging"/>
<link wikidata="Q161410" start="17908" end="17920" title="peer-to-peer" label="peer-to-peer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759675" start="17932" end="17936" title="YaCy" label="YaCy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4182287" start="17952" end="17965" title="Web search engine" label="search engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q10858568" start="17985" end="18001" title="Couchbase Server" label="Couchbase Server"/>
<link wikidata="Q306661" start="18111" end="18120" title="Memcached" label="Memcached"/>
<link wikidata="Q7239860" start="18186" end="18202" title="Prefix hash tree" label="Prefix hash tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q14746" start="18240" end="18251" title="Merkle tree" label="Merkle tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q339678" start="18352" end="18374" title="distributed data store" label="distributed data store"/>
<link wikidata="Q7535755" start="18414" end="18424" title="Skip graph" label="Skip graph"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="192143" wikidata="Q119709" url="?curid=192143" title="Being and Nothingness">
<text>Being and Nothingness: An Essay on Phenomenological Ontology (), sometimes published with the subtitle A Phenomenological Essay on Ontology, is a 1943 book by the philosopher Jean-Paul Sartre. In the book, Sartre develops a philosophical account in support of his existentialism, dealing with topics such as consciousness, perception, social philosophy, self-deception, the existence of &quot;nothingness&quot;, psychoanalysis, and the question of free will.

While a prisoner of war in 1940 and 1941, Sartre read Martin Heidegger&#x27;s &quot;Being and Time&quot; (1927), which uses the method of Husserlian phenomenology as a lens for examining ontology. Sartre attributed the course of his own philosophical inquiries to his exposure to this work. Though influenced by Heidegger, Sartre was profoundly skeptical of any measure by which humanity could achieve a kind of personal state of fulfillment comparable to the hypothetical Heideggerian &quot;re-encounter with Being&quot;. In Sartre&#x27;s account, man is a creature haunted by a vision of &quot;completion&quot; (what Sartre calls the &quot;ens causa sui&quot;, meaning literally &quot;a being that causes itself&quot;), which many religions and philosophers identify as God. Born into the material reality of one&#x27;s body, in a material universe, one finds oneself inserted into being. In accordance with Husserl&#x27;s notion that consciousness can only exist as consciousness &quot;of&quot; something, Sartre develops the idea that there can be no form of self that is &quot;hidden&quot; inside consciousness. On these grounds, Sartre goes on to offer a philosophical critique of Sigmund Freud&#x27;s theories, based on the claim that consciousness is essentially self-conscious.

&quot;Being and Nothingness&quot; is regarded as both the most important non-fiction expression of Sartre&#x27;s existentialism and his most influential philosophical work, original despite its debt to Heidegger. Many have praised the book&#x27;s central notion that &quot;existence precedes essence&quot;, its introduction of the concept of bad faith, and its exploration of &quot;nothingness&quot;, as well as its novel contributions to the philosophy of sex. However, the book has been criticized for its abstruseness and for its treatment of Freud.

== Background ==

=== Descartes ===
Sartre&#x27;s existentialism shares its philosophical starting point with René Descartes: The first thing we can be aware of is our existence, even when doubting everything else (Cogito ergo sum). In &quot;Nausea&quot;, the main character&#x27;s feeling of dizziness towards his own existence is induced by things, not thinking. This dizziness occurs &quot;in the face of one&#x27;s freedom and responsibility for giving a meaning to reality&quot;. As an important break with Descartes, Sartre rejects the &quot;primacy of knowledge&quot; (a rejection summed up in the phrase &quot;Existence precedes essence&quot;) and offers a different conception of knowledge and consciousness.

=== Husserl ===
Important ideas in &quot;Being and Nothingness&quot; build on Edmund Husserl&#x27;s phenomenology. To both philosophers, consciousness is intentional, meaning that there is only consciousness &quot;of&quot; something. For Sartre, intentionality implies that there is no form of self that is hidden inside consciousness (such as Husserl&#x27;s &quot;transcendental ego&quot;). An ego must be a structure outside consciousness, so that there can be consciousness &quot;of&quot; the ego.

==Summary==
In the introduction, Sartre sketches his own theory of consciousness, being, and phenomena through criticism of both earlier phenomenologists (most notably Husserl and Heidegger) as well as idealists, rationalists, and empiricists. According to him, one of the major achievements of modern philosophy is phenomenology because it disproved the kinds of dualism that set the existent up as having a &quot;hidden&quot; nature (such as Immanuel Kant&#x27;s noumenon); Phenomenology has removed &quot;the illusion of worlds behind the scene&quot;.

Based on an examination of the nature of phenomena, he describes the nature of two types of being, &quot;being-in-itself&quot; (the being of things) and &quot;being-for-itself&quot;. While being-in-itself is something that can only be approximated by human beings, being-for-itself is the being of consciousness.

===Part 1, Chapter 1: The origin of negation===
From Sartre&#x27;s phenomenological point of view, nothingness is an experienced reality and cannot be a merely subjective mistake. The absence of a friend and absence of money hint at a &quot;being&quot; of nothingness. It is part of reality. In the first chapter, Sartre develops a theory of nothingness which is central to the whole book, especially to his account for bad faith and freedom. For him, nothingness is not just a mental concept that sums up negative judgements such as &quot;Pierre is not here&quot; and &quot;I have no money&quot;. Though &quot;it is evident that non-being always appears within the limits of a human expectation&quot;, the concrete nothingness differs from mere abstract inexistence, such as the square circle. A concrete nothingness, e.g. not being able to see, is part of a totality: the life of the blind man in this world. This totality is modified by the nothingness which is part of it.

In the totality of consciousness and phenomenon (Heidegger&#x27;s being-in-the-world), both can be considered separately, but exist only as a whole (intentionality of consciousness). The human attitude of inquiry, of asking questions, puts consciousness at distance from the world. Every question brings up the possibility of a negative answer, of non-being, e.g. &quot;Who is entering? No one.&quot; For Sartre, this is how &quot;nothingness&quot; can exist at all. Non-being can neither be part of the being-in-itself nor can it be as a complement of it. Being-for-itself is the origin of negation. The relation between being-for-itself and being-in-itself is one of questioning the latter. By bringing nothingness into the world, consciousness does not annihilate the being of things, but changes its relation to it.

===Part 1, Chapter 2: Bad faith===
As bad faith, Sartre describes one&#x27;s self-deception about the human reality. It can take two forms, the first one is making oneself falsely believe not to be what one actually is. The second one is conceiving oneself as an object (e.g. being identical to a job) and thereby denying freedom.

This essentially means that in being a waiter, grocer, etc., one must believe that their social role is equivalent to their human existence. Living a life defined by one&#x27;s occupation, social, racial, or economic class, is the very essence of &quot;bad faith&quot;, the condition in which people cannot transcend their situations in order to realize what they must be (human) and what they are not (waiter, grocer, etc.). It is also essential for an existent to understand that negation allows the self to enter what Sartre calls the &quot;great human stream&quot;. The great human stream arises from a singular realization that nothingness is a state of mind in which we can become anything, in reference to our situation, that we desire.

The difference between existence and identity projection remains at the heart of human subjects who are swept up by their own condition, their &quot;bad faith&quot;. An example of projection that Sartre uses is the café waiter who performs the duties, traditions, functions, and expectations of a café waiter:

Sartre also gives, as an example of bad faith, the attitude of the homosexual who denies that he is a homosexual, feeling that &quot;a homosexual is not a homosexual&quot; in the same sense that a table is a table or a red-haired man is red-haired. Sartre argues that such an attitude is partially correct since it is based in the &quot;irreducible character of human reality&quot;, but that it would be fully correct only if the homosexual accepted that he is a homosexual in the sense that he has adopted a pattern of conduct defined as that of a homosexual, although not one &quot;to the extent that human reality can not be finally defined by patterns of conduct&quot;.

Sartre consistently mentions that in order to get out of bad faith, one must realize that one&#x27;s existence and one&#x27;s formal projection of a self are distinctly separate and within the means of human control. This separation is a form of &quot;nothingness&quot;. Nothingness, in terms of bad faith, is characterized by Sartre as the internal negation which separates pure existence and identity, and thus we are subject to playing our lives out in a similar manner. An example is &quot;something that is what it is&quot; (existence) and &quot;something that is what it is not&quot; (a waiter defined by his occupation).

However, Sartre takes a stance against characterizing bad faith in terms of &quot;mere social positions&quot;. Says Sartre, &quot;I am never any one of my attitudes, any one of my actions.&quot; The good speaker is the one who &quot;plays&quot; at speaking because he cannot &quot;be speaking&quot;. This literally means that, like the café waiter, the speaker is not his condition or social categorization, but is a speaker consumed by bad faith. Thus, we must realize what we are (beings who exist) and what we are not (a social/historical preoccupation) in order to step out of bad faith. Yet, existents (human beings) must maintain a balance between existence, their roles, and nothingness to become authentic beings.

Additionally, an important tenet of bad faith is that we must enact a bit of &quot;good faith&quot; in order to take advantage of our role to reach an authentic existence. The authentic domain of bad faith is realizing that the role we are playing is the lie. To live and project into the future as a project of a self, while keeping out of bad faith and living by the will of the self is living life authentically.

One of the most important implications of bad faith is the abolition of traditional ethics. Being a &quot;moral person&quot; requires one to deny authentic impulses (everything that makes us human) and allow the will of another person to change one&#x27;s actions. Being &quot;a moral person&quot; is one of the most severe forms of bad faith. Sartre essentially characterizes this as &quot;the faith of bad faith&quot; which is and should not be, in Sartre&#x27;s opinion, at the heart of one&#x27;s existence. Sartre has a very low opinion of conventional ethics, condemning it as a tool of the bourgeoisie to control the masses.

Bad faith also results when individuals begin to view their life as made up of distinct past events. By viewing one&#x27;s ego as it once was rather than as it currently is, one ends up negating the current self and replacing it with a past self that no longer exists.

===Part 3, Chapter 1: The look===
The mere possible presence of another person causes one to look at oneself as an object and see one&#x27;s world as it appears to the other. This is not done from a specific location outside oneself, but is non-positional. This is a recognition of the subjectivity in others.

This transformation is most clear when one sees a mannequin that one confuses for a real person for a moment.
*While they believe it is a person, their world is transformed. Objects now partly escape them; they have aspects that belong to the other person, and that are thus unknowable to them. During this time one can no longer have a total subjectivity. The world is now the other person&#x27;s world, a foreign world that no longer comes from the self, but from the other. The other person is a &quot;threat to the order and arrangement of your whole world...Your world is suddenly haunted by the Other&#x27;s values, over which you have no control&quot;.
*When they realise it is a mannequin, and is not subjective, the world seems to transfer back, and they are again in the center of a universe. This is back to the pre-reflective mode of being, it is &quot;the eye of the camera that is always present but is never seen&quot;. The person is occupied and too busy for self-reflection. This process is continual, unavoidable, and ineluctable.

====Being for Others====
Sartre states that many relationships are created by people&#x27;s attraction not to another person, but rather how that person makes them feel about themselves by how they look at them. This is a state of emotional alienation whereby a person avoids experiencing their subjectivity by identifying themselves with &quot;the look&quot; of the other. The consequence is conflict. In order to maintain the person&#x27;s own being, the person must control the other, but must also control the freedom of the other &quot;as freedom&quot;. These relationships are a profound manifestation of &quot;bad faith&quot; as the for-itself is replaced with the other&#x27;s freedom. The purpose of either participant is not to exist, but to maintain the other participant&#x27;s looking at them. This system is often mistakenly called &quot;love&quot;, but it is, in fact, nothing more than emotional alienation and denial of freedom through conflict with the other. Sartre believes that it is often created as a means of making the unbearable anguish of a person&#x27;s relationship to their &quot;facticity&quot; (all of the concrete details against the background of which human freedom exists and is limited, such as birthplace and time) bearable. At its extreme, the alienation can become so intense that due to the guilt of being so radically enslaved by &quot;the look&quot; and therefore radically missing their own freedoms, the participants can experience masochistic and sadistic attitudes. This happens when the participants cause pain to each other, in attempting to prove their control over the other&#x27;s look, which they cannot escape because they believe themselves to be so enslaved to the look that experiencing their own subjectivity would be equally unbearable.

====Sex====
Sartre explains that &quot;the look&quot; is the basis for sexual desire, declaring that a biological motivation for sex does not exist. Instead, &quot;double reciprocal incarnation&quot; is a form of mutual awareness which Sartre takes to be at the heart of the sexual experience. This involves the mutual recognition of subjectivity of some sort, as Sartre describes: &quot;I make myself flesh in order to impel the Other to realize for herself and for me her own flesh. My caress causes my flesh to be born for me insofar as it is for the Other flesh causing her to be born as flesh.&quot;

Even in sex (perhaps especially in sex), men and women are haunted by a state in which consciousness and bodily being would be in perfect harmony, with desire satisfied. Such a state, however, can never be. We try to bring the beloved&#x27;s consciousness to the surface of their body by use of magical acts performed, gestures (kisses, desires, etc.), but at the moment of orgasm the illusion is ended and we return to ourselves, just as it is ended when the skier comes to the foot of the mountain or when the commodity that once we desired loses its glow upon our purchase of it. There will be, for Sartre, no such moment of completion because &quot;man is a useless passion&quot; to be the &quot;ens causa sui&quot;, the God of the ontological proof.

====Nothingness====
Sartre contends that human existence is a conundrum whereby each of us exists, for as long as we live, within an overall condition of nothingness (&quot;no thing-ness&quot;)—that ultimately allows for free consciousness. Yet simultaneously, within our &quot;being&quot; (in the physical world), we are constrained to make continuous, conscious choices.

It is this dichotomy that causes anguish, because choice (subjectivity) represents a limit on freedom within an otherwise unbridled range of thoughts. Subsequently, humans seek to flee our anguish through action-oriented constructs such as escapes, visualizations, or visions (such as dreams) designed to lead us toward some meaningful end, such as necessity, destiny, determinism (God), etc. Thus, in living our lives, we often become unconscious &quot;actors&quot;—Bourgeois, Feminist, Worker, Party Member, Frenchman, Canadian or American—each doing as we must to fulfill our chosen characters&#x27; destinies.

However, Sartre contends our conscious choices (leading to often unconscious actions) run counter to our intellectual freedom. Yet we are bound to the conditioned and physical world—in which some form of action is always required. This leads to &quot;failed dreams of completion&quot;, as Sartre described them, because inevitably we are unable to bridge the void between the purity and spontaneity of thought and all-too constraining action; between the &quot;being&quot; and the &quot;nothingness&quot; that inherently coincide in our &quot;self&quot;.

Sartre&#x27;s recipe for &quot;fulfillment&quot; is to escape all quests by &quot;completing&quot; them. This is accomplished by rigorously forcing order onto nothingness, employing the &quot;spirit (or consciousness of mind) of seriousness&quot; and describing the failure to do so in terms such as &quot;bad faith&quot; and &quot;false consciousness&quot;. Though Sartre&#x27;s conclusion seems to be that being diminishes before nothingness since consciousness is probably based more on spontaneity than on stable seriousness, he contends that any person of a serious nature is &quot;obliged&quot; to continuous struggle between two things:

:a) The conscious desire for peaceful self-fulfillment through physical actions and social roles—as if living within a portrait that one actively paints of oneself

:b) The more pure and raging spontaneity of &quot;no thing&quot; consciousness, of being instantaneously free to overturn one&#x27;s roles, pull up stakes, and strike out on new paths

====Phenomenological ontology====
In Sartre&#x27;s opinion, consciousness does not make sense by itself: it arises only as an awareness of objects. Consciousness is therefore always and essentially consciousness &quot;of something&quot;, whether this &quot;something&quot; is a thing, a person, an imaginary object, etc. Phenomenologists often refer to this quality of consciousness as &quot;intentionality&quot;. Sartre&#x27;s contribution, then, is that in addition to always being consciousness &quot;of something&quot;, consciousness is always consciousness &quot;of itself&quot;. In other words, all consciousness is, by definition, &quot;self-consciousness&quot;. By &quot;self-consciousness&quot;, Sartre does not mean being aware of oneself thought of as an object (e.g., one&#x27;s &quot;ego&quot;), but rather that, as a phenomenon in the world, consciousness both appears and appears &quot;to itself&quot; at the same time. By appearing to itself, Sartre argues that consciousness is fully transparent; unlike an ordinary &quot;object&quot; (a house, for instance, of which it is impossible to perceive all of the sides at the same time), consciousness &quot;sees&quot; all aspects of itself at once. This non-positional quality of consciousness is what makes it a unique type of being, a being that exists &quot;for itself&quot;.

===Critique of Freud===
Sartre offers a critique of the psychoanalyst Sigmund Freud&#x27;s theory of the unconscious, based on the claim that consciousness is essentially self-conscious. Sartre also argues that Freud&#x27;s theory of repression is internally flawed. According to Sartre, in his clinical work, Freud encountered patients who seemed to embody a particular kind of paradox—they appeared to both &quot;know&quot; and &quot;not know&quot; the same thing. In response, Freud postulated the existence of the unconscious, which contains the &quot;truth&quot; of the traumas underlying the patients&#x27; behavior. This &quot;truth&quot; is actively repressed, which is made evident by the patients&#x27; resistance to its revelation during analysis. Yet what does the resisting if the patients are unaware of what they are repressing? Sartre finds the answer in what Freud calls the &quot;censor&quot;. &quot;The only level on which we can locate the refusal of the subject&quot;, Sartre writes, &quot;is that of the censor.&quot; Further:

In other words, Sartre views Freud&#x27;s unconscious to be a scapegoat for the paradox of simultaneously knowing and not knowing the same information. Instead of alleviating the paradox, Freud simply moves it to the censor, establishing &quot;between the unconscious and consciousness an autonomous consciousness in bad faith&quot;. Sartre thinks that the postulation of a censor within the psychic economy is therefore redundant: at the level of the censor, we still encounter the same problem of a consciousness that hides something from itself. For Sartre, what Freud identifies as repression is rather indicative of the larger structure of bad faith. Psychoanalysis thus does not yield any special insight, since hiding something from oneself occurs at the level of consciousness as a unified phenomenon, not as part of some intra-psychic mechanism.

==Special terminology used by Sartre==
Explanation of terms based on appendix to the English edition of &quot;Being and Nothingness&quot; by translator Hazel Barnes

*Being (être): Including both Being-in-itself and Being-for-itself (both as defined below), but the latter is the nihilation of the former. Being is objective, not subjective or individual.
*Being-in-itself (&quot;être-en-soi&quot;): Non-conscious Being. The sort of phenomenon that is greater than the knowledge that we have of it.
*Being-for-itself (&quot;être-pour-soi&quot;): The nihilation of Being-in-itself; consciousness conceived as a lack of Being, a desire for Being, a relation of Being. The For-itself brings Nothingness into the world and therefore can stand out from Being and form attitudes towards other beings by seeing what it is not.
*Being-for-others (&quot;être-pour-autrui&quot;): Here a new dimension arises in which the self exists as an object for others. Each For-itself seeks to recover its own Being by making an object out of the other.
*Consciousness: The transcending For-itself. Sartre states that &quot;Consciousness is a being such that in its being, its being is in question insofar as this being implies a being other than itself.&quot;
*Existence: Concrete, individual being-for-itself here and now.
*Existence precedes essence. The subjective existence of reality precedes and defines its nature. Who you are (your essence) is defined by what you do (your existence).
*Facticity (&quot;facticité&quot;): Broadly, facts about the world. More precisely, the For-itself&#x27;s necessary connection with the In-itself, with the world and its own past.
*Freedom: The very being of the For-itself which is &quot;condemned to be free&quot;. It must forever choose for itself and therefore make itself.
*Nothingness (&quot;néant&quot;): Although not having being, it is supported by being. It comes into the world by the For-itself.
*Reflection (&quot;reflet&quot;): The form in which the For-itself founds its own nothingness through the dyad of &quot;the-reflection-reflecting&quot;
*Reflection (&quot;réflexion&quot;):The consciousness attempting to become its own object.

==Reception==
&quot;Being and Nothingness&quot; is considered Sartre&#x27;s most important philosophical work, and the most important non-fiction expression of his existentialism. Christian existentialist Gabriel Marcel wrote that it was of &quot;incontestable&quot; importance and ranked among the most important contributions made to general philosophy. While Marcel noted the influence of Heidegger on &quot;the form at least&quot; of &quot;Being and Nothingness&quot;, he also observed that Sartre diverged from the views expressed by Heidegger in &quot;Being and Time&quot; (1927) in important ways, and that Sartre&#x27;s contributions were original. Marcel considered Sartre&#x27;s analysis of bad faith &quot;one of the most outstanding and solid&quot; parts of &quot;Being and Nothingness&quot;, writing that it prevented Sartre&#x27;s arguments from being purely abstract. Marcel saw one of the most important merits of the work to be to show &quot;that a form of metaphysics which denies or refuses grace inevitably ends by setting up in front of us the image of an atrophied and contradictory world where the better part of ourselves is finally unable to recognise itself&quot;.

The philosopher Jean Wahl criticized Sartre&#x27;s arguments about the topic of &quot;nothing&quot;. The philosopher Frederick Copleston described Sartre&#x27;s view that all human actions are the result of free choice as &quot;highly implausible&quot;, though he noted that Sartre had ways of defending his position. He also expressed sympathy for Marcel&#x27;s criticism of Sartre, and described Sartre&#x27;s view of freedom as both &quot;nihilistic&quot; and possibly inconsistent with some of Sartre&#x27;s other views. The philosopher A. J. Ayer wrote that, apart from some psychological insights, the book was &quot;a pretentious metaphysical thesis&quot; and &quot;principally an exercise in misusing the verb &#x27;to be&#x27;&quot;.

The author Susan Sontag praised Sartre&#x27;s discussions of the body and concrete relations with others. She identified them as part of a French tradition of serious thought about problems of fundamental importance. The literary scholar John B. Vickery wrote that &quot;Being and Nothingness&quot; resembles Sir James George Frazer&#x27;s &quot;The Golden Bough&quot; (1890) in the way its author &quot;merges psychology and the concrete sense of fiction&quot;, although he considered it less readable than Frazer&#x27;s work. The philosopher Iris Murdoch compared &quot;Being and Nothingness&quot; to Gilbert Ryle&#x27;s &quot;The Concept of Mind&quot; (1949). She maintained that continental philosophy shares the same general orientation as English analytic philosophy. According to the philosopher Steven Crowell, &quot;Being and Nothingness&quot; had come to be seen as outdated by Sartre&#x27;s death in 1980, since its emphasis on consciousness associated with &quot;the subjectivism and psychologism that structuralism and analytic philosophy had finally laid to rest&quot;.

The philosopher David Pears criticized Sartre&#x27;s critique of Freud, describing it as complex but imprecisely formulated and open to potential objections. The philosopher Thomas Baldwin described &quot;Being and Nothingness&quot; as a work of pessimism. He wrote that Sartre&#x27;s argument that Freud&#x27;s theory of repression is internally flawed is based on a misunderstanding of Freud, and that Sartre&#x27;s attempts to adapt Freud&#x27;s ideas are of greater interest. The director Richard Eyre recalled that &quot;Being and Nothingness&quot; was popular among British students in the 1960s, but suggests that among them the work usually went unread.

Several authors, including the sociologist Murray S, Davis, the philosophers Roger Scruton and Maxine Sheets-Johnstone, and the physician Frank Gonzalez-Crussi, have praised Sartre for his contributions to the philosophy of sex. Davis credited Sartre with being the first author to present a phenomenological analysis of sex. Scruton credited Sartre with providing &quot;perhaps the most acute philosophical analysis&quot; of sexual desire and correctly arguing that treating sexual desire as equivalent to appetite ignores &quot;the interpersonal component of human sexual responses.&quot; He described Sartre&#x27;s reflections on &quot;le visqueux&quot; as &quot;celebrated&quot;. He has also credited Sartre with providing a &quot;stunning apology for sado-masochism&quot;, and characterized &quot;Being and Nothingness&quot; as a &quot;great work of post-Christian theology&quot;. Gonzalez-Crussi credited Sartre with recognizing that it is incorrect to equate sexual desire with desire for sexual acts. Sheets-Johnstone believed Sartre presented a subtle analysis of human sexuality. She praised his understanding of desire in general and suggested that his views about the subject anticipated those of the philosopher Michel Foucault. She believed that his views contained both significant truth and internal contradictions. She suggested that despite his criticism of Freud, his views about women and female sexuality were in some ways similar to Freud&#x27;s. Naomi Greene, arguing that there is a &quot;distaste for sexuality&quot; in Sartre&#x27;s work, identifies a clear &quot;anti-sexual bias&quot; present in &quot;Being and Nothingness&quot;.

==See also==
* &quot;Critique of Dialectical Reason&quot;
* &quot;Existentialism is a Humanism&quot;
* &quot;Phenomenology of Perception&quot;
* &quot;Search for a Method&quot;
* &quot;The Imaginary&quot;

==References==
==External links==
*&quot;Being and nothingness: an essay in phenomenological ontology&quot;, By Jean-Paul Sartre, Citadel Press, 2001
*Class Lecture Notes on Sartre&#x27;s &quot;Being and Nothingness&quot; by Professor Spade at Indiana University.
*Dr. Bob Zunjic : Sartre&#x27;s &quot;Being and Nothingness&quot; (Outline)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q9364" start="175" end="191" title="Jean-Paul Sartre" label="Jean-Paul Sartre"/>
<link wikidata="Q38066" start="264" end="278" title="existentialism" label="existentialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q180592" start="335" end="352" title="social philosophy" label="social philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q41630" start="412" end="426" title="psychoanalysis" label="psychoanalysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q9476" start="448" end="457" title="free will" label="free will"/>
<link wikidata="Q48301" start="514" end="530" title="Martin Heidegger" label="Martin Heidegger"/>
<link wikidata="Q404567" start="544" end="558" title="Being and Time" label="Being and Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q58586" start="598" end="608" title="Husserlian" label="Husserlian"/>
<link wikidata="Q179235" start="609" end="622" title="Phenomenology (philosophy)" label="phenomenology"/>
<link wikidata="Q44325" start="647" end="655" title="ontology" label="ontology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355267" start="1102" end="1115" title="ens causa sui" label="ens causa sui"/>
<link wikidata="Q7087" start="1397" end="1410" title="consciousness" label="consciousness"/>
<link wikidata="Q9215" start="1647" end="1660" title="Sigmund Freud" label="Sigmund Freud"/>
<link wikidata="Q238372" start="1731" end="1745" title="self-consciousness" label="self-conscious"/>
<link wikidata="Q5420352" start="2021" end="2047" title="existence precedes essence" label="existence precedes essence"/>
<link wikidata="Q4348672" start="2090" end="2099" title="Bad faith (existentialism)" label="bad faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q7186275" start="2191" end="2208" title="philosophy of sex" label="philosophy of sex"/>
<link wikidata="Q9191" start="2412" end="2426" title="René Descartes" label="René Descartes"/>
<link wikidata="Q192325" start="2517" end="2532" title="Cogito ergo sum" label="Cogito ergo sum"/>
<link wikidata="Q658288" start="2544" end="2550" title="Nausea (novel)" label="Nausea"/>
<link wikidata="Q5420352" start="2920" end="2946" title="Existence precedes essence" label="Existence precedes essence"/>
<link wikidata="Q112610517" start="2977" end="3000" title="conception of knowledge" label="conception of knowledge"/>
<link wikidata="Q58586" start="3099" end="3113" title="Edmund Husserl" label="Edmund Husserl"/>
<link wikidata="Q179235" start="3121" end="3134" title="Phenomenology (philosophy)" label="phenomenology"/>
<link wikidata="Q179235" start="3660" end="3676" title="phenomenology (philosophy)" label="phenomenologists"/>
<link wikidata="Q33442" start="3725" end="3734" title="idealism" label="idealists"/>
<link wikidata="Q483024" start="3736" end="3748" title="rationalism" label="rationalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q83368" start="3754" end="3765" title="empiricism" label="empiricists"/>
<link wikidata="Q10860201" start="3887" end="3894" title="epistemological dualism" label="dualism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9312" start="3967" end="3980" title="Immanuel Kant" label="Immanuel Kant"/>
<link wikidata="Q239581" start="3988" end="3996" title="noumenon" label="noumenon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4881321" start="4184" end="4199" title="being-in-itself" label="being-in-itself"/>
<link wikidata="Q4348672" start="6230" end="6239" title="Bad faith (existentialism)" label="bad faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q10501881" start="6847" end="6857" title="Situation (Sartre)" label="situations"/>
<link wikidata="Q9465" start="10108" end="10114" title="ethics" label="ethics"/>
<link wikidata="Q52090" start="10621" end="10632" title="bourgeoisie" label="bourgeoisie"/>
<link wikidata="Q14467155" start="11020" end="11048" title="gaze" label="look at oneself as an object"/>
<link wikidata="Q25396191" start="11213" end="11225" title="subjectivity" label="subjectivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q855680" start="11288" end="11297" title="mannequin" label="mannequin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3356259" start="13398" end="13407" title="facticity" label="facticity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2211650" start="13765" end="13789" title="Sadomasochism" label="masochistic and sadistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107654" start="14156" end="14169" title="sexual desire" label="sexual desire"/>
<link wikidata="Q290" start="14214" end="14217" title="sex" label="sex"/>
<link wikidata="Q5887" start="15065" end="15071" title="orgasm" label="orgasm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355267" start="15391" end="15404" title="ens causa sui" label="ens causa sui"/>
<link wikidata="Q373152" start="15427" end="15444" title="ontological proof" label="ontological proof"/>
<link wikidata="Q4348672" start="17298" end="17307" title="Sartre and bad faith" label="bad faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q2581738" start="17324" end="17343" title="false consciousness" label="false consciousness"/>
<link wikidata="Q7087" start="18047" end="18060" title="consciousness" label="consciousness"/>
<link wikidata="Q654390" start="18379" end="18393" title="intentionality" label="intentionality"/>
<link wikidata="Q9215" start="19400" end="19413" title="Sigmund Freud" label="Sigmund Freud"/>
<link wikidata="Q192105" start="19435" end="19446" title="Unconscious mind" label="unconscious"/>
<link wikidata="Q483372" start="20559" end="20566" title="paradox" label="paradox"/>
<link wikidata="Q41630" start="21036" end="21050" title="Psychoanalysis" label="Psychoanalysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q15497931" start="21388" end="21400" title="Hazel Barnes" label="Hazel Barnes"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21593" end="21608" title="Being in itself#Being-in-itself for Sartre" label="Being-in-itself"/>
<link wikidata="Q468777" start="22477" end="22486" title="Existence" label="Existence"/>
<link wikidata="Q5420352" start="22541" end="22567" title="Existence precedes essence" label="Existence precedes essence"/>
<link wikidata="Q3356259" start="22710" end="22719" title="Facticity" label="Facticity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780478" start="23167" end="23177" title="self-reflection" label="Reflection"/>
<link wikidata="Q38066" start="23574" end="23588" title="existentialism" label="existentialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q154145" start="23615" end="23629" title="Gabriel Marcel" label="Gabriel Marcel"/>
<link wikidata="Q573120" start="24618" end="24627" title="Jean Wahl" label="Jean Wahl"/>
<link wikidata="Q981839" start="24719" end="24738" title="Frederick Copleston" label="Frederick Copleston"/>
<link wikidata="Q243757" start="25143" end="25153" title="A. J. Ayer" label="A. J. Ayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q152824" start="25357" end="25369" title="Susan Sontag" label="Susan Sontag"/>
<link wikidata="Q151936" start="25659" end="25678" title="James George Frazer" label="James George Frazer"/>
<link wikidata="Q651283" start="25692" end="25708" title="The Golden Bough" label="The Golden Bough"/>
<link wikidata="Q217495" start="25890" end="25902" title="Iris Murdoch" label="Iris Murdoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q313386" start="25949" end="25961" title="Gilbert Ryle" label="Gilbert Ryle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3211110" start="25975" end="25994" title="The Concept of Mind" label="The Concept of Mind"/>
<link wikidata="Q59104" start="26029" end="26051" title="continental philosophy" label="continental philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q183216" start="26099" end="26118" title="analytic philosophy" label="analytic philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7614598" start="26149" end="26163" title="Steven Crowell" label="Steven Crowell"/>
<link wikidata="Q958812" start="26447" end="26458" title="David Pears" label="David Pears"/>
<link wikidata="Q10996085" start="26605" end="26619" title="Thomas Baldwin (philosopher)" label="Thomas Baldwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q657354" start="26924" end="26936" title="Richard Eyre" label="Richard Eyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q445939" start="27171" end="27184" title="Roger Scruton" label="Roger Scruton"/>
<link wikidata="Q44272" start="28319" end="28334" title="Michel Foucault" label="Michel Foucault"/>
<link wikidata="Q957666" start="28775" end="28805" title="Critique of Dialectical Reason" label="Critique of Dialectical Reason"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247929" start="28820" end="28848" title="Existentialism Is a Humanism" label="Existentialism is a Humanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2714332" start="28863" end="28890" title="Phenomenology of Perception" label="Phenomenology of Perception"/>
<link wikidata="Q3414317" start="28905" end="28924" title="Search for a Method" label="Search for a Method"/>
<link wikidata="Q7741454" start="28939" end="28952" title="The Imaginary (Sartre)" label="The Imaginary"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="192150" wikidata="Q6880386" url="?curid=192150" title="Mistick Krewe of Comus">
<text>The Mistick Krewe of Comus (MKC), founded in 1856, is the oldest extant New Orleans, Louisiana Carnival Krewe, the longest to continually parade with few interruptions from 1856 to 1991, and continues to hold a tableau ball for its members and guests, to date. Initially its public facade was The Pickwick Club.

Before Comus was organized Carnival celebrations in New Orleans were mostly confined to the Catholic Creole community, parades were irregular and often very informal. Bernard de Marigny changed that in 1833 with the first formally organized New Orleans Carnival parade and tableau ball. It was Comus who in 1856, organized by 6 Protestant Anglo-Americans from the corresponding Uptown Neighborhoods (versus French Creole Vieux Carré), formalized the first continued observance of what we know today as New Orleans Mardi Gras or technically &quot;Carnival&quot; in New Orleans. French Catholics may have been invited thereafter, but sharp racial, ethnic, and class divides of New Orleans make it unlikely until later.

In 1991, the New Orleans City Council passed an ordinance that required social organizations to certify publicly that they did not discriminate on the basis of race, religion, gender, disability, or sexual orientation, in order to obtain parade permits and other public licensure. The Comus organization (along with Momus and Proteus, other 19th-century Krewes) withdrew from parading rather than racially integrating.

== History and formation ==
Building on the initial work of what French Creole American nobleman, and playboy, Bernard de Marigny had done in 1833, funding and organizing the first official Mardi Gras- a &quot;parade&quot; followed by a tableau ball celebration; in December 1856, six Anglo-American men of New Orleans gathered at Dr. John Pope&#x27;s Drug Store on the Corner of Jackson and Prytania, a favorite rendezvous for the young men of the Fourth District, to begin to organize a secret society to observe Mardi Gras in a more formal and organized fashion than their Creole predecessors. These men invited their businessmen friends, a group of some thirty to forty people, to meet at a club room above the now-defunct Gem Restaurant/Saloon in New Orleans&#x27; Vieux Carré on Jan 4, 1857, to organize the Carnival society. The inspiration for the name came from John Milton&#x27;s Lord of Misrule in his masque &quot;Comus&quot;. Part of the inspiration for the parade was a Mobile, Alabama, Carnival mystic society, with annual parades, called the &quot;Cowbellion de Rakin Society&quot; (from 1830).

Founding members: Samuel Manning Todd, a drygoods merchant from Utica, New York, who arrived in New Orleans by way of Mobile, Alabama, like a few others. Frank Shaw, Jr., commission merchant from New York State; Lloyd Dulany Addison (son of Walter Dulany Addison, of the Oxon Hill Manor Addisons, members of the Tidewater gentry) born in Kentucky, partner Bullitt, Miller &amp; Co. merchants and cotton factors; Dr. John H. Pope, credited with naming the group, from New York State originally, and Joseph Ellison, owned Pope, Ellison &amp; Co., commission merchants-Pope was also a pharmacist owning Pope&#x27;s Drugstore at the corner of Jackson and Prytania where this small coterie initially organized, he was born in Louisville, Kentucky; brother William Ellison, partner of firm Starke &amp; Ellison, Cotton Brokers was born in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.

The new group acquired the costumes, floats, flambeaux, and even theme — their very name, Comus — from the 1856 Cowbellion parade (Milton&#x27;s &quot;Paradise Lost&quot;). There are also indications that Striker&#x27;s Independent Society from Mobile, Alabama, were involved, and they went en masse to the first Comus event.

One Mardi Gras historian describes The Mistick Krewe&#x27;s creation in New Orleans thus:

: It was Comus, who, in 1857, saved and transformed the dying flame of the old Creole Carnival with his enchanter&#x27;s cup; it was Comus who introduced torch-lit processions and thematic floats to Mardi Gras; and it was Comus who ritually closed, and still closes, the most cherished festivities of New Orleans with splendor and pomp.

Comus&#x27; first night parade – replete with torches (which later came to be known as &quot;flambeaux&quot;), marching bands, and rolling floats – was wildly popular with Carnival revelers. So popular was the first Comus parade that the prospect of its second one attracted, for the first time, thousands of out-of-town visitors to New Orleans for the Carnival celebration.

Like that of other old established krewes, including Rex and Momus, Comus&#x27;s history includes ties to white supremacy, particularly New Orleans&#x27;s White League. Opposition to Reconstruction-era reforms prompted parade themes such as 1873&#x27;s &quot;The Missing Links to Darwin&#x27;s Origin of Species&quot; and 1877&#x27;s &quot;The Aryan Race&quot;.

== Parade ==
The Mistick Krewe presented a parade annually on the evening of Shrove Tuesday from 1857 to 1991 with some exceptions including during war. From 1885 to 1890 while the Mistick Krewe of Comus did not parade, the evening parade on Shrove Tuesday was the Krewe of Proteus. In 1890 Comus began parading again as the final parade on Mardi Gras with Proteus reverting to the evening of Lundi Gras.

=== Parade themes ===
== Gallery ==

=== Costumes and floats ===
=== Invitations ===
=== Parade ===
=== Programs ===
=== Tableau ===
== Respites from revelry ==
From the first Comus parade until a police strike in 1979, nothing suspended New Orleans&#x27; lavish Mardi Gras celebrations except war. On March 1, 1862, Comus issued his first proclamation suspending Carnival revelry on account of war. On that day, the &quot;New Orleans Daily Picayune&quot; published this notice:

Comus issued an identical proclamation in 1917 (for World War I), another in 1942 (for World War II), and again in 1951 (for the Korean War). On each occasion, the Captain of Comus persuaded the Captains of other Krewes to refrain from organized revelry during international hostilities.

From 1885–1889, the Mistick Krewe chose not to parade, although other observances continued. During this period, the Krewe of Proteus moved its parade to Carnival night. When Comus resumed parading in 1890, Proteus refused a request to withdraw from parading on Mardi Gras night. The same year, the two parades collided on Canal Street, nearly reaching an impasse. As the Captains of the two groups exchanged defiant expressions, a Comus masker diverted the horse bearing the Captain of Proteus, and Comus was able to complete its procession.

== Withdrawal from parading ==

In 1991 the New Orleans City Council, led by Democrat Dorothy Mae Taylor, passed an ordinance that required social organizations, including Mardi Gras Krewes, to certify publicly that they did not discriminate on the basis of race, religion, gender, disability, or sexual orientation, in order to obtain parade permits and other public licensure. The Comus organization (along with Momus and Proteus, other 19th-century Krewes) withdrew from parading, rather than racially integrating (Proteus returned to parading in 2000). Two federal courts later decided that the ordinance was an unconstitutional infringement on First Amendment rights of free association and an unwarranted intrusion into the privacy of the groups subject to the ordinance. The Krewe of Comus never resumed its parading.

== Early affiliation with The Pickwick Club ==

It is generally known by now that the Pickwick Club, in its beginnings, was the public shield behind which the revelries of the Mistick Krewe were planned and executed. The two were one, but only the Club was known to the public, and the allegiance of the early Pickwickian to the Misktick Krewe was a sacred secret. The fame of each grew independently until distinction became necessary in 1884. The Krewe came first into being, but soon resolved itself into the Club, in the same tradition as The Louisiana Club and the Knights of Momus along with The Stratford Club and the High Priests of Mithras carry one today.

In the 20th and early 21st centuries, their membership is not identical; but it is believed that there are members common to both groups.

== Carnival secrecy and exclusivity ==

The Mistick Krewe has jealously guarded the identities of its membership and the privacy of its activities (other than its parade), perhaps even more than the other Carnival organizations subscribing to the traditional code of secrecy.

Legend has it that admittance to the Mistick Krewe&#x27;s ball was so highly sought-after that a group of uninvited ladies formed a flying wedge and attempted to force their way into the Comus ball. In other years, uninvited persons have tried to beg, buy, or steal invitations to the ball.

Even after the Mystic Krewe of Comus ball is over, its invitations are prized by collectors. They are both rare and uncommonly beautiful.

== Meeting of the courts ==

The Mistick Krewe of Comus also originated another Carnival tradition: the &quot;Meeting of the Courts&quot;. The practice originated in 1882, when Rex (the King of Carnival) and his Queen paid a formal visit to the throne of Comus. This ritualized meeting eventually evolved into the symbolic conclusion of the Mardi Gras season, a practice which continues to this day.

Although Rex is the titular King, some observers believe that the Meeting of the Courts – in which Rex leaves his own festivities and is received by a seated Comus at the Mistick Krewe&#x27;s &quot;bal masque&quot; – establishes Comus as the more prestigious of the two organizations in the Carnival hierarchy.

== Mardi Gras parades ==
The first Comus parade was held on Mardi Gras 1857, and this became an annual event. Other organizations sprang up in New Orleans in the 19th century, inspired by the Comus model, and also came to be known as Krewes.

Parading on Mardi Gras night, Comus was the final parade of the carnival season for over 100 years. It was much smaller and more sedate than the other parades of the day put on by Rex and the Zulu Social Aid &amp; Pleasure Club.

The Comus parades became known for their sometimes obscure themes relating to ancient history and mythology. While other New Orleans parades, especially the newer super krewes of Endymion and Bacchus, might have a theme such as &quot;Foods of the World&quot; or &quot;Broadway Show Tunes&quot;, Comus would present themes on the order of &quot;Serpent Deities of the Ancient Near East&quot;.

== See also ==

*Striker&#x27;s Independent Society
*The Pickwick Club
*Knights of Momus
*Krewe
*Twelfth Night Revelers

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6880386" start="4" end="26" title="Mistick Krewe of Comus" label="Mistick Krewe of Comus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6880386" start="28" end="31" title="Mistick Krewe of Comus" label="MKC"/>
<link wikidata="Q34404" start="72" end="94" title="New Orleans" label="New Orleans, Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q4618" start="95" end="103" title="Carnival" label="Carnival"/>
<link wikidata="Q450946" start="104" end="109" title="Krewe" label="Krewe"/>
<link wikidata="Q60747015" start="293" end="310" title="The Pickwick Club" label="The Pickwick Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="405" end="413" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4386404" start="414" end="420" title="Louisiana Creole people" label="Creole"/>
<link wikidata="Q2898761" start="480" end="498" title="Bernard de Marigny" label="Bernard de Marigny"/>
<link wikidata="Q657449" start="575" end="581" title="parade" label="parade"/>
<link wikidata="Q546808" start="586" end="598" title="tableau vivant" label="tableau ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="641" end="651" title="Protestantism" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q96036383" start="652" end="667" title="Anglo-Americans" label="Anglo-Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q6144478" start="691" end="697" title="Uptown New Orleans" label="Uptown"/>
<link wikidata="Q602939" start="734" end="745" title="French Quarter" label="Vieux Carré"/>
<link wikidata="Q195839" start="815" end="837" title="New Orleans Mardi Gras" label="New Orleans Mardi Gras"/>
<link wikidata="Q4618" start="859" end="867" title="Carnival" label="Carnival"/>
<link wikidata="Q7010711" start="1044" end="1068" title="New Orleans City Council" label="New Orleans City Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q12131" start="1215" end="1225" title="disability" label="disability"/>
<link wikidata="Q17888" start="1230" end="1248" title="sexual orientation" label="sexual orientation"/>
<link wikidata="Q18331673" start="1347" end="1352" title="Knights of Momus" label="Momus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6436919" start="1357" end="1364" title="Krewe of Proteus" label="Proteus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4386404" start="1523" end="1529" title="Louisiana Creole people" label="Creole"/>
<link wikidata="Q134737" start="1539" end="1547" title="nobility" label="nobleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2898761" start="1562" end="1580" title="Bernard de Marigny" label="Bernard de Marigny"/>
<link wikidata="Q276548" start="1940" end="1954" title="secret society" label="secret society"/>
<link wikidata="Q35105" start="1966" end="1976" title="Mardi Gras" label="Mardi Gras"/>
<link wikidata="Q34404" start="2203" end="2214" title="New Orleans" label="New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q602939" start="2221" end="2232" title="Vieux Carré" label="Vieux Carré"/>
<link wikidata="Q79759" start="2322" end="2333" title="John Milton" label="John Milton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3054160" start="2341" end="2356" title="Lord of Misrule" label="Lord of Misrule"/>
<link wikidata="Q2207959" start="2364" end="2370" title="masque" label="masque"/>
<link wikidata="Q5157862" start="2377" end="2382" title="Comus (John Milton)" label="Comus"/>
<link wikidata="Q79875" start="2435" end="2450" title="Mobile, Alabama" label="Mobile, Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q6948988" start="2461" end="2475" title="mystic society" label="mystic society"/>
<link wikidata="Q124115619" start="2515" end="2542" title="Cowbellion de Rakin Society" label="Cowbellion de Rakin Society"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2775" end="2795" title="Lloyd Dulany Addison" label="Lloyd Dulany Addison"/>
<link wikidata="Q7964702" start="2804" end="2825" title="Walter Dulany Addison" label="Walter Dulany Addison"/>
<link wikidata="Q14692337" start="2834" end="2849" title="Oxon Hill Manor" label="Oxon Hill Manor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7623863" start="3628" end="3662" title="Striker&amp;#x27;s Independent Society" label="Striker&amp;#x27;s Independent Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q79875" start="3668" end="3674" title="Mobile, Alabama" label="Mobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q173" start="3676" end="3683" title="Alabama" label="Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q2516642" start="4710" end="4722" title="White League" label="White League"/>
<link wikidata="Q4845365" start="4995" end="5009" title="Shrove Tuesday" label="Shrove Tuesday"/>
<link wikidata="Q4845365" start="5160" end="5174" title="Shrove Tuesday" label="Shrove Tuesday"/>
<link wikidata="Q6436919" start="5183" end="5199" title="Krewe of Proteus" label="Krewe of Proteus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6436919" start="6210" end="6226" title="Krewe of Proteus" label="Krewe of Proteus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5031026" start="6416" end="6428" title="Canal Street, New Orleans" label="Canal Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q7010711" start="6681" end="6705" title="New Orleans City Council" label="New Orleans City Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="6714" end="6722" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q18157170" start="6723" end="6741" title="Dorothy Mae Taylor" label="Dorothy Mae Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q12131" start="6919" end="6929" title="disability" label="disability"/>
<link wikidata="Q17888" start="6934" end="6952" title="sexual orientation" label="sexual orientation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2515622" start="7253" end="7269" title="Constitutionality" label="unconstitutional"/>
<link wikidata="Q12616" start="7286" end="7301" title="First Amendment to the Constitution of the United States" label="First Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q60747015" start="7489" end="7506" title="The Pickwick Club" label="The Pickwick Club"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8006" end="8024" title="The Louisiana Club" label="The Louisiana Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q18331673" start="8033" end="8049" title="Knights of Momus" label="Knights of Momus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8061" end="8079" title="The Stratford Club" label="The Stratford Club"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8088" end="8111" title="High Priests of Mithras" label="High Priests of Mithras"/>
<link wikidata="Q7319354" start="10113" end="10116" title="Rex parade" label="Rex"/>
<link wikidata="Q14691865" start="10125" end="10160" title="Zulu Social Aid &amp;amp; Pleasure Club" label="Zulu Social Aid &amp;amp; Pleasure Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q6436911" start="10342" end="10350" title="Krewe of Endymion" label="Endymion"/>
<link wikidata="Q6436907" start="10355" end="10362" title="Krewe of Bacchus" label="Bacchus"/>
<link wikidata="Q721221" start="10507" end="10522" title="Serpent (symbolism)" label="Serpent Deities"/>
<link wikidata="Q7623863" start="10573" end="10607" title="Striker&amp;#x27;s Independent Society" label="Striker&amp;#x27;s Independent Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q60747015" start="10609" end="10626" title="The Pickwick Club" label="The Pickwick Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q18331673" start="10628" end="10644" title="Knights of Momus" label="Knights of Momus"/>
<link wikidata="Q450946" start="10646" end="10651" title="Krewe" label="Krewe"/>
<link wikidata="Q115939693" start="10653" end="10675" title="Twelfth Night Revelers" label="Twelfth Night Revelers"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="192152" wikidata="Q441578" url="?curid=192152" title="Penelope Spheeris">
<text>Penelope Spheeris (born December 2, 1945) is an American film director, producer, and screenwriter. She has directed both documentary and scripted films. Her best-known works include the trilogy titled &quot;The Decline of Western Civilization&quot;, each covering an aspect of Los Angeles underground culture, and &quot;Wayne&#x27;s World&quot;, her highest-grossing film.

==Early life==
Spheeris was born in New Orleans, Louisiana. Her Greek-immigrant father owned the &quot;Magic Empire Shows&quot; carnival and was a side-show strong man. Her mother, of Irish heritage, was raised in Kansas and later worked as a ticket taker for the carnival. Her father was 40 years old and her mother was 19 when they began a relationship. Spheeris has three full siblings, plus a number of older half-siblings from her father&#x27;s first marriage. She is a sister of singer Jimmie Spheeris and a first cousin of musician Chris Spheeris and Greek-French director Costa Gavras, which she says has made her consider that a genetic component exists to her vocation.

Spheeris told author Paul Stenning, &quot;I believe each of us is born with certain characteristics that we genetically inherit, some of which are good, some not so good. My mother was extremely compassionate, my father more of a barbarian. My father was passionately ambitious, where my mother was not. The most significant traits I learned from my parents were a strong sense of survival and unfaltering tenacity.&quot;

Spheeris spent her first seven years traveling around the American South and American Midwest with her father&#x27;s carnival. Her father was murdered in Troy, Alabama, after intervening in a racial dispute. In a 2015 interview, Spheeris stated that her father had come to the aid of an African-American man who had been struck on the back of the head with a cane by a white man over a dispute about cutting in front of him in line. The white man soon after returned and stabbed Spheeris&#x27; father. She states that her father&#x27;s killer served no jail time, the man&#x27;s legal defense apparently resting entirely on the claim that he was justified in murdering Spheeris senior as &quot;he was defending a black.&quot;

After her father&#x27;s death, Spheeris and her three siblings moved with their mother to California, generally living in trailer parks with a succession of stepfathers. She spent her teenaged years in Orange County, graduating from Westminster High School, where she was named &#x27;most likely to succeed&#x27;. After high school, Spheeris attended California State University Long Beach, where she majored in art. She admired the teachings of George Falcon, a behavioral scientist. From his influence, Spheeris went on to study psychobiology at the University of California, Irvine, in Orange County, southeast of Los Angeles.

Working as a waitress at Denny&#x27;s and IHOP, she put herself through film school. She majored in film and has a master of fine arts degree in theater arts from UCLA.

==Career==
While at UCLA, Spheeris got her first job in the industry transcribing footage for directors Gary Weis and John Head. They introduced her to their friend Lorne Michaels, who was putting together &quot;Saturday Night Live&quot;. Michaels had signed comedian Albert Brooks to make a series of short films and hired Spheeris to produce the films and teach Brooks how to direct. Her first feature film was &quot;The Decline of Western Civilization&quot; (1981), a punk rock documentary that she produced and directed. She followed up with &quot;Suburbia&quot; in 1983, produced by Roger Corman, &quot;The Decline of Western Civilization Part II: The Metal Years&quot;, this time about the Los Angeles heavy metal scene of 1988, with footage and interviews of legendary metal bands such as Kiss, Ozzy Osbourne, Aerosmith, Megadeth, and Motörhead. She later returned to the streets of Los Angeles and the punk rock scene in 1998 for the documentary &quot;The Decline of Western Civilization Part III&quot;. She was offered the chance to direct &quot;This is Spinal Tap&quot;, but declined.

In addition, she worked as a writer for the television series &quot;Roseanne&quot; (1988-1997). In the 1990s, she directed &quot;Wayne&#x27;s World&quot;, a comedy based on Mike Myers&#x27; sketches from &quot;Saturday Night Live&quot;. The movie grossed over $183 million and became a popular hit. She directed the &quot;Wayne&#x27;s World&quot; music video work for Queen&#x27;s &quot;Bohemian Rhapsody&quot;, which earned a Grammy Award nomination. She had difficulty working with Myers, while acknowledging him as &quot;profoundly talented,&quot; and in an &quot;Entertainment Weekly&quot; article stated she believes Myers dissuaded Paramount Pictures from hiring her for the sequel.

In 1996, she directed &quot;We Sold Our Souls for Rock &#x27;n Roll&quot;, a documentary about the Ozzfest, produced by Sharon Osbourne, which explored life on the road.

Other films Spheeris has directed include &quot;The Beverly Hillbillies&quot;; &quot;The Little Rascals&quot; (for which she co-wrote the screenplay); the Chris Farley/David Spade comedy &quot;Black Sheep&quot;; the Marlon Wayans-David Spade team-up &quot;Senseless&quot;; and &quot;The Kid &amp; I&quot; starring Tom Arnold. In 2006, she was set to direct the still-unfilmed &quot;Gospel According to Janis&quot;, about Janis Joplin.

The Portland Oregon Women&#x27;s Film Festival named Spheeris its guest of honor for 2013.

The moving image collection of Penelope Spheeris is held at the Academy Film Archive. The Academy Film Archive has preserved several of Penelope Spheeris&#x27; films, including &quot;Bath&quot;, &quot;Hats Off To Hollywood&quot;, and &quot;Shit&quot;.

==Personal life==
Spheeris has a daughter.

Since September 9, 1998, Spheeris has been in a relationship with a man known as Sin, whom she met while filming the documentary &quot;The Decline of Western Civilization Part III&quot;. In a 2015 interview, she revealed that he was in an institution in Florida after he stopped taking his medication (he has schizophrenia and bipolar disorder) and ended up in jail. She has described him as the love of her life.

==Radio and podcast appearances==
Spheeris appeared on &quot;WTF with Marc Maron&quot; on June 29, 2015.

She appeared on Ken Reid&#x27;s &quot;TV Guidance Counselor&quot; podcast on October 18, 2016.

In December 2021, she appeared on the fourteenth episode of &quot;The Ghost of Hollywood&quot;, where she discussed her work career in filmmaking, with a focus on &quot;Suburbia&quot; in particular.

An interview with Penelope Spheeris and journalist Barney Hoskyns appeared on the Rock&#x27;s Backpages web site.

== Awards ==
Spheeris&#x27; work has received recognition from the Directors Guild of America, The Recording Academy, Stinkers Bad Movie Awards, the Chicago International Film Festival, the Chicago Underground Film Festival, the Deep Ellum Film Festival, the LA Femme International Film Festival, the Los Angeles Greek Film Festival, the Los Angeles Silver Lake Film Festival, the Melbourne International Film Festival, the Sundance Film Festival, and the Temecula Valley International Film Festival.

* 1983 Won - Chicago International Film Festival award - Silver Hugo for Best First Feature Film (&quot;Suburbia&quot;)
* 1992 Nominated - Grammy Award for Best Music Video - Long Form (&quot;Bohemian Rhapsody (Wayne&#x27;s World Version)&quot;)
* 1993 Won - The Stinkers Bad Movie Award for Worst Resurrection of a Television Show (&quot;The Beverly Hillbillies&quot;)
* 1998 Won - Chicago Underground Film Festival award - Jury award for Best Documentary (&quot;The Decline of Western Civilization Part III&quot;)
* 1998 Nominated - Sundance Film Festival Award - Grand Jury award for Documentary (&quot;The Decline of Western Civilization Part III&quot;)
* 1998 Won - Sundance Film Festival Award - Freedom of Expression Award (&quot;The Decline of Western Civilization Part III&quot;)
* 2001 Won - Deep Ellum Film Festival award - Pioneer Filmmaker award
* 2001 Won - Los Angeles Silver Lake Film Festival award - Spirit of Silver Lake award
* 2001 Won - Melbourne International Film Festival award - Most Popular Documentary (&quot;We Sold Our Souls for Rock &#x27;n Roll&quot;)
* 2003 Won - Temecula Valley International Film Festival award - Lifetime Achievement Award
* 2005 Won - LA Femme International Film Festival award - Maverick Award
* 2009 Won - Los Angeles Greek Film Festival award - Honorary Award
* 2012 Nominated - Directors Guild award for Outstanding Directorial Achievement in Movies for Television/Miniseries (&quot;Five&quot;)

==Filmography==

=== Film ===
==== Feature films ====
==== Documentary ====
====Acting roles====
=== Unproduced projects ===
* &quot;The Thing in Bob&#x27;s Garage&quot; – A script was written but never made into a film
* &quot;The Gospel According to Janis&quot; – An autobiography about Janis Joplin was developed by Spheeris for 15 years, and she had received help from David Dalton on the script. In 2004, the project finally began moving forward when singer Pink was cast in the lead role. Peter Newman had helped finance. Zooey Deschanel replaced her two years later. In 2009, Deschanel declared the project dead.
* &quot;Closers&quot; – A romantic comedy distributed by Dimension Films, written by Monica Johnson and Josh Stolberg, and produced by Kevin Messick. The plot describes a man who signs up for a secret service in order to get a girl, only to realize that they assassinated her boyfriend.
* &quot;Posers&quot; – A comedy distributed by Miramax about three guys who have to save their uncle&#x27;s adult bookstore from being seized by launching their own porn site.
* &quot;Spam on Rye&quot; – An action/comedy from Franchise Pictures, written by Sal Stabile and Andrew Wasser. The plot was about a guy who steals a mobster&#x27;s car to impress a date and finds himself living the life of the one he stole from. David Arquette was being looked at to star.
* &quot;Flashbacks&quot; – Based on the autobiography of the same name by Timothy Leary, produced by Interscope Communications and written by Randall Jahnson.

=== Television ===
TV movies
=== Music videos ===
== Reception ==
Critical, public, and commercial reception to films Spheeris has directed.
==References==
==External links==
* The Decline of Western Civilization
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q441578" start="0" end="17" title="Penelope Spheeris" label="Penelope Spheeris"/>
<link wikidata="Q2526255" start="57" end="70" title="film director" label="film director"/>
<link wikidata="Q3282637" start="72" end="80" title="film producer" label="producer"/>
<link wikidata="Q28389" start="86" end="98" title="screenwriter" label="screenwriter"/>
<link wikidata="Q93204" start="122" end="133" title="documentary film" label="documentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2335241" start="208" end="243" title="The Decline of Western Civilization" label="The Decline of Western Civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q26392" start="290" end="309" title="underground culture" label="underground culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146194" start="321" end="339" title="Wayne&amp;#x27;s World (film)" label="Wayne&amp;#x27;s World"/>
<link wikidata="Q34404" start="411" end="433" title="New Orleans, Louisiana" label="New Orleans, Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q539051" start="439" end="444" title="Greek people" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q170826" start="559" end="564" title="Irish people" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1558" start="589" end="595" title="Kansas" label="Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6199404" start="867" end="882" title="Jimmie Spheeris" label="Jimmie Spheeris"/>
<link wikidata="Q5108136" start="914" end="928" title="Chris Spheeris" label="Chris Spheeris"/>
<link wikidata="Q121842" start="939" end="945" title="French people" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q296698" start="955" end="967" title="Costa Gavras" label="Costa Gavras"/>
<link wikidata="Q7162" start="1013" end="1020" title="Genetics" label="genetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q51092426" start="1077" end="1090" title="Paul Stenning" label="Paul Stenning"/>
<link wikidata="Q49042" start="1537" end="1551" title="American South" label="American South"/>
<link wikidata="Q186545" start="1556" end="1572" title="American Midwest" label="American Midwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q79862" start="1633" end="1646" title="Troy, Alabama" label="Troy, Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="2296" end="2306" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426493" start="2328" end="2341" title="trailer parks" label="trailer parks"/>
<link wikidata="Q5925" start="2408" end="2421" title="Orange County, California" label="Orange County"/>
<link wikidata="Q7989165" start="2439" end="2462" title="Westminster High School (Westminster, California)" label="Westminster High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026926" start="2557" end="2595" title="California State University Long Beach" label="California State University Long Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q846566" start="2737" end="2750" title="Behavioral neuroscience" label="psychobiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q868421" start="2758" end="2790" title="University of California, Irvine" label="University of California, Irvine"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="2823" end="2834" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189695" start="2862" end="2874" title="Denny&amp;#x27;s" label="Denny&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185675" start="2879" end="2883" title="IHOP" label="IHOP"/>
<link wikidata="Q11424" start="2937" end="2941" title="film" label="film"/>
<link wikidata="Q4175466" start="2952" end="2971" title="master of fine arts" label="master of fine arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q174710" start="3000" end="3004" title="University of California, Los Angeles" label="UCLA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2078767" start="3111" end="3120" title="Gary Weis" label="Gary Weis"/>
<link wikidata="Q521221" start="3172" end="3186" title="Lorne Michaels" label="Lorne Michaels"/>
<link wikidata="Q13979" start="3219" end="3238" title="Saturday Night Live" label="Saturday Night Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q356303" start="3275" end="3288" title="Albert Brooks" label="Albert Brooks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2335241" start="3426" end="3461" title="The Decline of Western Civilization" label="The Decline of Western Civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q670635" start="3469" end="3473" title="1981 in film" label="1981"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071" start="3478" end="3487" title="punk rock" label="punk rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q93204" start="3488" end="3499" title="documentary film" label="documentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q3502714" start="3559" end="3567" title="Suburbia (film)" label="Suburbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q318292" start="3595" end="3607" title="Roger Corman" label="Roger Corman"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3615" end="3675" title="The Decline of Western Civilization Part II: The Metal Years" label="The Decline of Western Civilization Part II: The Metal Years"/>
<link wikidata="Q38848" start="3715" end="3726" title="Heavy metal music" label="heavy metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q124179" start="3803" end="3807" title="Kiss (band)" label="Kiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q133151" start="3809" end="3822" title="Ozzy Osbourne" label="Ozzy Osbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q126826" start="3824" end="3833" title="Aerosmith" label="Aerosmith"/>
<link wikidata="Q83431" start="3835" end="3843" title="Megadeth" label="Megadeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q19697" start="3849" end="3858" title="Motörhead" label="Motörhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q7729524" start="3967" end="4011" title="The Decline of Western Civilization Part III" label="The Decline of Western Civilization Part III"/>
<link wikidata="Q7810384" start="4062" end="4080" title="This is Spinal Tap" label="This is Spinal Tap"/>
<link wikidata="Q575373" start="4171" end="4179" title="Roseanne (TV series)" label="Roseanne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146194" start="4232" end="4250" title="Wayne&amp;#x27;s World (film)" label="Wayne&amp;#x27;s World"/>
<link wikidata="Q185724" start="4276" end="4292" title="Mike Myers (actor)" label="Mike Myers&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q15862" start="4471" end="4476" title="Queen (band)" label="Queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q187745" start="4490" end="4507" title="Bohemian Rhapsody" label="Bohemian Rhapsody"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="4530" end="4542" title="Grammy Award" label="Grammy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q275033" start="4670" end="4690" title="Entertainment Weekly" label="Entertainment Weekly"/>
<link wikidata="Q159846" start="4741" end="4759" title="Paramount Pictures" label="Paramount Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427730" start="4780" end="4790" title="Wayne&amp;#x27;s World II" label="the sequel"/>
<link wikidata="Q12132395" start="4821" end="4860" title="We Sold Our Souls for Rock &amp;#x27;n Roll" label="We Sold Our Souls for Rock &amp;#x27;n Roll"/>
<link wikidata="Q722072" start="4892" end="4899" title="Ozzfest" label="Ozzfest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806985" start="4913" end="4928" title="Sharon Osbourne" label="Sharon Osbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211343" start="5012" end="5035" title="The Beverly Hillbillies (film)" label="The Beverly Hillbillies"/>
<link wikidata="Q644634" start="5049" end="5067" title="The Little Rascals (film)" label="The Little Rascals"/>
<link wikidata="Q311752" start="5119" end="5131" title="Chris Farley" label="Chris Farley"/>
<link wikidata="Q298658" start="5132" end="5143" title="David Spade" label="David Spade"/>
<link wikidata="Q880549" start="5157" end="5168" title="Black Sheep (1996 film)" label="Black Sheep"/>
<link wikidata="Q310785" start="5180" end="5193" title="Marlon Wayans" label="Marlon Wayans"/>
<link wikidata="Q298658" start="5194" end="5205" title="David Spade" label="David Spade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785626" start="5220" end="5229" title="Senseless" label="Senseless"/>
<link wikidata="Q6296252" start="5247" end="5262" title="The Kid &amp;amp; I" label="The Kid &amp;amp; I"/>
<link wikidata="Q353755" start="5278" end="5288" title="Tom Arnold (actor)" label="Tom Arnold"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514" start="5385" end="5397" title="Janis Joplin" label="Janis Joplin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4671357" start="5556" end="5576" title="Academy Film Archive" label="Academy Film Archive"/>
<link wikidata="Q7729524" start="5924" end="5968" title="The Decline of Western Civilization Part III" label="The Decline of Western Civilization Part III"/>
<link wikidata="Q41112" start="6098" end="6111" title="schizophrenia" label="schizophrenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q131755" start="6116" end="6132" title="bipolar disorder" label="bipolar disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q7956150" start="6265" end="6284" title="WTF with Marc Maron" label="WTF with Marc Maron"/>
<link wikidata="Q6388348" start="6326" end="6334" title="Ken Reid (comedian)" label="Ken Reid"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6472" end="6494" title="The Ghost of Hollywood" label="The Ghost of Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q4048388" start="6688" end="6709" title="Rock&amp;#x27;s Backpages" label="Rock&amp;#x27;s Backpages"/>
<link wikidata="Q1111310" start="6788" end="6814" title="Directors Guild of America Award" label="Directors Guild of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351100" start="6816" end="6837" title="The Recording Academy" label="The Recording Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7617446" start="6839" end="6864" title="Stinkers Bad Movie Awards" label="Stinkers Bad Movie Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071936" start="6870" end="6905" title="Chicago International Film Festival" label="Chicago International Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q5095821" start="6911" end="6944" title="Chicago Underground Film Festival" label="Chicago Underground Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q63676371" start="6980" end="7016" title="LA Femme Film Festival" label="LA Femme International Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q107388937" start="7022" end="7053" title="Los Angeles Greek Film Festival" label="Los Angeles Greek Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q7516147" start="7071" end="7096" title="Silver Lake Film Festival" label="Silver Lake Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q5252683" start="7102" end="7139" title="Melbourne International Film Festival" label="Melbourne International Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q189887" start="7145" end="7167" title="Sundance Film Festival" label="Sundance Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q7698061" start="7177" end="7220" title="Temecula Valley International Film Festival" label="Temecula Valley International Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071936" start="7236" end="7319" title="Chicago International Film Festival" label="Chicago International Film Festival award - Silver Hugo for Best First Feature Film"/>
<link wikidata="Q3502714" start="7327" end="7335" title="Suburbia (film)" label="Suburbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4992254" start="7362" end="7407" title="Grammy Award for Best Music Film" label="Grammy Award for Best Music Video - Long Form"/>
<link wikidata="Q187745" start="7415" end="7461" title="Bohemian Rhapsody" label="Bohemian Rhapsody (Wayne&amp;#x27;s World Version)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7617446" start="7482" end="7554" title="Stinkers Bad Movie Awards" label="The Stinkers Bad Movie Award for Worst Resurrection of a Television Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211343" start="7562" end="7585" title="The Beverly Hillbillies (film)" label="The Beverly Hillbillies"/>
<link wikidata="Q5095821" start="7606" end="7679" title="Chicago Underground Film Festival" label="Chicago Underground Film Festival award - Jury award for Best Documentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q7729524" start="7687" end="7731" title="The Decline of Western Civilization Part III" label="The Decline of Western Civilization Part III"/>
<link wikidata="Q189887" start="7758" end="7821" title="Sundance Film Festival" label="Sundance Film Festival Award - Grand Jury award for Documentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q189887" start="7894" end="7952" title="Sundance Film Festival" label="Sundance Film Festival Award - Freedom of Expression Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q12132395" start="8260" end="8299" title="We Sold Our Souls for Rock &amp;#x27;n Roll" label="We Sold Our Souls for Rock &amp;#x27;n Roll"/>
<link wikidata="Q5280678" start="8559" end="8656" title="Directors Guild of America Award for Outstanding Directing – Miniseries or TV Film" label="Directors Guild award for Outstanding Directorial Achievement in Movies for Television/Miniseries"/>
<link wikidata="Q15088590" start="8664" end="8668" title="Five (2011 film)" label="Five"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514" start="8966" end="8978" title="Janis Joplin" label="Janis Joplin"/>
<link wikidata="Q17198090" start="9050" end="9062" title="David Dalton (writer)" label="David Dalton"/>
<link wikidata="Q160009" start="9140" end="9144" title="Pink (singer)" label="Pink"/>
<link wikidata="Q3376856" start="9172" end="9184" title="Peter Newman (film producer)" label="Peter Newman"/>
<link wikidata="Q191719" start="9205" end="9220" title="Zooey Deschanel" label="Zooey Deschanel"/>
<link wikidata="Q908662" start="9354" end="9369" title="Dimension Films" label="Dimension Films"/>
<link wikidata="Q512967" start="9382" end="9396" title="Monica Johnson" label="Monica Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6289410" start="9401" end="9414" title="Josh Stolberg" label="Josh Stolberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q20753149" start="9432" end="9445" title="Kevin Messick" label="Kevin Messick"/>
<link wikidata="Q465449" start="9631" end="9638" title="Miramax" label="Miramax"/>
<link wikidata="Q3750890" start="9810" end="9828" title="Franchise Pictures" label="Franchise Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q19667430" start="9841" end="9852" title="Salvatore Stabile" label="Sal Stabile"/>
<link wikidata="Q294185" start="10007" end="10021" title="David Arquette" label="David Arquette"/>
<link wikidata="Q5457602" start="10091" end="10121" title="Flashbacks (book)" label="autobiography of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q211731" start="10125" end="10138" title="Timothy Leary" label="Timothy Leary"/>
<link wikidata="Q6056696" start="10152" end="10177" title="Interscope Communications" label="Interscope Communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q7291563" start="10193" end="10208" title="Randall Jahnson" label="Randall Jahnson"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="192153" wikidata="Q2470268" url="?curid=192153" title="USS Mississippi">
<text>USS &quot;Mississippi&quot;, named either for the state of Mississippi or the Mississippi River, may refer to:

* was a sidewheel frigate that saw action in the Mexican–American War and was lost during the American Civil War
* was the lead ship of the of battleships, saw action before World War I and was eventually sold to Greece
* was a and saw action during World War II
* was a nuclear-powered guided missile cruiser
* is a commissioned in 2012

==See also==
* refers to several United States Army Corps of Engineers towboats
* refers to a projected ironclad of the Confederate States Navy
*CSS &quot;Mississippi&quot; was a projected Confederate ironclad turret ram eventually completed as HMS Wivern (1863)
*SS &quot;Mississippi&quot; refers to several steamships in use circa 1862–1931</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2470268" start="0" end="21" title="USS Mississippi" label="USS &amp;quot;Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494" start="59" end="70" title="Mississippi" label="Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497" start="78" end="95" title="Mississippi River" label="Mississippi River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410980" start="555" end="563" title="ironclad" label="ironclad"/>
<link wikidata="Q5634990" start="696" end="713" title="HMS Wivern (1863)" label="HMS Wivern (1863)"/>
<link wikidata="Q124893411" start="715" end="741" title="SS Mississippi" label="SS &amp;quot;Mississippi&amp;quot;"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="192154" wikidata="Q491536" url="?curid=192154" title="Dennis Hwang">
<text>Hwang Jeong-mok (; born 1978), known professionally as Dennis Hwang, is a South Korean graphic artist currently working for Niantic, who was the original designer of some of the festive logos for Google.

==Early life and education==
Born in Knoxville, Tennessee, he moved to South Korea when he was about five years old. His hometown was Gwacheon where he &quot;had a very normal childhood&quot;. He went through public schools, spending six years at Gwacheon Elementary School and two years at Munwon Middle School, before returning to Knoxville and graduating from Bearden High School. His doodles during these years were frowned upon. On a return visit to Knoxville in 2003, Hwang was awarded an Appalachian Arts Fellow Award at World&#x27;s Fair Park by then-mayor Victor Ashe. Ashe proclaimed, &quot;Mr. Hwang&#x27;s work is impressioned hundreds of millions of times each week, and reaches all corners of the globe. He is arguably Knoxville&#x27;s most persistent artist.&quot;

He received a degree from Stanford in arts and computer science.

==Career==
During the Burning Man festival of 1998, Larry Page and Sergey Brin designed Google&#x27;s first &quot;doodle&quot; for the purpose of notifying users of their absence. Subsequently, Hwang was assigned to create special Google logos. His first logo design for Google was in honor of Bastille Day, on July 14, 2000, at the request of Page and Brin, and he went on to design a great many specialty logos. By 2005, he was creating about 50 Google logos each year. Hwang has designed Google logos commemorating Thanksgiving, Christmas, and other events such as Piet Mondrian&#x27;s birthday. He also designed the iconic Gmail logo on the night before its release.

His position within Google was international webmaster, which made him responsible for all of their international content.

==References==
==External links==

* Google Doodles</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q491536" start="0" end="15" title="Dennis Hwang" label="Hwang Jeong-mok"/>
<link wikidata="Q491536" start="55" end="67" title="Dennis Hwang" label="Dennis Hwang"/>
<link wikidata="Q627325" start="87" end="101" title="graphic artist" label="graphic artist"/>
<link wikidata="Q13462819" start="124" end="131" title="Niantic, Inc." label="Niantic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="178" end="191" title="Google logo#Google Doodles" label="festive logos"/>
<link wikidata="Q95" start="196" end="202" title="Google" label="Google"/>
<link wikidata="Q185582" start="242" end="262" title="Knoxville, Tennessee" label="Knoxville, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q884" start="276" end="287" title="South Korea" label="South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q42064" start="339" end="347" title="Gwacheon" label="Gwacheon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4876661" start="568" end="587" title="Bearden High School (Tennessee)" label="Bearden High School"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="700" end="729" title="Appalachian Arts Fellow Award" label="Appalachian Arts Fellow Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q366838" start="770" end="781" title="Victor Ashe" label="Victor Ashe"/>
<link wikidata="Q41506" start="1012" end="1020" title="Stanford" label="Stanford"/>
<link wikidata="Q152518" start="1074" end="1085" title="Burning Man" label="Burning Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q4934" start="1104" end="1114" title="Larry Page" label="Larry Page"/>
<link wikidata="Q92764" start="1119" end="1130" title="Sergey Brin" label="Sergey Brin"/>
<link wikidata="Q326724" start="1346" end="1358" title="Bastille Day" label="Bastille Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q13959" start="1570" end="1582" title="Thanksgiving" label="Thanksgiving"/>
<link wikidata="Q19809" start="1584" end="1593" title="Christmas" label="Christmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q151803" start="1620" end="1633" title="Piet Mondrian" label="Piet Mondrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9334" start="1679" end="1684" title="Gmail" label="Gmail"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="192156" wikidata="Q2470329" url="?curid=192156" title="USS Montana">
<text>USS &quot;Montana&quot; may refer to:

* , was a that provided convoy escort duty during World War I, and was eventually renamed and reclassified &quot;Missoula&quot; (CA-13) in reserve fleet
* , was a cargo ship during World War I and sunk by torpedo in August 1918
* , was a battleship laid down in 1920 but cancelled and scrapped in 1923
* USS &quot;Montana&quot; (BB-67), would have been the lead ship of the s; however, the entire class was cancelled in 1943
* , is a </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q182531" start="277" end="287" title="battleship" label="battleship"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="192158" wikidata="Q29406872" url="?curid=192158" title="Surinam">
<text>Surinam may refer to:

* Surinam (Dutch colony) (1667–1954), Dutch plantation colony in Guiana, South America
* Surinam (English colony) (1650–1667), English short-lived colony in South America
* Surinam, alternative spelling for Suriname, country in South America established 1954</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7646305" start="25" end="47" title="Surinam (Dutch colony)" label="Surinam (Dutch colony)"/>
<link wikidata="Q55637776" start="112" end="136" title="Surinam (English colony)" label="Surinam (English colony)"/>
<link wikidata="Q730" start="230" end="238" title="Suriname" label="Suriname"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="192163" wikidata="Q7319354" url="?curid=192163" title="Rex (krewe)">
<text>The Rex Organization (founded 1872), commonly referred to simply as Rex, is a New Orleans Carnival krewe which stages one of the city&#x27;s most celebrated parades on Mardi Gras Day. Rex is Latin for &#x27;king&#x27;, and Rex reigns as &quot;The King of Carnival&quot;.

== History and formation ==
Rex was organized by New Orleans businessmen in part to put on a spectacle in honour of the New Orleans visit of Grand Duke Alexei Alexandrovich of Russia (remembered locally as &quot;Grand Duke Alexis&quot;) during the 1872 Carnival season. Also in the minds of the founders of Rex was the desire to lure tourism and business to New Orleans in the years after the American Civil War.

Rex has held more parades in New Orleans than any other parading organization. Its official song is &quot;If Ever I Cease to Love&quot;, a quirky tune from the 1870s musical &quot;Bluebeard&quot;. This was adopted because the Grand Duke Alexis of Russia had a fondness for Lydia Thompson, the actress who sang the song in the musical, which was playing in New Orleans at the time of the first Rex parade in 1872. It has stuck around since then and is played often during Carnival.

== Membership ==
Traditionally, the secretive membership was restricted to New Orleans residents of European ancestry for most of its history, typically being elected from the membership rolls of The Boston Club including the first Rex, Louis Solomon, a Jewish businessman. However, in 1991 the New Orleans city council passed an ordinance that required social organizations, including Mardi Gras krewes, to certify publicly that they did not discriminate on the basis of race, religion, gender, or sexual orientation, in order to obtain parade permits and other public licensure. In effect, the ordinance required these, and other, private social groups to abandon their traditional code of secrecy and identify their members for the city&#x27;s Human Relations Commission. The Mistick Krewe of Comus (along with Momus and Proteus, other 19th century Krewes) withdrew from parading rather than identify its membership. Rex decided to comply with the new ordinance, rather than disappear from the main event of Mardi Gras Day. Two federal courts later declared that the ordinance was an unconstitutional infringement on First Amendment rights of free association and an unwarranted intrusion on the privacy of the groups subject to the ordinance. The Supreme Court refused to hear the city&#x27;s appeal from this decision. While the Krewe of Proteus returned to parading in 2000, the Mistick Krewe of Comus and the Knights of Momus have not since been seen.

The Rex organization and the Mistick Krewe of Comus still hold their annual balls together on Mardi Gras night.

== Parade ==
Rex assembles floats using techniques that have spanned generations, entirely by hand. Contrary to popular belief, Rex floats are not built over Civil War-era cotton wagons; they are instead built on wagons formerly employed by the City of New Orleans to collect refuse in the late 19th century.

The Rex parade is put on by The School of Design.

Since 1971, the parade has started at the corner of Napoleon Avenue and South Claiborne Avenue, proceeding south (river bound) on Napoleon to St. Charles Avenue, then east (downtown bound) on St. Charles to Canal Street. Unlike some other old-line krewes, Rex&#x27;s route never went through the French Quarter prior to the city&#x27;s ban on parades in the Vieux Carre which took effect in 1973.

=== Parade themes ===
The theme for each year&#x27;s parade is decided more than a year in advance, and as soon as the parade is over on Mardi Gras Day, float artists begin work on the next year&#x27;s parade. It takes thousands of man hours to create an entirely new parade, and it is for this reason, as well as the organization&#x27;s commitment to its history and traditions, that many consider the Rex parade to be the highlight and most beautiful sight of New Orleans carnival.

Parade themes tend to cover themes related to mythology, ancient kingdoms, and Louisiana.



=== Royal court ===
One member of the Rex Organization is each year chosen to be the monarch of the organization; he is often incorrectly referred to by the (technically redundant) phrase &quot;King Rex&quot;. The correct title is simply &quot;Rex&quot;. The identity of Rex is made public on Lundi Gras, the day before Mardi Gras. Rex is always a prominent person in the city, one who is usually involved in several philanthropic and civic causes. Being chosen Rex is one of the highest civic honors a person can receive in New Orleans. The Mayor of New Orleans traditionally hands over the key to the city of New Orleans to Rex for Mardi Gras Day.

A consort is also chosen each year for Rex and she is titled the &quot;Queen of Carnival&quot;. The queen is always a debutante of the current season. Like Rex, the queen is chosen in the spring of the previous year, and must keep her identity secret until Lundi Gras.

== Ball &amp; Meeting of the Courts ==
In addition to its famous parade, the Rex Organization also holds a private ball for its membership and invited guests on Mardi Gras night. In the 1950s, this ball made headlines when the Duke and Duchess of Windsor bowed down to Rex and the Queen of Carnival.

Pre Hurricane Katrina, the Rex ball was held on one side of the Municipal Auditorium, while on the other half of the building at the same time, the Mistick Krewe (the oldest krewe), holds its ball and was a more veiled affair.

Since Hurricane Katrina, the organizations have held their balls in the Sheraton and Marriott Hotels downtown. The rich tradition that Comus, ruler of the Mistick Krewe, extends an invitation to Rex and his queen to join him and his consort at the ball of the Mistick Krewe has been on public display on Canal Street, where a red carpet is rolled out. The court of The Rex Parade joins by invitation that of the senior krewe and the event is called &quot;The Meeting of the Courts&quot;, then when the monarchs have all made their exits, the Captain of the Mistick Krewe closes the curtain on the Carnival season. This event is televised live locally (and to selected areas outside of the city) – and many New Orleanians stay up to watch despite their weariness – until the very end.

== &quot;Le Boeuf Gras&quot; ==
In early Mardi Gras celebrations parades would include a live ox or (&#x27;fattened ox&#x27;). The ox represented the last meat to be eaten before the beginning of Lent.

The first appearance of in a modern parading krewe was the Mistick Krewe 1867 parade entitled &quot;Triumphs of Epicurus&quot; including masked and costumed krewemen representing food and beverages with included.

A was included in the first Rex parade decorated with garland and ribbons directly behind Rex. Legend has it that Old Jeff, a stockyard bull from Arabi, was used in later years.

In 1900 was taken out of the Rex parade as it was thought outsiders to traditional Mardi Gras would not understand. By proclamation from Rex usage of a live ox &quot;was not in harmony with the beautiful displays which are produced in this era and (it) must be relegated to the past.&quot;

In 1959 Rex issued another proclamation announcing the return of as a papier-mâché float design.

Today is the fourth float in the Rex parade and is surrounded by masked krewemen costumed as butchers and bakers, many of whom are past kings of Carnival.

== Pro Bono Publico ==
Since its founding in 1872, a few years after the civil war, Rex has constantly held itself to a tradition of public service. The Rex motto, &quot;Pro Bono Publico&quot; (for the public good) was adopted during this time, and continues to define the organization&#x27;s commitment to service.

Following Hurricane Katrina, Rex organized a series of community service initiatives in 2006 under the banner &quot;Operation Pro Bono Publico.&quot; The efforts of Rex targeted specific community needs such as support for police and other first responders, an organized clean-up effort of the Uptown parade route after Mardi Gras, as well as continued efforts to support New Orleans&#x27; Charter Schools.

== Mardi Gras Colors ==
Rex established purple, green, and gold as the official colors of Mardi Gras in 1892. The three colors symbolize justice, faith, and power.

==Gallery==

===Bulletin===
===Floats and Costumes===
===Invitation===
===Parade===
===Proclamation===
===Tableau===
==See also==
*The Boston Club
*Boeuf gras
*The Mistick Krewe

==References==
==External links==
* Rex Organization Official Site</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7319354" start="0" end="20" title="Rex (krewe)" label="The Rex Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q7319354" start="68" end="71" title="Rex (krewe)" label="Rex"/>
<link wikidata="Q34404" start="78" end="89" title="New Orleans" label="New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q4618" start="90" end="98" title="Carnival" label="Carnival"/>
<link wikidata="Q450946" start="99" end="104" title="krewe" label="krewe"/>
<link wikidata="Q195839" start="168" end="178" title="New Orleans Mardi Gras" label="Mardi Gras"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="191" end="196" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q116" start="207" end="211" title="Monarch" label="king"/>
<link wikidata="Q315726" start="413" end="454" title="Grand Duke Alexei Alexandrovich of Russia" label="Grand Duke Alexei Alexandrovich of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="665" end="683" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q450946" start="742" end="763" title="Krewe" label="parading organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q22043357" start="792" end="815" title="If Ever I Cease to Love" label="If Ever I Cease to Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q274725" start="959" end="973" title="Lydia Thompson" label="Lydia Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q60747012" start="1364" end="1379" title="The Boston Club" label="The Boston Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q7319354" start="3079" end="3099" title="The School of Design" label="The School of Design"/>
<link wikidata="Q602939" start="3398" end="3412" title="French Quarter" label="French Quarter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202334" start="5226" end="5253" title="Duke of Windsor" label="Duke and Duchess of Windsor"/>
<link wikidata="Q16422" start="5304" end="5321" title="Hurricane Katrina" label="Hurricane Katrina"/>
<link wikidata="Q6880386" start="5448" end="5461" title="Mistick Krewe of Comus" label="Mistick Krewe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6880386" start="5683" end="5696" title="Mistick Krewe of Comus" label="Mistick Krewe"/>
<link wikidata="Q450946" start="6561" end="6566" title="krewe" label="krewe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6880386" start="6575" end="6588" title="Mistick Krewe of Comus" label="Mistick Krewe"/>
<link wikidata="Q42470" start="7611" end="7616" title="motto" label="motto"/>
<link wikidata="Q35535" start="7994" end="8000" title="police" label="police"/>
<link wikidata="Q60747012" start="8475" end="8490" title="The Boston Club" label="The Boston Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q16039723" start="8492" end="8502" title="Bœuf Gras" label="Boeuf gras"/>
<link wikidata="Q6880386" start="8504" end="8521" title="Mistick Krewe of Comus" label="The Mistick Krewe"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="192165" wikidata="Q528344" url="?curid=192165" title="USS North Carolina">
<text>USS &quot;North Carolina&quot; may refer to:

* was a ship of the line launched in 1820 and sold in 1867
* was a launched in 1906 and escorted troop transports during World War I and sold for scrap in 1930
* was a &quot;South Dakota&quot;-class battleship, laid down but soon canceled by the Washington Naval Treaty in 1920
* is a launched in 1940; decommissioned in 1947 and a museum ship in Wilmington, North Carolina
* is a commissioned in 2008 and currently in service

See also</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q207452" start="54" end="70" title="ship of the line" label="ship of the line"/>
<link wikidata="Q696550" start="292" end="315" title="Washington Naval Treaty" label="Washington Naval Treaty"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="192166" wikidata="Q277162" url="?curid=192166" title="Hammersmith">
<text>Hammersmith is a district of West London, England, southwest of Charing Cross. It is the administrative centre of the London Borough of Hammersmith and Fulham, and identified in the London Plan as one of 35 major centres in Greater London.

It is bordered by Shepherd&#x27;s Bush to the north, Kensington to the east, Chiswick to the west, and Fulham to the south, all on the north bank of the River Thames. The area is one of west London&#x27;s main commercial and employment centres, and has for some decades been a major centre of London&#x27;s Polish community. It is a major transport hub for west London, with two London Underground stations and a bus and coach station at Hammersmith Broadway. 

==Toponymy==

Hammersmith may mean &quot;(Place with) a hammer smithy or forge&quot;, although, in 1839, Thomas Faulkner proposed that the name derived from two &#x27;Saxon&#x27; words: the initial &quot;Ham&quot; from ham and the remainder from hythe, alluding to Hammersmith&#x27;s riverside location. In 1922, Gover proposed that the prefix was a personal name, Heahmaer or Hæmar, and stating that the suffix must be Anglo-Saxon from -myðe, meaning the junction of two rivers, as Hammersmith Creek merged with the Thames here. The earliest spelling is Hamersmyth in 1294, with alternative spellings of Hameresmithe in 1312, Hamyrsmyth in 1535, and Hammersmith 1675.

==History==

The district was a chapelry of the ancient parish of Fulham, but became a fully independent parish in 1631. In the early 1660s, Hammersmith&#x27;s first parish church, which later became St Paul&#x27;s, was built by Sir Nicholas Crispe who ran the brickworks in Hammersmith. It contained a monument to Crispe as well as a bronze bust of King Charles I by Hubert Le Sueur. In 1696 Sir Samuel Morland was buried there. The church was completely rebuilt in 1883, but the monument and bust were transferred to the new church.

In 1745, two Scots, James Lee and Lewis Kennedy, established the Vineyard Nursery, over six acres devoted to landscaping plants. During the next hundred and fifty years the nursery introduced many new plants to England, including fuchsia and the standard rose tree.

1804 saw the trial of Francis Smith for the murder of Thomas Millwood in Beaver Lane, Hammersmith. Called the Hammersmith Ghost murder case, it set a unique standard in English legal history.

In 1868, Hammersmith was the name of a parish, and of a suburban district, within the hundred of Ossulstone, in the county of Middlesex. Major industrial sites included the Osram lamp factory at Brook Green, the J. Lyons factory (which at one time employed 30,000 people). During both World Wars, Waring &amp; Gillow&#x27;s furniture factory, in Cambridge Grove, became the site of aircraft manufacture.

Hammersmith Borough Council had provided the borough with electricity since the early twentieth century from Hammersmith power station. Upon nationalisation of the electricity industry in 1948 ownership passed to the British Electricity Authority and later to the Central Electricity Generating Board. Electricity connections to the national grid rendered the 20 megawatt (MW) coal-fired power station redundant. It closed in 1965; in its final year of operation it delivered 5,462 MWh of electricity to the borough.

==Economy==
Hammersmith is located at the confluence of one of the arterial routes out of central London (the A4) with several local feeder roads and a bridge over the Thames. The focal point of the district is the commercial centre (the Broadway Centre) located at this confluence, which houses a shopping centre, bus station, an Underground station and an office complex.

Stretching about westwards from this centre is King Street, Hammersmith&#x27;s main shopping street. Named after John King, Bishop of London, it contains a second shopping centre (Livat Hammersmith), many small shops, the town hall, the Lyric Theatre, a cinema, the Polish community centre and two hotels. King Street is supplemented by other shops along Shepherds Bush Road to the north, Fulham Palace Road to the south and Hammersmith Road to the east. Hammersmith&#x27;s office activity takes place mainly to the eastern side of its centre, along Hammersmith Road and in the Ark, an office complex to the south of the flyover which traverses the area.

Charing Cross Hospital on Fulham Palace Road is a large multi-disciplinary NHS hospital with accident &amp; emergency and teaching departments run by the Imperial College School of Medicine.

==Architecture==

&quot;The Ark&quot; office building, designed by British architect Ralph Erskine and completed in 1992, has some resemblance to the hull of a sailing ship. Hammersmith Bridge Road Surgery was designed by Guy Greenfield.
22 St Peter&#x27;s Square, the former Royal Chiswick Laundry and Island Records HQ, has been converted to architects&#x27; studios and offices by Lifschutz Davidson Sandilands. It has a Hammersmith Society Conservation award plaque (2009) and has been included in tours in Architecture Week.
Several of Hammersmith&#x27;s pubs are listed buildings, including the &quot;Black Lion&quot;, &quot;The Dove&quot;, &quot;The George&quot;, &quot;The Hop Poles&quot;, the &quot;Hope and Anchor&quot;, the &quot;Salutation Inn&quot; and &quot;The Swan&quot;, as are Hammersmith&#x27;s two parish churches, St Paul&#x27;s (the town&#x27;s original church, rebuilt in the 1890s) and St Peter&#x27;s, built in the 1820s.

==Culture and entertainment==
Riverside Studios is a cinema, performance space, bar and cafe. Originally film studios, Riverside Studios were used by the BBC from 1954 to 1975 for television productions. The Lyric Hammersmith Theatre is just off King Street.
Hammersmith Apollo concert hall and theatre (formerly the Carling Hammersmith Apollo, the Hammersmith Odeon, and before that the Gaumont Cinema) is just south of the gyratory.
The former Hammersmith Palais nightclub has been demolished and the site reused as student accommodation.
The Polish Social and Cultural Association is on King Street. It contains a theatre, an art gallery and several restaurants. Its library has one of the largest collections of Polish-language books outside Poland.

&quot;The Dove&quot; is a riverside pub with what the &quot;Guinness Book of Records&quot; listed as the smallest bar room in the world, in 2016 surviving as a small space on the right of the bar. The pub was frequented by Ernest Hemingway and Graham Greene; James Thomson lodged and likely wrote &quot;Rule Britannia&quot; here. The narrow alley in which it stands is the only remnant of the riverside village of Hammersmith, the bulk of which was demolished in the 1930s. Furnivall Gardens, which lies to the east, covers the site of Hammersmith Creek and the High Bridge.

Leisure activity also takes place along Hammersmith&#x27;s pedestrianised riverside, home to the pubs of Lower Mall, rowing clubs and the riverside park of Furnival Gardens. Hammersmith has a municipal park, Ravenscourt Park, to the west of the centre. Its facilities include tennis courts, a basketball court, a bowling lawn, a paddling pool, and playgrounds.

Hammersmith is the historical home of the West London Penguin Swimming and Water Polo Club, formerly known as the &quot;Hammersmith Penguin Swimming Club&quot;.
Hammersmith Chess Club has been active in the borough since it was formed in 1962. It was initially based in Westcott Lodge, later moving to St Paul&#x27;s Church, then to Blythe House and now Lytton Hall, near West Kensington tube station.

==Transport==

The area is on the main A4 trunk road heading west from central London towards the M4 motorway and Heathrow Airport. The A4, a busy commuter route, passes over the area&#x27;s main road junction, Hammersmith Gyratory System, on a long viaduct, the Hammersmith Flyover. Hammersmith Bridge closed in August 2020 to pedestrians, cyclists and road traffic, severing the link with Barnes in the southwest. Its cast iron pedestals that hold the suspension system in place had become unsafe.

The centre of Hammersmith is served by two London Underground stations named Hammersmith: one is served by the Hammersmith &amp; City and Circle lines and the other is served by the Piccadilly and District lines. The latter station is part of a larger office, retail and transport development, locally known as &quot;The Broadway Centre&quot;. Hammersmith Broadway stretches from the junction of Queen Caroline Street and King Street in the west to the junction of Hammersmith Road and Butterwick in the east. It forms the north side of the gyratory system also known as Hammersmith Roundabout. The Broadway Shopping Centre includes a major bus station. The length of King Street places the westernmost shops and offices closest to Ravenscourt Park Underground station on the District line, one stop west of Hammersmith itself.

==Hammersmith Bridge==


The first Hammersmith Bridge was designed by William Tierney Clark and opened in 1827 and was the first suspension bridge crossing the River Thames. It was redesigned by Joseph Bazalgette, and reopened in 1887. In August 2020, it closed to pedestrians, cyclists and road traffic as the cast iron pedestals that hold the suspension system in place became unsafe. Work began to improve the structural integrity of the bridge in 2022.

==In literature and music==
Hammersmith features in Charles Dickens&#x27; &quot;Great Expectations&quot; as the home of the Pocket family. Pip resides with the Pockets in their house by the river and goes boating on the river. 
William Morris&#x27;s utopian novel &quot;News from Nowhere&quot; (1890) describes a journey up the river from Hammersmith towards Oxford.

In 1930, Gustav Holst composed &quot;Hammersmith&quot;, a work for military band (later rewritten for orchestra), reflecting his impressions of the area, having lived across the river in Barnes for nearly forty years. It begins with a haunting musical depiction of the River Thames flowing underneath Hammersmith Bridge. Holst taught music at St Paul&#x27;s Girls&#x27; School and composed many of his most famous works there, including his &quot;The Planets&quot; suite. A music room in the school is named after him. Holst dedicated &quot;Hammersmith&quot;: &quot;To the Author of &quot;&quot;The Water Gypsies&quot;&quot;.

==Notable people==

===17th century===

* John Milton (1608–1674), poet
* William Sheridan ( – 3 October 1711), Bishop of Kilmore and Ardagh
===18th century===
===19th century===

===1900–1945===


===1946–2000===


==See also==

* List of districts in Hammersmith and Fulham

==References==
==External links==
* London Borough of Hammersmith &amp; Fulham
* Hammersmith&#x27;s local community web site
* Description of Hammersmith in 1868 
* Hammersmith, Fulham and Putney, by Geraldine Edith Mitton and John Cunningham Geikie, 1903, from Project Gutenberg</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q277162" start="0" end="11" title="Hammersmith" label="Hammersmith"/>
<link wikidata="Q2734390" start="29" end="40" title="West London" label="West London"/>
<link wikidata="Q216185" start="64" end="77" title="Charing Cross" label="Charing Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q40478" start="118" end="158" title="London Borough of Hammersmith and Fulham" label="London Borough of Hammersmith and Fulham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571368" start="182" end="193" title="London Plan" label="London Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q23306" start="224" end="238" title="Greater London" label="Greater London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026182" start="259" end="279" title="Shepherd&amp;#x27;s Bush" label="Shepherd&amp;#x27;s Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q288781" start="294" end="304" title="Kensington" label="Kensington"/>
<link wikidata="Q845015" start="318" end="326" title="Chiswick" label="Chiswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q3367868" start="344" end="350" title="Fulham" label="Fulham"/>
<link wikidata="Q19686" start="394" end="406" title="River Thames" label="River Thames"/>
<link wikidata="Q7210044" start="548" end="564" title="Polish minority in United Kingdom" label="Polish community"/>
<link wikidata="Q2734390" start="598" end="609" title="west London" label="west London"/>
<link wikidata="Q20075" start="620" end="638" title="London Underground" label="London Underground"/>
<link wikidata="Q5645739" start="679" end="699" title="Hammersmith Broadway" label="Hammersmith Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7789539" start="808" end="823" title="Thomas Faulkner (topographer)" label="Thomas Faulkner"/>
<link wikidata="Q3748264" start="922" end="925" title="List of generic forms in place names in Ireland and the United Kingdom" label="ham"/>
<link wikidata="Q3748264" start="949" end="954" title="List of generic forms in place names in Ireland and the United Kingdom" label="hythe"/>
<link wikidata="Q15222677" start="1186" end="1203" title="Hammersmith Creek" label="Hammersmith Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q3367868" start="1439" end="1445" title="Fulham" label="Fulham"/>
<link wikidata="Q17551309" start="1573" end="1587" title="St Paul&amp;#x27;s, Hammersmith" label="St Paul&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q588026" start="1602" end="1621" title="Sir Nicholas Crispe, 1st Baronet" label="Sir Nicholas Crispe"/>
<link wikidata="Q81506" start="1723" end="1737" title="Charles I of England" label="King Charles I"/>
<link wikidata="Q3142050" start="1741" end="1756" title="Hubert Le Sueur" label="Hubert Le Sueur"/>
<link wikidata="Q950850" start="1766" end="1784" title="Samuel Morland" label="Sir Samuel Morland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6515682" start="1929" end="1956" title="Lee and Kennedy" label="James Lee and Lewis Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6515682" start="1974" end="1990" title="Vineyard Nursery" label="Vineyard Nursery"/>
<link wikidata="Q161066" start="2139" end="2146" title="fuchsia" label="fuchsia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7061732" start="2164" end="2173" title="Rhododendron maximum" label="rose tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q5645741" start="2286" end="2315" title="Hammersmith Ghost murder case" label="Hammersmith Ghost murder case"/>
<link wikidata="Q7107544" start="2455" end="2476" title="hundred of Ossulstone" label="hundred of Ossulstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q19186" start="2495" end="2504" title="Middlesex" label="Middlesex"/>
<link wikidata="Q310481" start="2542" end="2547" title="Osram" label="Osram"/>
<link wikidata="Q4974338" start="2564" end="2575" title="Brook Green" label="Brook Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q6106384" start="2581" end="2589" title="J. Lyons and Co." label="J. Lyons"/>
<link wikidata="Q103495" start="2654" end="2663" title="World War" label="World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q14997092" start="2666" end="2685" title="Waring &amp;amp; Gillow" label="Waring &amp;amp; Gillow"/>
<link wikidata="Q5025430" start="2715" end="2730" title="Cambridge Grove" label="Cambridge Grove"/>
<link wikidata="Q104853462" start="2883" end="2908" title="Hammersmith power station" label="Hammersmith power station"/>
<link wikidata="Q178564" start="2915" end="2930" title="Nationalization" label="nationalisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969912" start="2991" end="3020" title="British Electricity Authority" label="British Electricity Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q5061023" start="3038" end="3074" title="Central Electricity Generating Board" label="Central Electricity Generating Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q15261121" start="3107" end="3120" title="National Grid (Great Britain)" label="national grid"/>
<link wikidata="Q6558431" start="3151" end="3175" title="coal-fired power station" label="coal-fired power station"/>
<link wikidata="Q182098" start="3256" end="3259" title="Kilowatt hour" label="MWh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1966303" start="3402" end="3404" title="A4 road (Great Britain)" label="A4"/>
<link wikidata="Q7486929" start="3623" end="3642" title="Hammersmith tube station (Piccadilly and District lines)" label="Underground station"/>
<link wikidata="Q24197318" start="3714" end="3725" title="King Street, Hammersmith" label="King Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q6243121" start="3780" end="3807" title="John King (Bishop of London)" label="John King, Bishop of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q16893474" start="3847" end="3864" title="Livat Hammersmith" label="Livat Hammersmith"/>
<link wikidata="Q26353499" start="3889" end="3898" title="Hammersmith Town Hall" label="town hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q12061418" start="3904" end="3917" title="Lyric Hammersmith" label="Lyric Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q257061" start="3933" end="3956" title="Polish Social and Cultural Association" label="Polish community centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q277162" start="4092" end="4108" title="Hammersmith Road" label="Hammersmith Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q7714246" start="4245" end="4248" title="The London Ark" label="Ark"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425560" start="4288" end="4295" title="Overpass" label="flyover"/>
<link wikidata="Q4982607" start="4323" end="4345" title="Charing Cross Hospital" label="Charing Cross Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q16251481" start="4398" end="4401" title="National Health Service (England)" label="NHS"/>
<link wikidata="Q6006500" start="4477" end="4512" title="Imperial College School of Medicine" label="Imperial College School of Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7714246" start="4533" end="4568" title="The Ark, London" label="&amp;quot;The Ark&amp;quot; office building"/>
<link wikidata="Q4631324" start="4753" end="4778" title="22 St Peter&amp;#x27;s Square" label="22 St Peter&amp;#x27;s Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q190585" start="4818" end="4832" title="Island Records" label="Island Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q6545586" start="4899" end="4928" title="Lifschutz Davidson Sandilands" label="Lifschutz Davidson Sandilands"/>
<link wikidata="Q570600" start="5084" end="5099" title="listed building" label="listed building"/>
<link wikidata="Q15978902" start="5122" end="5132" title="Black Lion, Hammersmith" label="Black Lion"/>
<link wikidata="Q15979554" start="5146" end="5154" title="The Dove, Hammersmith" label="The Dove"/>
<link wikidata="Q15979556" start="5168" end="5178" title="The George, Hammersmith" label="The George"/>
<link wikidata="Q15979561" start="5192" end="5205" title="The Hop Poles" label="The Hop Poles"/>
<link wikidata="Q15979020" start="5223" end="5238" title="Hope and Anchor, Hammersmith" label="Hope and Anchor"/>
<link wikidata="Q15979280" start="5256" end="5270" title="Salutation, Hammersmith" label="Salutation Inn"/>
<link wikidata="Q15979572" start="5287" end="5295" title="The Swan, Hammersmith" label="The Swan"/>
<link wikidata="Q317557" start="5333" end="5346" title="parish church" label="parish church"/>
<link wikidata="Q17551309" start="5350" end="5364" title="St Paul&amp;#x27;s, Hammersmith" label="St Paul&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q7595244" start="5425" end="5440" title="St Peter&amp;#x27;s Church, Hammersmith" label="St Peter&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q7338619" start="5493" end="5510" title="Riverside Studios" label="Riverside Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="5617" end="5620" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q12061418" start="5671" end="5696" title="Lyric Theatre (Hammersmith)" label="Lyric Hammersmith Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337772" start="5722" end="5740" title="Hammersmith Apollo" label="Hammersmith Apollo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5645751" start="5909" end="5927" title="Hammersmith Palais" label="Hammersmith Palais"/>
<link wikidata="Q257061" start="6008" end="6046" title="Polish Social and Cultural Association" label="Polish Social and Cultural Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q15979554" start="6224" end="6232" title="The Dove, Hammersmith" label="The Dove"/>
<link wikidata="Q41675" start="6278" end="6302" title="Guinness Book of Records" label="Guinness Book of Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q23434" start="6441" end="6457" title="Ernest Hemingway" label="Ernest Hemingway"/>
<link wikidata="Q128560" start="6462" end="6475" title="Graham Greene" label="Graham Greene"/>
<link wikidata="Q555029" start="6477" end="6490" title="James Thomson (poet, born 1700)" label="James Thomson"/>
<link wikidata="Q215729" start="6521" end="6535" title="Rule Britannia" label="Rule Britannia"/>
<link wikidata="Q24022937" start="6692" end="6709" title="Furnivall Gardens" label="Furnivall Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q15222677" start="6754" end="6771" title="Hammersmith Creek" label="Hammersmith Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q24022937" start="6950" end="6966" title="Furnival Gardens" label="Furnival Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q7296505" start="7002" end="7018" title="Ravenscourt Park" label="Ravenscourt Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q7985796" start="7198" end="7246" title="West London Penguin Swimming and Water Polo Club" label="West London Penguin Swimming and Water Polo Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q23891211" start="7426" end="7440" title="Westcott Lodge" label="Westcott Lodge"/>
<link wikidata="Q4930882" start="7489" end="7501" title="Blythe House" label="Blythe House"/>
<link wikidata="Q944664" start="7528" end="7556" title="West Kensington tube station" label="West Kensington tube station"/>
<link wikidata="Q2145163" start="7601" end="7611" title="trunk road" label="trunk road"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638174" start="7657" end="7668" title="M4 motorway" label="M4 motorway"/>
<link wikidata="Q8691" start="7673" end="7689" title="Heathrow Airport" label="Heathrow Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q5645765" start="7822" end="7841" title="Hammersmith Flyover" label="Hammersmith Flyover"/>
<link wikidata="Q1573860" start="7843" end="7861" title="Hammersmith Bridge" label="Hammersmith Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q668140" start="7950" end="7956" title="Barnes, London" label="Barnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q20075" start="8103" end="8121" title="London Underground" label="London Underground"/>
<link wikidata="Q1762419" start="8150" end="8153" title="Hammersmith tube station (Circle and Hammersmith &amp;amp; City lines)" label="one"/>
<link wikidata="Q211270" start="8171" end="8193" title="Hammersmith &amp;amp; City line" label="Hammersmith &amp;amp; City"/>
<link wikidata="Q210321" start="8198" end="8204" title="Circle line (London Underground)" label="Circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7486929" start="8215" end="8224" title="Hammersmith tube station (District and Piccadilly lines)" label="the other"/>
<link wikidata="Q207689" start="8242" end="8252" title="Piccadilly line" label="Piccadilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q211265" start="8257" end="8265" title="District line" label="District"/>
<link wikidata="Q5645739" start="8404" end="8424" title="Hammersmith Broadway" label="Hammersmith Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q768560" start="8792" end="8828" title="Ravenscourt Park tube station" label="Ravenscourt Park Underground station"/>
<link wikidata="Q211265" start="8836" end="8849" title="District line" label="District line"/>
<link wikidata="Q837564" start="8959" end="8980" title="William Tierney Clark" label="William Tierney Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q12570" start="9018" end="9035" title="suspension bridge" label="suspension bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q19686" start="9049" end="9061" title="River Thames" label="River Thames"/>
<link wikidata="Q981915" start="9084" end="9101" title="Joseph Bazalgette" label="Joseph Bazalgette"/>
<link wikidata="Q5686" start="9399" end="9414" title="Charles Dickens" label="Charles Dickens"/>
<link wikidata="Q219552" start="9427" end="9445" title="Great Expectations" label="Great Expectations"/>
<link wikidata="Q182589" start="9575" end="9589" title="William Morris" label="William Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q7019506" start="9617" end="9634" title="News from Nowhere" label="News from Nowhere"/>
<link wikidata="Q34217" start="9706" end="9712" title="Oxford" label="Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q200867" start="9724" end="9736" title="Gustav Holst" label="Gustav Holst"/>
<link wikidata="Q116550385" start="9752" end="9763" title="Hammersmith (Holst)" label="Hammersmith"/>
<link wikidata="Q668140" start="9902" end="9908" title="Barnes, London" label="Barnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4638918" start="10058" end="10091" title="St Paul&amp;#x27;s Girls&amp;#x27; School" label="St Paul&amp;#x27;s Girls&amp;#x27; School"/>
<link wikidata="Q303508" start="10162" end="10173" title="The Planets" label="The Planets"/>
<link wikidata="Q17062312" start="10304" end="10333" title="The Water Gipsies (novel)" label="&amp;quot;The Water Gypsies&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q79759" start="10384" end="10395" title="John Milton" label="John Milton"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018376" start="10416" end="10432" title="William Sheridan (Bishop of Kilmore and Ardagh)" label="William Sheridan"/>
<link wikidata="Q21559589" start="10574" end="10617" title="List of districts in Hammersmith and Fulham" label="List of districts in Hammersmith and Fulham"/>
<link wikidata="Q12404784" start="10846" end="10868" title="John Cunningham Geikie" label="John Cunningham Geikie"/>
<link wikidata="Q22673" start="10881" end="10898" title="Project Gutenberg" label="Project Gutenberg"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="192167" wikidata="Q520405" url="?curid=192167" title="Talsi">
<text>Talsi (; , ) (population 11,371) is a town in the Courland region of Latvia. It is the administrative centre of Talsi Municipality. It is nicknamed the &quot;green pearl of Courland&quot;.

==Etymology==
It is believed that the name is derived from an old Livonian word, &quot;talusse&quot;, meaning &quot;secluded place&quot;.

==History==

===Early history===
A hill fort has existed in Talsi at least since the 10th century, originally inhabited by Curonians. The settlement of Talsi is mentioned in written sources for the first time in 1231 during the Middle Ages, in a contract between the elders of a Curonian tribe and the papal envoy Baldwin von Alna. During the Northern Crusades, the settlement came under German over-lordship and a castle was built in Talsi during the late 13th century. The settlement grew in the 15th century, when traders and artisans from German-speaking lands settled in Talsi. The presently visible main church of the town was inaugurated in 1567; pastor , a close friend of Ludwig van Beethoven, worked in the church for many years. During the reign of Duke Jacob Kettler, an iron smelting furnace was constructed in Talsi, an early industrial development. The town has suffered from the plague twice (1657 and 1710) and was devastated by a large fire in 1733. The town became part of the Russian Empire in 1795 together with the rest of Courland. At that time, Baltic Germans constituted about sixty percent of the population. At the end of the 18th century, Jews were allowed to settle in Talsi for the first time. Most of the Jews who settled in Talsi originally came from Lithuania and would with time come to form a substantial part of the town population. Eventually a synagogue was built in Talsi.

===19th century and World War I===
An elementary school opened in 1863 and a private school in 1873 (the latter was for many years the workplace of linguist Kārlis Mīlenbahs); both schools initially taught only in German. In 1887 a Russian-language school was also opened in Talsi. During the Revolution of 1905, there was unrest in the town and several houses burned down and inhabitants killed. During World War I the town suffered heavily and its population decreased from around 5,000 to about 1,100. The entire Jewish population was expelled by Russian military authorities (but some would later return). Peace was not entirely restored until 1920, with the end of the Latvian War of Independence which made Talsi part of the newly proclaimed Latvian republic.

===In independent Latvia and during the 20th century===
The town grew rapidly again and in 1935 had 4116 inhabitants (82% ethnic Latvians, 12% Jews and 3% Germans). The town was under German occupation from 3 July 1941 right up until the end of World War II on 9 May 1945. The occupying German army used one of the buildings in Talsi as a place where they tortured prisoners; during the Soviet times a bas-relief was put up in commemoration of the victims on the wall of the house. During the Nazi occupation the town&#x27;s entire Jewish population was murdered. The Germans were aided by ethnic Latvian collaborators. A single Jewish woman was hidden by a local farmer but discovered in 1944 and killed.

The 1950s and 60s were a time of relative prosperity. The town had a forceful leader in Kārlis Grīnbergs, chairman of Talsi Executive Committee (as the town now was part of the Latvian Soviet Socialist Republic under Soviet occupation). A metalworking plant was opened in 1965 that would attract many jobs to the town. Following the dissolution of the Soviet Union and the re-establishment of Latvia&#x27;s independence, one of the main monuments of the town, a sculpture called &quot;Koklētājs&quot; and dedicated to the Latvian freedom fighters could finally be inaugurated. It was begun during the 1930s but could not be finished until after the fall of the Soviet Union.

==Geography==
Talsi is characterised by its location by nine hills and two lakes. The hills are called &quot;Pilskalns&quot;, &quot;Ķēniņkalns&quot;, &quot;Leču kalns&quot;, &quot;Tiguļu kalns&quot;, &quot;Sauleskalns&quot;, &quot;Baznīckalns&quot;, &quot;Krievragkalns&quot;, &quot;Vilkmuižas kalns&quot; and &quot;Dzirnavkalns&quot;. &quot;Pilskalns&quot;, meaning &quot;castle hill&quot; is the location of the old hill fort. The hill is high and lies at the centre of the town. An archaeological excavation of the hill fort was carried out here in 1936 – 1938. The highest hill in Talsi is &quot;Tiguļu kalns&quot;. This hill has an arboretum and is the location of Talsi Regional Museum, housed in a manor house originally built for a local aristocrat, Baron von Firck. On&quot;Leču kalns&quot; there is a memorial sculpture in remembrance of the Revolution of 1905, when six revolutionaries where killed here. Talsi lake, in the middle of the town, is surrounded by a promenade and there is a fountain installed in the lake.
==Culture and religion==

As mentioned above, the town hosts a regional museum in the former manor house of Baron von Firck. There is also a cultural centre with a &quot;creative yard&quot; in the middle of the town. The town also has two libraries of which one is a children&#x27;s library. There are churches of the Lutheran, Catholic, Baptist and Seventh-Day Adventist Christian faiths in Talsi. The former synagogue is today a private house. The Lutheran church, built in 1567 but reconstructed several times, is the oldest stone building in Talsi.

==Sport==
Talsi has a municipal school of sport, and hosts an annual rally competition. In addition, there are numerous sports facilities in the town, e.g. skating, ice hockey and association football.

==Transportation and infrastructure==
Talsi is connected to Riga via bus. A journey from Riga to Talsi takes approximately two hours. An airfield was built around outside Talsi during Soviet times. It is used for small planes and occasionally for events.

==Notable people==
*Karl Friedrich Amenda (1777-1836), composer, close friend of Ludwig van Beethoven
*Arved von Schultz (1883–1967), geographer
*Frédéric Fiebig (1885–1953), painter
*Israel Medalyer (1889-1950), grandfather of Robert Rinder
*Vera Zozulya (born 1956), luger
*Anita Liepiņa born 1967), athlete
*Uvis Helmanis (born 1972), basketball player
*Raimonds Tiguls (brons 1972), musician, composer
*Romāns Vainšteins (born 1973), cyclist
*Ilze Indriksone (born 1974), politician
*Intars Busulis (born 1978), singer
*Māris Ziediņš (born 1978), ice hockey player
*Krišjānis Zeļģis (born 1985), poet
*Artūrs Strēlnieks (born 1985), basketball player
*Markus Riva (born 1986), singer
*Jānis Strēlnieks (born 1989), basketball player
*Dzintars Čīča (born 1993), singer

==Events==

A number of events are arranged annually in the town. The International Carl Ferdinand Amenda Music School Competition is a classical music competition arranged by the municipality and open for children aged 7–17 years. There is an annual &quot;Talsi Celebration&quot; every year in July, a market fair at the end of August and designated days of poetry and art. In addition, national holidays such as Independence Day (18 November) and Lāčplēsis Day are observed in the town.

==Twin towns — sister cities==

Talsi is twinned with:

* Alanya, Turkey
* Lejre, Denmark
* Orhei, Moldova
* Prienai, Lithuania
* Saaremaa, Estonia
* Shchyolkovo, Russia
* Söderköping, Sweden
* Telavi, Georgia
==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q520405" start="0" end="5" title="Talsi" label="Talsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3957" start="38" end="42" title="town" label="town"/>
<link wikidata="Q185072" start="50" end="58" title="Courland" label="Courland"/>
<link wikidata="Q211" start="69" end="75" title="Latvia" label="Latvia"/>
<link wikidata="Q97232890" start="112" end="130" title="Talsi Municipality" label="Talsi Municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q185072" start="173" end="181" title="Courland" label="Courland"/>
<link wikidata="Q33698" start="256" end="264" title="Livonian language" label="Livonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q744099" start="364" end="373" title="hill fort" label="hill fort"/>
<link wikidata="Q756922" start="452" end="461" title="Curonians" label="Curonians"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="557" end="568" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q3741310" start="643" end="659" title="Baldwin von Alna" label="Baldwin von Alna"/>
<link wikidata="Q51662" start="672" end="689" title="Northern Crusades" label="Northern Crusades"/>
<link wikidata="Q23413" start="744" end="750" title="castle" label="castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q255" start="1010" end="1030" title="Ludwig van Beethoven" label="Ludwig van Beethoven"/>
<link wikidata="Q156038" start="1089" end="1093" title="Duchy of Courland and Semigallia" label="Duke"/>
<link wikidata="Q313191" start="1094" end="1107" title="Jacob Kettler" label="Jacob Kettler"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748405" start="1117" end="1125" title="smelting" label="smelting"/>
<link wikidata="Q133780" start="1224" end="1230" title="Plague (disease)" label="plague"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="1325" end="1339" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q185072" start="1374" end="1382" title="Courland" label="Courland"/>
<link wikidata="Q157139" start="1398" end="1412" title="Baltic Germans" label="Baltic Germans"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="1496" end="1500" title="Jews" label="Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q5869693" start="1612" end="1621" title="History of the Jews in Lithuania" label="Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q34627" start="1711" end="1720" title="synagogue" label="synagogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q8162" start="1890" end="1898" title="linguist" label="linguist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398031" start="1899" end="1915" title="Kārlis Mīlenbahs" label="Kārlis Mīlenbahs"/>
<link wikidata="Q184928" start="2035" end="2053" title="1905 Russian Revolution" label="Revolution of 1905"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="2146" end="2157" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q543042" start="2416" end="2443" title="Latvian War of Independence" label="Latvian War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="2693" end="2699" title="Nazi Germany" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="2754" end="2766" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q132781" start="2865" end="2872" title="torture" label="torture"/>
<link wikidata="Q245117" start="2911" end="2921" title="bas-relief" label="bas-relief"/>
<link wikidata="Q192180" start="3393" end="3426" title="Latvian Soviet Socialist Republic" label="Latvian Soviet Socialist Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q58473" start="3433" end="3450" title="Occupation of the Baltic states" label="Soviet occupation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5167679" start="3549" end="3580" title="dissolution of the Soviet Union" label="dissolution of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q272231" start="4529" end="4538" title="arboretum" label="arboretum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4562" end="4583" title="Talsi Regional Museum" label="Talsi Regional Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q879050" start="4597" end="4608" title="manor house" label="manor house"/>
<link wikidata="Q2066912" start="4632" end="4648" title="Baltic nobility" label="local aristocrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q7856" start="5546" end="5551" title="Rallying" label="rally"/>
<link wikidata="Q41466" start="5642" end="5652" title="ice hockey" label="ice hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="5657" end="5677" title="association football" label="association football"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773" start="5740" end="5744" title="Riga" label="Riga"/>
<link wikidata="Q62447" start="5817" end="5825" title="airfield" label="airfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q255" start="6017" end="6037" title="Ludwig van Beethoven" label="Ludwig van Beethoven"/>
<link wikidata="Q97318" start="6039" end="6056" title="Arved von Schultz" label="Arved von Schultz"/>
<link wikidata="Q22704125" start="6082" end="6097" title="Frédéric Fiebig" label="Frédéric Fiebig"/>
<link wikidata="Q23721874" start="6164" end="6177" title="Robert Rinder" label="Robert Rinder"/>
<link wikidata="Q323777" start="6179" end="6191" title="Vera Zozulya" label="Vera Zozulya"/>
<link wikidata="Q4765573" start="6212" end="6225" title="Anita Liepiņa" label="Anita Liepiņa"/>
<link wikidata="Q280025" start="6247" end="6260" title="Uvis Helmanis" label="Uvis Helmanis"/>
<link wikidata="Q16350403" start="6293" end="6308" title="Raimonds Tiguls" label="Raimonds Tiguls"/>
<link wikidata="Q461956" start="6343" end="6360" title="Romāns Vainšteins" label="Romāns Vainšteins"/>
<link wikidata="Q58371485" start="6383" end="6398" title="Ilze Indriksone" label="Ilze Indriksone"/>
<link wikidata="Q370816" start="6424" end="6438" title="Intars Busulis" label="Intars Busulis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3334027" start="6460" end="6473" title="Māris Ziediņš" label="Māris Ziediņš"/>
<link wikidata="Q24014800" start="6506" end="6522" title="Krišjānis Zeļģis" label="Krišjānis Zeļģis"/>
<link wikidata="Q15696520" start="6542" end="6559" title="Artūrs Strēlnieks" label="Artūrs Strēlnieks"/>
<link wikidata="Q20564810" start="6592" end="6603" title="Markus Riva" label="Markus Riva"/>
<link wikidata="Q3208805" start="6625" end="6641" title="Jānis Strēlnieks" label="Jānis Strēlnieks"/>
<link wikidata="Q210851" start="6674" end="6687" title="Dzintars Čīča" label="Dzintars Čīča"/>
<link wikidata="Q9730" start="6845" end="6860" title="classical music" label="classical music"/>
<link wikidata="Q4158329" start="7123" end="7139" title="Proclamation Day of the Republic of Latvia" label="Independence Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q16362852" start="7158" end="7171" title="Lāčplēsis Day" label="Lāčplēsis Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q184711" start="7240" end="7247" title="Sister city" label="twinned"/>
<link wikidata="Q171810" start="7257" end="7263" title="Alanya" label="Alanya"/>
<link wikidata="Q505369" start="7274" end="7279" title="Lejre Municipality" label="Lejre"/>
<link wikidata="Q423258" start="7291" end="7296" title="Orhei" label="Orhei"/>
<link wikidata="Q47090" start="7308" end="7315" title="Prienai District Municipality" label="Prienai"/>
<link wikidata="Q31273165" start="7329" end="7337" title="Saaremaa Municipality" label="Saaremaa"/>
<link wikidata="Q198369" start="7349" end="7360" title="Shchyolkovo" label="Shchyolkovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q515680" start="7371" end="7382" title="Söderköping Municipality" label="Söderköping"/>
<link wikidata="Q209009" start="7393" end="7399" title="Telavi" label="Telavi"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="192174" wikidata="Q211490" url="?curid=192174" title="Eurovision Song Contest 1973">
<text>The Eurovision Song Contest 1973 was the 18th edition of the annual Eurovision Song Contest. It took place in Luxembourg City, Luxembourg, following the country&#x27;s victory at the with the song &quot;Après toi&quot; by Vicky Leandros. Organised by the European Broadcasting Union (EBU) and host broadcaster (CLT), the contest was held at the on 7 April 1973 and was hosted by German television presenter Helga Guitton.

Seventeen countries took part in the contest this year, with and deciding not to participate, and competing for the first time.

In a back-to-back victory, won the contest again with the song &quot;&quot; by Anne-Marie David. The voting was a very close one, with with &quot;Eres tú&quot; by Mocedades finishing only 4 points behind and the with &quot;Power to All Our Friends&quot; by Cliff Richard (who had come second in just behind Spain) another 2 points further back. The winning song scored the highest score ever achieved in Eurovision under any voting format until 1975, recording 129 points out of a possible 160, which represented almost 81% of the possible maximum. This was partly due to a scoring system which guaranteed all countries at least two points from each country.

== Location ==

Luxembourg City is a commune with city status, and the capital of the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg. It is located at the confluence of the Alzette and Pétrusse Rivers in southern Luxembourg. The city contains the historic Luxembourg Castle, established by the Franks in the Early Middle Ages, around which a settlement developed.

The , inaugurated in 1964 as the , became the venue for the 1973 contest. It is the city&#x27;s major venue for drama, opera and ballet.

== Participating countries ==

Seventeen nations took part in this year&#x27;s contest. participated for the first time, while and decided against participating. Malta had originally being drawn to perform in sixth position between Norway and Monaco, however the Maltese broadcaster withdrew before the deadline to select an entry.

Several of the performing artists had previously competed as lead artists representing the same country in past editions: Marion Rung had represented , Cliff Richard had represented the , and Massimo Ranieri had represented .

The language rule forcing countries to enter songs sung in any of their national languages was dropped this year, so performers from some countries sang in English.

== Contest overview ==

In light of the events that had happened during the 1972 Summer Olympics in Munich, there were fears of a terrorist threat, particularly directed against Israel&#x27;s first-ever entrant, leading to unusually tight security for the contest. This gave rise to one of the best-known Eurovision anecdotes, frequently recounted by the BBC&#x27;s long-serving commentator Terry Wogan. He recalled that the floor manager strongly advised the audience to remain seated while applauding the performances, otherwise they risked being shot by security forces.

This contest holds the record for the most watched Eurovision Song Contest in the United Kingdom, and is also the 18th most watched television show there, with an estimated 21.54 million tuning in on the evening. The song &quot;Power to All Our Friends&quot; performed by Cliff Richard represented the , finising 3rd with 123 points. The winner though was &quot;&quot; performed by Anne-Marie David.

== Detailed voting results ==

Each participating broadcaster appointed two jury members, one aged between 16 and 25 and one aged between 26 and 55, with at least 10 years between their ages. They each awarded 1 to 5 points for each song (other than the song from their own country) immediately after it was performed and the votes were collected and counted as soon as they were cast. All jury members were located at Villa Louvigny CLT studios, watched the show on television from there, and appeared on screen to confirm their scores after all songs were performed.
=== 10 points ===
Below is a summary of all perfect 10 scores that were given during the voting.

== Broadcasts ==

Each participating broadcaster was required to relay the contest via its networks. Non-participating EBU member broadcasters were also able to relay the contest as &quot;passive participants&quot;. Broadcasters were able to send commentators to provide coverage of the contest in their own native language and to relay information about the artists and songs to their television viewers.

In addition to the participating countries, the contest was also reportedly broadcast in Algeria, Austria, Greece, Iceland, Malta, Morocco, Tunisia, and Turkey; in Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, East Germany, Hungary, Poland, Romania, and the Soviet Union via Intervision; and the Middle Eastern countries and Japan, with an estimated global audience of 400 million. The contest was reportedly broadcast via radio in countries including Ireland, Japan, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, and the United Kingdom. Known details on the broadcasts in each country, including the specific broadcasting stations and commentators are shown in the tables below.

== Notes==
== References ==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q211490" start="4" end="32" title="Eurovision Song Contest 1973" label="Eurovision Song Contest 1973"/>
<link wikidata="Q276" start="68" end="91" title="Eurovision Song Contest" label="Eurovision Song Contest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1842" start="110" end="125" title="Luxembourg City" label="Luxembourg City"/>
<link wikidata="Q774177" start="203" end="212" title="Après toi" label="Après toi"/>
<link wikidata="Q160772" start="222" end="236" title="Vicky Leandros" label="Vicky Leandros"/>
<link wikidata="Q166400" start="255" end="282" title="European Broadcasting Union" label="European Broadcasting Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q97362" start="407" end="420" title="Helga Guitton" label="Helga Guitton"/>
<link wikidata="Q232884" start="631" end="647" title="Anne-Marie David" label="Anne-Marie David"/>
<link wikidata="Q853079" start="698" end="705" title="Eres tú" label="Eres tú"/>
<link wikidata="Q497682" start="715" end="724" title="Mocedades" label="Mocedades"/>
<link wikidata="Q7236638" start="775" end="799" title="Power to All Our Friends" label="Power to All Our Friends"/>
<link wikidata="Q82238" start="809" end="822" title="Cliff Richard" label="Cliff Richard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1842" start="1228" end="1243" title="Luxembourg City" label="Luxembourg City"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919801" start="1249" end="1256" title="Communes of Luxembourg" label="commune"/>
<link wikidata="Q211142" start="1262" end="1273" title="List of cities in Luxembourg" label="city status"/>
<link wikidata="Q5119" start="1283" end="1290" title="Capital (political)" label="capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q32" start="1298" end="1323" title="Luxembourg" label="Grand Duchy of Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q723748" start="1346" end="1356" title="confluence" label="confluence"/>
<link wikidata="Q450722" start="1364" end="1371" title="Alzette" label="Alzette"/>
<link wikidata="Q950660" start="1376" end="1384" title="Pétrusse" label="Pétrusse"/>
<link wikidata="Q278386" start="1447" end="1464" title="Fortress of Luxembourg" label="Luxembourg Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q43482" start="1485" end="1491" title="Franks" label="Franks"/>
<link wikidata="Q202763" start="1499" end="1516" title="Early Middle Ages" label="Early Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q243057" start="2149" end="2160" title="Marion Rung" label="Marion Rung"/>
<link wikidata="Q82238" start="2179" end="2192" title="Cliff Richard" label="Cliff Richard"/>
<link wikidata="Q467069" start="2219" end="2234" title="Massimo Ranieri" label="Massimo Ranieri"/>
<link wikidata="Q229007" start="2447" end="2466" title="Munich massacre" label="light of the events"/>
<link wikidata="Q8438" start="2496" end="2516" title="1972 Summer Olympics" label="1972 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q734264" start="2811" end="2822" title="Terry Wogan" label="Terry Wogan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3114" end="3142" title="List of most watched television broadcasts in the United Kingdom#Most watched programmes" label="most watched television show"/>
<link wikidata="Q7236638" start="3223" end="3247" title="Power to All Our Friends" label="Power to All Our Friends"/>
<link wikidata="Q82238" start="3267" end="3280" title="Cliff Richard" label="Cliff Richard"/>
<link wikidata="Q232884" start="3377" end="3393" title="Anne-Marie David" label="Anne-Marie David"/>
<link wikidata="Q1308887" start="3815" end="3829" title="Villa Louvigny" label="Villa Louvigny"/>
<link wikidata="Q686577" start="4725" end="4736" title="International Radio and Television Organisation" label="Intervision"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="192176" wikidata="Q736998" url="?curid=192176" title="Shura">
<text>Shura () is the term for collective decision-making in Islam. It can, for example, take the form of a council or a referendum. The Quran encourages Muslims to decide their affairs in consultation with each other. 

Shura is mentioned as a praiseworthy activity often used in organizing the affairs of a mosque, Islamic organizations, and is a common term involved in naming parliaments. In the 21st century, some emerging scholars are now advocating the infusion of Shura with digital technology as a means to enhance participatory governance or E-Governance among Muslims for state- and community-building purposes.

==Shura in Islam==
Sunni Muslims believe that Islam requires decisions made by the Muslim societies to be made by shura of the Muslim community. Traditionally however, the amir, sultan or caliph would consult with his wazirs (ministers) and make a decision, after taking into consideration their opinions.

Shia Muslims say that Islam requires submission to existing rulers if they are correctly appointed, so long as they govern according to Sharia or Islamic law. This is a more traditional approach, characteristic of many centuries of Islamic history.

The difference between the two appears more semantic than actual—the latter accept that the rulers must be accounted in all aspects of ruling, to ensure affairs are managed in the best possible way whether decisions were taken through consultation or not.

===Shura in the Qur&#x27;an===
* The first mention of Shura in the Qur&#x27;an comes in the 2nd Sura of Qur&#x27;an 2:233 in the matter of the collective family decision regarding weaning the child from mother&#x27;s milk. This verse encourages that both parents decide by their mutual consultation about weaning their child.
* The 42nd Sura of the Qur&#x27;an is named “Shura”. The 38th verse of that Sura declares shura to be the praiseworthy lifestyle of a successful believer. It states that Muslims should decide on their matters by consulting with each other. 
&quot;Those who hearken to their Lord, and establish regular Prayer; who (conduct) their affairs by mutual consultation among themselves; who spend out of what We bestow on them for Sustenance&quot; [are praised] (Q.42:38) 

* The 159th verse of 3rd Sura advises Muhammad to consult with believers regarding a matter. 
 Thus it is due to mercy from God that you deal with them gently, and had you been rough, hard hearted, they would certainly have dispersed from around you; pardon them therefore and ask pardon for them, and take counsel with them in the affair; so when you have decided, then place your trust in God; surely God loves those who trust. (Q.3:159) 
The first verse only deals with family matters. The second proposed a lifestyle of people who will enter heavens and is considered the most comprehensive verse on shura.

Muhammad made some of his decisions in consultation with his followers unless it was a matter in which he said Allah had ordained something. It was common among Muhammad&#x27;s companions to ask him if a certain advice was from God or from him. If it was from Muhammad, they felt free to give their opinion. Some times Muhammad changed his opinion on the advice of his followers like his decision to defend the city of Madinah by going out of the city in Uhad instead of from within the city.

Arguments over shura began with the debate over the ruler in the Islamic world. When Muhammad died in 632 CE, a tumultuous meeting at Saqifah selected Abu Bakr as his successor. This meeting did not include some of those with a strong interest in the matter—especially Ali ibn Abi Talib, Muhammad&#x27;s cousin and son-in-law; people who wanted Ali to be the caliph (ruler) (later known as Shia ) still consider Abu Bakr an illegitimate leader of the caliphate.

In later years, the followers of Ali (Shi&#x27;atu Ali) as the ruler of Muslims became one school of thought, while the followers of Abu Bakr became the Sunni school of thought.

The Sunni school of thought believe that shura is recommended in the Qur&#x27;an (though some classical jurists maintained it is obligatory), The Qur&#x27;an, and by numerous hadith, or oral traditions of the sayings and doings of Muhammad and his companions. They say that the first four caliphs, or rulers of Islam, whom they call the Four Rightly-guided Caliphs, were chosen by shura. (See Succession to Muhammad, Umar ibn al-Khattab, The election of Uthman, and Ali Ibn Abi Talib.)

The Shi&#x27;a school of thought believe that Muhammad had clearly indicated that Ali was his appointed infallible ruler of Muslim nation regardless of shura, a recommendation that was ignored by the first three caliphs. Shi&#x27;a do not stress the role of shura in choosing leaders, but believe that the divine vice-regent is chosen by God, or Allah, from the lineage of Muhammad (Ahl al-Bayt). The largest Shi&#x27;a sect believes that the current imam is in &quot;occultation&quot;, hidden away until the last days, but there are minority Shi&#x27;a who follow leaders believed to be infallible imams.

===Shura and the caliphate===
During and after Ali&#x27;s tenure as caliph, the Muslim community fell into civil war. Power was eventually grasped by the Umayyad caliphs and then by the Abbasid caliphs. There were also rival caliphates in Egypt and Al-Andalus (today&#x27;s Spain and Portugal), and in the Indian subcontinent. The Ottoman Caliphate was officially dissolved by the newly founded Grand National Assembly of Turkey in 1924.

Few of the later caliphs had anything but nominal control over the many Islamic states, and none were chosen by shura; all reached power by inheritance. 

===Dispute over importance===
The Muslim clergy counseled submission to rulers but also stressed the duty of the ruler to rule by shura. They based this recommendation on the passages from the Qur&#x27;an mentioned above. 

Author Jebran Chamieh notes that while some Muslims consider Shurah a &quot;pillar&quot; of Islam, a number of factors indicate it may not be. 
* The two Quranic verses mention shura only briefly, 
* and while the verses indicate that shura is praiseworthy they do not indicate who should be consulted, what they should be consulted about, or whether the ruler or the shura should prevail in the event the two do not agree.
* There are few or no mentions of shura in Hadith, the usual place to expand on brief mentions in the Quran if those have any importance.
* Some Muslims argue Muhammad sought the advice of the Companions occasionally, but he &quot;never felt the advice was binding on him&quot;, nor did he follow the &quot;pre-islamic practice of holding regular meetings in the assemblies of Mecca and Medina&quot;.
* Contrary to the insistance of some Muslim authors, Muhammad&#x27;s successors, the Rashidun Caliphs, did not seek consultation on decisions in ruling or in the picking of the next Caliph.

==Shura and contemporary Muslim-majority states==

In some Muslim nations, shuras play a role in the constitution or governance. Some Muslim nations, such as Turkey, are secular republics, and Morocco is a constitutional monarchy. They could thus be said to be ruled by one version of shura. For instance, the bicameral Parliament of Pakistan is officially called the Majlis-i-Shura, although the Constitution uses various spellings of the term. In Egypt, the Upper House of Parliament was known as the Shura Council. The People&#x27;s Consultative Assembly in Indonesia is called &quot;Majlis Permusyawaratan Rakyat&quot; in Indonesian language. The word &quot;musyawarat&quot; is derived from shura/syawara.

In some monarchies and clerical regimes, there is a shura with an advisory or consultative role. Saudi Arabia, a monarchy, was given a shura council, the Consultative Assembly of Saudi Arabia, in 1993; there are now 150 members. All real power is held by the King, who is elected by family members. Oman, also a monarchy, has a shura council; all members are elected except the president, who is appointed by the sultan. The council can only offer advice, which may be refused by the sultan.

In Iran, a council called the assembly of experts has the ability to impeach the supreme leader. In addition to that, a general shura wields legislative powers, equivalent to a modern-day Western parliament.

Shuras have also been a feature of revolutions in Islamic societies, such as in the Iranian revolution of 1979, where they were formed by workers and held considerable power over parts of the economy for a year before being dismantled. Shuras were similarly a feature of the uprisings in Iraq in 1991, where they functioned as a form of participatory democracy.

===Resemblance between majlis al-shura and a parliament===

Many traditional Sunni Islamic lawyers agree that to be in keeping with Islam, a government should have some form of council of consultation or &quot;majlis al-shura&quot;, although it must recognize that God and not the people are sovereign. Al-Mawardi has written that members of the majlis should satisfy three conditions: they must be just, have enough knowledge to distinguish a good caliph from a bad one, and have sufficient wisdom and judgment to select the best caliph. Al-Mawardi also said that in emergencies when there is no caliphate and no majlis, the people themselves should create a majlis, select a list of candidates for caliph, and then the majlis should select a caliph from the list of candidates.

Many contemporary Muslims have compared the concept of Shura to the principles of western parliamentary democracy. For example: 
What is the shura principle in Islam? ... It is predicated on three basic precepts. First, that all persons in any given society are equal in human and civil rights. Second, that public issues are best decided by majority view. And third, that the three other principles of justice, equality and human dignity, which constitute Islam&#x27;s moral core, ... are best realized, in personal as well as public life, under shura governance.

Other modern Muslim thinkers distance themselves from democracy. Taqiuddin al-Nabhani, the founder of the modern transnational Islamist party Hizb ut-Tahrir, writes that shura is important and part of &quot;the ruling structure&quot; of the Islamic caliphate, &quot;but not one of its pillars.&quot; If the caliph &quot;neglects it,&quot; by not paying much or any attention, as happened after the first four caliphs, &quot;he would be negligent, but the ruling system would remain Islamic.&quot;

This is because the shura (consultation) in Islam is for seeking the opinion and not for ruling. This is contrary to the parliamentary system in democracy.
The democratic parliamentary system being distinct from and inferior to the true Islamic caliphate system according to Taqiuddin an-Nabhani.

Under the Hizb ut-Tahrir constitution, non-Muslims may not serve a caliph or any other ruling official, nor vote for these officials, but may be part of the majlis and voice &quot;complaints in respect to unjust acts performed by the rulers or the misapplication of Islam upon them.&quot;

Still others, such as the Muslim author Sayyid Qutb, go further, arguing that an Islamic shura should advise the caliph but not elect or supervise him. In an analysis of the shura chapter of the Qur&#x27;an, Qutb noted that Islam requires only that the ruler consult with at least some of the ruled (usually the elite), within the general context of God-made laws that the ruler must execute. In 1950 Qutb denounced democracy in favor of dictatorship, saying it was already bankrupt in the West and asking why it should be imported to the Middle East.

The practice of a consultative, but not bill-passing, caliph-electing or popularly elected shura, was adopted by the self-described strict Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan. While the Kandahar Shura of the Taliban debated issues, in the end its spokesman declared, &quot;we abide by the Amir&#x27;s view even if he alone takes this view.&quot;

==Soviet etymology==
In Persian language and Dari in Afghanistan, the term , &quot;shuravi&quot; is used for &#x27;Soviet&#x27; (the etymology being related to &quot;council&quot;). In Tajik language it is written .

==See also==
*Islamic democracy

==References==
==External links==
*Liberal Democracy and Political Islam: The Search for Common Ground
*Ijtihad.org
*Alhewar.com
*Shura.org
*Shura. Mutual Consultation by Adam Hani Walker, UK</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q736998" start="0" end="5" title="Shura" label="Shura"/>
<link wikidata="Q428" start="131" end="136" title="Quran" label="Quran"/>
<link wikidata="Q32815" start="303" end="309" title="mosque" label="mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q483654" start="637" end="650" title="Sunni Muslims" label="Sunni Muslims"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="664" end="669" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q166382" start="790" end="794" title="amir" label="amir"/>
<link wikidata="Q43292" start="796" end="802" title="sultan" label="sultan"/>
<link wikidata="Q131401" start="806" end="812" title="caliph" label="caliph"/>
<link wikidata="Q175240" start="836" end="842" title="Vizier" label="wazirs"/>
<link wikidata="Q9585" start="925" end="937" title="Shia Muslims" label="Shia Muslims"/>
<link wikidata="Q482752" start="1061" end="1067" title="Sharia" label="Sharia"/>
<link wikidata="Q642379" start="1157" end="1172" title="Islamic history" label="Islamic history"/>
<link wikidata="Q234262" start="1528" end="1532" title="Sura" label="Sura"/>
<link wikidata="Q428" start="1536" end="1547" title="Qur&amp;#x27;an" label="Qur&amp;#x27;an"/>
<link wikidata="Q230466" start="1760" end="1773" title="Ash-Shura" label="The 42nd Sura"/>
<link wikidata="Q428" start="1781" end="1792" title="Qur&amp;#x27;an" label="Qur&amp;#x27;an"/>
<link wikidata="Q4164559" start="3464" end="3471" title="Saqifah" label="Saqifah"/>
<link wikidata="Q334923" start="3481" end="3489" title="Abu Bakr" label="Abu Bakr"/>
<link wikidata="Q39619" start="3599" end="3616" title="Ali ibn Abi Talib" label="Ali ibn Abi Talib"/>
<link wikidata="Q9585" start="3720" end="3724" title="Shia" label="Shia"/>
<link wikidata="Q188711" start="4220" end="4230" title="sahaba" label="companions"/>
<link wikidata="Q12490507" start="4261" end="4267" title="Rashidun Caliphate" label="caliph"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115056" start="4365" end="4387" title="Succession to Muhammad" label="Succession to Muhammad"/>
<link wikidata="Q8467" start="4389" end="4408" title="Umar ibn al-Khattab" label="Umar ibn al-Khattab"/>
<link wikidata="Q7776990" start="4410" end="4432" title="The election of Uthman" label="The election of Uthman"/>
<link wikidata="Q39619" start="4438" end="4455" title="Ali Ibn Abi Talib" label="Ali Ibn Abi Talib"/>
<link wikidata="Q385139" start="4842" end="4853" title="Ahl al-Bayt" label="Ahl al-Bayt"/>
<link wikidata="Q8575586" start="5220" end="5227" title="Umayyad" label="Umayyad"/>
<link wikidata="Q12536" start="5252" end="5259" title="Abbasid" label="Abbasid"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="5305" end="5310" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q123559" start="5315" end="5325" title="Al-Andalus" label="Al-Andalus"/>
<link wikidata="Q60140" start="5372" end="5391" title="Indian subcontinent" label="Indian subcontinent"/>
<link wikidata="Q2034358" start="5397" end="5414" title="Ottoman Caliphate" label="Ottoman Caliphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q188711" start="6501" end="6511" title="Companions of the Prophet" label="Companions"/>
<link wikidata="Q180465" start="6794" end="6810" title="Rashidun Caliphs" label="Rashidun Caliphs"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="7058" end="7064" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028" start="7093" end="7100" title="Morocco" label="Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q2665089" start="7220" end="7242" title="Parliament of Pakistan" label="Parliament of Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2665089" start="7268" end="7282" title="Majlis-i-Shoora" label="Majlis-i-Shura"/>
<link wikidata="Q2518540" start="7297" end="7309" title="Constitution of Pakistan" label="Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="7349" end="7354" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q637846" start="7360" end="7371" title="Upper House" label="Upper House"/>
<link wikidata="Q35749" start="7375" end="7385" title="Parliament" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q124819854" start="7403" end="7416" title="Shura Council" label="Shura Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q818711" start="7422" end="7457" title="People&amp;#x27;s Consultative Assembly" label="People&amp;#x27;s Consultative Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="7461" end="7470" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q9240" start="7526" end="7545" title="Indonesian language" label="Indonesian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q851" start="7708" end="7720" title="Saudi Arabia" label="Saudi Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q818708" start="7765" end="7802" title="Consultative Assembly of Saudi Arabia" label="Consultative Assembly of Saudi Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q842" start="7910" end="7914" title="Oman" label="Oman"/>
<link wikidata="Q28478447" start="8024" end="8030" title="Sultan of Oman" label="sultan"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="8107" end="8111" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q917663" start="8134" end="8153" title="assembly of experts" label="assembly of experts"/>
<link wikidata="Q10931" start="8348" end="8358" title="revolution" label="revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q126065" start="8397" end="8415" title="Iranian revolution" label="Iranian revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="8601" end="8605" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q310988" start="8650" end="8673" title="participatory democracy" label="participatory democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q483654" start="8753" end="8758" title="Sunni" label="Sunni"/>
<link wikidata="Q189459" start="8759" end="8773" title="Islamic lawyer" label="Islamic lawyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q124819854" start="8886" end="8901" title="Majlis al-Shura" label="majlis al-shura"/>
<link wikidata="Q335635" start="8979" end="8989" title="Al-Mawardi" label="Al-Mawardi"/>
<link wikidata="Q283908" start="10088" end="10108" title="Taqiuddin al-Nabhani" label="Taqiuddin al-Nabhani"/>
<link wikidata="Q493302" start="10165" end="10179" title="Hizb ut-Tahrir" label="Hizb ut-Tahrir"/>
<link wikidata="Q493302" start="10829" end="10843" title="Hizb ut-Tahrir" label="Hizb ut-Tahrir"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="11135" end="11141" title="Muslim" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q211379" start="11149" end="11160" title="Sayyid Qutb" label="Sayyid Qutb"/>
<link wikidata="Q428" start="11304" end="11315" title="Qur&amp;#x27;an" label="Qur&amp;#x27;an"/>
<link wikidata="Q317" start="11547" end="11559" title="dictatorship" label="dictatorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="11801" end="11831" title="Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan" label="Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q42418" start="11865" end="11872" title="Taliban" label="Taliban"/>
<link wikidata="Q9168" start="12028" end="12044" title="Persian language" label="Persian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q4527926" start="12087" end="12094" title="shuravi" label="shuravi"/>
<link wikidata="Q627093" start="12119" end="12125" title="Workers&amp;#x27; council" label="Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q9260" start="12189" end="12203" title="Tajik language" label="Tajik language"/>
<link wikidata="Q2641411" start="12235" end="12252" title="Islamic democracy" label="Islamic democracy"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="192180" wikidata="Q211942" url="?curid=192180" title="Eurovision Song Contest 1972">
<text>The Eurovision Song Contest 1972 was the 17th edition of the annual Eurovision Song Contest. It took place in Edinburgh, Scotland, United Kingdom and was organised by the European Broadcasting Union (EBU) and host broadcaster British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC), who agreed to stage the event after the Monégasque broadcaster Télé Monte Carlo (TMC), who won in , was unable to meet the demands of hosting the event and could not find a suitable venue. The contest was held at the Usher Hall on 25 March 1972 and was hosted by Scottish ballet dancer Moira Shearer. Eighteen countries took part in the contest, the same number as the previous year.

This contest marked the first time that the event was hosted in Scotland. Prior to 1972, when the BBC hosted the contest in , , and , it had always chosen a venue in London. However, for the Eurovision Song Contest 1972, the BBC broke this trend and chose to host the competition in the Scottish capital, marking the first time that London had not been chosen. The 1972 contest also marked the first time that the event was broadcast live in Asia, with viewers in Japan, Taiwan, the Philippines, Hong Kong, and Thailand able to watch the show on television for the first time. The 1972 contest also marked the first time that a video wall was used to present song titles and artists prior to their performance.

The winner was with the song &quot;, performed by Vicky Leandros, with lyrics by Yves Dessca, and music composed by Mario Panas (which was the writing pseudonym of Vicky&#x27;s father Leo Leandros). &quot; became the winner with the lowest percentage of the total vote, winning with just 8.30% of the points available. Yves Dessca also wrote &quot;&quot; that had won the previous edition, and became the second person to win the contest twice, the first person to win for two different countries and the first person to win two years in a row. finished in third place for the third consecutive year, equalling their highest placement from the previous two editions.

== Location ==

Following &#x27;s win at the in Dublin, with the song &quot;&quot; performed by Séverine, the winning broadcaster Télé Monte Carlo (TMC) planned to organise the 1972 contest as an open-air event, setting the date in June rather than early spring. However, due to a lack of funding, TMC sought help from the French public broadcaster, (ORTF), which accepted to organise the contest. Because TMC wanted the contest to be held in Monaco while ORTF wanted it in France, negotiations never came through. In July 1971, TMC informed the European Broadcasting Union (EBU) that it was unable to organise the 1972 contest. The EBU asked &#x27;s Televisión Española (TVE) and &#x27;s ARD, which respectively finished second and third at the 1971 contest, but both broadcasters declined to host the 1972 contest.

The event was eventually organised by the British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC) in Edinburgh, making it the first of five times that the BBC had chosen a venue outside London with the , , , and contests held in Brighton, Harrogate, Birmingham, and Liverpool respectively. It is also the only time that the contest has been held in Scotland. It is the only Eurovision Song Contest hosted in the United Kingdom to have been held outside England.

The Usher Hall, the venue for the 1972 contest, is a concert hall, situated on Lothian Road, in the west end of the city. It has hosted concerts and events since its construction in 1914 and can hold approximately 2,900 people in its recently restored auditorium, which is well loved by performers due to its acoustics. The Hall is flanked by The Royal Lyceum Theatre on the right and The Traverse Theatre on the left. Historic Scotland has registered the Hall with Category A listed building status.

== Participating countries ==

The same countries that participated in the 1971 contest were present this year.

Several of the performing artists had previously competed as lead artists representing the same country in past editions: Vicky Leandros had represented , Carlos Mendes had represented , and Family Four had represented . In addition, Tereza Kesovija representing Yugoslavia, had represented .

== Contest overview ==

== Detailed voting results ==

Each participating broadcaster appointed two jury members, one aged between 16 and 25 and one aged between 26 and 55, with at least 10 years between their ages. They each awarded 1 to 5 points for each song, other than the song of their own country. They cast their votes immediately after each song was performed and the votes were then collected and counted. For the public voting sequence after the interval act, the jury members were shown on the stage&#x27;s screen with each lifting a signboard with the number between 1 and 5 for each song, as a visual verification of the scores they had awarded earlier.

=== 10 points ===
Below is a summary of all perfect 10 scores that were given during the voting.

== Broadcasts ==

Each participating broadcaster was required to relay the contest via its networks. Non-participating EBU member broadcasters were also able to relay the contest as &quot;passive participants&quot;. Broadcasters were able to send commentators to provide coverage of the contest in their own native language and to relay information about the artists and songs to their television viewers.

In addition to the participating countries, the contest was also reportedly broadcast in Iceland, Israel, Morocco, and Tunisia; in Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Poland, and Romania via Intervision; and Brazil, Hong Kong, Japan, the Philippines, Taiwan, Thailand, and Zaire. With an estimated global audience of 400 million viewers. Known details on the broadcasts in each country, including the specific broadcasting stations and commentators are shown in the tables below.

== Notes==
== References ==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q211942" start="4" end="32" title="Eurovision Song Contest 1972" label="Eurovision Song Contest 1972"/>
<link wikidata="Q276" start="68" end="91" title="Eurovision Song Contest" label="Eurovision Song Contest"/>
<link wikidata="Q23436" start="110" end="119" title="Edinburgh" label="Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q166400" start="171" end="198" title="European Broadcasting Union" label="European Broadcasting Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="226" end="258" title="British Broadcasting Corporation" label="British Broadcasting Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q971163" start="329" end="345" title="Télé Monte Carlo" label="Télé Monte Carlo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636910" start="483" end="493" title="Usher Hall" label="Usher Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q266166" start="552" end="565" title="Moira Shearer" label="Moira Shearer"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="715" end="723" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q160772" start="1413" end="1427" title="Vicky Leandros" label="Vicky Leandros"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761" start="2079" end="2085" title="Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q232963" start="2127" end="2135" title="Séverine (singer)" label="Séverine"/>
<link wikidata="Q971163" start="2161" end="2177" title="Télé Monte Carlo" label="Télé Monte Carlo"/>
<link wikidata="Q166400" start="2577" end="2604" title="European Broadcasting Union" label="European Broadcasting Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q544560" start="2682" end="2701" title="Televisión Española" label="Televisión Española"/>
<link wikidata="Q49653" start="2720" end="2723" title="ARD (broadcaster)" label="ARD"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="2891" end="2923" title="British Broadcasting Corporation" label="British Broadcasting Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q23436" start="2933" end="2942" title="Edinburgh" label="Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q131491" start="3061" end="3069" title="Brighton" label="Brighton"/>
<link wikidata="Q215829" start="3071" end="3080" title="Harrogate" label="Harrogate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2256" start="3082" end="3092" title="Birmingham" label="Birmingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q24826" start="3098" end="3107" title="Liverpool" label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="3181" end="3189" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636910" start="3299" end="3309" title="Usher Hall" label="Usher Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q11302994" start="3348" end="3360" title="concert hall" label="concert hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374418" start="3642" end="3662" title="Royal Lyceum Theatre" label="Royal Lyceum Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7836167" start="3684" end="3700" title="Traverse Theatre" label="Traverse Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q111854" start="3714" end="3731" title="Historic Scotland" label="Historic Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q209429" start="3872" end="3884" title="Eurovision Song Contest 1971" label="1971 contest"/>
<link wikidata="Q160772" start="4032" end="4046" title="Vicky Leandros" label="Vicky Leandros"/>
<link wikidata="Q277180" start="4065" end="4078" title="Carlos Mendes (singer)" label="Carlos Mendes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395403" start="4101" end="4112" title="Family Four" label="Family Four"/>
<link wikidata="Q239256" start="4144" end="4159" title="Tereza Kesovija" label="Tereza Kesovija"/>
<link wikidata="Q686577" start="5568" end="5579" title="International Radio and Television Organisation" label="Intervision"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="192181" wikidata="Q948229" url="?curid=192181" title="USS Oklahoma (BB-37)">
<text>USS &quot;Oklahoma&quot; (BB-37) was a built by the New York Shipbuilding Corporation for the United States Navy, notable for being the first American class of oil-burning dreadnoughts. Commissioned in 1916, the ship served in World War I as a part of Battleship Division Six, protecting Allied convoys on their way across the Atlantic. After the war, she served in both the United States Battle Fleet and Scouting Fleet. &quot;Oklahoma&quot; was modernized between 1927 and 1929. In 1936, she rescued American citizens and refugees from the Spanish Civil War. On returning to the West Coast in August of the same year, &quot;Oklahoma&quot; spent the rest of her service in the Pacific.

On 7 December 1941, during the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor, several torpedoes from torpedo bombers hit the &quot;Oklahoma&quot;″s hull and the ship capsized. A total of 429 crew died; survivors jumped off the ship into burning oil on water or crawled across mooring lines that connected &quot;Oklahoma&quot; and . Some sailors inside escaped when rescuers drilled holes and opened hatches to rescue them. The ship was salvaged in 1943. Unlike most of the other battleships that were recovered following Pearl Harbor, &quot;Oklahoma&quot; was too damaged to return to duty. Her wreck was eventually stripped of her remaining armament and superstructure before being sold for scrap in 1946. The hulk sank in a storm while being towed from Oahu, Hawaii, to a breakers yard in San Francisco Bay in 1947.

==Design==


&quot;Oklahoma&quot; was the second of the two s which were ordered in a naval appropriation act on 4 March 1911. She was the latest in a series of 22 battleships and seven armored cruisers ordered by the United States Navy between 1900 and 1911. The &quot;Nevada&quot;-class ships were the first of the US Navy&#x27;s Standard-type battleships, of which 12 were completed by 1923. With these ships, the Navy created a fleet of modern battleships similar in long-range gunnery, speed, turning radius, and protection. Significant improvements, however, were made in the Standard-type ships as naval technology progressed. The main innovations were triple turrets and all-or-nothing protection. The triple turrets reduced the length of the ship that needed protection by placing 10 guns in four turrets instead of five, thus allowing thicker armor. The &quot;Nevada&quot;-class ships were also the first US battleships with oil-fired instead of coal-fired boilers, oil having more recoverable energy per ton than coal, thus increasing the ships&#x27; range. &quot;Oklahoma&quot; differed from her sister in being fitted with triple-expansion steam engines, a much older technology than &quot;Nevada&quot;″s new geared steam turbines.

As constructed, she had a standard displacement of and a full-load displacement of . She was in length overall, at the waterline, and had a beam of and a draft of .

The ship was powered by 12 oil-fired Babcock &amp; Wilcox boilers driving two dual-acting, vertical triple-expansion steam engines, which provided for a maximum speed of . She had a designed range of at .

As built, the armor on &quot;Oklahoma&quot; consisted of belt armor from thick. Deck armor was thick with a second deck, and turret armor was or on the face, on the top, on the sides, and on the rear. Armor on her barbettes was 13.5 inches. Her conning tower was protected by 16 inches of armor, with 8 inches of armor on its roof.

Her armament consisted of ten /45 caliber guns, arranged in two triple and two twin mounts. As built, she also carried 21 /51 caliber guns, primarily for defense against destroyers and torpedo boats. She also had two (some references say four) torpedo tubes for the Bliss-Leavitt Mark 3 torpedo. Her crew consisted of 864 officers and enlisted men.

==Service history==
===Construction===
&quot;Oklahoma&quot;″s keel was laid down on 26 October 1912, by the New York Shipbuilding Corporation of Camden, New Jersey, which bid $5,926,000 to construct the ship. By 12 December 1912, she was 11.2% complete, and by 13 July 1913, she was at 33%.

She was launched on 23 March 1914, sponsored by Lorena J. Cruce, daughter of Oklahoma Governor Lee Cruce. The launch was preceded by an invocation, the first for an American warship in half a century, given by Elijah Embree Hoss, and was attended by various dignitaries from Oklahoma and the federal government. She was subsequently moved to a dock near the new Argentine battleship and Chinese cruiser &quot;Fei Hung&quot;, soon to be the Greek , for fitting-out.
On the night of 19 July 1915, large fires were discovered underneath the fore main battery turret, the third to flare up on an American battleship in less than a month. However, by 22 July, the Navy believed that the &quot;Oklahoma&quot; fire had been caused by &quot;defective insulation&quot; or a mistake made by a dockyard worker. The fire delayed the battleship&#x27;s completion so much that &quot;Nevada&quot; was able to conduct her sea trials and be commissioned before &quot;Oklahoma&quot;. On 23 October 1915, she was 98.1 percent complete. She was commissioned at Philadelphia, on 2 May 1916, with Captain Roger Welles in command.

=== World War I ===
Following commissioning, the ship remained along the East Coast of the United States, primarily visiting various Navy yards. At first, she was unable to join the Battleship Division Nine task force sent to support the Grand Fleet in the North Sea during World War I because oil was unavailable there. In 1917, she underwent a refit, with two /50 caliber guns being installed forward of the mainmast for antiaircraft defense and nine of the 5-inch/51 caliber guns being removed or repositioned. While conditions on the ship were cramped, the sailors on the ship had many advantages for education available to them. They also engaged in athletic competitions, including boxing, wrestling, and rowing competitions with the crews of the battleship and the tug . The camaraderie built from these small competitions led to fleet-wide establishment of many athletic teams pitting crews against one another for morale by the 1930s.

On 13 August 1918, &quot;Oklahoma&quot; was assigned to Battleship Division Six under the command of Rear Admiral Thomas S. Rodgers, and departed for Europe alongside &quot;Nevada&quot;. On 23 August, they met with destroyers , , , , , and , west of Ireland, before steaming for Berehaven, where they waited for 18 days before battleship arrived. The division remained at anchor, tasked to protect American convoys coming into the area, but was only called out of the harbor once in 80 days. On 14 October 1918, while under command of Charles B. McVay Jr., she escorted troop ships into port at the United Kingdom, returning on 16 October. For the rest of the time, the ship conducted drills at anchor or in nearby Bantry Bay. To pass the time, the crews played American football, and competitive sailing. &quot;Oklahoma&quot; suffered six casualties between 21 October and 2 November to the 1918 flu pandemic. &quot;Oklahoma&quot; remained off Berehaven until the end of the war on 11 November 1918. Shortly thereafter, several &quot;Oklahoma&quot; crewmembers were involved in a series of fights with members of Sinn Féin, forcing the ship&#x27;s commander to apologize and financially compensate two town mayors.

===Interwar period===

&quot;Oklahoma&quot; left for Portland on 26 November, joined there by on 30 November, &quot;Nevada&quot; on 4 December, and Battleship Division Nine&#x27;s ships shortly after. The ships were assigned as a convoy escort for the ocean liner , carrying President Woodrow Wilson, and arrived with that ship in France several days later. She departed 14 December, for New York City, and then spent early 1919 conducting winter battle drills off the coast of Cuba. On 15 June 1919, she returned to Brest, escorting Wilson on a second trip, and returned to New York, on 8 July. A part of the Atlantic Fleet for the next two years, &quot;Oklahoma&quot; was overhauled and her crew trained. The secondary battery was reduced from 20 to 12 5-inch/51 caliber guns in 1918. Early in 1921, she voyaged to South America&#x27;s West Coast for combined exercises with the Pacific Fleet, and returned later that year for the Peruvian Centennial.

She then joined the Pacific Fleet and, in 1925, began a high-profile training cruise with several other battleships. They left San Francisco on 15 April 1925, arrived in Hawaii, on 27 April, where they conducted war games. They left for Samoa, on 1 July, crossing the equator on 6 July. On 27 July, they arrived in Australia and conducted a number of exercises there, before spending time in New Zealand, returning to the United States later that year. In early 1927, she transited the Panama Canal and moved to join the Scouting Fleet.

In November 1927, she entered the Philadelphia Navy Yard for an extensive overhaul. She was modernized by adding eight 5-inch/25 cal guns, and her turrets&#x27; maximum elevation was raised from 15 to 30 degrees. An aircraft catapult was installed atop turret No.3. She was also substantially up-armored between September 1927 and July 1929, with anti-torpedo bulges added, as well as an additional of steel on her armor deck. The overhaul increased her beam to , the widest in the US Navy, and reduced her speed to .
&quot;Oklahoma&quot; rejoined the Scouting Fleet for exercises in the Caribbean, then returned to the West Coast in June 1930, for fleet operations through spring 1936. That summer, she carried midshipmen on a European training cruise, visiting northern ports. The cruise was interrupted by the outbreak of civil war in Spain. &quot;Oklahoma&quot; sailed to Bilbao, arriving on 24 July 1936, to rescue American citizens and other refugees whom she carried to Gibraltar and French ports. She returned to Norfolk on 11 September, and to the West Coast on 24 October.

The Pacific Fleet operations of &quot;Oklahoma&quot; during the next four years included joint operations with the Army and the training of reservists. &quot;Oklahoma&quot; was based at Pearl Harbor from 29 December 1937, for patrols and exercises, and only twice returned to the mainland, once to have anti-aircraft guns and armor added to her superstructure at Puget Sound Navy Yard in early February 1941, and once to have armor replaced at San Pedro in mid-August of the same year. En route on 22 August, a severe storm hit &quot;Oklahoma&quot;. One man was swept overboard and three others were injured. The next morning, a broken starboard propeller shaft forced the ship to halt, assess the damage, and sail to San Francisco, the closest navy yard with an adequate drydock. She remained in drydock, undergoing repairs until mid-October. The ship then returned to Hawaii.
The Washington Naval Treaty had precluded the Navy from replacing &quot;Oklahoma&quot;, leading to the series of refits to extend her lifespan. The ship was planned to be retired on 2 May 1942.

===Attack on Pearl Harbor===

On 7 December 1941, when the Japanese attacked Pearl Harbor, &quot;Oklahoma&quot; was moored in berth Fox 5, on Battleship Row, in the outboard position alongside the battleship . She was immediately targeted by planes from the Japanese aircraft carriers &quot;Akagi&quot; and &quot;Kaga&quot;, and was struck by three torpedoes. The first and second hit seconds apart, striking amidships at approximately 07:50 or 07:53, below the waterline between the smokestack and mainmast. The torpedoes blew away a large section of her anti-torpedo bulge and spilled oil from the adjacent fuel bunkers&#x27; sounding tubes, but neither penetrated the hull. About 80 men scrambled to man the AA guns on deck, but were unable to use them because the firing locks were in the armory. Most of the men manned battle stations below the ship&#x27;s waterline or sought shelter in the third deck, protocol during an aerial attack. The third torpedo struck at 08:00, near Frame 65, hitting close to where the first two did, penetrating the hull, destroying the adjacent fuel bunkers on the second platform deck and rupturing access trunks to the two forward boiler rooms as well as the transverse bulkhead to the aft boiler room and the longitudinal bulkhead of the two forward firing rooms.

As she began to capsize to port, two more torpedoes struck, and her men were strafed as they abandoned ship. In less than twelve minutes, she rolled over until halted by her masts touching bottom, her starboard side above water, and a part of her keel exposed. It&#x27;s believed the ship absorbed as many as eight hits in all. Many of her crew, however, remained in the fight, clambering aboard &quot;Maryland&quot; to help serve her anti-aircraft batteries. Four hundred twenty-nine of her officers and enlisted men were killed or missing. One of those killed, Father Aloysius Schmitt, was the first American chaplain of any faith to die in World War II. Thirty-two others were wounded, and many were trapped within the capsized hull. Efforts to rescue them began within minutes of the ship&#x27;s capsizing and continued into the night, in several cases rescuing men trapped inside the ship for hours. Julio DeCastro, a Hawaiian civilian yard worker, organized a team that saved 32 &quot;Oklahoma&quot; sailors. This was a particularly tricky operation as cutting open the hull released trapped air, raising the water levels around entombed men, while cutting in the wrong places could ignite stored fuel. It is likely that some survivors were never reached in time.

Some of those who died later had ships named after them, including Ensign John C. England for whom and are named. was named for Ensign Charles M. Stern, Jr. was named for Chief Carpenter John Arnold Austin, who was also posthumously awarded the Navy Cross for his actions during the attack. was named for Father Aloysius Schmitt. was named for Malcolm, Randolph, and Leroy Barber. In addition to Austin&#x27;s Navy Cross, the Medal of Honor was awarded to Ensign Francis C. Flaherty and Seaman James R. Ward, while three Navy and Marine Corps Medals were awarded to others on &quot;Oklahoma&quot; during the attack.

====Salvage====
By early 1942, it was determined that &quot;Oklahoma&quot; could be salvaged and that she was a navigational hazard, having rolled into the harbor&#x27;s navigational channel. Even though it was cost-prohibitive to do so, the job of salvaging &quot;Oklahoma&quot; commenced on 15 July 1942, under the immediate command of Captain F. H. Whitaker, and a team from the Pearl Harbor Naval Shipyard.

Preparations for righting the overturned hull took under eight months to complete. Air was pumped into interior chambers and improvised airlocks built into the ship, forcing of water out of the ship through the torpedo holes. of coral soil were deposited in front of her bow to prevent sliding and two barges were posted on either end of the ship to control the ship&#x27;s rising.

Twenty-one derricks were attached to the upturned hull; each carried high-tensile steel cables that were connected to hydraulic winching machines ashore. The righting (parbuckling) operation began on 8 March, and was completed by 16 June 1943. Teams of naval specialists then entered the previously submerged ship to remove human remains. Cofferdams were then placed around the hull to allow basic repairs to be undertaken so that the ship could be refloated; this work was completed by November. On 28 December, &quot;Oklahoma&quot; was towed into drydock No. 2, at the Pearl Harbor Naval Shipyard. Once in the dock, her main guns, machinery, remaining ammunition, and stores were removed. The severest structural damage on the hull was also repaired to make the ship watertight. The US Navy deemed her too old and too heavily damaged to be returned to service.

&quot;Oklahoma&quot; was decommissioned on 1 September 1944, and all remaining armaments and superstructure were then removed. She was then put up for auction at the Brooklyn Navy Yard on 26 November 1946, with her engines, boilers, turbo generators, steering units and about of structural steel deemed salvageable. She was sold to Moore Drydock Co. of Oakland, California for $46,127.

====Final voyage====
In May 1947, a two-tug towing operation began to move the hull of &quot;Oklahoma&quot; from Pearl Harbor to San Francisco Bay. She was due to arrive on Memorial Day (26 May); a delegation of nearly 500 Oklahomans led by Governor Roy J. Turner planned to visit and pay final respects to the ship.

Disaster struck on 17 May, when the ships entered a storm more than from Hawaii. The tug &quot;Hercules&quot; put her searchlight on the former battleship, revealing that she had begun listing heavily. After radioing the naval base at Pearl Harbor, both tugs were instructed to turn around and head back to port. Without warning, &quot;Hercules&quot; was pulled back past &quot;Monarch&quot;, which was being dragged backwards at . &quot;Oklahoma&quot; had begun to sink straight down, causing water to swamp the sterns of both tugs.

Both tug skippers had fortunately loosened their cable drums connecting the tow lines to &quot;Oklahoma&quot;. As the battleship sank rapidly, the line from &quot;Monarch&quot; quickly played out, releasing the tug. However, &quot;Hercules&quot;″ cables did not release until the last possible moment, leaving her tossing and pitching above the grave of the sunken &quot;Oklahoma&quot;. The battleship&#x27;s exact location is unknown.

==Memorials and recovery of remains==

During dredging operations in 2006, the US Navy recovered a part of &quot;Oklahoma&quot; from the bottom of Pearl Harbor. The Navy believes it to be a portion of the port side rear fire control tower support mast. It was flown to Tinker Air Force Base then delivered to the Muskogee War Memorial Park in Muskogee, in 2010, where the , , barnacle-encrusted mast section is now on permanent outdoor display. The ship&#x27;s bell, a screw and two of her anchors are at the Science Museum in Oklahoma City. &quot;Oklahoma&quot;″s aft wheel is at the Oklahoma History Center in Oklahoma City.

On 7 December 2007, the 66th anniversary of the attack on Pearl Harbor, a memorial for the 429 crew members who were killed in the attack was dedicated on Ford Island, just outside the entrance to where the battleship is docked as a museum. &quot;Missouri&quot; is moored where &quot;Oklahoma&quot; was moored when she was sunk. The USS &quot;Oklahoma&quot; memorial is part of Pearl Harbor National Memorial and is an arrangement of engraved black granite walls and white marble posts. Only 35 of the 429 sailors and Marines who died on &quot;Oklahoma&quot; were identified in the years following the attack. The remains of 394 unidentified sailors and Marines were first interred as unknowns in the Nu&#x27;uanu and Halawa cemeteries, but were all disinterred in 1947, in an unsuccessful attempt to identify more personnel. In 1950, all unidentified remains from &quot;Oklahoma&quot; were buried in 61 caskets in 45 graves at the National Memorial Cemetery of the Pacific.

===Identification program===
In April 2015, the Department of Defense announced, as part of a policy change that established threshold criteria for disinterment of unknowns, that the unidentified remains of the crew members of &quot;Oklahoma&quot; would be exhumed for DNA analysis, with the goal of returning identified remains to their families. The process began in June 2015, when four graves, two individual and two group graves, were disinterred for DNA analysis by the Defense POW/MIA Accounting Agency (DPAA). By December 2017, the identity of 100 crew members had been discovered, and with the numbers of sailor and Marine identities increasing at a steady pace, the 200th unknown was identified by 26 February 2019. Throughout 2019 and 2020, the DPAA continued to successfully identify more crew members, and on 4 February 2021, they announced the identity of the 300th unknown, a 19 year old Marine from Illinois.

As of 29 June 2021, the DPAA announced that the program was coming to a close, and that the remains of 51 crew members that could not be identified have been returned to Hawaii, and will be reinterred at the National Memorial Cemetery of the Pacific at Punchbowl Crater, with a ceremony scheduled for 7 December, the 80th anniversary of the Attack on Pearl Harbor.
The program identified 343 crew members, including two Medal of Honor recipients, giving the DPAA a success rate of 88%. DPAA Director Kelly McKeague stated she had hoped to be able to identify at least a few more crew members before the program shut down, and in time for the ceremony. On 17 September 2021, the Department of Defense announced that number of identified was 346. After a final push to identify as many of the remaining unknown crew members as possible, the Department of Defense announced that they had identified a total 396 of 429 crew members, improving their success rate to 92.3%. As was previously planned, the crew remains that could not be identified, numbering only 33, would be reinterred at the Punchbowl Cemetery, during a ceremony on 7 December, that will coincide with the anniversary of the attack on Pearl Harbor, 80 years earlier.

==Honors, awards and memorabilia==

* World War I Victory Medal
* Asiatic-Pacific Campaign Medal with battle star
* World War II Victory Medal


==See also==
* List of commanding officers of USS &quot;Oklahoma&quot; (BB-37)
* List of U.S. Navy losses in World War II
* Pearl Harbor Survivors Association

==Notes==
==References==
===Citations===
===Sources===
*
* 
* 
*
* 
* 
* 
===Other reading===
* 
* 
* 
==External links==

* Maritimequest USS &quot;Oklahoma&quot; BB-37 Photo Gallery
* 
* USS &quot;Oklahoma&quot; (BB-37) Official Web Site</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q948229" start="0" end="32" title="USS Oklahoma (BB-37)" label="USS &amp;quot;Oklahoma&amp;quot; (BB-37)"/>
<link wikidata="Q426695" start="52" end="85" title="New York Shipbuilding Corporation" label="New York Shipbuilding Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="94" end="112" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q847109" start="172" end="184" title="dreadnoughts" label="dreadnoughts"/>
<link wikidata="Q14475832" start="186" end="198" title="Ship commissioning" label="Commissioned"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="227" end="238" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="252" end="275" title="United States Battleship Division Six, Atlantic Fleet" label="Battleship Division Six"/>
<link wikidata="Q5166678" start="288" end="302" title="Convoys in World War I" label="Allied convoys"/>
<link wikidata="Q4870041" start="375" end="401" title="United States Battle Fleet" label="United States Battle Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3476385" start="406" end="420" title="Scouting Fleet" label="Scouting Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859" start="542" end="559" title="Spanish Civil War" label="Spanish Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q12606" start="581" end="591" title="West Coast of the United States" label="West Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q219712" start="719" end="727" title="Imperial Japanese Navy" label="Japanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q52418" start="728" end="750" title="attack on Pearl Harbor" label="attack on Pearl Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q165363" start="760" end="767" title="torpedo" label="torpedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q753224" start="775" end="790" title="torpedo bombers" label="torpedo bombers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522772" start="840" end="848" title="capsized" label="capsized"/>
<link wikidata="Q820382" start="1110" end="1118" title="Marine salvage" label="salvaged"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370583" start="1329" end="1343" title="superstructure" label="superstructure"/>
<link wikidata="Q336332" start="1366" end="1371" title="ship breaking" label="scrap"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416413" start="1385" end="1389" title="hulk (ship)" label="hulk"/>
<link wikidata="Q131347" start="1429" end="1433" title="Oahu" label="Oahu"/>
<link wikidata="Q232264" start="1465" end="1482" title="San Francisco Bay" label="San Francisco Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q847478" start="1679" end="1694" title="armored cruiser" label="armored cruiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="1711" end="1729" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4439350" start="1825" end="1849" title="Standard-type battleship" label="Standard-type battleship"/>
<link wikidata="Q4064212" start="2172" end="2186" title="all or nothing (armor)" label="all-or-nothing"/>
<link wikidata="Q558591" start="2210" end="2217" title="Gun turret" label="turrets"/>
<link wikidata="Q24489" start="2449" end="2459" title="coal-fired" label="coal-fired"/>
<link wikidata="Q3195517" start="2460" end="2467" title="boilers" label="boilers"/>
<link wikidata="Q16000066" start="2629" end="2658" title="triple-expansion steam engine" label="triple-expansion steam engine"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2722" end="2736" title="steam turbine#marine propulsion" label="steam turbines"/>
<link wikidata="Q5636358" start="2765" end="2786" title="standard displacement" label="standard displacement"/>
<link wikidata="Q5636358" start="2796" end="2818" title="full-load displacement" label="full-load displacement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2358152" start="2835" end="2849" title="length overall" label="length overall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1817392" start="2851" end="2867" title="length at the waterline" label="at the waterline"/>
<link wikidata="Q2376482" start="2879" end="2883" title="beam (nautical)" label="beam"/>
<link wikidata="Q244777" start="2893" end="2898" title="draft (nautical)" label="draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358526" start="2942" end="2969" title="Babcock &amp;amp; Wilcox boiler" label="Babcock &amp;amp; Wilcox boiler"/>
<link wikidata="Q422887" start="3168" end="3178" title="belt armor" label="belt armor"/>
<link wikidata="Q208123" start="3191" end="3195" title="Deck (ship)" label="Deck"/>
<link wikidata="Q81697" start="3325" end="3334" title="barbettes" label="barbettes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187402" start="3356" end="3369" title="conning tower" label="conning tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q2936480" start="3474" end="3489" title="14&amp;quot;/45 caliber gun" label="/45 caliber gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q4639525" start="3566" end="3581" title="5&amp;quot;/51 caliber gun" label="/51 caliber gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q174736" start="3614" end="3623" title="destroyer" label="destroyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q324233" start="3629" end="3641" title="torpedo boat" label="torpedo boat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330003" start="3688" end="3700" title="torpedo tube" label="torpedo tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q15991056" start="3710" end="3738" title="Bliss-Leavitt Mark 3 torpedo" label="Bliss-Leavitt Mark 3 torpedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q582062" start="3856" end="3860" title="keel" label="keel"/>
<link wikidata="Q426695" start="3902" end="3935" title="New York Shipbuilding Corporation" label="New York Shipbuilding Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q138367" start="3939" end="3945" title="Camden, New Jersey" label="Camden"/>
<link wikidata="Q914232" start="3965" end="3968" title="Ask price" label="bid"/>
<link wikidata="Q596643" start="4094" end="4102" title="ship naming and launching" label="launched"/>
<link wikidata="Q7497970" start="4121" end="4130" title="ship sponsor" label="sponsored"/>
<link wikidata="Q2550683" start="4163" end="4180" title="Governor of Oklahoma" label="Oklahoma Governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811775" start="4181" end="4190" title="Lee Cruce" label="Lee Cruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q1671839" start="4222" end="4232" title="invocation" label="invocation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5360913" start="4296" end="4314" title="Elijah Embree Hoss" label="Elijah Embree Hoss"/>
<link wikidata="Q2365041" start="4448" end="4457" title="Argentine" label="Argentine"/>
<link wikidata="Q8733" start="4473" end="4480" title="Qing dynasty" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q830335" start="4481" end="4488" title="Protected cruiser" label="cruiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q5455500" start="4538" end="4549" title="fitting-out" label="fitting-out"/>
<link wikidata="Q301897" start="4624" end="4628" title="bow (ship)" label="fore"/>
<link wikidata="Q17143625" start="4629" end="4641" title="main battery" label="main battery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1988181" start="4992" end="5002" title="sea trials" label="sea trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q14475832" start="5111" end="5123" title="ship commissioning" label="commissioned"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="5127" end="5139" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5036512" start="5161" end="5168" title="Captain (United States O-6)" label="Captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7359095" start="5169" end="5181" title="Roger Welles" label="Roger Welles"/>
<link wikidata="Q16165730" start="5377" end="5401" title="Battleship Division Nine" label="Battleship Division Nine"/>
<link wikidata="Q644266" start="5433" end="5444" title="Grand Fleet" label="Grand Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1693" start="5452" end="5461" title="North Sea" label="North Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="5469" end="5480" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q4634025" start="5557" end="5573" title="3&amp;quot;/50 caliber gun" label="/50 caliber guns"/>
<link wikidata="Q86739852" start="5618" end="5630" title="antiaircraft" label="antiaircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q32112" start="5883" end="5889" title="boxing" label="boxing"/>
<link wikidata="Q42486" start="5891" end="5900" title="wrestling" label="wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q159354" start="5906" end="5912" title="Rowing (sport)" label="rowing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278830" start="6241" end="6253" title="Rear Admiral (United States)" label="Rear Admiral"/>
<link wikidata="Q7793738" start="6254" end="6271" title="Thomas S. Rodgers" label="Thomas S. Rodgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2661507" start="6419" end="6428" title="Castletownbere" label="Berehaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q5075320" start="6675" end="6695" title="Charles B. McVay Jr." label="Charles B. McVay Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q2292350" start="6855" end="6865" title="Bantry Bay" label="Bantry Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q41323" start="6902" end="6919" title="American football" label="American football"/>
<link wikidata="Q178275" start="7032" end="7049" title="1918 flu pandemic" label="1918 flu pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q76382" start="7254" end="7263" title="Sinn Féin" label="Sinn Féin"/>
<link wikidata="Q774215" start="7410" end="7418" title="Portland, England" label="Portland"/>
<link wikidata="Q697196" start="7609" end="7620" title="ocean liner" label="ocean liner"/>
<link wikidata="Q34296" start="7642" end="7656" title="Woodrow Wilson" label="Woodrow Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="7745" end="7758" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q12193" start="7874" end="7879" title="Brest, France" label="Brest"/>
<link wikidata="Q357104" start="8219" end="8228" title="military exercise" label="exercises"/>
<link wikidata="Q494920" start="8238" end="8251" title="United States Pacific Fleet" label="Pacific Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="8439" end="8452" title="San Francisco" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q683" start="8549" end="8554" title="Samoa" label="Samoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7350" start="8798" end="8810" title="Panama Canal" label="Panama Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3476385" start="8833" end="8847" title="Scouting Fleet" label="Scouting Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548690" start="8884" end="8906" title="Philadelphia Navy Yard" label="Philadelphia Navy Yard"/>
<link wikidata="Q4639526" start="8969" end="8986" title="5&amp;quot;/25 caliber gun" label="5-inch/25 cal gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031873" start="9066" end="9083" title="aircraft catapult" label="aircraft catapult"/>
<link wikidata="Q1606852" start="9197" end="9216" title="anti-torpedo bulges" label="anti-torpedo bulges"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859" start="9675" end="9693" title="Spanish Civil War" label="civil war in Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q8692" start="9726" end="9732" title="Bilbao" label="Bilbao"/>
<link wikidata="Q131572" start="9798" end="9805" title="refugee" label="refugee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410" start="9827" end="9836" title="Gibraltar" label="Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q49231" start="9871" end="9878" title="Norfolk, Virginia" label="Norfolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="10049" end="10053" title="US Army" label="Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q15261194" start="10120" end="10132" title="Naval Station Pearl Harbor" label="Pearl Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297188" start="10297" end="10318" title="Puget Sound Navy Yard" label="Puget Sound Navy Yard"/>
<link wikidata="Q290356" start="10378" end="10387" title="San Pedro, Los Angeles" label="San Pedro"/>
<link wikidata="Q811177" start="10706" end="10713" title="drydock" label="drydock"/>
<link wikidata="Q696550" start="10816" end="10839" title="Washington Naval Treaty" label="Washington Naval Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q4873243" start="11149" end="11163" title="Battleship Row" label="Battleship Row"/>
<link wikidata="Q320967" start="11265" end="11309" title="Japanese aircraft carrier Akagi" label="Japanese aircraft carriers &amp;quot;Akagi&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q726146" start="11314" end="11330" title="Japanese aircraft carrier Kaga" label="&amp;quot;Kaga&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1606852" start="11563" end="11581" title="anti-torpedo bulge" label="anti-torpedo bulge"/>
<link wikidata="Q492878" start="11869" end="11878" title="waterline" label="waterline"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522772" start="12327" end="12334" title="capsize" label="capsize"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430863" start="12388" end="12395" title="Strafing" label="strafed"/>
<link wikidata="Q331744" start="12485" end="12490" title="Mast (sailing)" label="masts"/>
<link wikidata="Q240313" start="12760" end="12769" title="Artillery battery" label="batteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q4734714" start="12874" end="12897" title="Aloysius Schmitt" label="Father Aloysius Schmitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q208762" start="12922" end="12930" title="chaplain" label="chaplain"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="12954" end="12966" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q14595679" start="13649" end="13655" title="Ensign (rank)" label="Ensign"/>
<link wikidata="Q6224394" start="13656" end="13671" title="John C. England" label="John C. England"/>
<link wikidata="Q833465" start="13827" end="13837" title="Navy Cross (United States)" label="Navy Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q203535" start="14008" end="14022" title="Medal of Honor" label="Medal of Honor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5480399" start="14045" end="14064" title="Francis C. Flaherty" label="Francis C. Flaherty"/>
<link wikidata="Q6141754" start="14076" end="14089" title="James R. Ward" label="James R. Ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772872" start="14103" end="14130" title="Navy and Marine Corps Medal" label="Navy and Marine Corps Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q820382" start="14448" end="14457" title="Marine salvage" label="salvaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065881" start="14581" end="14608" title="Pearl Harbor Naval Shipyard" label="Pearl Harbor Naval Shipyard"/>
<link wikidata="Q686514" start="15005" end="15012" title="derrick" label="derrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q17105169" start="15162" end="15173" title="Parbuckle salvage" label="parbuckling"/>
<link wikidata="Q205077" start="15333" end="15342" title="Cofferdam" label="Cofferdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q14475832" start="15883" end="15897" title="Ship decommissioning" label="decommissioned"/>
<link wikidata="Q524435" start="16024" end="16042" title="Brooklyn Navy Yard" label="Brooklyn Navy Yard"/>
<link wikidata="Q232264" start="16374" end="16391" title="San Francisco Bay" label="San Francisco Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2170852" start="16495" end="16508" title="Roy J. Turner" label="Roy J. Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q5736409" start="16652" end="16672" title="Hercules (1907)" label="&amp;quot;Hercules&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999664" start="17804" end="17825" title="Tinker Air Force Base" label="Tinker Air Force Base"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17848" end="17874" title="Muskogee War Memorial Park" label="Muskogee War Memorial Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q524233" start="17878" end="17886" title="Muskogee, Oklahoma" label="Muskogee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7433576" start="18044" end="18058" title="Science Museum Oklahoma" label="Science Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q64396787" start="18541" end="18571" title="Pearl Harbor National Memorial" label="Pearl Harbor National Memorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q11218" start="18681" end="18688" title="USMC" label="Marines"/>
<link wikidata="Q7073404" start="18864" end="18876" title="Oahu Cemetery" label="Nu&amp;#x27;uanu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2891136" start="19095" end="19136" title="National Memorial Cemetery of the Pacific" label="National Memorial Cemetery of the Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q18965383" start="19615" end="19648" title="Defense POW/MIA Accounting Agency" label="Defense POW/MIA Accounting Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q2118341" start="20318" end="20334" title="Punchbowl Crater" label="Punchbowl Crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q203535" start="20485" end="20499" title="Medal of Honor" label="Medal of Honor"/>
<link wikidata="Q11209" start="20904" end="20925" title="United States Department of Defense" label="Department of Defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q13409491" start="21334" end="21359" title="World War I Victory Medal (United States)" label="World War I Victory Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2338071" start="21362" end="21392" title="Asiatic-Pacific Campaign Medal" label="Asiatic-Pacific Campaign Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035234" start="21398" end="21409" title="battle star" label="battle star"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079534" start="21412" end="21438" title="World War II Victory Medal" label="World War II Victory Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6611989" start="21456" end="21519" title="List of commanding officers of USS Oklahoma (BB-37)" label="List of commanding officers of USS &amp;quot;Oklahoma&amp;quot; (BB-37)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634395" start="21522" end="21562" title="List of U.S. Navy losses in World War II" label="List of U.S. Navy losses in World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7158097" start="21565" end="21599" title="Pearl Harbor Survivors Association" label="Pearl Harbor Survivors Association"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="192182" wikidata="Q86749788" url="?curid=192182" title="USS Oklahoma">
<text>Oklahoma was the name of one ship of the United States Navy and will be the name of a future submarine. 

* , a launched in 1914 and sunk by Japanese bombers in the attack on Pearl Harbor 7 December 1941.
* , a planned &quot;Virginia&quot;-class nuclear attack submarine.

==See also==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="41" end="59" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="192184" wikidata="Q1134891" url="?curid=192184" title="Pica (disorder)">
<text>Pica is the craving or consumption of objects that are not normally intended to be consumed. It is classified as an eating disorder but can also be the result of an existing mental disorder. The ingested or craved substance may be biological, natural or manmade. The term was drawn directly from the medieval Latin word for magpie, a bird subject to much folklore regarding its opportunistic feeding behaviors.

According to the &quot;Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th Edition&quot; (DSM-5), pica as a standalone eating disorder must persist for more than one month at an age when eating such objects is considered developmentally inappropriate, not part of culturally sanctioned practice, and sufficiently severe to warrant clinical attention. Pica may lead to intoxication in children, which can result in an impairment of both physical and mental development. In addition, it can cause surgical emergencies to address intestinal obstructions, as well as more subtle symptoms such as nutritional deficiencies and parasitosis. Pica has been linked to other mental disorders. Stressors such as psychological trauma, maternal deprivation, family issues, parental neglect, pregnancy, and a disorganized family structure are risk factors for pica.

Pica is most commonly seen in pregnant women, small children, and people who may have developmental disabilities such as autism. Children eating painted plaster containing lead may develop brain damage from lead poisoning. A similar risk exists from eating soil near roads that existed before the phase-out of tetraethyllead or that were sprayed with oil (to settle dust) contaminated by toxic PCBs or dioxin. In addition to poisoning, a much greater risk exists of gastrointestinal obstruction or tearing in the stomach. Another risk of eating soil is the ingestion of animal feces and accompanying parasites. Cases of severe bacterial infections occurrence (leptospirosis) in patients diagnosed with pica have also been reported. Pica can also be found in animals such as dogs and cats.

==Signs and symptoms==
Pica is the consumption of substances with no significant nutritional value such as soap, plaster, or paint. Subtypes are characterized by the substance eaten:

This eating pattern should last at least one month to meet the time diagnostic criteria of pica.

===Complications===
Complications may occur due to the substance consumed. For example, lead poisoning may result from the ingestion of paint or paint-soaked plaster, hairballs may cause intestinal obstruction, and &quot;Toxoplasma&quot; or &quot;Toxocara&quot; infections may follow ingestion of feces or soil.

==Causes==
Pica is currently recognized as a mental disorder by the &quot;Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders&quot; (DSM-5). According to the DSM-5, mineral deficiencies are occasionally associated with pica, but biological abnormalities are rarely found. People practicing forms of pica, such as geophagy, pagophagy, and amylophagy, are more likely to be anemic or to have low hemoglobin concentration in their blood, lower levels of red blood cells (hematocrit), or lower plasma zinc levels. Specifically, practicing geophagy is more likely to be associated with anemia or low hemoglobin. Practicing pagophagy and amylophagy is more highly associated with anemia. Additionally, children and pregnant women may be more likely to have anemia or low hemoglobin relative to the general population. 

Mental health conditions such as obsessive–compulsive disorder (OCD) and schizophrenia have been proposed as causes of pica. More recently, cases of pica have been tied to the obsessive–compulsive spectrum, and a move has arisen to consider OCD in the cause of pica. Sensory, physiological, cultural, and psychosocial perspectives have also been used to explain the causation of pica.

Pica may be a cultural practice not associated with a deficiency or disorder. Ingestion of kaolin (white clay) among African American women in the US state of Georgia shows the practice there to be a DSM-4 &quot;culture-bound syndrome&quot; and &quot;not selectively associated with other psychopathology&quot;. Similar kaolin ingestion is also widespread in parts of Africa. Such practices may stem from purported health benefits, such as the ability of clay to absorb plant toxins and protect against toxic alkaloids and tannic acids.

==Diagnosis==
No single test confirms pica, but because pica can occur in people who have lower than normal nutrient levels and poor nutrition (malnutrition), the health care provider should test blood levels of iron and zinc.
Hemoglobin can also be checked to test for anemia. Lead levels should always be checked in children who may have eaten paint or objects covered in lead-paint dust. The healthcare provider should test and monitor for infection if the patient has been eating contaminated soil or animal waste.

===DSM-5===
The DSM-5 posits four criteria that must be met for a person to be diagnosed with pica:

#Person must have been eating non-nutritive nonfoods for at least one month.
#This eating must be considered abnormal for the person&#x27;s stage of development.
#Eating these substances cannot be associated with a cultural practice that is considered normal in the social context of the individual.
#For people who currently have a medical condition (e.g.: pregnancy) or a mental disorder (e.g.: autism spectrum), the action of eating non-nutritive nonfoods should only be considered pica if it is dangerous and requires extra medical investigation or treatment on top of what they are already receiving for their pre-existing condition.

===Differential diagnosis===
In individuals with autism, schizophrenia, and certain physical disorders (such as Kleine–Levin syndrome), non-nutritive substances may be eaten. In such instances, pica should only be noted as an additional diagnosis if the eating behaviour is sufficiently persistent and severe to warrant additional clinical attention.

==Treatment==
Treatment for pica may vary by patient and suspected cause (e.g., child, developmentally disabled, pregnant, or psychogenic) and may emphasize psychosocial, environmental and family-guidance approaches; iron deficiency may be treatable through iron supplements or through dietary changes. An initial approach often involves screening for, and if necessary, treating any mineral deficiencies or other comorbid conditions. For pica that appears to be of psychogenic cause, therapy and medication such as SSRIs have been used successfully. However, previous reports have cautioned against the use of medication until all non-psychogenic causes have been ruled out.

Looking back at the different causes of pica related to assessment, the clinician tries to develop a treatment. First, there is pica as a result of social attention. A strategy might be used of ignoring the person&#x27;s behavior or giving them the least possible attention. If their pica is a result of obtaining a favorite item, a strategy may be used where the person is able to receive the item or activity without eating inedible items. The individual&#x27;s communication skills should increase so that they can relate what they want to another person without engaging in this behavior. If pica is a way for a person to escape an activity or situation, the reason why the person wants to escape the activity should be examined and the person should be moved to a new situation. If pica is motivated by sensory feedback, an alternative method of feeling that sensation should be provided. Other nonmedication techniques might include other ways for oral stimulation such as gum. Foods such as popcorn have also been found helpful. These things can be placed in a &quot;pica box&quot; that should be easily accessible to the individual when they feel like engaging in pica.

Behavior-based treatment options for pica can be useful for individuals who have a developmental disability or mental illness. Behavioral treatments have been shown to reduce pica severity by 80% in people with intellectual disabilities. These treatments may involve using positive reinforcement normal behavior. Many use aversion therapy, where the patient learns through positive reinforcement which foods are good and which ones they should not eat. Often, treatment is similar to the treatment of obsessive–compulsive or addictive disorders (such as exposure therapy). In some cases, treatment is as simple as addressing the fact they have this disorder and why they may have it. A recent study classified nine such classes of behavioral intervention: Success with treatment is generally high and generally fades with age, but it varies depending on the cause of the disorder. Developmental causes tend to have a lower success rate.

==Epidemiology==
The prevalence of pica is difficult to establish because of differences in definition and the reluctance of patients to admit to abnormal cravings and ingestion, thus leading to the prevalence recordings of pica among at-risk groups being in the range of 8% to 65% depending on the study. Based on compiled self-report and interview data of pregnant and postpartum women, pica is most prevalent geographically in Africa, with an estimated prevalence of 44.8%, followed by North and South America (23.0%) and Eurasia (17.5%). Factors associated with Pica in this population were determined to be anemia and low levels of education, both of which are associated with low socioeconomic backgrounds. Two studies of adults with intellectual disabilities living in institutions found that 21.8% and 25.8% of these groups had pica.

Prevalence rates for children are unknown. Young children commonly place non-nutritious material into their mouths. This activity occurs in 75% of 12-month-old infants, and 15% of two- to three-year-old children.

In institutionalized children with mental disabilities, pica occurs in 10–33%.

==History==
The condition currently known as pica was first described by Hippocrates.

The term pica originates in the Latin word for magpie, &quot;pīca&quot;, a bird famed for its unusual eating behaviors and believed to eat almost anything. The Latin may have been a translation of a Greek word meaning both &#x27;magpie, jay&#x27; and &#x27;pregnancy craving, craving for strange food&#x27;. In 13th-century Latin work, pica was referenced by the Greeks and Romans; however, it was not addressed in medical texts until 1563.

In the southern United States in the 1800s, geophagia was a common practice among the slave population. Geophagia is a form of pica in which the person consumes earthly substances such as clay, and is particularly prevalent to augment a mineral-deficient diet. Noteworthy is the fact that kaolin was consumed by West Africans enslaved in the Southeastern United States, particularly the Georgia belt, due to the antidiarrheal qualities in the treatment of dysentery and other abdominal ailments. The practice of consuming kaolin rocks was thereafter studied scientifically, the results of which led to the subsequent pharmaceutical commercialization of kaolinite, the clay mineral contained in kaolin. Kaolinite became the active ingredient in antidiarrheal drugs such as Kaopectate, although it was replaced by attapulgite in the 1980s and by bismuth subsalicylate starting in 2004.

Research on eating disorders from the 16th to the 20th centuries suggests that during that time in history, pica was regarded more as a symptom of other disorders rather than its own specific disorder. Even today, what could be classified as pica behavior is a normative practice in some cultures as part of their beliefs, healing methods, or religious ceremonies.

Prior to the elimination of the category of &quot;feeding disorders in infancy and early childhood&quot;, which is where pica was classified, from the DSM-5, pica was primarily diagnosed in children. However, since the removal of the category, psychiatrists have started to diagnose pica in people of all ages.

The Glore Psychiatric Museum in Saint Joseph, Missouri has a 1910 exhibit with &quot;an imaginative starburst arrangement of 1,446 buttons, screws, bolts, and nails that were eaten by a patient who died unexpectedly. They were only discovered during her autopsy.&quot;

==Animals==
Unlike in humans, pica in dogs or cats may be a sign of immune-mediated hemolytic anemia, especially when it involves eating substances such as tile grout, concrete dust, and sand. Dogs exhibiting this form of pica should be tested for anemia with a complete blood count or at least hematocrit levels. Although several hypotheses have been proposed by experts to explain pica in animals, insufficient evidence exists to prove or disprove any of them.

== See also ==
* Michel Lotito, Frenchman known for his ability to eat and digest metal, nicknamed Monsieur Mangetout (&#x27;Mr. Eat-All&#x27;)
* &quot;Swallow&quot;, a 2019 film about a young woman who, emotionally stifled in her marriage and domestic life, develops an impulse to consume inedible objects.
* Jacques de Falaise

==References==
==Further reading==

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1134891" start="0" end="4" title="Pica (disorder)" label="Pica"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495957" start="324" end="330" title="magpie" label="magpie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3064664" start="435" end="501" title="DSM-5" label="Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th Edition"/>
<link wikidata="Q373822" start="538" end="553" title="eating disorder" label="eating disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q2910672" start="640" end="655" title="Cognitive development" label="developmentally"/>
<link wikidata="Q1601794" start="1040" end="1051" title="Parasitic disease" label="parasitosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q11995" start="1301" end="1315" title="pregnancy" label="pregnant women"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142806" start="1357" end="1383" title="Developmental disability" label="developmental disabilities"/>
<link wikidata="Q38404" start="1392" end="1398" title="Autism spectrum" label="autism"/>
<link wikidata="Q274988" start="1424" end="1431" title="plaster" label="plaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q708" start="1443" end="1447" title="lead" label="lead"/>
<link wikidata="Q110315" start="1478" end="1492" title="lead poisoning" label="lead poisoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q266210" start="1581" end="1595" title="tetraethyllead" label="tetraethyllead"/>
<link wikidata="Q211171" start="1665" end="1669" title="Polychlorinated biphenyl" label="PCBs"/>
<link wikidata="Q11087111" start="1673" end="1679" title="Polychlorinated dibenzodioxins" label="dioxin"/>
<link wikidata="Q16244733" start="1737" end="1765" title="bowel obstruction" label="gastrointestinal obstruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029907" start="1784" end="1791" title="stomach" label="stomach"/>
<link wikidata="Q186517" start="1871" end="1880" title="parasitism" label="parasites"/>
<link wikidata="Q274988" start="2501" end="2508" title="plaster" label="plaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q2360566" start="2510" end="2518" title="hairball" label="hairball"/>
<link wikidata="Q131003" start="2564" end="2574" title="Toxoplasma gondii" label="Toxoplasma"/>
<link wikidata="Q2522497" start="2590" end="2598" title="Toxocaridae" label="Toxocara"/>
<link wikidata="Q201561" start="2730" end="2783" title="Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders" label="Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349107" start="2971" end="2979" title="Geophagia" label="geophagy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3288182" start="2981" end="2990" title="Pagophagia" label="pagophagy"/>
<link wikidata="Q43041" start="3052" end="3062" title="hemoglobin" label="hemoglobin"/>
<link wikidata="Q111146" start="3126" end="3136" title="hematocrit" label="hematocrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q178190" start="3505" end="3534" title="obsessive–compulsive disorder" label="obsessive–compulsive disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q41112" start="3545" end="3558" title="schizophrenia" label="schizophrenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8778538" start="3648" end="3677" title="obsessive–compulsive spectrum" label="obsessive–compulsive spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q223197" start="3949" end="3955" title="Kaolinite" label="kaolin"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="3975" end="3991" title="African Americans" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428" start="4017" end="4024" title="Georgia (U.S. state)" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349107" start="4035" end="4043" title="Geophagia" label="practice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1791709" start="4070" end="4092" title="culture-bound syndrome" label="culture-bound syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q427956" start="4381" end="4392" title="tannic acid" label="tannic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q5445" start="4666" end="4672" title="anemia" label="anemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q38404" start="5414" end="5429" title="autism spectrum" label="autism spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q38404" start="5706" end="5712" title="autism" label="autism"/>
<link wikidata="Q41112" start="5714" end="5727" title="schizophrenia" label="schizophrenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q613809" start="5769" end="5790" title="Kleine–Levin syndrome" label="Kleine–Levin syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q3410145" start="6166" end="6178" title="psychosocial" label="psychosocial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1313081" start="6226" end="6241" title="iron deficiency" label="iron deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414874" start="6423" end="6442" title="Comorbidity" label="comorbid conditions"/>
<link wikidata="Q334477" start="6525" end="6530" title="Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor" label="SSRIs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321905" start="8138" end="8160" title="positive reinforcement" label="positive reinforcement"/>
<link wikidata="Q719602" start="9002" end="9012" title="prevalence" label="prevalence"/>
<link wikidata="Q183560" start="9543" end="9568" title="Intellectual disability" label="intellectual disabilities"/>
<link wikidata="Q210999" start="9579" end="9591" title="Psychiatric hospital" label="institutions"/>
<link wikidata="Q5264" start="10013" end="10024" title="Hippocrates" label="Hippocrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="10059" end="10064" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495957" start="10074" end="10080" title="magpie" label="magpie"/>
<link wikidata="Q42302" start="10658" end="10662" title="clay" label="clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q17141847" start="11242" end="11252" title="Kaopectate" label="Kaopectate"/>
<link wikidata="Q414065" start="11282" end="11293" title="Palygorskite" label="attapulgite"/>
<link wikidata="Q81890" start="11314" end="11335" title="bismuth subsalicylate" label="bismuth subsalicylate"/>
<link wikidata="Q373822" start="11367" end="11382" title="eating disorder" label="eating disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q18150876" start="12037" end="12061" title="Glore Psychiatric Museum" label="Glore Psychiatric Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q128267" start="12065" end="12077" title="Saint Joseph" label="Saint Joseph"/>
<link wikidata="Q1581" start="12079" end="12087" title="Missouri" label="Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q7969590" start="12371" end="12403" title="Warm antibody autoimmune hemolytic anemia" label="immune-mediated hemolytic anemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4580104" start="12464" end="12469" title="grout" label="grout"/>
<link wikidata="Q22657" start="12471" end="12479" title="concrete" label="concrete"/>
<link wikidata="Q34679" start="12490" end="12494" title="sand" label="sand"/>
<link wikidata="Q886518" start="12565" end="12585" title="complete blood count" label="complete blood count"/>
<link wikidata="Q111146" start="12598" end="12608" title="hematocrit" label="hematocrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q739692" start="12784" end="12797" title="Michel Lotito" label="Michel Lotito"/>
<link wikidata="Q55634470" start="12913" end="12932" title="Swallow (2019 film)" label="&amp;quot;Swallow&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q27514742" start="13077" end="13095" title="Jacques de Falaise" label="Jacques de Falaise"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="192191" wikidata="Q5550156" url="?curid=192191" title="Gerard Slevin">
<text>Gerard Slevin (1 November 1919 – 18 January 1997) was Chief Herald of Ireland from 1954 to 1981. 

Born in Cork, Slevin was assistant to Edward McLysaght, the Chief Herald of Ireland, from 1944 to 1954, at which time he succeeded McLysaght. 

== Career ==
During his time as Chief Herald, Slevin inaugurated a genealogy advisory service, to assist in requests for help from people of Irish ancestry. Slevin granted the Kennedy family of the United States their coat of arms in 1961.

Slevin was also heavily involved in the design of the European flag, a circle of 12 golden stars on a deep blue background, and in recognition of this was made a member of the Académie Internationale d&#x27;Héraldique. His exact role in the design is uncertain (and may continue to remain so). According to some sources (such as archivist and biographer Dr. Susan Hood), he was the actual designer of the flag; others (such as Tom McCarthy, president of the Genealogical Society of Ireland) suggest a more peripheral role. The story that the flag&#x27;s design was solely that of Slevin continues, however.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5550156" start="0" end="13" title="Gerard Slevin" label="Gerard Slevin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5531582" start="54" end="77" title="Chief Herald of Ireland" label="Chief Herald of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q36647" start="107" end="111" title="Cork (city)" label="Cork"/>
<link wikidata="Q5344293" start="137" end="153" title="Edward McLysaght" label="Edward McLysaght"/>
<link wikidata="Q5531582" start="159" end="182" title="Chief Herald of Ireland" label="Chief Herald of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q34821" start="419" end="433" title="Kennedy family" label="Kennedy family"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="441" end="454" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q122482" start="538" end="551" title="European flag" label="European flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q2822422" start="660" end="701" title="Académie Internationale d&amp;#x27;Héraldique" label="Académie Internationale d&amp;#x27;Héraldique"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="842" end="852" title="Susan Hood" label="Susan Hood"/>
<link wikidata="Q5531579" start="942" end="973" title="Genealogical Society of Ireland" label="Genealogical Society of Ireland"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="192194" wikidata="Q6842198" url="?curid=192194" title="Midge (Barbie)">
<text>Margaret &quot;Midge&quot; Hadley Sherwood is a doll character in the Barbie line of toys by Mattel that was first released in 1963. She was marketed as Barbie&#x27;s best friend. 

Although created at the same time as Skipper, Midge was re-introduced in 1988 as part of the play line, though two vintage reproduction dolls were made specifically for collectors in 1993 and 1998. These dolls were typically redheaded, freckled and blue-eyed. 

Also in the period, Wedding Day Midge was sold, with the groom being Allan Sherwood, who had been marketed as Midge&#x27;s boyfriend in the vintage years. The two had three children introduced named Ryan, Nikki and Cassandra; they also had twins who were never introduced. This was known as the &quot;Happy Family&quot; line and, in the set, Midge was sold &quot;pregnant&quot; with Nikki as a newborn baby. The &quot;Happy Family&quot; product became the subject of controversy when some parents disliked the &quot;pregnant&quot; Midge toy because they believed that Midge was too young to have children.

In 2013, Mattel decided to revamp Midge&#x27;s history, reintroducing her as a best friend of Barbie&#x27;s, but unmarried, without children and no connection to Allan.

==History==
===Vintage years===
When Barbie debuted, she was the subject of a lot of criticism, some of which claimed Barbie was too mature-looking for children. Midge was the first same-size friend of Barbie and was created to oppose these controversies. She had a fuller, gentler face mold, although her body proportions were the same as Barbie and they both stood at tall. This allowed the two dolls to be able to share clothes and accessories. Her head mold was stamped &quot;1958&quot;, the same as Barbie. When Midge arrived, the markings on the straight leg body mold they shared changed to include both her and Barbie. Midge had shoulder-length hair that flipped at the ends. Buyers had an option of buying a doll with one of three different hair colors: red, blond, or brunette. Her face was usually brushed with freckles. The dolls that were sold without freckles had a longer hair style and are now hard to find. Depending on the doll&#x27;s hair color, the color of her two-piece swimming suit varied. If Midge had red hair, her swimsuit was yellow and orange, for blond hair, it was in two shades of blue, and if she was brunette, it was pink and red. The first vintage Midge dolls had a value of $175 MIB (Mint In Box) in 2007.

For the first two years, she had &quot;straight legs&quot; that could not bend at the knee. A rare Midge with teeth was sold the first year and is now sought after by collectors. One year later in 1964, the dolls that were sold had slightly longer hair. Midge&#x27;s boyfriend Allan arrived as well. Early in 1965, Wigs Wardrobe Midge was sold, and consisted of a Midge head with short molded hair and three wigs. This was the Midge counterpart of the Fashion Queen Barbie. Since she came with only a head, another doll had to provide for the body. In 1965, Midge with bendable legs was introduced. She had shorter &quot;bobbed&quot; hair, like the American Girl Barbie, with a blue headband. Her swimming suit was different as well, and was now one-piece and striped.

There was also a Japanese exclusive Midge only offered in Japan in the years 1963 and 1964. These dolls were similar to a fashion queen in which they had molded hair but a very different face mould and more of a bouffant shaped head.

===Return===
From her introduction until 1967, Midge was marketed as Barbie&#x27;s original best friend, but no dolls were sold for about 20 years until 1988, when California Dream Midge was sold as part of a beach line, which used the &quot;Steffie&quot; mold. The same &quot;Steffie&quot; mold was used for Cool Times Midge in 1989. In 1990, she began to use the &quot;Diva&quot; mold for All Stars Midge and The Beat Midge. In 1991, she was married to Allan (now spelled &quot;Alan&quot;). Before and after the Wedding Day Midge doll was sold, many Midge play line dolls were produced. Before Wedding Day Midge, Midge dolls still had freckles, but up until Hawaii Midge was sold in 1999, the dolls lacked freckles. Most of the dolls were red-haired with blue or green eyes, but some dolls were brunette. The most commonly used head mold for Midge in this period was the &quot;Diva&quot; mold, stamped 1985.

A 35th anniversary Midge reproduction doll was sold in 1998 for collectors, made to look like the vintage Midge dolls. She had red hair, was dressed in her original orange and lime two-piece swimming suit, and came with a reproduction of the Senior Prom outfit from 1964–1965 as well as a reproduction of the box the Midge dolls originally came in. Earlier in 1993, for Midge&#x27;s 30th anniversary, a Midge reproduction doll was also produced, but she did not possess a reproduction of her original swimsuit or the original box. Like the later version, she came in a reproduction of the Senior Prom outfit.

In 2013, Midge appeared on the webseries &quot;&quot; where it is revealed that she has moved to Malibu. With this, her canon has been changed extensively, and she is a teenager who is retro at heart and still uses old-fangled terms. The whole &#x27;Happy Family&#x27; canon has been dropped altogether due to controversy. Two Midge dolls were released in 2013, one is as part of a collectors set with Barbie, and the other on her own in the Life in the Dreamhouse doll line.

===&quot;Happy Family&quot; line===
The year after Midge and Alan were married, a picture of the couple with twin babies was shown in a pamphlet, but the dolls were never produced. However, in 2003, she and Alan were re-introduced with a family consisting of them and three different kids, including three-year-old Ryan and newborn baby Nikki. This was known as the &quot;Happy Family&quot; line, and was similar to the discontinued Heart Family line of the 1980s. The dolls came in both European American and African American versions. This was the first time an African-American Midge was ever produced.

Midge was sold &quot;pregnant&quot; with Nikki, who was a tiny baby inside Midge&#x27;s magnetic removable womb. This led to some controversy with some consumers saying that the doll was inappropriate for children, or that it promoted teen pregnancy. Another cause for this controversy was that Midge did not initially have a wedding ring, but this was later fixed. She also was packaged without Alan. Customers also complaining about the doll led to Walmart pulling the Happy Family line off their shelves. A new version of this Midge was produced for Walmart, this time not pregnant, and with a cardboard cut-out display of Alan and Ryan standing next to her inside the box. The Happy Family Line included everything from a talking house, a backyard swimming pool, neighborhood market, and playground.

Later, around Nikki&#x27;s first birthday, Midge was &quot;pregnant&quot; again with another child, who was neither named or given a specific gender, as the gender was a surprise when the owner opened the doll&#x27;s box. Midge&#x27;s new baby was later named Cassandra. Midge has two known parents who are simply called &quot;Grandpa&quot; and &quot;Grandma&quot;. At first, the grandparent dolls were sold together as part of a big set consisting of the dolls and a kitchen play set, but for Nikki&#x27;s first birthday they were sold separately. Midge, Alan, and Ryan gave Nikki a dog for her birthday. They also came in both Caucasian and African American versions. They use different body molds, to reflect their age.

==Head molds==
* Midge&#x27;s first appearance was made with her own head mold, Vintage Midge.
* In 1964 and 1965, the Japanese exclusive &quot;new Midge&quot; face mold was released and was only offered in Japan.
* Midge next used the Steffie head mold, until the debut of Teresa, which took over the Steffie head. 
* Later, Midge used the Diva head mold from the &quot;Barbie and the Rockers&quot; set.
* One version of the Florida Vacation Midge uses the Diva sculpt, while an alternative version used the Mackie head mold.
* Midge returned to the Steffie head mold for the 50th-anniversary version.

==In other media==
* Midge appears in the web series &quot;&quot; in the episode &quot;A Smidge of Midge&quot;, voiced by Ashlyn Madden.
* The Happy Family pregnant version of Midge was satirized in Season 10 of &quot;Robot Chicken&quot;, where she was sent to the Island of Recalled Toys.
* Emerald Fennell portrays Midge in the 2023 live-action film &quot;Barbie&quot;, based on the pregnant version of the doll.

==See also==

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6842198" start="0" end="42" title="Midge (Barbie)" label="Margaret &amp;quot;Midge&amp;quot; Hadley Sherwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q168658" start="48" end="52" title="doll" label="doll"/>
<link wikidata="Q167447" start="70" end="76" title="Barbie" label="Barbie"/>
<link wikidata="Q11422" start="85" end="88" title="toy" label="toy"/>
<link wikidata="Q596139" start="93" end="99" title="Mattel" label="Mattel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1995127" start="219" end="226" title="Skipper (Barbie)" label="Skipper"/>
<link wikidata="Q152357" start="407" end="416" title="redheaded" label="redheaded"/>
<link wikidata="Q187882" start="418" end="426" title="Freckle" label="freckled"/>
<link wikidata="Q23786" start="431" end="440" title="blue eyes" label="blue-eyed"/>
<link wikidata="Q121283139" start="513" end="527" title="Allan (Barbie character)" label="Allan Sherwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q212989" start="2213" end="2226" title="swimsuit" label="swimming suit"/>
<link wikidata="Q934849" start="3147" end="3155" title="headband" label="headband"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="3292" end="3297" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q43103" start="5955" end="5972" title="European American" label="European American"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="5977" end="5993" title="African American" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q9612" start="6181" end="6185" title="womb" label="womb"/>
<link wikidata="Q535691" start="6309" end="6323" title="teen pregnancy" label="teen pregnancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q842096" start="6400" end="6412" title="wedding ring" label="wedding ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q483551" start="6525" end="6532" title="Walmart" label="Walmart"/>
<link wikidata="Q167918" start="7259" end="7270" title="grandparent" label="grandparent"/>
<link wikidata="Q8822" start="8425" end="8438" title="Robot Chicken" label="Robot Chicken"/>
<link wikidata="Q16207879" start="8499" end="8514" title="Emerald Fennell" label="Emerald Fennell"/>
<link wikidata="Q55436290" start="8565" end="8571" title="Barbie (film)" label="Barbie"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="192196" wikidata="Q44371" url="?curid=192196" title="Valentina Tereshkova">
<text>Valentina Vladimirovna Tereshkova (born 6 March 1937) is a Russian engineer, member of the State Duma, and former Soviet cosmonaut. She was the first woman in space, having flown a solo mission on Vostok 6 on 16 June 1963. She orbited the Earth 48 times, spent almost three days in space, is the only woman to have been on a solo space mission and is the last surviving Vostok programme cosmonaut. Twenty-six years old at the time of her spaceflight, she remains the youngest woman to have flown in space under the international definition of 100 km altitude, and the youngest woman to fly in Earth orbit.

Before her selection for the Soviet space programme, Tereshkova was a textile factory worker and an amateur skydiver. She joined the Air Force as part of the Cosmonaut Corps and was commissioned as an officer after completing her training. After the dissolution of the first group of female cosmonauts in 1969, Tereshkova remained in the space programme as a cosmonaut instructor. She later graduated from the Zhukovsky Air Force Engineering Academy and re-qualified for spaceflight, but never went to space again. She retired from the Air Force in 1997 having attained the rank of major general.

Tereshkova was a prominent member of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, holding various political offices including being a member of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet from 1974 to 1989. She remained politically active following the collapse of the Soviet Union but twice lost elections to the national State Duma in 1995 and 2003. Tereshkova was later elected in 2008 to her regional parliament, the Yaroslavl Oblast Duma. In 2011, she was elected to the national State Duma as a member of the ruling United Russia party and was re-elected in 2016 and 2021.

She has the federal state civilian service rank of 1st class Active State Councillor of the Russian Federation. In 2022, she voted for the Russian invasion of Ukraine, which led to numerous international sanctions against her.

== Early life ==
Valentina Tereshkova was born on 6 March 1937 in the Bolshoye Maslennikovo, a village on the Volga River northeast of Moscow and part of the Yaroslavl Oblast in central Russia. Her parents had migrated from Belarus. Her father, Vladimir Tereshkov, was a former tractor driver and a sergeant in command of a tank in the Soviet Army. He died in the Finnish Winter War when Tereshkova was two years of age. He and her mother Elena Fyodorovna Tereshkova had three children. After her father&#x27;s death, her mother moved the family to Yaroslavl, seeking better employment opportunity, and became employed at the Krasny Perekop cotton mill.

Tereshkova was first enrolled in school at age 8 and graduated at 16. She began working at a tire factory, and later at a textile mill, but continued her education by taking correspondence courses and graduated from the Light Industry Technical School in 1960. Tereshkova also became interested from a young age in parachuting, and trained in skydiving at the local Aeroclub, making her first jump at age 22, on 21 May 1959. While still employed as a textile worker, she trained as a competitive parachutist, keeping this a secret from her family. Tereshkova also joined the local Komsomol (Communist Youth League) in Yaroslavl, serving as the secretary of the organisation in 1960 and 1961. She became a member of the Communist Party in 1962.

== Soviet space programme ==
=== Selection and training ===
Tereshkova had not expressed any particular desire to go into space before being recruited, Rather, her experience at skydiving contributed to her selection as a cosmonaut. After the flight of Yuri Gagarin in 1961, Nikolai Kamanin, director of cosmonaut training, read in the American media that female pilots were training to be astronauts as part of Mercury 13. In his diary, he wrote, &quot;We cannot allow that the first woman in space will be American. This would be an insult to the patriotic feelings of Soviet women.&quot; Approval was granted to place five female cosmonauts in the next group, which would begin training in 1963. To increase the odds of sending a Soviet woman into space first, the women cosmonauts began their training before the men. The rules required that the potential cosmonaut be a parachutist under 30 years of age, less than in height, and no more than in weight. By January 1962, the All-Union Voluntary Society for Assistance to the Army, Air Force and Navy (DOSAAF) had selected 400 candidates for consideration. After the initial screening, 58 of those candidates met the requirements, which Kamanin reduced to 23. On 16 February 1962, Tereshkova was selected, along with four other candidates, to join the female cosmonaut corps.

Since they had no military experience, they started with the rank of private in the Soviet Air Forces. Training included isolation tests, centrifuge tests, thermo-chamber tests, decompression chamber testing, and pilot training in MiG-15UTI jet fighters. Tereshkova underwent water recovery training at sea, as part of which several motorboats were used to agitate the water, in order to simulate the rough conditions of space travel. She also began studying at the Zhukovsky Air Force Engineering Academy and graduated a few years after her flight. The group spent several months in basic training and, after they finished their training and passed an examination, Kamanin offered them the option to be commissioned as regular Air Force officers. With advice from the male cosmonauts, they chose to accept Kamanin&#x27;s offer, as it would make it harder for the programme to get rid of them after the first flight. All five women became junior lieutenants in the Air Force in December 1962. Tatyana Kuznetsova became ineligible for the first flight due to illness, and Zhanna Yorkina was performing poorly in training, leaving Tereshkova, Irina Solovyova, and Valentina Ponomaryova as the leading candidates.
Originally, a joint mission profile was developed that would involve launching two women into space, on solo Vostok flights, on consecutive days in March or April 1963. It was intended that Tereshkova would launch first, in Vostok 5, while Ponomaryova would follow her into orbit in Vostok 6. However, this flight plan was altered in March 1963. Vostok 5 would now carry a male cosmonaut, Valery Bykovsky, flying alongside a woman aboard Vostok 6, both to be launched in June 1963. The State Space Commission, at their meeting on 21 May, nominated Tereshkova to pilot Vostok 6. Kamanin called her &quot;Gagarin in a skirt.&quot; Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev was happy with the propaganda potential of her selection, since she was the daughter of a collective farm worker who had died in the Winter War; he confirmed her selection. Solovyova was appointed as her first backup. Tereshkova was promoted to lieutenant before her flight and to captain mid-flight.

=== Vostok 6 ===
After the successful launch of Vostok 5 on 14 June, Tereshkova began final preparations for her own flight. On the morning of 16 June 1963, Tereshkova and her backup Solovyova were both dressed in spacesuits and taken to the launch pad by bus. Following the tradition set by Gagarin, Tereshkova also urinated on the bus tire, becoming the first woman to do so. After completing her communication- and life-support checks, she was sealed inside the Vostok. After a two-hour countdown, Vostok 6 launched faultlessly, and Tereshkova became the first woman in space; she remains the only woman to have flown into space solo, and, at 26 years of age, the youngest. Her call sign on this flight was &quot;Chaika&quot; (); in commemoration, this name was later bestowed on an asteroid, 1671 Chaika. After her launch, she radioed down:
Vostok 6 was the final Vostok flight and was launched two days after Vostok 5 which carried Bykovsky into a five-day mission. The two vessels spent three days in orbital planes 30° apart and, during Tereshkova&#x27;s first orbit, approached each other to within . Although they were able to communicate by radio, neither could be sure if they saw each other. Cameras placed inside both the spacecraft transmitted live footage that was broadcast on Soviet state television. Tereshkova also maintained a flight log and took photographs of the horizon, which were later used to identify aerosol layers within the atmosphere.

In this single flight, she logged more flight time than the combined times of all American astronauts who had flown before that date. Her mission was used to continue the medical studies on humans in spaceflight and offered comparative data about the effects of space travel on women. Although Tereshkova experienced nausea and physical discomfort for much of the flight, she orbited the earth 48 times and spent 2 days, 22 hours, and 50 minutes in space.

As planned in all Vostok missions, Tereshkova ejected from the capsule during its descent at about four miles above the Earth and made a parachute landing north-east of Karaganda, Kazakhstan at 8:20 am UTC on 19 June. Bykovsky landed three hours after her.

Tereshkova later disclosed that she encountered challenges in managing her parachute due to violent gusts of wind. However, she landed safely but received a bruise on her nose, then she had dinner with some local villagers in the Altai Krai who helped her to get out of her spacesuit.

== After the Vostok 6 flight ==

According to the Russian newspaper &quot;Pravda&quot;, one million flowers were brought in to celebrate the success of the dual flights and greet the cosmonauts in Moscow. On 22 June 1963, Khrushchev greeted Bykovsky dressed in his uniform who saluted while Khrushchev hugged and kissed Tereshkova who was dressed in civilian attire. In front of the thousands in attendance, the Premier also announced that both the cosmonauts were awarded the Hero of the Soviet Union medal. All three made speeches from atop Lenin&#x27;s Tomb on the Red Square; Tereshkova said, &quot;my father perished defending our country and my mother brought up her three children. We know the bitterness of that war. We don&#x27;t need war,&quot; referring to the anniversary of the German invasion of Russia that began 22 years ago that day. Sometime after her mission, she was reportedly asked how the Soviet Union should thank her for her service to the country; Tereshkova requested that the government search for and publish the location of where her father was killed in action. This was done, and a monument was erected at the site in the Lemetti, Karelia—now on the Russian side of the border. The evening of 22 June, a reception was held in the Kremlin in which both Bykovsky and Tereshkova were awarded the Order of Lenin.
Less than a week after her return from space, Moscow hosted the International Women&#x27;s Congress on 24 June where Tereshkova and Bykovsky were greeted by a gathering of about 2,000 women from 119 countries. Of all the Russian cosmonauts, Tereshkova received the most requests to visit foreign nations. Her trips in particular required pre-approval from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the Ministry of Defense, and the KGB and were ultimately authorized by the Presidium of the Central Committee of the Communist Party, the highest political bureau in the Soviet Union.

All the Vostok cosmonauts toured extensively, but Tereshkova most of all; she made 42 trips abroad between 1963 and 1970. On 1 October 1963, Tereshkova arrived in Havana, Cuba, and met Fidel Castro. She toured the country which at the time was dealing with the effects of Hurricane Flora. The following month she presented a silver cup, which went to the team from the Soviet Union who won gold in all five boat classes, at the women&#x27;s 1963 European Rowing Championships held in Khimki near Moscow. By February 1964, Tereshkova was pregnant when she visited Elizabeth II of the United Kingdom who was also pregnant at the time. Except for a few-months break that year, Tereshkova went on a continuous and exhausting world tour, returning to her public duties only two months after the birth of her daughter.

After her spaceflight, Tereshkova became a national and international role model. She received &quot;congratulatory telegrams and letters... from around the world.&quot; These telegrams express the impact that Tereshkova had on other countries, outside the Soviet Union. Women were particularly excited about her flight. For example, in New Delhi, Tereshkova was a &quot;feminist standard bearer bringing a message of hope for &#x27;enslaved&#x27; Indian womanhood.&quot;

Tereshkova was a well-known representative of the Soviet Union abroad. She became a member of the World Peace Council in 1966 and a member of the Yaroslavl Soviet in 1967. She was also the Soviet representative to the UN Conference for the International Women&#x27;s Year in Mexico City in 1975. She led the Soviet delegation to the World Conference on Women in Copenhagen and was &quot;interested in socialist internationalism and women&#x27;s roles in guaranteeing world peace&quot;. Tereshkova was also chosen for several political positions; she was a member of the Supreme Soviet of the Soviet Union (1966–1974), a member of the Central Committee of the Communist Party (1969–1991), and a member of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet (1974–1989). She was appointed vice president of the International Woman&#x27;s Democratic Federation and president of the Soviet-Algerian Friendship Society.
Although she desired to continue pursuing a career as a cosmonaut and engineer, her superiors had a different plan for her in politics. Following Gagarin&#x27;s death, the Soviet space program was not willing to risk losing another hero. Against her wishes, she was appointed as the leader of the Committee for Soviet Women in 1968. A few months after she graduated with honours from the Zhukovsky Air Force Engineering Academy in October 1969, the team of women cosmonauts was disbanded and a woman would not go to space again until Svetlana Savitskaya in 1982, after a gap of 19 years.

By 1976, Tereshkova was a colonel in the Soviet Air Forces. In April 1977, she earned a doctorate in aeronautical engineering and underwent the medical examinations to qualify for spaceflight when selection of a new class of women cosmonauts was announced in 1978. Although she did not go to space again, she remained an instructor at the Yuri Gagarin Cosmonaut Training Center.

== Later political career ==
She remained politically active following the collapse of the Soviet Union but lost elections to the national State Duma during 1995. In the year 1995, Tereshkova was promoted to an honorary rank of major general. On 28 April 1997, she left the Russian Air Force due to reaching the age of compulsory retirement at 60 years old. In 2003, Tereshkova ran again for a seat in the State Duma. In 2007, Tereshkova was invited to Prime Minister Vladimir Putin&#x27;s residence in Novo-Ogaryovo for the celebration of her 70th birthday. While there she said that she would like to fly to Mars, even if it meant that it was a one-way trip. She was later elected during 2008 to her regional parliament, the Yaroslavl Oblast Duma.

On 4 December 2011, Tereshkova was elected to the State Duma, the lower house of the Russian legislature, as a representative of the Yaroslavl Oblast and a member of the United Russia party. In the 6th State Duma, together with Yelena Mizulina, Irina Yarovaya and Andrey Skoch, she was a member of the inter-factional committee for the protection of Christian values. In this capacity, she supported the introduction of amendments to the preamble of Constitution of Russia, to add that &quot;Orthodoxy is the basis of Russia&#x27;s national and cultural identity&quot;. These views stand in opposition to atheist views Tereshkova espoused during the Soviet era that were aligned with the official Communist Party line at the time, such as calling religion &quot;a big evil&quot;.

On 18 September 2016, Tereshkova was re-elected to the 7th State Duma. She serves as deputy chairperson of the Committee on the Federal Structure and Local Government.

During the drafting process for the 2020 amendments to the Constitution of Russia, she proposed to lift the term limits for president Putin.

In response to the Russian invasion of Ukraine, the Office of Foreign Assets Control of the United States Department of the Treasury added Tereshkova to the Specially Designated Nationals and Blocked Persons List on 30 September 2022, which results in her assets being frozen and U.S. persons being prohibited from dealing with her. In December 2022, the European Union (EU) had placed sanctions on various Russian media personalities and politicians including Tereshkova, which involves freezing assets and banning them from entering EU member states.

== Personal life ==

Valentina married cosmonaut Andriyan Nikolayev on 3 November 1963 at the Moscow Wedding Palace with Khrushchev presiding at the wedding party together with top government and space programme leaders. The marriage was encouraged by the Soviet space authorities as a &quot;fairy-tale message to the country&quot;. General Kamanin, head of the space programme, described it as &quot;probably useful for politics and science&quot;. On 8 June 1964, nearly one year after her space flight, she gave birth to their daughter Elena Andrianovna Nikolaeva-Tereshkova, the first person whose parents had both travelled into space.

Later in their marriage, the couple grew apart and refused to even stand next to each other in photographs. Tereshkova told the biographer Antonella Kerr that the marriage ended in 1977; she and Nikolayev divorced in 1982 and Tereshkova married Yuli Shaposhnikov, a surgeon she had met during her medical examinations to re-qualify as a cosmonaut. They remained married until Shaposhnikov&#x27;s death in 1999.

== Awards and honours ==


=== Russian ===

*Order of Merit for the Fatherland:
**3rd class (6 March 1997)
**2nd class (6 March 2007)
**1st class (1 March 2017)
*Order of Alexander Nevsky (2013)
*Order of Honour (10 June 2003)
*Order of Friendship (12 April 2011)
*Russian Federation State Prize for outstanding achievements in the field of humanitarian action in 2008 (4 June 2009)
*Participant of the Military Operation in Syria Medal (2016)
*Order of Gagarin (2023)
* (2018)
* Certificates of appreciation from the Government of the Russian Federation;
**3 March 1997 – for the contribution to the development of space, the strengthening of international scientific and cultural ties and years of diligent work
**12 June 2003 – for large contribution to the development of crewed space flight
**16 June 2008 – for long-term fruitful state and public activities, considerable personal contribution to the development of crewed space flight and in connection with the 45th anniversary of spaceflight
*Order of St. Euphrosyne of Moscow (January 2008)
=== Soviet ===
*Merited Master of Sports of the Soviet Union (June 1963)
* Hero of the Soviet Union (1963)
*Order of Lenin (1963, 1981)
* Order of the October Revolution (1971)
* Order of the Red Banner of Labour (1987)
*Order of the Friendship of Peoples
*Pilot-Cosmonaut of the Soviet Union (1963)

=== Other decorations and honours ===

* Gold star Hero of Socialist Labor (Czechoslovakia, August 1963)
* Gold star Hero of Socialist Labor (Bulgaria) (9 September 1963)
* Order of Georgi Dimitrov (Bulgaria, 9 September 1963)
* Order of Karl Marx (East Germany, October 1963)
* (East Germany, October 1963)
* Cross of Grunwald, 1st class (Poland, October 1963)
*Order of the Flag of the Republic of Hungary, 1st class (April 1965)
* Star of the Republic of Indonesia, 2nd class (November 1963)
* Order of the Volta (Ghana, January 1964)
* Gold Star Medal of the Hero of the Mongolian People&#x27;s Republic (May 1965)
* Order of Sukhbaatar (Mongolia, May 1965)
* Order of the Enlightenment (Afghanistan, August 1969)
* Order of Planets (Jordan, December 1969)
* Order of the Nile (Egypt, January 1971)
* Gold Star of Hero of Labor (Vietnam, October 1971)
* Order of Bernardo O&#x27;Higgins (Chile, March 1972)
* Order of Ana Betancourt (Cuba, 1974)
*Order of Friendship (Laos, 1997)
* Order of Duke Branimir, with sash (Croatia, presented on 8 September 2005)
*She received the Eduard Rhein Ring of Honor from the German Eduard Rhein Foundation in 2007.
* Gold Medal of the British Society for interplanetary communications &quot;For achievements in space exploration&quot; (February 1964)
* Gold Space Medal (FAI, 1963)
*Honorary doctorate from the University of Edinburgh (1990)
== Legacy ==
Numerous objects and places were named after Tereshkova in the USSR and Russia.

Novopromyshna Square in Tver was renamed Tereshkova Square in 1963.

In 1967, created a sculpture of Tereshkova for Cosmonaut Alley in Moscow. There is a monument in Bayevsky District of Altai Territory, Siberia, close to her landing place of 53°N, 80°E. In August 1970, Tereshkova was among the first group of living people to have a lunar crater named after them. Tereshkova crater is located on the far side of the Moon.

In 2003 Tereshkova was portrayed by Apollonia Vanova in the 2003 made-for-TV movie of Madeleine L&#x27;Engle&#x27;s A Wrinkle in Time.

None of the other four in Tereshkova&#x27;s early group flew and, in October 1969, the pioneering female cosmonaut group was dissolved. Even though there were plans for further flights by women, it took 19 years until the second woman, Svetlana Savitskaya, flew into space.

In 1997, London-based electronic pop group Komputer released a song entitled &quot;Valentina&quot; which gives a more-or-less direct account of her career as a cosmonaut. It was released as a single and appears on their album &quot;The World of Tomorrow&quot;. The 2000 album &quot;Vostok 6&quot; by Kurt Swinghammer is a concept album about Tereshkova. The 2015 album &quot;The Race for Space by&quot; Public Service Broadcasting also has a song featuring the Smoke Fairies entitled &quot;Valentina&quot;. In the same year, Findlay Napier&#x27;s album &quot;&quot; included a song &quot;Valentina&quot;, written in her honour by Napier and Boo Hewerdine. In 2015, a short film entitled &quot;Valentina&#x27;s Dream&quot; was released by Meat Bingo Productions. The film stars Rebecca Front as Tereshkova and is based on an interview by the former cosmonaut where she expressed a desire to journey to Mars.

The Cosmos Museum was opened 25 January 1975 near Yaroslavl. Among its exhibits is a replica of her childhood home. The city library was named after her in 2013. The school she attended as a child was renamed for her. A planetarium in Yaroslavl was built and named for her in 2011. The International Women of the Year association named her as the &quot;greatest woman achiever of the 20th century&quot;. Tereshkova was a torchbearer of the 2008 Summer Olympics torch relay in Saint Petersburg and the 2014 Winter Olympics torch relay in Sochi.

Streets in Ukraine that bore Tereshkova&#x27;s name have been renamed due to her support of Russia&#x27;s military actions against Ukraine and in accordance with the country&#x27;s 2015 decommunisation law. A proposal was also brought forward in 2015 to move a monument to Tereshkova in Lviv, Ukraine to the Territory of Communist Terror Memorial Museum. Monuments of communist leaders are removed from the public and placed in the museum as part of decommunization efforts. In January 2021, 24 Ukrainian streets were still named after Tereshkova; including a street in Busk, located in the same province as Lviv. As of 2023, these streets have acquired new names, and there are no more objects named after Tereshkova in Ukraine. The monument to Tereshkova in Lviv was dismantled in November 2023 and transferred to the Museum of Totalitarian Regimes.

== See also ==
*List of female spacefarers
*List of female Heroes of the Soviet Union

== Notes ==
== References ==
=== Citations ===
=== Sources ===
* 
*
*
*
*
*
** Reprint of 
*
== Further reading ==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

== External links ==
* Astronautix biography of Tereshkova
* Testing of rocket and space technology – the business of my life&#x27; Events and facts&quot; – A.I. Ostashev, Korolyov, 2001.
* &quot;First woman in space&quot; at History.com</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q44371" start="0" end="33" title="Valentina Tereshkova" label="Valentina Vladimirovna Tereshkova"/>
<link wikidata="Q715641" start="91" end="101" title="State Duma" label="State Duma"/>
<link wikidata="Q11631" start="121" end="130" title="cosmonaut" label="cosmonaut"/>
<link wikidata="Q17018052" start="150" end="164" title="Women in space" label="woman in space"/>
<link wikidata="Q269668" start="197" end="205" title="Vostok 6" label="Vostok 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q623873" start="370" end="386" title="Vostok programme" label="Vostok programme"/>
<link wikidata="Q849730" start="636" end="656" title="Soviet space program" label="Soviet space program"/>
<link wikidata="Q193210" start="715" end="723" title="skydiver" label="skydiver"/>
<link wikidata="Q921432" start="740" end="749" title="Soviet Air Force" label="Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934904" start="1017" end="1056" title="Zhukovsky Air Force Engineering Academy" label="Zhukovsky Air Force Engineering Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q157148" start="1189" end="1202" title="major general" label="major general"/>
<link wikidata="Q79854" start="1246" end="1281" title="Communist Party of the Soviet Union" label="Communist Party of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1643162" start="1349" end="1380" title="Presidium of the Supreme Soviet" label="Presidium of the Supreme Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q131630594" start="1446" end="1474" title="collapse of the Soviet Union" label="collapse of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q4345591" start="1589" end="1608" title="Regional parliaments of Russia" label="regional parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q4538835" start="1614" end="1635" title="Yaroslavl Oblast Duma" label="Yaroslavl Oblast Duma"/>
<link wikidata="Q151469" start="1715" end="1728" title="United Russia" label="United Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4156896" start="1824" end="1883" title="1st class Active State Councillor of the Russian Federation" label="1st class Active State Councillor of the Russian Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q110999040" start="1912" end="1939" title="Russian invasion of Ukraine" label="Russian invasion of Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q111022187" start="1963" end="1986" title="International sanctions during the Russian invasion of Ukraine" label="international sanctions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132498" start="2071" end="2092" title="Bolshoye Maslennikovo" label="Bolshoye Maslennikovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q626" start="2111" end="2122" title="Volga River" label="Volga River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2448" start="2159" end="2175" title="Yaroslavl Oblast" label="Yaroslavl Oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q157696" start="2300" end="2308" title="sergeant" label="sergeant"/>
<link wikidata="Q43456" start="2337" end="2348" title="Soviet Army" label="Soviet Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q134949" start="2373" end="2383" title="Winter War" label="Winter War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2423" start="2550" end="2559" title="Yaroslavl" label="Yaroslavl"/>
<link wikidata="Q193210" start="2999" end="3008" title="skydiving" label="skydiving"/>
<link wikidata="Q193210" start="3152" end="3163" title="Parachuting" label="parachutist"/>
<link wikidata="Q166073" start="3237" end="3245" title="Komsomol" label="Komsomol"/>
<link wikidata="Q7327" start="3654" end="3666" title="Yuri Gagarin" label="Yuri Gagarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q927979" start="3676" end="3691" title="Nikolai Kamanin" label="Nikolai Kamanin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517045" start="3813" end="3823" title="Mercury 13" label="Mercury 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154782" start="4457" end="4463" title="DOSAAF" label="DOSAAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q158668" start="4801" end="4808" title="Private (rank)" label="private"/>
<link wikidata="Q921432" start="4816" end="4833" title="Soviet Air Forces" label="Soviet Air Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q187377" start="4963" end="4972" title="Mikoyan-Gurevich MiG-15" label="MiG-15UTI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934904" start="5198" end="5237" title="Zhukovsky Air Force Engineering Academy" label="Zhukovsky Air Force Engineering Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q87410916" start="5671" end="5688" title="junior lieutenant" label="junior lieutenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q4994273" start="5725" end="5743" title="Tatyana Kuznetsova" label="Tatyana Kuznetsova"/>
<link wikidata="Q8070504" start="5803" end="5817" title="Zhanna Yorkina" label="Zhanna Yorkina"/>
<link wikidata="Q820606" start="5873" end="5888" title="Irina Solovyova" label="Irina Solovyova"/>
<link wikidata="Q3553627" start="5894" end="5915" title="Valentina Ponomaryova" label="Valentina Ponomaryova"/>
<link wikidata="Q257797" start="6167" end="6175" title="Vostok 5" label="Vostok 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q269668" start="6226" end="6234" title="Vostok 6" label="Vostok 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q159681" start="6332" end="6347" title="Valery Bykovsky" label="Valery Bykovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q462189" start="6572" end="6586" title="Premier of the Soviet Union" label="Soviet Premier"/>
<link wikidata="Q35314" start="6587" end="6604" title="Nikita Khrushchev" label="Nikita Khrushchev"/>
<link wikidata="Q25114211" start="6886" end="6893" title="captain" label="captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353183" start="7149" end="7159" title="launch pad" label="launch pad"/>
<link wikidata="Q142158" start="7703" end="7714" title="1671 Chaika" label="1671 Chaika"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8200" end="8223" title="Television in the Soviet Union#Soviet television channels" label="Soviet state television"/>
<link wikidata="Q104541" start="8336" end="8343" title="aerosol" label="aerosol"/>
<link wikidata="Q8104" start="8362" end="8372" title="atmosphere" label="atmosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q186889" start="8692" end="8698" title="nausea" label="nausea"/>
<link wikidata="Q484706" start="9001" end="9010" title="Karaganda" label="Karaganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536" start="9034" end="9037" title="Coordinated Universal Time" label="UTC"/>
<link wikidata="Q5942" start="9320" end="9330" title="Altai Krai" label="Altai Krai"/>
<link wikidata="Q183644" start="9450" end="9456" title="Pravda" label="Pravda"/>
<link wikidata="Q178473" start="9853" end="9877" title="Hero of the Soviet Union" label="Hero of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q191414" start="9919" end="9936" title="Lenin&amp;#x27;s Tomb" label="Lenin&amp;#x27;s Tomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q41116" start="9944" end="9954" title="Red Square" label="Red Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q83055" start="10167" end="10192" title="Operation Barbarossa" label="German invasion of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q210392" start="10451" end="10467" title="killed in action" label="killed in action"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10530" end="10537" title="Lemetti, Karelia" label="Lemetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q192273" start="10539" end="10546" title="Karelia" label="Karelia"/>
<link wikidata="Q133274" start="10634" end="10645" title="the Kremlin" label="the Kremlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q185493" start="10701" end="10715" title="Order of Lenin" label="Order of Lenin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1959942" start="11077" end="11104" title="Ministry of Foreign Affairs (Soviet Union)" label="Ministry of Foreign Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q4294505" start="11110" end="11129" title="Ministry of Defense (Soviet Union)" label="Ministry of Defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q80919" start="11139" end="11142" title="KGB" label="KGB"/>
<link wikidata="Q1971373" start="11198" end="11238" title="Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union" label="Central Committee of the Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1563" start="11454" end="11460" title="Havana" label="Havana"/>
<link wikidata="Q11256" start="11476" end="11488" title="Fidel Castro" label="Fidel Castro"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243642" start="11563" end="11578" title="Hurricane Flora" label="Hurricane Flora"/>
<link wikidata="Q19951771" start="11732" end="11766" title="1963 European Rowing Championships (women)" label="1963 European Rowing Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q197582" start="11775" end="11781" title="Khimki" label="Khimki"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="11854" end="11866" title="Elizabeth II" label="Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354497" start="12676" end="12695" title="World Peace Council" label="World Peace Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q2448" start="12724" end="12733" title="Yaroslavl Oblast" label="Yaroslavl"/>
<link wikidata="Q14626962" start="12818" end="12849" title="International Women&amp;#x27;s Year" label="International Women&amp;#x27;s Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q1489" start="12853" end="12864" title="Mexico City" label="Mexico City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337795" start="12979" end="13005" title="Proletarian internationalism" label="socialist internationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q326465" start="13148" end="13182" title="Supreme Soviet of the Soviet Union" label="Supreme Soviet of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1971373" start="13212" end="13252" title="Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union" label="Central Committee of the Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1643162" start="13286" end="13317" title="Presidium of the Supreme Soviet" label="Presidium of the Supreme Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q152318" start="14011" end="14030" title="Svetlana Savitskaya" label="Svetlana Savitskaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q104680" start="14092" end="14099" title="colonel" label="colonel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3798668" start="14167" end="14191" title="Aerospace engineering" label="aeronautical engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q730282" start="14405" end="14443" title="Yuri Gagarin Cosmonaut Training Center" label="Yuri Gagarin Cosmonaut Training Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q5167679" start="14521" end="14549" title="Dissolution of the Soviet Union" label="collapse of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q715641" start="14585" end="14595" title="State Duma" label="State Duma"/>
<link wikidata="Q157148" start="14674" end="14687" title="major general" label="major general"/>
<link wikidata="Q209833" start="14720" end="14737" title="Russian Air Force" label="Russian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q11104487" start="14765" end="14786" title="compulsory retirement" label="compulsory retirement"/>
<link wikidata="Q7747" start="14914" end="14928" title="Vladimir Putin" label="Vladimir Putin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1510282" start="14949" end="14962" title="Novo-Ogaryovo" label="Novo-Ogaryovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4345591" start="15148" end="15167" title="Regional parliaments of Russia" label="regional parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q4538835" start="15173" end="15194" title="Yaroslavl Oblast Duma" label="Yaroslavl Oblast Duma"/>
<link wikidata="Q715641" start="15247" end="15257" title="State Duma" label="State Duma"/>
<link wikidata="Q457869" start="15282" end="15301" title="Federal Assembly (Russia)" label="Russian legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q2448" start="15330" end="15346" title="Yaroslavl Oblast" label="Yaroslavl Oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q151469" start="15367" end="15380" title="United Russia" label="United Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4146582" start="15395" end="15409" title="6th State Duma" label="6th State Duma"/>
<link wikidata="Q4292925" start="15425" end="15440" title="Yelena Mizulina" label="Yelena Mizulina"/>
<link wikidata="Q4538691" start="15442" end="15456" title="Irina Yarovaya" label="Irina Yarovaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q4422468" start="15461" end="15473" title="Andrei Skoch" label="Andrey Skoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084103" start="15547" end="15563" title="Christian values" label="Christian values"/>
<link wikidata="Q652062" start="15647" end="15669" title="Constitution of Russia" label="Constitution of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7066" start="15802" end="15809" title="Atheism" label="atheist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187324" start="15885" end="15914" title="Religion in the Soviet Union" label="official Communist Party line"/>
<link wikidata="Q26708541" start="16033" end="16047" title="7th State Duma" label="7th State Duma"/>
<link wikidata="Q84826485" start="16183" end="16228" title="2020 amendments to the Constitution of Russia" label="2020 amendments to the Constitution of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q110999040" start="16308" end="16335" title="Russian invasion of Ukraine" label="Russian invasion of Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1620015" start="16341" end="16373" title="Office of Foreign Assets Control" label="Office of Foreign Assets Control"/>
<link wikidata="Q648666" start="16381" end="16421" title="United States Department of the Treasury" label="United States Department of the Treasury"/>
<link wikidata="Q15848109" start="16446" end="16501" title="Specially Designated Nationals and Blocked Persons List" label="Specially Designated Nationals and Blocked Persons List"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="16644" end="16658" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q17100524" start="16777" end="16792" title="Asset freezing" label="freezing assets"/>
<link wikidata="Q312474" start="16892" end="16910" title="Andriyan Nikolayev" label="Andriyan Nikolayev"/>
<link wikidata="Q4776130" start="17623" end="17637" title="Antonella Kerr, Marchioness of Lothian" label="Antonella Kerr"/>
<link wikidata="Q1630643" start="17941" end="17974" title="Order of Merit for the Fatherland" label="Order of Merit for the Fatherland"/>
<link wikidata="Q612907" start="18058" end="18083" title="Order of Alexander Nevsky" label="Order of Alexander Nevsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q2268261" start="18092" end="18107" title="Order of Honour (Russian Federation)" label="Order of Honour"/>
<link wikidata="Q791135" start="18124" end="18143" title="Order of Friendship" label="Order of Friendship"/>
<link wikidata="Q4146631" start="18161" end="18191" title="Russian Federation State Prize" label="Russian Federation State Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q24063579" start="18280" end="18332" title="Medal &amp;quot;Participant of the military operation in Syria&amp;quot;" label="Participant of the Military Operation in Syria Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q118770453" start="18341" end="18357" title="Order of Gagarin" label="Order of Gagarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2624015" start="18898" end="18931" title="Order of St. Euphrosyne of Moscow" label="Order of St. Euphrosyne of Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1978208" start="18963" end="19007" title="Merited Master of Sports of the Soviet Union" label="Merited Master of Sports of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q178473" start="19022" end="19046" title="Hero of the Soviet Union" label="Hero of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q185493" start="19055" end="19069" title="Order of Lenin" label="Order of Lenin"/>
<link wikidata="Q728960" start="19085" end="19116" title="Order of the October Revolution" label="Order of the October Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q478850" start="19126" end="19159" title="Order of the Red Banner of Labour" label="Order of the Red Banner of Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q583881" start="19168" end="19202" title="Order of the Friendship of Peoples" label="Order of the Friendship of Peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428575" start="19204" end="19239" title="Pilot-Cosmonaut of the Soviet Union" label="Pilot-Cosmonaut of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19299" end="19322" title="Hero of Socialist Labor (Czechoslovakia)" label="Hero of Socialist Labor"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19365" end="19388" title="Hero of Socialist Labor (Bulgaria)" label="Hero of Socialist Labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2028781" start="19421" end="19445" title="Order of Georgi Dimitrov" label="Order of Georgi Dimitrov"/>
<link wikidata="Q694401" start="19477" end="19495" title="Order of Karl Marx" label="Order of Karl Marx"/>
<link wikidata="Q1648388" start="19558" end="19575" title="Cross of Grunwald" label="Cross of Grunwald"/>
<link wikidata="Q458911" start="19611" end="19655" title="Order of the Flag of the Republic of Hungary" label="Order of the Flag of the Republic of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2340171" start="19682" end="19715" title="Star of the Republic of Indonesia" label="Star of the Republic of Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417302" start="19745" end="19763" title="Order of the Volta" label="Order of the Volta"/>
<link wikidata="Q4137459" start="19811" end="19855" title="Hero of the Mongolian People&amp;#x27;s Republic" label="Hero of the Mongolian People&amp;#x27;s Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q530008" start="19869" end="19888" title="Order of Sukhbaatar" label="Order of Sukhbaatar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783222" start="20011" end="20028" title="Order of the Nile" label="Order of the Nile"/>
<link wikidata="Q3355325" start="20066" end="20079" title="Hero of Labor (Vietnam)" label="Hero of Labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2300740" start="20106" end="20138" title="Order of Bernardo O&amp;#x27;Higgins" label="Order of Bernardo O&amp;#x27;Higgins"/>
<link wikidata="Q108208245" start="20161" end="20184" title="Order of Ana Betancourt" label="Order of Ana Betancourt"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20199" end="20218" title="Order of Friendship (Laos)" label="Order of Friendship"/>
<link wikidata="Q126011" start="20234" end="20256" title="Order of Duke Branimir" label="Order of Duke Branimir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1287814" start="20327" end="20353" title="Eduard Rhein Ring of Honor" label="Eduard Rhein Ring of Honor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1287814" start="20370" end="20393" title="Eduard Rhein Foundation" label="Eduard Rhein Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20541" end="20557" title="Gold Space Medal" label="Gold Space Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q160302" start="20599" end="20622" title="University of Edinburgh" label="University of Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2288" start="20748" end="20752" title="Tver" label="Tver"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20840" end="20855" title="Cosmonaut Alley" label="Cosmonaut Alley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1654138" start="20890" end="20907" title="Bayevsky District" label="Bayevsky District"/>
<link wikidata="Q7702267" start="21090" end="21107" title="Tereshkova (crater)" label="Tereshkova crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q816838" start="21126" end="21146" title="far side of the Moon" label="far side of the Moon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21185" end="21201" title="Apollonia Vanova" label="Apollonia Vanova"/>
<link wikidata="Q278040" start="21265" end="21282" title="A Wrinkle in Time (2003 film)" label="A Wrinkle in Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q152318" start="21521" end="21540" title="Svetlana Savitskaya" label="Svetlana Savitskaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q5979023" start="21603" end="21611" title="Komputer" label="Komputer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6447081" start="21860" end="21876" title="Kurt Swinghammer" label="Kurt Swinghammer"/>
<link wikidata="Q19627530" start="21935" end="21953" title="The Race for Space (album)" label="The Race for Space"/>
<link wikidata="Q7257602" start="21963" end="21990" title="Public Service Broadcasting (band)" label="Public Service Broadcasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q2295446" start="22021" end="22034" title="Smoke Fairies" label="Smoke Fairies"/>
<link wikidata="Q5449996" start="22085" end="22099" title="Findlay Napier" label="Findlay Napier"/>
<link wikidata="Q4942738" start="22201" end="22214" title="Boo Hewerdine" label="Boo Hewerdine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1944303" start="22337" end="22350" title="Rebecca Front" label="Rebecca Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q576619" start="22908" end="22940" title="2008 Summer Olympics torch relay" label="2008 Summer Olympics torch relay"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="22944" end="22960" title="Saint Petersburg" label="Saint Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q4532830" start="22969" end="23001" title="2014 Winter Olympics torch relay" label="2014 Winter Olympics torch relay"/>
<link wikidata="Q39420" start="23005" end="23010" title="Sochi" label="Sochi"/>
<link wikidata="Q15860072" start="23105" end="23151" title="Russian military intervention in Ukraine (2014–present)" label="Russia&amp;#x27;s military actions against Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q19801088" start="23194" end="23218" title="decommunization in Ukraine" label="2015 decommunisation law"/>
<link wikidata="Q36036" start="23300" end="23304" title="Lviv" label="Lviv"/>
<link wikidata="Q282824" start="23583" end="23587" title="Busk, Ukraine" label="Busk"/>
<link wikidata="Q164193" start="23600" end="23625" title="Lviv Oblast" label="the same province as Lviv"/>
<link wikidata="Q1958552" start="23882" end="23908" title="List of female spacefarers" label="List of female spacefarers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4433748" start="23910" end="23951" title="List of female Heroes of the Soviet Union" label="List of female Heroes of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q4338575" start="24244" end="24257" title="Arkady Ostashev" label="A.I. Ostashev"/>
<link wikidata="Q155309" start="24259" end="24267" title="Korolyov, Moscow Oblast" label="Korolyov"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="192198" wikidata="Q1519099" url="?curid=192198" title="Polio vaccine">
<text>Polio vaccines are vaccines used to prevent poliomyelitis (polio). Two types are used: an inactivated poliovirus given by injection (IPV) and a weakened poliovirus given by mouth (OPV). The World Health Organization (WHO) recommends all children be fully vaccinated against polio. The two vaccines have eliminated polio from most of the world, and reduced the number of cases reported each year from an estimated 350,000 in 1988 to 33 in 2018.
The inactivated polio vaccines are very safe. Mild redness or pain may occur at the site of injection. Oral polio vaccines cause about three cases of vaccine-associated paralytic poliomyelitis per million doses given. This compares with 5,000 cases per million who are paralysed following a polio infection. Both types of vaccine are generally safe to give during pregnancy and in those who have HIV/AIDS, but are otherwise well. However, the emergence of circulating vaccine-derived poliovirus (cVDPV), a form of the vaccine virus that has reverted to causing poliomyelitis, has led to the development of novel oral polio vaccine type 2 (nOPV2), which aims to make the vaccine safer and thus stop further outbreaks of cVDPV.
The first successful demonstration of a polio vaccine was by Hilary Koprowski in 1950, with a live attenuated virus that people drank. The vaccine was not approved for use in the United States, but was used successfully elsewhere. The success of an inactivated (killed) polio vaccine, developed by Jonas Salk, was announced in 1955. Another attenuated live oral polio vaccine ,developed by Albert Sabin, came into commercial use in 1961.

Polio vaccine is on the World Health Organization&#x27;s List of Essential Medicines.

==Medical uses==

Interruption of person-to-person transmission of the virus by vaccination is important in global polio eradication, since no long-term carrier state exists for poliovirus in individuals with normal immune function, polio viruses have no non-primate reservoir in nature, and survival of the virus in the environment for an extended period appears to be remote. The two types of vaccine are inactivated polio vaccine (IPV) and oral polio vaccine (OPV).

===Inactivated===
When the IPV (injection) is used, 90% or more of individuals develop protective antibodies to all three serotypes of poliovirus after two doses, and at least 99% are immune following three doses. The duration of immunity induced by IPV is not known with certainty, although a complete series is thought to protect for many years. IPV replaced the oral vaccine in many developed countries in the 1990s mainly due to the (small) risk of vaccine-derived polio in the oral vaccine.

===Attenuated===
Oral polio vaccines were easier to administer than IPV, as they eliminated the need for sterile syringes, so were more suitable for mass vaccination campaigns. OPV also provided longer-lasting immunity than the Salk vaccine, as it provides both humoral immunity and cell-mediated immunity.

One dose of trivalent OPV produces immunity to all three poliovirus serotypes in roughly 50% of recipients. Three doses of live-attenuated OPV produce protective antibodies to all three poliovirus types in more than 95% of recipients. As with other live-virus vaccines, immunity initiated by OPV is probably lifelong. OPV produces excellent immunity in the intestine, the primary site of wild poliovirus entry, which helps prevent infection with wild virus in areas where the virus is endemic. OPV does not require special medical equipment or extensive training. Attenuated poliovirus derived from the OPV is excreted for a few days after vaccination, potentially infecting and thus indirectly inducing immunity in unvaccinated individuals, thus amplifying the effects of the doses delivered. Taken together, these advantages have made it the favored vaccine of many countries, and it has long been preferred by the global eradication initiative.The primary disadvantage of OPV derives from its inherent nature. As an attenuated but active virus, it can induce vaccine-associated paralytic poliomyelitis (VAPP) in roughly one individual per every 2.7million doses administered. The live virus can circulate in under-vaccinated populations (termed either variant poliovirus or circulating vaccine-derived poliovirus, cVDPV), and over time can revert to a neurovirulent form causing paralytic polio. This genetic reversal of the pathogen to a virulent form takes a considerable time and does not affect the person who was originally vaccinated. With wild polio cases at record lows, 2017 was the first year where more cases of cVDPV were recorded than the wild poliovirus.

Until recent times, a trivalent OPV containing all three viral strains was used, and had nearly eradicated polio infection worldwide. With the complete eradication of wild poliovirus type2 this was phased out in 2016 and replaced with bivalent vaccine containing just types 1 and 3, supplemented with monovalent type2 OPV in regions where cVDPV type 2 was known to circulate. The switch to the bivalent vaccine and associated missing immunity against type 2 strains, among other factors, led to outbreaks of circulating vaccine-derived poliovirus type 2 (cVDPV2), which increased from two cases in 2016 to 1037 cases in 2020. 

A novel OPV2 vaccine (nOPV2), which has been genetically modified to reduce the likelihood of disease-causing activating mutations, was granted emergency licencing in 2021, and subsequently full licensure in December 2023. This has greater genetic stability than the traditional oral vaccine and is less likely to revert to a virulent form. Genetically stabilised vaccines targeting poliovirus types 1 and 3 are in development, with the intention that these will eventually completely replace the Sabin vaccines.

===Schedule===
In countries with endemic polio or where the risk of imported cases is high, the WHO recommends OPV vaccine at birth followed by a primary series of three OPV doses and at least one IPV dose starting at 6 weeks of age, with a minimum of 4 weeks between OPV doses. In countries with more than 90% immunization coverage and low risk of importation, the WHO recommends one or two IPV doses starting at two months of age followed by at least two OPV doses, with the doses separated by 4–8 weeks depending on the risk of exposure. In countries with the highest levels of coverage and the lowest risks of importation and transmission, the WHO recommends a primary series of three IPV injections, with a booster dose after an interval of six months or more if the first dose was administered before two months of age.

==Side effects==
The inactivated polio vaccines are very safe. Mild redness or pain may occur at the site of injection. They are generally safe to be given to pregnant women and those who have HIV/AIDS, but are otherwise well.

=== Allergic reaction to the vaccine ===
Inactivated polio vaccine can cause an allergic reaction in a few people, since the vaccine contains trace amounts of antibiotics, streptomycin, polymyxin B, and neomycin. It should not be given to anyone who has an allergic reaction to these medicines. Signs and symptoms of an allergic reaction, which usually appear within minutes or a few hours after receiving the injected vaccine, include breathing difficulties, weakness, hoarseness or wheezing, heart-rate fluctuations, skin rash, and dizziness.

=== Vaccine-associated paralytic polio ===
A potential adverse effect of the Sabin OPV is caused by its known potential to recombine to a form that causes neurological infection and paralysis. The Sabin OPV results in vaccine-associated paralytic poliomyelitis (VAPP) in around one individual per every 2.7million doses administered, with symptoms identical to wild polio. Due to its improved genetic stability, the novel OPV (nOPV) has a reduced risk of this occurring.

===Contamination concerns===

In 1960, the rhesus monkey kidney cells used to prepare the poliovirus vaccines were determined to be infected with the simian virus-40 (SV40), which was also discovered in 1960 and is a naturally occurring virus that infects monkeys. In 1961, SV40 was found to cause tumors in rodents. More recently, the virus was found in certain forms of cancer in humans, for instance brain and bone tumors, pleural and peritoneal mesothelioma, and some types of non-Hodgkin lymphoma. However, SV40 has not been determined to cause these cancers.

SV40 was found to be present in stocks of the injected form of the IPV in use between 1955 and 1963; it is not found in the OPV form. Over 98 million Americans received one or more doses of polio vaccine between 1955 and 1963, when a proportion of vaccine was contaminated with SV40; an estimated 10–30 million Americans may have received a dose of vaccine contaminated with SV40. Later analysis suggested that vaccines produced by the former Soviet bloc countries until 1980, and used in the USSR, China, Japan, and several African countries, may have been contaminated, meaning hundreds of millions more may have been exposed to SV40.

In 1998, the National Cancer Institute undertook a large study, using cancer case information from the institute&#x27;s SEER database. The published findings from the study revealed no increased incidence of cancer in persons who may have received vaccine containing SV40. Another large study in Sweden examined cancer rates of 700,000 individuals who had received potentially contaminated polio vaccine as late as 1957; the study again revealed no increased cancer incidence between persons who received polio vaccines containing SV40 and those who did not. The question of whether SV40 causes cancer in humans remains controversial, however, and the development of improved assays for detection of SV40 in human tissues will be needed to resolve the controversy.

During the race to develop an oral polio vaccine, several large-scale human trials were undertaken. By 1958, the National Institutes of Health had determined that OPV produced using the Sabin strains was the safest. Between 1957 and 1960, however, Hilary Koprowski continued to administer his vaccine around the world. In Africa, the vaccines were administered to roughly one million people in the Belgian territories (now the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Rwanda, and Burundi). The results of these human trials have been controversial, and unfounded accusations in the 1990s arose that the vaccine had created the conditions necessary for transmission of simian immunodeficiency virus from chimpanzees to humans, causing HIV/AIDS. These hypotheses, however, have been conclusively refuted. By 2004, cases of poliomyelitis in Africa had been reduced to just a small number of isolated regions in the western portion of the continent, with sporadic cases elsewhere. Recent local opposition to vaccination campaigns has evolved due to lack of adequate information, often relating to fears that the vaccine might induce sterility. The disease has since resurged in Nigeria and several other African nations without necessary information, which epidemiologists believe is due to refusals by certain local populations to allow their children to receive the polio vaccine.

==Manufacture==

===Inactivated===
The Salk vaccine, IPV, is based on three wild, virulent reference strains, Mahoney (type 1 poliovirus), MEF-1 (type 2 poliovirus), and Saukett (type 3 poliovirus), grown in a type of monkey kidney tissue culture (Vero cell line), which are then inactivated with formalin. The injected Salk vaccine confers IgG-mediated immunity in the bloodstream, which prevents polio infection from progressing to viremia and protects the motor neurons, thus eliminating the risk of bulbar polio and post-polio syndrome.

In the United States, the vaccine is administered along with the tetanus, diphtheria, and acellular pertussis vaccines (DTaP) and a pediatric dose of hepatitis B vaccine. In the UK, IPV is combined with tetanus, diphtheria, pertussis, and &quot;Haemophilus influenzae&quot; type b vaccines.

===Attenuated===
OPV is an attenuated vaccine, produced by the passage of the virus through nonhuman cells at a subphysiological temperature, which produces spontaneous mutations in the viral genome. Oral polio vaccines were developed by several groups, one of which was led by Albert Sabin. Other groups, led by Hilary Koprowski and H.R. Cox, developed their attenuated vaccine strains. In 1958, the NIH created a special committee on live polio vaccines. The various vaccines were carefully evaluated for their ability to induce immunity to polio while retaining a low incidence of neuropathogenicity in monkeys. Large-scale clinical trials performed in the Soviet Union in the late 1950s to early 1960s by Mikhail Chumakov and his colleagues demonstrated the safety and high efficacy of the vaccine. Based on these results, the Sabin strains were chosen for worldwide distribution. Fifty-seven nucleotide substitutions distinguish the attenuated Sabin 1 strain from its virulent parent (the Mahoney serotype), two nucleotide substitutions attenuate the Sabin 2 strain, and 10 substitutions are involved in attenuating the Sabin 3 strain. The primary attenuating factor common to all three Sabin vaccines is a mutation located in the virus&#x27;s internal ribosome entry site, which alters stem-loop structures and reduces the ability of poliovirus to translate its RNA template within the host cell. The attenuated poliovirus in the Sabin vaccine replicates very efficiently in the gut, the primary site of infection and replication, but is unable to replicate efficiently within nervous system tissue. In 1961, type 1 and 2 monovalent oral poliovirus vaccine (MOPV) was licensed, and in 1962, type 3 MOPV was licensed. In 1963, trivalent OPV (TOPV) was licensed, and became the vaccine of choice in the United States and most other countries of the world, largely replacing the inactivated polio vaccine. A second wave of mass immunizations led to a further dramatic decline in the number of polio cases. Between 1962 and 1965, about 100 million Americans (roughly 56% of the population at that time) received the Sabin vaccine. The result was a substantial reduction in the number of poliomyelitis cases, even from the much-reduced levels following the introduction of the Salk vaccine.

OPV is usually provided in vials containing 10–20 doses of vaccine. A single dose of oral polio vaccine (usually two drops) contains 1,000,000 infectious units of Sabin 1 (effective against PV1), 100,000 infectious units of the Sabin 2 strain, and 600,000 infectious units of Sabin 3. The vaccine contains small traces of antibiotics—neomycin and streptomycin—but does not contain preservatives.

==History==

In a generic sense, vaccination works by priming the immune system with an &quot;immunogen&quot;. Stimulating immune response, by use of an infectious agent, is known as immunization. The development of immunity to polio efficiently blocks person-to-person transmission of wild poliovirus, thereby protecting both individual vaccine recipients and the wider community.

The development of two polio vaccines led to the first modern mass inoculations. The last cases of paralytic poliomyelitis caused by endemic transmission of wild virus in the United States occurred in 1979, with an outbreak among the Amish in several Midwest states.

=== 1930s ===
In the 1930s, poliovirus was perceived as especially terrifying, as little was known of how the disease was transmitted or how it could be prevented. This virus was also notable for primarily impacting affluent children, making it a prime target for vaccine development, despite its relatively low mortality and morbidity. Despite this, the community of researchers in the field thus far had largely observed an informal moratorium on any vaccine development, as it was perceived to present too high a risk for too little likelihood of success.

This shifted in the early 1930s, when American groups took up the challenge: Maurice Brodie led a team from the public health laboratory of the city of New York and John A. Kolmer collaborated with the Research Institute of Cutaneous Medicine in Philadelphia. The rivalry between these two researchers lent itself to a race-like mentality, which combined with a lack of oversight of medical studies, was reflected in the methodology and outcomes of each of these early vaccine-development ventures.

==== Kolmer&#x27;s live vaccine ====
Kolmer began his vaccine development project in 1932 and ultimately focused on producing an attenuated or &quot;live virus vaccine&quot;. Inspired by the success of vaccines for rabies and yellow fever, he hoped to use a similar process to denature the polio virus. To go about attenuating his polio vaccine, he repeatedly passed the virus through monkeys. Using methods of production that were later described as &quot;hair-raisingly amateurish, the therapeutic equivalent of bath-tub gin,&quot; Kolmer ground the spinal cords of his infected monkeys and soaked them in a salt solution. He then filtered the solution through mesh, treated it with ricinolate, and refrigerated the product for 14 days to ultimately create what would later be prominently critiqued as a &quot;veritable witches brew&quot;.

In keeping with the norms of the time, Kolmer completed a relatively small animal trial with 42 monkeys before proceeding to self-experimentation in 1934. He tested his vaccine upon himself, his two children, and his assistant. He gave his vaccine to just 23 more children before declaring it safe and sending it out to doctors and health departments for a larger test of efficacy. By April 1935, he was able to report having tested the vaccine on 100 children without ill effect. Kolmer&#x27;s first formal presentation of results did not come about until November 1935, when he presented the results of 446 children and adults he had vaccinated with his attenuated vaccine. He also reported that together the Research Institute of Cutaneous Medicine and the Merrell Company of Cincinnati (the manufacturer who held the patent for his ricinoleating process) had distributed 12,000 doses of vaccine to some 700 physicians across the United States and Canada. Kolmer did not describe any monitoring of this experimental vaccination program, nor did he provide these physicians with instructions in how to administer the vaccine or how to report side effects. Kolmer dedicated the bulk of his publications thereafter to explaining what he believed to be the cause of the 10+ reported cases of paralytic polio following vaccination, in many cases in towns where no polio outbreak had occurred. Six of these cases had been fatal. Kolmer had no control group, but asserted that many more children would have gotten sick.

==== Brodie&#x27;s inactivated vaccine ====
At nearly the same time as Kolmer&#x27;s project, Maurice Brodie had joined immunologist William H. Park at the New York City Health Department, where they worked together on poliovirus. With the aid of grant funding from the President&#x27;s Birthday Ball Commission (a predecessor to what would become the March of Dimes), Brodie was able to pursue the development of an inactivated or &quot;killed virus&quot; vaccine. Brodie&#x27;s process also began by grinding the spinal cords of infectious monkeys and then treating the cords with various germicides, ultimately finding a solution of formaldehyde to be the most effective. By 1 June 1934, Brodie was able to publish his first scholarly article describing his successful induction of immunity in three monkeys with inactivated poliovirus. Through continued study on an additional 26 monkeys, Brodie ultimately concluded that administration of live virus vaccine tended to result in humoral immunity, while administration of killed virus vaccine tended to result in tissue immunity.

Soon after, following a similar protocol to Kolmer&#x27;s, Brodie proceeded with self-experimentation upon himself and his co-workers at the NYC Health Department laboratory. Brodie&#x27;s progress was eagerly covered by popular press, as the public hoped for a successful vaccine to become available. Such reporting did not make mention of the 12 children in a New York City Asylum who were subjected to early safety trials. As none of the subjects experienced ill effects, Park, described by contemporaries as &quot;never one to let grass grow under his feet,&quot; declared the vaccine safe. When a severe polio outbreak overwhelmed Kern County, California, it became the first trial site for the new vaccine on very short notice. Between November 1934 and May 1935, over 1,500 doses of the vaccine were administered in Kern County. While initial results were very promising, insufficient staffing and poor protocol design left Brodie open to criticism when he published the California results in August 1935. Through private physicians, Brodie also conducted a broader field study, including 9,000 children who received the vaccine and 4,500 age- and location-matched controls who did not receive a vaccine. Again, the results were promising. Of those who received the vaccine, only a few went on to develop polio. Most had been exposed before vaccination and none had received the full series of vaccine doses being studied. Additionally, a polio epidemic in Raleigh, North Carolina, provided an opportunity for the U.S. Public Health Service to conduct a highly structured trial of the Brodie vaccine using funding from the Birthday Ball Commission.

==== Academic reception ====
While their work was ongoing, the larger community of bacteriologists began to raise concerns regarding the safety and efficacy of the new poliovirus vaccines. At this time, very little oversight of medical studies occurred and the ethical treatment of study participants largely relied upon moral pressure from peer academic scientists. Brodie&#x27;s inactivated vaccines faced scrutiny from many who felt killed virus vaccines could not be efficacious. While researchers were able to replicate the tissue immunity he had produced in his animal trials, the prevailing wisdom was that humoral immunity was essential for an efficacious vaccine. Kolmer directly questioned the killed virus approach in scholarly journals. Kolmer&#x27;s studies, however, had raised even more concern with increasing reports of children becoming paralysed following vaccination with his live-virus vaccine and notably, with paralysis beginning at the arm rather than the foot in many cases. Both Kolmer and Brodie were called to present their research at the Annual Meeting of the American Public Health Association in Milwaukee WI in October 1935. Additionally, Thomas M. Rivers was asked to discuss each of the presented papers as a prominent critic of the vaccine development effort. This resulted in the APHA arranging a symposium on poliomyelitis to be delivered at the annual meeting of their southern branch the following month. During the discussion at this meeting, James Leake of the U.S. Public Health Service stood to immediately present clinical evidence that the Kolmer vaccine had caused several deaths and then allegedly accused Kolmer of being a murderer. As Rivers recalled in his oral history, &quot;All hell broke loose, and it seemed as if everybody was trying to talk at the same time...Jimmy Leake used the strongest language that I have ever heard used at a scientific meeting.&quot; In response to the attacks from all sides, Brodie was reported to have stood up and stated, &quot;It looks as though, according to Dr. Rivers, my vaccine is no good, and according to Dr. Leake, Dr Kolmer&#x27;s is dangerous.&quot; Kolmer simply responded by stating, &quot;Gentlemen, this is one time I wish the floor would open up and swallow me.&quot; Ultimately, Kolmer&#x27;s live vaccine was undoubtedly shown to be dangerous and had already been withdrawn in September 1935 before the Milwaukee meeting. While the consensus of the symposium was largely skeptical of the efficacy of Brodie&#x27;s vaccine, its safety was not in question and the recommendation was for a much larger, well-controlled trial. However, when three children became ill with paralytic polio following a dose of the vaccine, the directors of the Warm Springs Foundation in Georgia (acting as the primary funders for the project) requested it be withdrawn in December 1935. Following its withdrawal, the previously observed moratorium on human poliomyelitis vaccine development resumed and another attempt would not be made for nearly 20 years.

While Brodie had arguably made the most progress in the pursuit of a poliovirus vaccine, he suffered the most significant career repercussions due to his status as a less widely known researcher. Modern researchers recognize that Brodie may well have developed an effective polio vaccine, but the basic science and technology of the time were insufficient to understand and use this breakthrough. Brodie&#x27;s work using formalin-inactivated virus later became the basis for the Salk vaccine, but he did not live to see this success. Brodie was fired from his position within three months of the symposium&#x27;s publication. While he was able to find another laboratory position, he died of a heart attack only three years later at age 36. By contrast, Park, who was believed in the community to be reaching senility at this point in his older age, was able to retire from his position with honors before he died in 1939. Kolmer, already an established and well-respected researcher, returned to Temple University as a professor of medicine. Kolmer had a very productive career, receiving multiple awards, and publishing countless papers, articles, and textbooks until his retirement in 1957.

===1948===
A breakthrough came in 1948 when a research group headed by John Enders at the Children&#x27;s Hospital Boston successfully cultivated the poliovirus in human tissue in the laboratory. This group had recently successfully grown mumps in cell culture. In March 1948, Thomas H. Weller was attempting to grow &quot;varicella&quot; virus in embryonic lung tissue. He had inoculated the planned number of tubes when he noticed that a few unused tubes. He retrieved a sample of mouse brain infected with poliovirus and added it to the remaining test tubes, on the off chance that the virus might grow. The &quot;varicella&quot; cultures failed to grow, but the polio cultures were successful. This development greatly facilitated vaccine research and ultimately allowed for the development of vaccines against polio. Enders and his colleagues, Thomas H. Weller and Frederick C. Robbins, were recognized in 1954 for their efforts with a Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine. Other important advances that led to the development of polio vaccines included the identification of three poliovirus serotypes (poliovirus type 1 – PV1, or Mahoney; PV2, Lansing; and PV3, Leon), the finding that before paralysis, the virus must be present in the blood, and the demonstration that administration of antibodies in the form of gamma globulin protects against paralytic polio.

=== 1950–1955 ===
During the early 1950s, polio rates in the U.S. were above 25,000 annually; in 1952 and 1953, the U.S. experienced an outbreak of 58,000 and 35,000 polio cases, respectively, up from a typical number of some 20,000 a year, with deaths in those years numbering 3,200 and 1,400. Amid this U.S. polio epidemic, millions of dollars were invested in finding and marketing a polio vaccine by commercial interests, including Lederle Laboratories in New York under the direction of H. R. Cox. Also working at Lederle was Polish-born virologist and immunologist Hilary Koprowski of the Wistar Institute in Philadelphia, who tested the first successful polio vaccine, in 1950. His vaccine, however, being a live attenuated virus taken orally, was still in the research stage and would not be ready for use until five years after Jonas Salk&#x27;s polio vaccine (a dead-virus injectable vaccine) had reached the market. Koprowski&#x27;s attenuated vaccine was prepared by successive passages through the brains of Swiss albino mice. By the seventh passage, the vaccine strains could no longer infect nervous tissue or cause paralysis. After one to three further passages on rats, the vaccine was deemed safe for human use. On 27 February 1950, Koprowski&#x27;s live, attenuated vaccine was tested for the first time on an 8-year-old boy living at Letchworth Village, an institution for physically and mentally disabled people located in New York. After the child had no side effects, Koprowski enlarged his experiment to include 19 other children.

==== Jonas Salk ====


The first effective polio vaccine was developed in 1952 by Jonas Salk and a team at the University of Pittsburgh that included Julius Youngner, Byron Bennett, L. James Lewis, and Lorraine Friedman, which required years of subsequent testing. Salk went on CBS radio to report a successful test on a small group of adults and children on 26 March 1953; two days later, the results were published in &quot;JAMA&quot;. Leone N. Farrell invented a key laboratory technique that enabled the mass production of the vaccine by a team she led in Toronto. Beginning 23 February 1954, the vaccine was tested at Arsenal Elementary School and the Watson Home for Children in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.

Salk&#x27;s vaccine was then used in a test called the Francis Field Trial, led by Thomas Francis, the largest medical experiment in history at that time. The test began with about 4,000 children at Franklin Sherman Elementary School in McLean, Virginia, and eventually involved 1.8 million children, in 44 states from Maine to California. By the conclusion of the study, roughly 440,000 received one or more injections of the vaccine, about 210,000 children received a placebo, consisting of harmless culture media, and 1.2 million children received no vaccination and served as a control group, who would then be observed to see if any contracted polio.

The results of the field trial were announced on 12 April 1955 (the tenth anniversary of the death of President Franklin D. Roosevelt, whose paralytic illness was generally believed to have been caused by polio). The Salk vaccine had been 60–70% effective against PV1 (poliovirus type 1), over 90% effective against PV2 and PV3, and 94% effective against the development of bulbar polio. Soon after Salk&#x27;s vaccine was licensed in 1955, children&#x27;s vaccination campaigns were launched. In the U.S., following a mass immunization campaign promoted by the March of Dimes, the annual number of polio cases fell from 35,000 in 1953 to 5,600 by 1957. By 1961 only 161 cases were recorded in the United States.

A week before the announcement of the Francis Field Trial results in April 1955, Pierre Lépine at the Pasteur Institute in Paris had also announced an effective polio vaccine.

====Safety incidents====
In April 1955, soon after mass polio vaccination began in the US, the Surgeon General began to receive reports of patients who contracted paralytic polio about a week after being vaccinated with the Salk polio vaccine from the Cutter pharmaceutical company, with the paralysis starting in the limb the vaccine was injected into. The Cutter vaccine had been used in vaccinating 409,000 children in the western and midwestern United States.
Later investigations showed that the Cutter vaccine had caused 260 cases of polio, killing 11.
In response, the Surgeon General pulled all polio vaccines made by Cutter Laboratories from the market, but not before 260 cases of paralytic illness had occurred. Eli Lilly, Parke-Davis, Pitman-Moore, and Wyeth polio vaccines were also reported to have paralyzed numerous children. It was soon discovered that some lots of Salk polio vaccine made by Cutter, Wyeth, and the other labs had not been properly inactivated, allowing live poliovirus into more than 100,000 doses of vaccine. In May 1955, the National Institutes of Health and Public Health Services established a Technical Committee on Poliomyelitis Vaccine to test and review all polio vaccine lots and advise the Public Health Service as to which lots should be released for public use. These incidents reduced public confidence in the polio vaccine, leading to a drop in vaccination rates.

===1961===

At the same time that Salk was testing his vaccine, both Albert Sabin and Hilary Koprowski continued working on developing a vaccine using live virus. During a meeting in Stockholm to discuss polio vaccines in November 1955, Sabin presented results obtained on a group of 80 volunteers, while Koprowski read a paper detailing the findings of a trial enrolling 150 people. Sabin and Koprowski both eventually succeeded in developing vaccines. Because of the commitment to the Salk vaccine in America, Sabin and Koprowski both did their testing outside the United States, Sabin in Mexico and the Soviet Union, Koprowski in the Congo and Poland. In 1957, Sabin developed a trivalent vaccine containing attenuated strains of all three types of poliovirus. In 1959, ten million children in the Soviet Union received the Sabin oral vaccine. For this work, Sabin was given the medal of the Order of Friendship of Peoples, described as the Soviet Union&#x27;s highest civilian honor. Sabin&#x27;s oral vaccine using live virus came into commercial use in 1961.

Once Sabin&#x27;s oral vaccine became widely available, it supplanted Salk&#x27;s injected vaccine, which had been tarnished in the public&#x27;s opinion by the Cutter incident of 1955, in which Salk vaccines improperly prepared by one company resulted in several children dying or becoming paralyzed.

=== 1987 ===
An enhanced-potency IPV was licensed in the United States in November 1987, and is currently the vaccine of choice there. The first dose of the polio vaccine is given shortly after birth, usually between 1 and 2 months of age, and a second dose is given at 4 months of age. The timing of the third dose depends on the vaccine formulation but should be given between 6 and 18 months of age. A booster vaccination is given at 4 to 6 years of age, for a total of four doses at or before school entry. In some countries, a fifth vaccination is given during adolescence. Routine vaccination of adults (18 years of age and older) in developed countries is neither necessary nor recommended because most adults are already immune and have a very small risk of exposure to wild poliovirus in their home countries. In 2002, a pentavalent (five-component) combination vaccine (called Pediarix) containing IPV was approved for use in the United States.

===1988===
A global effort to eradicate polio, led by the World Health Organization (WHO), UNICEF, and the Rotary Foundation, began in 1988, and has relied largely on the oral polio vaccine developed by Albert Sabin and Mikhail Chumakov (Sabin-Chumakov vaccine).

===After 1990===
Polio was eliminated in the Americas by 1994. The disease was officially eliminated in 36 Western Pacific countries, including China and Australia, in 2000. Europe was declared polio-free in 2002. Since January 2011, no cases of the disease have been reported in India, hence in February 2012, the country was taken off the WHO list of polio-endemic countries. In March 2014, India was declared a polio-free country.

Although poliovirus transmission has been interrupted in much of the world, transmission of wild poliovirus does continue and creates an ongoing risk for the importation of wild poliovirus into previously polio-free regions. If importations of poliovirus occur, outbreaks of poliomyelitis may develop, especially in areas with low vaccination coverage and poor sanitation. As a result, high levels of vaccination coverage must be maintained. In November 2013, the WHO announced a polio outbreak in Syria. In response, the Armenian government put out a notice asking Syrian Armenians under age 15 to get the polio vaccine. As of 2014, polio virus had spread to 10 countries, mainly in Africa, Asia, and the Middle East, with Pakistan, Syria, and Cameroon advising vaccinations to outbound travellers.

Polio vaccination programs have been resisted by some people in Pakistan, Afghanistan, and Nigeria - the three countries as of 2017 with remaining polio cases. Almost all Muslim religious and political leaders have endorsed the vaccine, but a fringe minority believes that the vaccines are secretly being used for the sterilisation of Muslims. The fact that the CIA organized a fake vaccination program in 2011 to help find Osama bin Laden is an additional cause of distrust. In 2015, the WHO announced a deal with the Taliban to encourage them to distribute the vaccine in areas they control. However, the Pakistani Taliban was not supportive. On 11 September 2016, two unidentified gunmen associated with the Pakistani Taliban, Jamaat-ul-Ahrar, shot Zakaullah Khan, a doctor who was administering polio vaccines in Pakistan. The leader of the Jamaat-ul-Ahrar claimed responsibility for the shooting and stated that the group would continue this type of attack. Such resistance to and skepticism of vaccinations has consequently slowed down the polio eradication process within the two remaining endemic countries.

== Travel requirements ==
Travellers who wish to enter or leave certain countries must be vaccinated against polio, usually at most 12 months and at least 4 weeks before crossing the border, and be able to present a vaccination record/certificate at the border checks. Most requirements apply only to travel to or from so-called &#x27;polio-endemic&#x27;, &#x27;polio-affected&#x27;, &#x27;polio-exporting&#x27;, &#x27;polio-transmission&#x27;, or &#x27;high-risk&#x27; countries. As of August 2020, Afghanistan and Pakistan are the only polio-endemic countries in the world (where wild polio has not yet been eradicated). Several countries have additional precautionary polio vaccination travel requirements, for example to and from &#x27;key at-risk countries&#x27;, which as of December 2020 include China, Indonesia, Mozambique, Myanmar, and Papua New Guinea.


==Society and culture==

===Cost===
, the Global Alliance for Vaccines and Immunization supplies the inactivated vaccine to developing countries for as little as (about ) per dose in 10-dose vials.

===Misconceptions===

A misconception has been present in Pakistan that the polio vaccine contains &quot;haram&quot; ingredients and could cause impotence and infertility in male children, leading some parents not to have their children vaccinated. This belief is most common in the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa province and the FATA region. Attacks on polio vaccination teams have also occurred, thereby hampering international efforts to eradicate polio in Pakistan and globally.

== References ==
== Further reading ==
* 


== External links ==
* History of Vaccines Website – History of Polio History of Vaccines, a project of the College of Physicians of Philadelphia
* PBS.org – &#x27;People and Discoveries: Salk Produces Polio Vaccine 1952&#x27;, Public Broadcasting Service (PBS)
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1519099" start="0" end="14" title="Polio vaccine" label="Polio vaccines"/>
<link wikidata="Q134808" start="19" end="26" title="vaccine" label="vaccine"/>
<link wikidata="Q12195" start="44" end="57" title="poliomyelitis" label="poliomyelitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3560939" start="90" end="101" title="inactivated vaccine" label="inactivated"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810913" start="144" end="152" title="attenuated vaccine" label="weakened"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="190" end="215" title="World Health Organization" label="World Health Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q11995" start="808" end="817" title="pregnancy" label="pregnancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12199" start="840" end="848" title="HIV/AIDS" label="HIV/AIDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q936389" start="1231" end="1247" title="Hilary Koprowski" label="Hilary Koprowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810913" start="1269" end="1285" title="Attenuated vaccine" label="attenuated virus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3560939" start="1419" end="1430" title="Inactivated vaccine" label="inactivated"/>
<link wikidata="Q200101" start="1468" end="1478" title="Jonas Salk" label="Jonas Salk"/>
<link wikidata="Q108085545" start="1484" end="1501" title="Announcement of Polio vaccine success" label="announced in 1955"/>
<link wikidata="Q164790" start="1560" end="1572" title="Albert Sabin" label="Albert Sabin"/>
<link wikidata="Q37155" start="1633" end="1693" title="WHO Model List of Essential Medicines" label="World Health Organization&amp;#x27;s List of Essential Medicines"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209788" start="1811" end="1828" title="Poliomyelitis eradication" label="polio eradication"/>
<link wikidata="Q1549382" start="1849" end="1856" title="asymptomatic carrier" label="carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q12438936" start="1874" end="1884" title="poliovirus" label="poliovirus"/>
<link wikidata="Q848328" start="2288" end="2296" title="serotype" label="serotype"/>
<link wikidata="Q182581" start="2873" end="2881" title="immunity (medical)" label="immunity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142875" start="2925" end="2941" title="humoral immunity" label="humoral immunity"/>
<link wikidata="Q189146" start="2946" end="2968" title="cell-mediated immunity" label="cell-mediated immunity"/>
<link wikidata="Q11829360" start="3328" end="3337" title="intestine" label="intestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q506680" start="3456" end="3463" title="endemic (epidemiology)" label="endemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164833" start="3675" end="3683" title="Contact immunity" label="immunity"/>
<link wikidata="Q11995" start="6772" end="6780" title="pregnancy" label="pregnant"/>
<link wikidata="Q12199" start="6806" end="6814" title="HIV/AIDS" label="HIV/AIDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q12187" start="7000" end="7011" title="Antibiotic" label="antibiotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q192717" start="7013" end="7025" title="streptomycin" label="streptomycin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088175" start="7027" end="7038" title="polymyxin B" label="polymyxin B"/>
<link wikidata="Q423098" start="7044" end="7052" title="neomycin" label="neomycin"/>
<link wikidata="Q156606" start="7902" end="7915" title="rhesus monkey" label="rhesus monkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q734305" start="8009" end="8024" title="SV40" label="simian virus-40"/>
<link wikidata="Q10850" start="8167" end="8173" title="rodent" label="rodent"/>
<link wikidata="Q12078" start="8231" end="8237" title="cancer" label="cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q233309" start="8262" end="8267" title="brain tumor" label="brain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328805" start="8272" end="8282" title="bone tumor" label="bone tumor"/>
<link wikidata="Q192398" start="8285" end="8292" title="pleural" label="pleural"/>
<link wikidata="Q9629" start="8297" end="8307" title="peritoneal" label="peritoneal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138590" start="8340" end="8360" title="non-Hodgkin lymphoma" label="non-Hodgkin lymphoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q170541" start="8868" end="8879" title="Soviet bloc" label="Soviet bloc"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="8918" end="8922" title="USSR" label="USSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="8924" end="8929" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="8931" end="8936" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="8950" end="8956" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q664846" start="9076" end="9101" title="National Cancer Institute" label="National Cancer Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q936389" start="10077" end="10093" title="Hilary Koprowski" label="Hilary Koprowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q974" start="10256" end="10288" title="Democratic Republic of the Congo" label="Democratic Republic of the Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1037" start="10290" end="10296" title="Rwanda" label="Rwanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q967" start="10302" end="10309" title="Burundi" label="Burundi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3984114" start="10385" end="10409" title="OPV AIDS hypothesis" label="accusations in the 1990s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1890246" start="10490" end="10519" title="simian immunodeficiency virus" label="simian immunodeficiency virus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4126704" start="10525" end="10535" title="Common chimpanzee" label="chimpanzee"/>
<link wikidata="Q12199" start="10556" end="10564" title="HIV/AIDS" label="HIV/AIDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q3984114" start="10593" end="10623" title="OPV AIDS hypothesis" label="have been conclusively refuted"/>
<link wikidata="Q179399" start="10951" end="10960" title="Infertility" label="sterility"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033" start="10996" end="11003" title="Nigeria" label="Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q133805" start="11075" end="11089" title="epidemiologist" label="epidemiologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460232" start="11284" end="11292" title="virulent" label="virulent"/>
<link wikidata="Q9377" start="11427" end="11433" title="kidney" label="kidney"/>
<link wikidata="Q3066564" start="11450" end="11459" title="Vero cell" label="Vero cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q161210" start="11499" end="11507" title="formalin" label="formalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q79448" start="11543" end="11546" title="Immunoglobulin G" label="IgG"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425304" start="11636" end="11643" title="viremia" label="viremia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133903" start="11661" end="11674" title="motor neurons" label="motor neurons"/>
<link wikidata="Q12195" start="11705" end="11717" title="bulbar polio" label="bulbar polio"/>
<link wikidata="Q220188" start="11722" end="11741" title="post-polio syndrome" label="post-polio syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q5861101" start="11809" end="11816" title="tetanus vaccine" label="tetanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q134649" start="11818" end="11828" title="diphtheria" label="diphtheria"/>
<link wikidata="Q169731" start="11834" end="11843" title="acellular" label="acellular"/>
<link wikidata="Q134859" start="11844" end="11853" title="pertussis" label="pertussis"/>
<link wikidata="Q908600" start="11864" end="11868" title="DTaP" label="DTaP"/>
<link wikidata="Q6853" start="11894" end="11905" title="hepatitis B" label="hepatitis B"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141979" start="11989" end="12011" title="Haemophilus influenzae" label="Haemophilus influenzae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810913" start="12063" end="12081" title="attenuated vaccine" label="attenuated vaccine"/>
<link wikidata="Q521" start="12151" end="12164" title="physiological" label="physiological"/>
<link wikidata="Q164790" start="12314" end="12326" title="Albert Sabin" label="Albert Sabin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5628482" start="12370" end="12378" title="H. R. Cox" label="H.R. Cox"/>
<link wikidata="Q594632" start="12745" end="12761" title="Mikhail Chumakov" label="Mikhail Chumakov"/>
<link wikidata="Q28745" start="12933" end="12943" title="nucleotide" label="nucleotide"/>
<link wikidata="Q166992" start="13285" end="13313" title="internal ribosome entry site" label="internal ribosome entry site"/>
<link wikidata="Q418900" start="13328" end="13337" title="stem-loop" label="stem-loop"/>
<link wikidata="Q9404" start="13619" end="13633" title="nervous system" label="nervous system"/>
<link wikidata="Q134808" start="13664" end="13674" title="monovalent vaccine" label="monovalent"/>
<link wikidata="Q274579" start="14710" end="14722" title="preservative" label="preservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059" start="14792" end="14805" title="immune system" label="immune system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1660181" start="14820" end="14829" title="immunogen" label="immunogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415366" start="14909" end="14921" title="immunization" label="immunization"/>
<link wikidata="Q736798" start="15087" end="15106" title="herd immunity" label="the wider community"/>
<link wikidata="Q1664296" start="15176" end="15187" title="inoculation" label="inoculation"/>
<link wikidata="Q104444" start="15343" end="15348" title="Amish" label="Amish"/>
<link wikidata="Q186545" start="15360" end="15367" title="Midwest" label="Midwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q56163351" start="16014" end="16028" title="Maurice Brodie" label="Maurice Brodie"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16102" end="16116" title="John A. Kolmer" label="John A. Kolmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420239" start="16139" end="16179" title="Temple University College of Public Health" label="Research Institute of Cutaneous Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810913" start="16752" end="16763" title="Attenuated vaccine" label="attenuating"/>
<link wikidata="Q424484" start="17122" end="17132" title="Ricinoleic acid" label="ricinolate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7448090" start="17405" end="17425" title="Self-experimentation in medicine" label="self-experimentation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5489637" start="18040" end="18069" title="Marion Merrell Dow" label="Merrell Company of Cincinnati"/>
<link wikidata="Q56163351" start="18891" end="18905" title="Maurice Brodie" label="Maurice Brodie"/>
<link wikidata="Q8010742" start="18930" end="18945" title="William Hallock Park" label="William H. Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q16995038" start="18953" end="18984" title="New York City Health Department" label="New York City Health Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q751572" start="19149" end="19163" title="March of Dimes" label="March of Dimes"/>
<link wikidata="Q161210" start="19433" end="19445" title="formaldehyde" label="formaldehyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142875" start="19780" end="19796" title="humoral immunity" label="humoral immunity"/>
<link wikidata="Q189146" start="19863" end="19878" title="Cell-mediated immunity" label="tissue immunity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7014077" start="20022" end="20043" title="New York State Department of Health" label="NYC Health Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q108047" start="20517" end="20540" title="Kern County, California" label="Kern County, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q41087" start="21345" end="21368" title="Raleigh, North Carolina" label="Raleigh, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q476322" start="21402" end="21428" title="United States Public Health Service" label="U.S. Public Health Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q15816836" start="21621" end="21635" title="bacteriologist" label="bacteriologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q215028" start="21879" end="21892" title="Peer review" label="peer academic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142875" start="22152" end="22168" title="humoral immunity" label="humoral immunity"/>
<link wikidata="Q4744758" start="22628" end="22662" title="American Public Health Association" label="American Public Health Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q37836" start="22666" end="22675" title="Milwaukee" label="Milwaukee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2426144" start="22710" end="22726" title="Thomas Milton Rivers" label="Thomas M. Rivers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4744758" start="22855" end="22859" title="American Public Health Association" label="APHA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7969573" start="24281" end="24304" title="Warm Springs Historic District" label="Warm Springs Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420239" start="25578" end="25595" title="Temple University" label="Temple University"/>
<link wikidata="Q312961" start="25847" end="25858" title="John Enders" label="John Enders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000479" start="25866" end="25897" title="Children&amp;#x27;s Hospital Boston" label="Children&amp;#x27;s Hospital Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q176741" start="26015" end="26020" title="mumps" label="mumps"/>
<link wikidata="Q189082" start="26024" end="26036" title="cell culture" label="cell culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q310131" start="26053" end="26069" title="Thomas H. Weller" label="Thomas H. Weller"/>
<link wikidata="Q65119893" start="26259" end="26270" title="mouse brain" label="mouse brain"/>
<link wikidata="Q310131" start="26625" end="26641" title="Thomas H. Weller" label="Thomas H. Weller"/>
<link wikidata="Q309885" start="26646" end="26666" title="Frederick C. Robbins" label="Frederick C. Robbins"/>
<link wikidata="Q80061" start="26717" end="26754" title="Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine" label="Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5520338" start="27099" end="27113" title="gamma globulin" label="gamma globulin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5628482" start="27641" end="27650" title="H. R. Cox" label="H. R. Cox"/>
<link wikidata="Q7215" start="27692" end="27702" title="virologist" label="virologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q101929" start="27707" end="27719" title="immunologist" label="immunologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q936389" start="27720" end="27736" title="Hilary Koprowski" label="Hilary Koprowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q6533195" start="28503" end="28521" title="Letchworth Village" label="Letchworth Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q200101" start="28787" end="28797" title="Jonas Salk" label="Jonas Salk"/>
<link wikidata="Q235034" start="28816" end="28840" title="University of Pittsburgh" label="University of Pittsburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q22909872" start="28855" end="28870" title="Julius Youngner" label="Julius Youngner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470970" start="29131" end="29135" title="JAMA (journal)" label="JAMA"/>
<link wikidata="Q57728607" start="29143" end="29159" title="Leone N. Farrell" label="Leone N. Farrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q4796402" start="29328" end="29353" title="Arsenal Middle School" label="Arsenal Elementary School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5203838" start="29362" end="29386" title="D. T. Watson Home for Crippled Children" label="Watson Home for Children"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342" start="29390" end="29414" title="Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania" label="Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q2423973" start="29500" end="29514" title="Thomas Francis, Jr." label="Thomas Francis"/>
<link wikidata="Q963138" start="29654" end="29670" title="McLean, Virginia" label="McLean, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q724" start="29736" end="29741" title="Maine" label="Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="29745" end="29755" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q269829" start="29887" end="29894" title="placebo" label="placebo"/>
<link wikidata="Q575920" start="29919" end="29932" title="culture media" label="culture media"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="30186" end="30207" title="Franklin D. Roosevelt" label="Franklin D. Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5491443" start="30215" end="30232" title="Franklin D. Roosevelt&amp;#x27;s paralytic illness" label="paralytic illness"/>
<link wikidata="Q751572" start="30636" end="30650" title="March of Dimes" label="March of Dimes"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30869" end="30882" title="Pierre Lépine" label="Pierre Lépine"/>
<link wikidata="Q391083" start="30890" end="30907" title="Pasteur Institute" label="Pasteur Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q5196941" start="31217" end="31223" title="Cutter Laboratories" label="Cutter"/>
<link wikidata="Q164790" start="32448" end="32460" title="Albert Sabin" label="Albert Sabin"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="33180" end="33192" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q583881" start="33274" end="33304" title="Order of Friendship of Peoples" label="Order of Friendship of Peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q5196941" start="33606" end="33621" title="Cutter incident" label="Cutter incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q2066956" start="33773" end="33780" title="potency (pharmacology)" label="potency"/>
<link wikidata="Q131774" start="34314" end="34325" title="adolescence" label="adolescence"/>
<link wikidata="Q171407" start="34578" end="34589" title="pentavalent" label="pentavalent"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="34762" end="34787" title="World Health Organization" label="World Health Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q740308" start="34795" end="34801" title="UNICEF" label="UNICEF"/>
<link wikidata="Q7370251" start="34811" end="34828" title="The Rotary Foundation" label="Rotary Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q164790" start="34907" end="34919" title="Albert Sabin" label="Albert Sabin"/>
<link wikidata="Q594632" start="34924" end="34940" title="Mikhail Chumakov" label="Mikhail Chumakov"/>
<link wikidata="Q683045" start="35969" end="35985" title="Syrian Armenians" label="Syrian Armenians"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="36109" end="36120" title="Middle East" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009" start="36148" end="36156" title="Cameroon" label="Cameroon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36566" end="36614" title="CIA_transnational_health_and_economic_activities#Using_public_aid_for_information" label="CIA organized a fake vaccination program in 2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317" start="36628" end="36643" title="Osama bin Laden" label="Osama bin Laden"/>
<link wikidata="Q42418" start="36723" end="36730" title="Taliban" label="Taliban"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209788" start="37903" end="37941" title="polio eradication" label="wild polio has not yet been eradicated"/>
<link wikidata="Q688592" start="38229" end="38274" title="Global Alliance for Vaccines and Immunization" label="Global Alliance for Vaccines and Immunization"/>
<link wikidata="Q223862" start="38491" end="38496" title="haram" label="haram"/>
<link wikidata="Q183314" start="38669" end="38687" title="Khyber Pakhtunkhwa" label="Khyber Pakhtunkhwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q208270" start="38705" end="38709" title="FATA" label="FATA"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146808" start="39011" end="39048" title="College of Physicians of Philadelphia" label="College of Physicians of Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q215616" start="39131" end="39158" title="Public Broadcasting Service" label="Public Broadcasting Service"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="192199" wikidata="Q1689346" url="?curid=192199" title="Jimmy Dean">
<text>Jimmy Ray Dean (August 10, 1928 – June 13, 2010) was an American country music singer, television host, actor and businessman. He was the creator of the Jimmy Dean sausage brand as well as the spokesman for its TV commercials, and his likeness and voice continue to be used in advertisements after his death.

He became a national television personality starting on CBS in 1957. He rose to fame for his 1961 country music crossover hit into rock and roll with &quot;Big Bad John&quot; and his 1963 television series &quot;The Jimmy Dean Show&quot; gave puppeteer Jim Henson his first national exposure with his character, Rowlf.

His acting career included appearing in the early seasons in the &quot;Daniel Boone&quot; TV series as the sidekick of the famous frontiersman played by star Fess Parker. Later, he was on the big screen in a supporting role as billionaire Willard Whyte in the James Bond film &quot;Diamonds Are Forever&quot; (1971), starring Sean Connery.

He lived near Richmond, Virginia, and was nominated for the Country Music Hall of Fame in 2010, but died before his induction that year at the age of 81.

==Biography==
===Early life===
Dean was born on August 10, 1928, in Seth Ward, Texas and raised in nearby Plainview, the son of George Otto Dean and his second wife, the former Ruth Taylor. Ruth taught Jimmy how to play piano at the age of 10. He attributed his interest in music to the Seth Ward Baptist Church. He dropped out of high school and became a professional entertainer after serving in the U.S. Air Force in the late 1940s. Dean was 22 and just starting in show business when he married his first wife, Mary Sue, in 1950.

===Entertainment career===
Dean had his first hit, &quot;Bumming Around&quot;, in 1953 on the 4 Star label (written by Pete Graves, credited to &quot;C. Graves&quot; on the Quality label). Dean signed with Columbia Records in 1957.

He had minor pop hits, such as &quot;Little Sandy Sleighfoot&quot; (a Christmas novelty song) and &quot;Sing Along&quot;, later used as the theme for TV&#x27;s &quot;Sing Along with Mitch&quot;, hosted by chorus leader Mitch Miller.

In 1954, Dean hosted the popular Washington, D.C., radio program &quot;Town and Country Time&quot; on WARL-AM, and with his Texas Wildcats became popular in the Mid-Atlantic region. Patsy Cline and Roy Clark got their starts on the show. Although Cline and Dean became good friends, Clark (Dean&#x27;s lead guitarist) was fired by the singer for what was explained as his chronic tardiness. Dean replaced Clark with Billy Grammer. In 1955, &quot;Town and Country Time&quot; moved to WMAL-TV (now WJLA-TV) on weekday afternoons. Dean and the Texas Wildcats also appeared during 1957 on &quot;Town and Country Jamboree&quot; on WMAL-TV on Saturdays, which was also carried by TV stations in neighboring Maryland and Virginia on a regional network.

Also during 1957, while he lived in Arlington County, Virginia, Dean hosted &quot;Country Style&quot; on WTOP-TV (now WUSA-TV). CBS picked up the show nationally from Washington for eight months in 1957 under the name &quot;The Morning Show&quot;. Then from September 14, 1958, to June 1959, CBS carried &quot;The Jimmy Dean Show&quot; on weekday and Saturday afternoons.

Dean became best known for &quot;Big Bad John&quot;, his 1961 recitation song about a heroic miner. Recorded in Nashville, the record went to number one on the &quot;Billboard&quot; pop chart and inspired many imitations and parodies. It sold over one million copies and was awarded a gold disc. The track peaked at number two in the UK Singles Chart. The song won Dean the 1962 Grammy Award for Best Country &amp; Western Recording. He had several more top 40 songs, including a top 10 in 1962 with &quot;PT-109&quot;, a song in honor of President John F. Kennedy&#x27;s bravery in World War II, with the sinking of his PT-boat in the South Pacific Ocean by the Japanese.

In the early 1960s, he hosted &quot;The Tonight Show&quot; on occasion (he was the first guest host during Johnny Carson&#x27;s tenure, hosting for the first time on January 14, 1963) and one night introduced country singer Roy Clark, with whom he had remained friendly. In the mid-1960s, Dean helped bring country music into the mainstream with his 1963–66 variety series &quot;The Jimmy Dean Show&quot;. It presented country music entertainers including Roger Miller, George Jones, Charlie Rich, Buck Owens, and some (such as Joe Maphis) who seldom received network exposure. In 1964, he hosted Hank Williams Jr. in Williams&#x27; first television appearance at the age of 14. He sang several songs associated with his father, Hank Williams. The program also featured comedy and a variety of popular music artists, and Dean&#x27;s sketches with Rowlf the Dog, one of Jim Henson&#x27;s Muppets. Henson was so grateful for this break that he offered Dean a 40% interest in his production company, but Dean declined on the basis that he had done nothing to truly earn it and Henson deserved all the rewards for his own work. For the rest of his life, Dean made it clear that he never regretted this decision.

Dean appeared on several TV talk shows and game shows in the 1960s and performed on variety programs, including &quot;The Ed Sullivan Show&quot;, &quot;The Pat Boone Chevy Showroom&quot; and &quot;The Hollywood Palace&quot;. Dean turned to acting after his television series ended in 1966. His best-known role was as a reclusive Las Vegas billionaire Willard Whyte, inspired by Howard Hughes, in the James Bond movie &quot;Diamonds Are Forever&quot; (1971) with Sean Connery as Bond. He also appeared in 14 episodes of &quot;Daniel Boone&quot; (1967–70) in three different roles (one episode as &quot;Delo Jones,&quot; two as &quot;Jeremiah,&quot; and 11 as &quot;Josh Clements&quot;); as Charlie Rowlands in two &quot;Fantasy Island&quot; episodes (1981–82); and on other television shows including a semi-regular role as Charlie Bullets on &quot;J.J. Starbuck&quot; starring Dale Robertson (1987–1988).

Dean&#x27;s singing career remained strong into the mid-1960s; in 1965, he achieved a second number one country hit with the ballad &quot;The First Thing Ev&#x27;ry Morning (And the Last Thing Ev&#x27;ry Night)&quot;, and he had a top 40 hit that year with &quot;Harvest of Sunshine&quot;. In 1966, Dean signed with RCA Victor and immediately had a top 10 hit with &quot;Stand Beside Me&quot;. His other major hits during this time included &quot;Sweet Misery&quot; (1967) and &quot;A Thing Called Love&quot; (1968). He continued charting into the early 1970s with his major hits, including &quot;Slowly&quot; (1971), a duet with Dottie West, and a solo hit with &quot;The One You Say Good Morning To&quot; (1972).

In 1976, Dean achieved a million-seller with another recitation song called &quot;I.O.U.&quot;, a tribute to his mother and mothers everywhere. The song was released a few weeks before Mother&#x27;s Day and quickly became a top 10 country hit, his first in 10 years, and a top 40 pop hit, his first in 14 years. The song was re-released in 1977, 1983, and 1984, but with minor success each time.

In January 1978, Dean hosted an all-star tribute to Elvis Presley titled &quot;Nashville Remembers Elvis on His Birthday&quot;, during which he reminisced about his friendship with the recently deceased singer and performed his own hit &quot;Big Bad John&quot; and &quot;Peace in the Valley&quot;.

===Business career===
In 1969, he founded the Jimmy Dean Sausage Company with his brother Don. The company did well in part because of Dean&#x27;s own extemporized, humorous commercials.

The success of the company led to its acquisition in 1984 by Consolidated Foods, later renamed the Sara Lee Corporation. Dean remained involved as spokesman for the company, but the new corporate parent immediately began phasing him out of any management duties. In January 2004, Dean said that Sara Lee had dropped him as the spokesman for the sausage brand because he was too old. In March 2004, Dean revealed that he had sold all but one of his shares in Sara Lee stock. In 2018, several years after his death, the sausage company began re-airing some classic commercials featuring the voice of Dean introducing himself and praising the product.

===Later years and death===
In the 1980s, he and his wife and family were residents of Tenafly, New Jersey.

A Virginia resident from 1990, Dean was inducted into the Virginia Country Music Hall of Fame in 1997. Former Virginia governor Jim Gilmore appointed Dean to the Virginia Board of Game and Inland Fisheries, which oversees the state&#x27;s wildlife efforts and boating laws. Dean owned a 110-foot yacht, &quot;Big Bad John&quot;, on which he hosted President George Bush on numerous occasions. The two had originally met on Dean&#x27;s cable show in Nashville, where Bush did an impression of Dean selling sausage.

In the late 1990s, Dean and his wife donated generously to Varina High School. After initially considering opening their own school, they chose to support that public school instead. They sponsored financial rewards for academic achievements for students, as well as stipends for teacher professional development.

In the fall of 2004, he released his blunt, straight-talking autobiography &quot;30 Years of Sausage, 50 Years of Ham&quot;. Dean lived in semi-retirement with his second wife, Donna Meade Dean, a singer, songwriter, and recording artist he married in 1991, who helped him write his book. The couple lived on their property at Chaffin&#x27;s Bluff overlooking the James River in Henrico County, on the outskirts of Richmond, Virginia. On April 20, 2009, the main house was largely gutted by a fire, although the Deans escaped injury. The Deans rebuilt their home on the same foundation and returned early in 2010.

Dean announced on May 20, 2008, a donation of $1 million to Wayland Baptist University in Plainview, the largest gift ever from one individual to the institution. Dean said: &quot;I&#x27;ve been so blessed, and it makes me proud to give back, especially to my hometown.&quot;

On February 23, 2010, Dean was nominated for the Country Music Hall of Fame; he was scheduled to be inducted in October 2010, but this occurred after his death.

Dean had three children, Garry, Connie and Robert, with his first wife Mary Sue (Sue) (née Wittauer) Dean, and two granddaughters, Caroline Taylor (Connie&#x27;s daughter) and Brianna Dean (Robert&#x27;s daughter). He married his first wife in 1950; she divorced him in 1990 because of his affair with country-singer Donna Meade who became his second wife. Donna Dean married her childhood sweetheart Jason Stevens two years after Dean&#x27;s death.

Dean died on June 13, 2010, at the age of 81 at his home in Varina, Virginia. He was survived by his second wife Donna. She told the Associated Press that he was doing well health-wise, so his death came unexpectedly. She recollects that he was eating dinner while watching television, she left the room, and when she came back in he was unresponsive. He was declared dead at 7:54 pm. His estate was estimated to be worth over $50 million.

He was entombed in a piano-shaped mausoleum overlooking the James River on the grounds of his estate. His epitaph reads &quot;Here Lies One Hell of a Man&quot;, which is a paraphrased lyric from the uncensored version of his song &quot;Big Bad John&quot;.
On June 24, 2014, a groundbreaking was held for the Jimmy Dean Museum, which opened two years later on the grounds of Wayland Baptist University in his hometown of Plainview, Texas. Dean&#x27;s widow, Donna Dean Stevens, was present for the ceremony. The museum houses much of Jimmy Dean&#x27;s memorabilia as well as a larger-than-life-size bronze statue created by Richmond sculptor Paul DiPasquale and funded by Hillshire Brands, then-owner of the Jimmy Dean sausage brand. The museum is funded by a gift from the Dean Family Foundation.

==Filmography==
==Discography==
== References ==
==External links==

* Jimmy Dean at CMT.com
* 
* Interview with Jimmy Dean at Elvis.com.au
* &quot;Jimmy Dean—AN INTERVIEW WITH &quot;THE DEAN OF COUNTRY MUSIC,&quot; with Bill Miller</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1689346" start="0" end="14" title="Jimmy Dean" label="Jimmy Ray Dean"/>
<link wikidata="Q83440" start="65" end="78" title="country music" label="country music"/>
<link wikidata="Q6199965" start="153" end="177" title="Jimmy Dean (brand)" label="Jimmy Dean sausage brand"/>
<link wikidata="Q4904974" start="466" end="478" title="Big Bad John" label="Big Bad John"/>
<link wikidata="Q7743279" start="522" end="541" title="The Jimmy Dean Show" label="The Jimmy Dean Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q2629392" start="553" end="562" title="puppeteer" label="puppeteer"/>
<link wikidata="Q191037" start="563" end="573" title="Jim Henson" label="Jim Henson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5252430" start="622" end="627" title="Rowlf the Dog" label="Rowlf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160120" start="701" end="713" title="Daniel Boone (1964 TV series)" label="Daniel Boone"/>
<link wikidata="Q553575" start="788" end="799" title="Fess Parker" label="Fess Parker"/>
<link wikidata="Q844" start="890" end="900" title="James Bond" label="James Bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q107914" start="912" end="932" title="Diamonds Are Forever (film)" label="Diamonds Are Forever"/>
<link wikidata="Q4573" start="956" end="968" title="Sean Connery" label="Sean Connery"/>
<link wikidata="Q43421" start="985" end="1003" title="Richmond, Virginia" label="Richmond, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q680685" start="1031" end="1057" title="Country Music Hall of Fame" label="Country Music Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q978553" start="1194" end="1210" title="Seth Ward, Texas" label="Seth Ward, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q982448" start="1232" end="1241" title="Plainview, Texas" label="Plainview"/>
<link wikidata="Q11223" start="1528" end="1542" title="United States Air Force" label="U.S. Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q17016861" start="1718" end="1732" title="Just Bummin&amp;#x27; Around" label="Bumming Around"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439985" start="1755" end="1761" title="Four Star Records" label="4 Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q183387" start="1867" end="1883" title="Columbia Records" label="Columbia Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q115867063" start="2060" end="2081" title="Sing Along with Mitch" label="Sing Along with Mitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q709499" start="2113" end="2125" title="Mitch Miller" label="Mitch Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q20715626" start="2230" end="2237" title="WAVA (AM)" label="WARL-AM"/>
<link wikidata="Q273080" start="2310" end="2321" title="Patsy Cline" label="Patsy Cline"/>
<link wikidata="Q721819" start="2326" end="2335" title="Roy Clark" label="Roy Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q4912633" start="2544" end="2557" title="Billy Grammer" label="Billy Grammer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7951257" start="2611" end="2618" title="WJLA-TV" label="WMAL-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q7951257" start="2624" end="2631" title="WJLA-TV" label="WJLA-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q107126" start="2911" end="2937" title="Arlington County, Virginia" label="Arlington County, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2957" end="2970" title="The Jimmy Dean Show#Daytime" label="Country Style"/>
<link wikidata="Q645710" start="2980" end="2987" title="WUSA (TV)" label="WTOP-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q645710" start="2993" end="3000" title="WUSA-TV" label="WUSA-TV"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3099" end="3115" title="CBS Morning Show#The 1950s" label="The Morning Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q7743279" start="3185" end="3204" title="The Jimmy Dean Show" label="The Jimmy Dean Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q4904974" start="3281" end="3293" title="Big Bad John" label="Big Bad John"/>
<link wikidata="Q7302501" start="3310" end="3325" title="recitation song" label="recitation song"/>
<link wikidata="Q1848885" start="3390" end="3400" title="Hot 100 No. 1 Hits of 1961 (USA)" label="number one"/>
<link wikidata="Q485240" start="3414" end="3423" title="Billboard magazine" label="Billboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q241365" start="3533" end="3542" title="music recording sales certification" label="gold disc"/>
<link wikidata="Q193259" start="3582" end="3598" title="UK Singles Chart" label="UK Singles Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q5593781" start="3627" end="3680" title="Grammy Award for Best Country &amp;amp; Western Recording" label="Grammy Award for Best Country &amp;amp; Western Recording"/>
<link wikidata="Q7120932" start="3754" end="3760" title="PT-109 (song)" label="PT-109"/>
<link wikidata="Q9696" start="3797" end="3812" title="John F. Kennedy" label="John F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="3831" end="3843" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1888190" start="3869" end="3876" title="PT-boat" label="PT-boat"/>
<link wikidata="Q219712" start="3911" end="3919" title="Imperial Japanese Navy" label="Japanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q6057742" start="3958" end="3974" title="The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson" label="The Tonight Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q310819" start="4029" end="4042" title="Johnny Carson" label="Johnny Carson"/>
<link wikidata="Q721819" start="4146" end="4155" title="Roy Clark" label="Roy Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q7743279" start="4301" end="4320" title="The Jimmy Dean Show" label="The Jimmy Dean Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q712359" start="4378" end="4390" title="Roger Miller" label="Roger Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q508202" start="4392" end="4404" title="George Jones" label="George Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q563057" start="4406" end="4418" title="Charlie Rich" label="Charlie Rich"/>
<link wikidata="Q712353" start="4420" end="4430" title="Buck Owens" label="Buck Owens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1691521" start="4450" end="4460" title="Joe Maphis" label="Joe Maphis"/>
<link wikidata="Q552819" start="4519" end="4536" title="Hank Williams Jr." label="Hank Williams Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q206181" start="4651" end="4664" title="Hank Williams" label="Hank Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q5252430" start="4769" end="4782" title="Rowlf the Dog" label="Rowlf the Dog"/>
<link wikidata="Q2081494" start="5249" end="5269" title="The Ed Sullivan Show" label="The Ed Sullivan Show"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5283" end="5311" title="The Pat Boone Chevy Showroom" label="The Pat Boone Chevy Showroom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7740000" start="5328" end="5348" title="The Hollywood Palace" label="The Hollywood Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304007" start="5482" end="5495" title="Willard Whyte" label="Willard Whyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q189081" start="5509" end="5522" title="Howard Hughes" label="Howard Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q844" start="5531" end="5541" title="James Bond" label="James Bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q107914" start="5554" end="5574" title="Diamonds Are Forever (film)" label="Diamonds Are Forever"/>
<link wikidata="Q4573" start="5593" end="5605" title="Sean Connery" label="Sean Connery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160120" start="5656" end="5668" title="Daniel Boone (1964 TV series)" label="Daniel Boone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395913" start="5850" end="5864" title="Fantasy Island" label="Fantasy Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q15072824" start="5979" end="5992" title="J.J. Starbuck" label="J.J. Starbuck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1157865" start="6008" end="6022" title="Dale Robertson" label="Dale Robertson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7734206" start="6175" end="6247" title="The First Thing Ev&amp;#x27;ry Morning (And the Last Thing Ev&amp;#x27;ry Night)" label="The First Thing Ev&amp;#x27;ry Morning (And the Last Thing Ev&amp;#x27;ry Night)"/>
<link wikidata="Q202585" start="6353" end="6363" title="RCA Victor" label="RCA Victor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4660070" start="6520" end="6539" title="A Thing Called Love (song)" label="A Thing Called Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q243124" start="6667" end="6678" title="Dottie West" label="Dottie West"/>
<link wikidata="Q5967862" start="6835" end="6841" title="I.O.U. (Jimmy Dean song)" label="I.O.U."/>
<link wikidata="Q47502" start="6938" end="6955" title="Mother&amp;#x27;s Day" label="Mother&amp;#x27;s Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q303" start="7202" end="7215" title="Elvis Presley" label="Elvis Presley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919234" start="7421" end="7440" title="Peace in the Valley" label="Peace in the Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6199965" start="7495" end="7521" title="Jimmy Dean (brand)" label="Jimmy Dean Sausage Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q660309" start="7736" end="7756" title="Sara Lee Corporation" label="Sara Lee Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1013254" start="8374" end="8393" title="Tenafly, New Jersey" label="Tenafly, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q705472" start="8524" end="8535" title="Jim Gilmore" label="Jim Gilmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q7934152" start="8558" end="8601" title="Virginia Board of Game and Inland Fisheries" label="Virginia Board of Game and Inland Fisheries"/>
<link wikidata="Q23505" start="8754" end="8765" title="George Herbert Walker Bush" label="George Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q7915911" start="8970" end="8988" title="Varina High School" label="Varina High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5066801" start="9553" end="9573" title="Chaffin&amp;#x27;s Bluff" label="Chaffin&amp;#x27;s Bluff"/>
<link wikidata="Q7975912" start="9901" end="9927" title="Wayland Baptist University" label="Wayland Baptist University"/>
<link wikidata="Q680685" start="10167" end="10193" title="Country Music Hall of Fame" label="Country Music Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q3479235" start="10791" end="10797" title="Varina, Virginia" label="Varina"/>
<link wikidata="Q7975912" start="11546" end="11572" title="Wayland Baptist University" label="Wayland Baptist University"/>
<link wikidata="Q16864631" start="11843" end="11859" title="Hillshire Brands" label="Hillshire Brands"/>
<link wikidata="Q6199965" start="11875" end="11903" title="Jimmy Dean (brand)" label="the Jimmy Dean sausage brand"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="192202" wikidata="Q730811" url="?curid=192202" title="H.R. Pufnstuf">
<text>H.R. Pufnstuf is an American children&#x27;s television series created by Sid and Marty Krofft. It was the first independent live-action, life-sized-puppet program, following on from their work with Hanna-Barbera&#x27;s program &quot;The Banana Splits Adventure Hour&quot;. The seventeen episodes were originally broadcast Saturday from September 6, 1969, to December 27, 1969. The broadcasts were successful enough that NBC kept it on the schedule as reruns until September 4, 1971. The show was shot at Paramount Studios and its opening was shot at Big Bear Lake, California. Reruns of the show returned on ABC Saturday morning from September 2, 1972, to September 8, 1973, and on Sunday mornings in some markets from September 16, 1973, to September 8, 1974. It was syndicated by itself from September 1974 to June 1978 and in a package with six other Krofft series under the banner &quot;Krofft Superstars&quot; from 1978 to 1985. Reruns of the show were featured on TV Land in 1999 as part of its Super Retrovision Saturdaze Saturday morning-related overnight prime programming block and in the summer of 2004 as part of its TV Land Kitschen weekend late-night prime programming block, and it was later shown on MeTV from 2014 until 2016.

In 2004 and 2007, &quot;H.R. Pufnstuf&quot; was ranked #22 and #27 respectively on &quot;TV Guide&quot;″s Top Cult Shows Ever.

Fast food chain McDonald&#x27;s later emulated aspects of the series for its long-running advertising campaign McDonaldland, and the company was successfully sued by the Krofft brothers for copyright infringement.

==Overview==
The Kroffts created the H.R. Pufnstuf character for the HemisFair &#x27;68 World&#x27;s Fair, where they produced a show called &quot;Kaleidoscope&quot; for the Coca-Cola pavilion. The character&#x27;s name was Luther, and he became a mascot for the fair.

&quot;H.R. Pufnstuf&quot; introduced the Kroffts&#x27; most-used plot scenario of a fairy tale of good versus evil, as well as their second plot scenario of the stranger in a strange land. The show centered on a shipwrecked boy named Jimmy, portrayed by teenage actor Jack Wild. He is 11 years old when he arrives on the island and turns 12 in the episode called &quot;The Birthday Party.&quot; Jimmy and a talking flute named Freddy take a ride on a mysterious boat, but the boat is actually owned by a wicked witch named Wilhelmina W. Witchiepoo (portrayed by Billie Hayes) who rides on a broomstick-vehicle called the Vroom Broom. She uses the boat to lure Jimmy and Freddy to her castle on Living Island, where she intends to take Jimmy prisoner and steal Freddy for her own purposes.

The Mayor of Living Island is a friendly and helpful anthropomorphic dragon named H.R. Pufnstuf, performed by Roberto Gamonet and voiced by the show&#x27;s writer Lennie Weinrib, who also voiced many of the other characters. The dragon rescues Jimmy and protects him from Witchiepoo, as his cave is the only place where her magic has no effect.

All of the characters on Living Island were realized by large, cumbersome costumes or puppetry of anthropomorphic animals and objects. Everything was alive on the island, including houses, boats, clocks, candles, and so forth; virtually any part of the Living Island sets could become a character, usually voiced in a parody of a famous film star such as Mae West, Edward G. Robinson, or John Wayne.

==Characters==
===Main===
* Jimmy (portrayed by Jack Wild) – A young English human who was lured to Living Island by an enchanted boat. Witchiepoo controlled the boat with the aim of stealing Jimmy&#x27;s magic talking flute named Freddy.
* H.R. Pufnstuf (performed by Roberto Gamonet, voiced by Lennie Weinrib ) – A friendly dragon who is the Mayor of Living Island.
* Freddy the Flute (voiced by Joan Gerber) – A magic talking flute that is owned by Jimmy. He is often targeted by Witchiepoo.
* Cling and Clang (performed by Joy Campbell and Angelo Rossitto) – Two short mute police officers who work for H.R. Pufnstuf as his Rescue Racer Crew. Cling wears red and Clang wears green. Although they appear vaguely animal-like with their beaked faces, and furry three-toed feet, the Kroffts have said they are actually bells, hence their names.
* Wilhelmina W. Witchiepoo (portrayed by Billie Hayes) – The primary antagonist of the series, inspired by Margaret Hamilton&#x27;s portrayal of the Wicked Witch of the West. Witchiepoo is a wicked but ineffective witch who has been targeting Freddy the Flute. She rides a large rocket-powered broom with a steering wheel called the Vroom Broom. She is cruel to everyone around her, even her henchmen, whom she constantly whacks with her wand. Yet when faced with failure, Witchiepoo usually starts to pity herself by asking &quot;Why me&quot;?
** Orson Vulture (performed by Joy Campbell, voiced by Lennie Weinrib, imitating Frank Nelson) – A stuffy, somewhat inept vulture who is one of Witchiepoo&#x27;s henchmen. As her favorite flunky, he multitasks as her sounding board operator, butler, and co-pilot on her Vroom Broom. Orson once made the mistake of asking what the W. in his boss&#x27;s name stood for. The answer: WHACK!
** Seymour Spider (performed by Angelo Rossitto, voiced by Walker Edmiston) – A dim-witted &quot;spider&quot; (appearance as a furry orange ogre with eight limbs) who is another of Witchiepoo&#x27;s henchmen. As her second favorite flunky, he primarily serves her as her hairdresser and an alternative sounding board operator when Orson was busy.
** Stupid Bat (performed by Sharon Baird, voiced by Lennie Weinrib) – A bat who is the least favorite and least seen of Witchiepoo&#x27;s henchmen. He mainly serves as her messenger. As his name implies, Stupid Bat is not very bright and his messages are usually delivered one second too late.
** Skeleton Guards – Two skeletons who guard Witchiepoo&#x27;s castle. They are easily spooked and will often run from danger in a flash, but not before their armor and capes fly off in a cartoonish fashion.

===Others===
* Dr. Blinky (performed by Johnny Silver, voiced by Walker Edmiston impersonating Ed Wynn) – An owl who is Living Island&#x27;s local physician and scientist. Dr. Blinky is also the head of H.R. Pufnstuf&#x27;s &quot;Anti-Smog, Pollution, and Witch Committee&quot;. Other characters (including Polka-Dotted Horse) fear his medical incompetence and are terrified at the prospect of being treated by him.
* Judy Frog (performed by Sharon Baird, voiced by Joan Gerber) – A singing, dancing frog who is one of H.R. Pufnstuf&#x27;s friends and the resident entertainer. Judy is based on Judy Garland, whom Sid Krofft had previously toured with and opened for.
* Pop Lolly (voiced by Lennie Weinrib) – A living lollipop who makes and sells candy and other sweet goods.
** Cheese Guards – Two guards that are living pieces of cheese who work for Pop Lolly. They would often help Pop Lolly fend off a group of Hippie Ants who want to have free candy.
* Ludicrous Lion (performed by Johnny Silver, voiced by Walker Edmiston impersonating W. C. Fields) – A lion who works as a peddler and owns a horse-drawn wagon. He is quite cunning and not always so honest when it comes to money. Although slightly shady and greedy, he is officially one of the Good Guys since he would often help to thwart Witchiepoo&#x27;s plots.
** Polka-Dotted Horse (performed by Felix Silla, voiced by Lennie Weinrib) – A good-natured but dim-witted horse who works for Ludicrous Lion.
* Tick Tock (performed by Andy Ratoucheff, voiced by Lennie Weinrib) – A mobile alarm clock that warns the good characters when Witchiepoo is coming and informs them of various other dangers.
* Grandfather Clock (voiced by Walker Edmiston) – A mobile grandfather clock who is married to Grandmother Clock.
* Grandmother Clock (voiced by Joan Gerber) – A mobile grandmother clock who is married to Grandfather Clock.
* Miss Wristwatch (voiced by Joan Gerber impersonating Zsa Zsa Gabor) – A glamorous rich mobile human-sized wristwatch.
* Hippie Ants - A group of ants that would try to have free candy from Pop Lolly.
* The Boyds - A bunch of birds that serve as Living Island&#x27;s residential band. The Boyds are based on The Byrds.
** Lady Boyd (performed by Sharon Baird, voiced by Joan Gerber) – A blue bird who is the lead singer of The Boyds. She was often seen singing the end theme to this show.
* Shirlee Pufnstuf (performed by Sharon Baird, voiced by Joan Gerber impersonating a younger Shirley Temple) – A dragon who is H.R. Pufnstuf&#x27;s sister and a famous actress.
* Max von Toadenoff the Great (voiced by Lennie Weinrib) – A monocled toad who works as a film director. Max von Toadenoff the Great is based on Erich von Stroheim, but named for Akim Tamiroff.
* The Good Trees – Several walking, talking trees who always help out H.R. Pufnstuf and the good guys. In the film &quot;Pufnstuf&quot;, the song &quot;Living Island&quot; described them as the &quot;Hippie Trees of Peace and Love&quot;. They consist of:
** Hippie Tree (voiced by Lennie Weinrib) – A tree with sunglasses and dreadlocks who often speaks in hippie slang.
** Madame Willow (voiced by Joan Gerber) – Also known as the Dowager Tree, Madame Willow is an older, elitist female tree with a lorgnette.
** Chief Redwood (voiced by Walker Edmiston) – Also known as the Indian Tree, Chief Redwood dons a feathered headdress and speaks in the fashion of a stereotypical melodramatic Native American.
** There is an older, male tree who may or may not be the husband of Madame Willow.
** There is another female tree whose lips are always in the shape of an &quot;O&quot;.
** There is a baby tree.
* The Evil Trees – Three trees on Witchiepoo&#x27;s side that speak in a Transylvanian accent.
**Evil Tree #1 – (voiced by Lennie Weinrib impersonating Béla Lugosi) – The leader of the Evil Trees.
** Evil Tree #2 (voiced by Walker Edminston impersonating Peter Lorre) –.
** Evil Tree #3 (voiced by Lennie Weinrib) – A tree that always speaks in rhyme.
* The Mushrooms – A group of talking mushrooms on Witchiepoo&#x27;s side that turn whoever touches them into mushrooms. The mushroom leader smokes a cigar and speaks like James Cagney.
* The Crustaceans – They are shown in several episodes as well as the closing theme song, some crab-like characters who are never named or introduced. There is a family of them, much like the living clocks and the living trees. They almost never say anything, but one of them has a couple of brief lines in &quot;The Almost Election of Witchiepoo.&quot;
* Witchiepoo&#x27;s Castle – A talking, living entity that is home to Witchiepoo and her minions. There is also a door inside the castle that is a separate living entity as well as living pillars.
* Dr. Blinky&#x27;s House – A broken down house, propped up with crutches with a bandage on one side and an ice pack atop its chimney. It suffers from explosive sneezing that it has no control over. This usually sends Pufnstuf and friends running for cover, although it has been occasionally used to thwart Witchiepoo&#x27;s plans enough for her to tell the house to cover its door when it sneezes. It houses several other inanimate talking characters such as fireplace (who speaks like Edward G. Robinson), a test tube (voiced by Walker Edmiston) and a candle (voiced by Walker Edmiston). There is a talking human skull (who speaks like Boris Karloff) and a few talking books, one of which is named Charlie (voiced by Lennie Weinrib). Charlie&#x27;s brother, an evil black book of spells, is kept on Witchiepoo&#x27;s nightstand.
* The Winds – The Winds of Living Island are often called upon by H.R. Pufnstuf to blow Witchiepoo out of the sky. They consist of the North Wind (voiced by Walker Edmiston in a shivering voice), the South Wind (voiced by Joan Gerber in a southern belle voice), the East Wind (voiced by Walker Edmiston in a Chinese accent), and the West Wind (voiced by Lennie Weinrib impersonating John Wayne).

==Production==
After creating costumes for characters in the live-action portion of &quot;The Banana Splits Adventure Hour&quot;, Sid and Marty Krofft were asked to develop their own Saturday morning children&#x27;s series for NBC. The plot was recycled from &quot;Kaleidoscope&quot;, a live puppet show the Kroffts had staged in the Coca-Cola pavilion of the HemisFair &#x27;68 World&#x27;s Fair. It included several key characters from this show, such as Luther the dragon and a silly witch. Other ideas were cultivated from Sid&#x27;s life. As a child, he had charged friends buttons, not pennies, to view puppet shows in his back yard; buttons were standard currency on Living Island. Sid and Marty had toured with their puppets as the opening act for Judy Garland, and they based Judy the Frog on her. Ludicrous Lion bears more than a passing resemblance to Irving, the eponymous lion in a pilot they had made in 1957 called &quot;Here&#x27;s Irving&quot;.

Sid&#x27;s friend Lionel Bart asked him to view a rough cut of the movie adaptation of &quot;Oliver!&quot; Sid took notice of young actor Jack Wild and immediately decided that he was the kid whom he wanted to play the lead in his television series. Only two actresses auditioned to play Witchiepoo. The first was then-unknown Penny Marshall. Stage veteran Billie Hayes came in next, set into a maniacal cackle and hopped up on a desk. She was given the part on the spot.

For Marty Krofft, the production was a particular headache. Marty accepted guardianship of Jack Wild while the teenage boy was in the United States filming the show. He later described bringing Wild into his home as a mistake, considering that he already had his hands full with two young daughters.

Like most children&#x27;s television shows of the era, &quot;H.R. Pufnstuf&quot; contained a laugh track, the inclusion of which the Kroffts were initially against. Sid Krofft commented &quot;We were sort of against that, but Si Rose — being in sitcoms — he felt that when the show was put together that the children would not know when to laugh.&quot; Marty Krofft added &quot;the bottom line — it&#x27;s sad — you gotta tell them when it&#x27;s funny. And the laugh track, (Si) was right. It was necessary, as much as we were always looking to have a &quot;real&quot; laugh track, &quot;a real&quot; audience. In comedies, if you don&#x27;t have them (laugh track), you&#x27;re in big trouble, because if you don&#x27;t hear a laugh track, it&#x27;s not funny. And that&#x27;s the way the audience (at home) was programmed to view these shows.&quot;

H.R. Pufnstuf appeared in a segment of &quot;Sigmund and the Sea Monsters&quot;, and along with Witchiepoo in the &quot;Lidsville&quot; episode &quot;Have I Got a Girl For Hoo Doo&quot;, where Hoo Doo conjures Pufnstuf as Witchiepoo&#x27;s date for a witches&#x27; dance. &quot;The Krofft Superstar Hour&quot; also involved characters in two segments &quot;The Lost Island&quot; (which H.R. Pufnstuf was in) and &quot;Horror Hotel&quot; (in which Witchiepoo, Orson Vulture, Seymour Spider, and Stupid Bat are featured with Hoodoo). The Kroffts also loaned out the character, with Hayes reprising her role, for &quot;The Paul Lynde Halloween Special&quot;, in which she appears as the sister of the Wicked Witch of the West (portrayed by Margaret Hamilton).

==Theme song==
The show&#x27;s theme song, titled &quot;H.R. Pufnstuf&quot;, was written by Les Szarvas but is also credited to Paul Simon. Simon&#x27;s credit was added when he successfully sued The Kroffts, claiming that the theme too closely mimicked his song &quot;The 59th Street Bridge Song (Feelin&#x27; Groovy)&quot;. He is credited as the song&#x27;s co-writer in TeeVee Tunes&#x27;s &quot;Television&#x27;s Greatest Hits Volume 5: In Living Color&quot;.

A cover of the show&#x27;s theme song, performed by The Murmurs, is included on the 1995 tribute album &quot;Saturday Morning: Cartoons&#x27; Greatest Hits&quot;, produced by Ralph Sall for MCA Records.

==Episodes==

&quot;All episodes were directed by Hollingsworth Morse and written by Lennie Weinrib and Paul Harrison. (Robert Ridolphi also co-wrote Episode 1 &quot;The Magic Path&quot;.) &quot;

==Cast==
* Jack Wild – Jimmy
* Billie Hayes – Wilhelmina W. Witchiepoo

===Krofft puppets===

===Voice characterizations===
* Lennie Weinrib – H.R. Pufnstuf, Bela Lugosi Tree, Dr. Blinky&#x27;s Talking Book, Stupid Bat, Pop Lolly, West Wind, Akim Toadenoff the Great, Orson Vulture, Polka Dotted Horse, Hippie Tree, Alarm Clock, Jimmy as Movie Villain
* Walker Edmiston – Dr. Blinky, Peter Lorre Tree, Dr. Blinky&#x27;s Candle, East Wind, Grandfather Clock, North Wind, Chief Redwood, Dr. Blinky&#x27;s Test Tube, Ludicrous Lion, Seymour Spider
* Joan Gerber – Freddy the Flute, Grandmother Clock, Judy the Frog, Madame Willow, South Wind, Lady Boyd, Shirley Pufnstuf

==Film==

While the television series was still in production, the Kroffts were approached to do a film adaptation. A joint venture between Universal Pictures and the show&#x27;s sponsor Kellogg&#x27;s Cereal, the 1970 film retained most of the cast and crew from the series and featured guest appearances by Cass Elliot as Witch Hazel and Martha Raye as Boss Witch. The movie was finally released on VHS in 2001 by Universal Home Video as part of its Universal Treasures Collection and on DVD on May 19, 2009. The film also included Googy Gopher, Orville Pelican, and Boss Witch&#x27;s chauffeur Heinrich Rat, who were exclusive to the movie. A difference in the film is that the characters that had been voiced by Lennie Weinrib were each voiced by Allan Melvin and Don Messick.

The Kroffts have long had plans for a new &quot;H.R. Pufnstuf&quot; film. Sony first attempted a remake in 2000, but dropped the project. Eight years later, Sony again announced development on the project, but there has been no news since.

==Tours==
A number of stage show tours were run in the United States starring the characters from the show. The most prominent of these was &quot;H.R. Pufnstuf &amp; The Brady Kids Live at the Hollywood Bowl&quot;, which was performed and recorded in 1973. This performance was released on VHS in 1997.

In 1970, H.R. Pufnstuf was featured in a float at the Rose Parade in Pasadena, featuring the cast from the show.


An elaborate H.R. Pufnstuf puppet show was featured at The Sid and Marty Krofft Puppet Theater at Six Flags Over Mid-Missouri in 1971. H.R. Pufnstuf and his pals Cling and Clang also made life-size appearances at the park. A section of the 1971 Six Flags Over Mid-Missouri map shows the location of the theater near entrance to the park&#x27;s Sky-Way Ride.
==Home media releases==
In 2004, Rhino Entertainment/Rhino Retrovision released &quot;H.R. Pufnstuf: The Complete Series&quot;, featuring all 17 episodes on three discs, remastered and uncut, accompanied by interviews with Sid &amp; Marty Krofft, Billie Hayes, and Jack Wild. &quot;Pufnstuf&quot;, a major motion picture released in 1970, was also released on May 19, 2009, by Universal Studios. SMK and Vivendi Entertainment has obtained the home video rights to the series and released the complete series on January 11, 2011. Two versions of the release exist; one is a traditional complete series set, while the other is a collector&#x27;s set, featuring a bobble-head of H.R. Pufnstuf. The series is also available in Digital media format at iTunes Store.

In the United Kingdom, during 1986, Channel 5 Video released the opening three episodes of the television series on VHS.

==McDonaldland lawsuit==

The show was the subject of a successful U.S. federal lawsuit brought by the Kroffts against the fast food restaurant McDonald&#x27;s, whose McDonaldland characters were found to have infringed the show&#x27;s copyright. The case, &quot;Sid &amp; Marty Krofft Television Productions Inc. v. McDonald&#x27;s Corp.&quot;, 562 F.2d 1157, was decided by the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit in 1977.

==Claims of drug references==
The Krofft brothers have responded in several interviews to popular beliefs that subtle recreational drug references exist in the show. For example, the title character&#x27;s name &quot;Pufnstuf&quot; has been interpreted as a reference to smoking hand-rolled (H.R.) marijuana (puffin&#x27; stuff); Marty Krofft has said the initials &quot;H.R.&quot; actually stand for &quot;Royal Highness&quot; backwards. The show&#x27;s theme song lyric &quot;he can&#x27;t do a little, &#x27;cause he can&#x27;t do enough&quot; has been read as referring to the addictive nature of drugs. Pufnstuf has quotes like &quot;Whoa, dude!&quot; and other &quot;hippie&quot; slang words. Lennie Weinrib, the show&#x27;s head writer and the voice of Pufnstuf, has said, &quot;I think fans gave it a kind of mysterious code-like meaning, like &#x27;Ah, was Pufnstuf puffing stuff? Like grass?&#x27; Was it psychedelic? Was it drug oriented? Not to us, it wasn&#x27;t.&quot; In a 2000 interview, Marty Krofft answered the question by saying, &quot;The Krofft look has a lot of color, but there were no drug connotations in the show.&quot; He addressed the topic at length in an interview with the &quot;St. Louis Post-Dispatch&quot; in 2004, in response to the question, &quot;OK, let&#x27;s get this right out in the open. Is &quot;H.R. Pufnstuf&quot; just one giant drug reference?&quot;:

Authors of books on the show and its contemporaries, however, have not always accepted the Kroffts&#x27; alternative explanations for apparent references to drugs. David Martindale, author of &quot;Pufnstuf &amp; Other Stuff&quot;, maintains that the Kroffts&#x27; desire to attract an audience who are now parents of impressionable children pushes them to downplay the double entendres: &quot;But to deny it, the shows lose some of their mystique. The Kroffts prefer to remain playfully vague.&quot; Martindale said in another interview that he fully believes Marty Krofft&#x27;s insistence that he did not use drugs, especially given that Marty&#x27;s focus was that of a businessman, but Martindale describes Sid Krofft as &quot;a big kid&quot; and &quot;a hippy&quot;, saying, &quot;His comment when I told him we were going to do this book was—and I quote—&#x27;Oh, far out.&#x27; He says these shows didn&#x27;t come from smoking just a little pot, and you could say, &#x27;Oh, yeah. It comes from smoking a lot of pot.&#x27; But I think he was very deliberately doing double meanings so the show could amuse people on different levels.&quot;

Kevin Burke, co-author of &quot;Saturday Morning Fever: Growing Up with Cartoon Culture&quot;, argues that the &quot;consistency of thought&quot; in the rumors of drug references has a basis, although his co-author and brother Timothy Burke, a history professor at Swarthmore College, insists &quot;human beings are capable of achieving hallucinatory heights without chemical assistance.&quot; Contradicting his own position, Marty Krofft has neither admitted nor hinted in occasional interviews that the references were made knowingly; in one case, a writer reported that when pressed as to the connotation of &quot;lids&quot; in the title &quot;Lidsville&quot;, &quot;Well, maybe we just had a good sense of humor&quot;, Krofft said, laughing. His comments to another interviewer were more direct; in a &quot;Times Union&quot; profile whose author observed, &quot;Watching the shows today, it&#x27;s hard to imagine a show with more wink-and-nod allusions to pot culture, short of something featuring characters named Spliffy and Bong-O&quot;, Krofft conceded that the show&#x27;s title had been an intentional marijuana reference, as had &quot;Lidsville&quot;, but &quot;that was just a prank to see if they could get them past clueless NBC executives&quot;.

==Parodies and tributes==

*H.R. Pufnstuf appears in the eighth episode of the first-season of &quot;CHiPs&quot;, titled &quot;Green Thumb Burglars&quot;, with his voice reprised by Lennie Weinrib. He is pulled over by Ponch (Erik Estrada) and Jon (Larry Wilcox) on one of Los Angeles&#x27; numerous freeways. Though he was referred to by name, while Jon maintained a sense of decorum about the actor inside the Pufnstuf suit, he let the good Mayor Pufnstuf off with a warning. Ponch later declared himself a &quot;big overgrown kid&quot;, in reference to the kids&#x27; show.
*One of the most notable parodies of &quot;H.R. Pufnstuf&quot; was &quot;The Altered State of Druggachusetts&quot;, a segment on the HBO comedy series &quot;Mr. Show with Bob and David&quot;. The sketch consists of a failed television pilot for a kids&#x27; show introduced by &quot;Sam and Criminy Craffft&quot; (portrayed by Bob Odenkirk and David Cross). The show itself is similar to &quot;H.R. Pufnstuf&quot;, with drug references made humorously overt. Instead of a talking flute, the boy carries a talking bong, and all of the residents in Druggachusetts take or are living incarnations of various drugs.
*Nike made a skateboarding shoe for their SB Dunk line named after the show, with the colors of the shoe resembling those of Pufnstuf.
*Todd Kauffman, animator and director of the &quot;Total Drama&quot; series, initially made a pitch for an animated adaptation of H.R. Pufnstuf in 2005 complete with an animated opening sequence with the theme song covered and performed by Finger Eleven, but option rights costs led the project to be disbanded. Kauffman however, was later inquired to do the cover for the DVD release, &quot;Sid &amp; Marty Kroffts Saturday Morning Hits&quot;.
*H.R. Pufnstuf appears in the fifth episode of season 3 of &quot;My Name Is Earl&quot; titled &quot;Creative Writing&quot;. In a fantasy sequence based on a story written by Randy (Ethan Suplee), H.R. Pufnstuf is the sidekick to Randy&#x27;s secret agent character.
*In 2016, H.R. Pufnstuf, Cling, Clang, and Freddy the Flute appear in a crossover episode of &quot;Mutt &amp; Stuff&quot; titled &quot;H.R. Pufnstuf Comes to Mutt &amp; Stuff!&quot; with H.R. Pufnstuf voiced by Randy Credico with Mary Karcz providing the in-suit performance and Donna Kimball providing the face performance, Freddy the Flute performed by Kimball, and Cling and Clang performed by Arturo Gil and Joseph S. Griffo. H.R. Pufnstuf is depicted as the uncle of Stuff.
*In 2017, professor of religion Jeffrey Kripal wrote in his book &quot;Secret Body&quot; of the show&#x27;s impact on his young life. &quot;Disturbing,&quot; he recalled. &quot;Who wrote this stuff? And puff&#x27;n on what stuff?&quot;
*In 2018, reference to &quot;H.R. Pufnstuf&quot; is made in Season 2 of the Amazon Original show &quot;Goliath&quot;. In the show, criminal billionaire Tom Wyatt (Mark Duplass) recreates his own erotic memories/fantasies from his childhood while the intro to &quot;H.R. Pufnstuf&quot; is playing on the TV. Duplass&#x27; character on the show is fixated on individuals, male and female, who have lost their limbs. While having ties to the &quot;La Mano Cartel&quot; on the show, the head of the cartel, removes limbs, heads, etc., and sends these people to Wyatt to use in his fantasies. Each time before Duplass&#x27; character reverts to his fantasies, he says &quot;H.R. Pufnstuf, who&#x27;s your friend when things get rough?&quot;

==References==
==External links==
*70s Live Action Kid Vid
*The Straight Dope - &quot;Was McDonaldland plagiarized from the old &quot;H.R. Pufnstuf&quot; kids&#x27; TV show?&quot;
*DVD Verdict – Region 1 DVD review
*DVD Times – Region 0 DVD review
*&quot;In Search Of..H R Pufnstuf&quot; - The Nice Rooms Webzine</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7507960" start="74" end="94" title="Sid and Marty Krofft" label="Sid and Marty Krofft"/>
<link wikidata="Q736464" start="199" end="212" title="Hanna-Barbera" label="Hanna-Barbera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1111916" start="234" end="266" title="The Banana Splits" label="The Banana Splits Adventure Hour"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="421" end="424" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q159846" start="505" end="522" title="Paramount Pictures" label="Paramount Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q430708" start="551" end="576" title="Big Bear Lake, California" label="Big Bear Lake, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q169889" start="609" end="612" title="American Broadcasting Company" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109582" start="971" end="978" title="TV Land" label="TV Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q3303733" start="1217" end="1221" title="MeTV" label="MeTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q7672340" start="1334" end="1342" title="TV Guide" label="TV Guide"/>
<link wikidata="Q81799" start="1373" end="1382" title="Fast food" label="Fast food"/>
<link wikidata="Q38076" start="1389" end="1404" title="McDonald&amp;#x27;s" label="McDonald&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q3309036" start="1484" end="1496" title="McDonaldland" label="McDonaldland"/>
<link wikidata="Q647578" start="1563" end="1585" title="copyright infringement" label="copyright infringement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2467552" start="1657" end="1675" title="HemisFair &amp;#x27;68" label="HemisFair &amp;#x27;68"/>
<link wikidata="Q2813" start="1762" end="1771" title="Coca-Cola" label="Coca-Cola"/>
<link wikidata="Q338177" start="2126" end="2135" title="Jack Wild" label="Jack Wild"/>
<link wikidata="Q2903551" start="2420" end="2432" title="Billie Hayes" label="Billie Hayes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4355500" start="2811" end="2825" title="Lennie Weinrib" label="Lennie Weinrib"/>
<link wikidata="Q202878" start="3349" end="3357" title="Mae West" label="Mae West"/>
<link wikidata="Q83812" start="3359" end="3377" title="Edward G. Robinson" label="Edward G. Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q40531" start="3382" end="3392" title="John Wayne" label="John Wayne"/>
<link wikidata="Q338177" start="3443" end="3452" title="Jack Wild" label="Jack Wild"/>
<link wikidata="Q4355500" start="3691" end="3705" title="Lennie Weinrib" label="Lennie Weinrib"/>
<link wikidata="Q7559" start="3721" end="3727" title="dragon" label="dragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q30185" start="3739" end="3744" title="Mayor" label="Mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q11405" start="3776" end="3781" title="Flute" label="Flute"/>
<link wikidata="Q3179586" start="3793" end="3804" title="Joan Gerber" label="Joan Gerber"/>
<link wikidata="Q370108" start="3939" end="3954" title="Angelo Rossitto" label="Angelo Rossitto"/>
<link wikidata="Q384593" start="3973" end="3987" title="police officer" label="police officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2903551" start="4281" end="4293" title="Billie Hayes" label="Billie Hayes"/>
<link wikidata="Q245204" start="4309" end="4319" title="antagonist" label="antagonist"/>
<link wikidata="Q257756" start="4347" end="4364" title="Margaret Hamilton (actress)" label="Margaret Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3822980" start="4389" end="4413" title="Wicked Witch of the West" label="Wicked Witch of the West"/>
<link wikidata="Q259745" start="4454" end="4459" title="witchcraft" label="witch"/>
<link wikidata="Q123120" start="4794" end="4801" title="Vulture" label="Vulture"/>
<link wikidata="Q4355500" start="4840" end="4854" title="Lennie Weinrib" label="Lennie Weinrib"/>
<link wikidata="Q3082747" start="4866" end="4878" title="Frank Nelson (actor)" label="Frank Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520565" start="4984" end="4994" title="Human multitasking" label="multitasks"/>
<link wikidata="Q833899" start="5027" end="5033" title="butler" label="butler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357" start="5183" end="5189" title="Spider" label="Spider"/>
<link wikidata="Q370108" start="5204" end="5219" title="Angelo Rossitto" label="Angelo Rossitto"/>
<link wikidata="Q4017804" start="5231" end="5246" title="Walker Edmiston" label="Walker Edmiston"/>
<link wikidata="Q290562" start="5312" end="5316" title="ogre" label="ogre"/>
<link wikidata="Q28425" start="5529" end="5532" title="Bat" label="Bat"/>
<link wikidata="Q3481517" start="5547" end="5559" title="Sharon Baird" label="Sharon Baird"/>
<link wikidata="Q4355500" start="5571" end="5585" title="Lennie Weinrib" label="Lennie Weinrib"/>
<link wikidata="Q2333502" start="5816" end="5824" title="Skeleton (undead)" label="Skeleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q85517751" start="6062" end="6075" title="Johnny Silver" label="Johnny Silver"/>
<link wikidata="Q259537" start="6117" end="6124" title="Ed Wynn" label="Ed Wynn"/>
<link wikidata="Q25222" start="6131" end="6134" title="owl" label="owl"/>
<link wikidata="Q39631" start="6169" end="6178" title="physician" label="physician"/>
<link wikidata="Q901" start="6183" end="6192" title="scientist" label="scientist"/>
<link wikidata="Q53636" start="6445" end="6449" title="Frog" label="Frog"/>
<link wikidata="Q3481517" start="6464" end="6476" title="Sharon Baird" label="Sharon Baird"/>
<link wikidata="Q3179586" start="6488" end="6499" title="Joan Gerber" label="Joan Gerber"/>
<link wikidata="Q11637" start="6617" end="6629" title="Judy Garland" label="Judy Garland"/>
<link wikidata="Q217446" start="6740" end="6748" title="lollipop" label="lollipop"/>
<link wikidata="Q10943" start="6854" end="6860" title="cheese" label="cheese"/>
<link wikidata="Q140" start="6990" end="6994" title="Lion" label="Lion"/>
<link wikidata="Q85517751" start="7009" end="7022" title="Johnny Silver" label="Johnny Silver"/>
<link wikidata="Q352971" start="7064" end="7076" title="W. C. Fields" label="W. C. Fields"/>
<link wikidata="Q638172" start="7102" end="7109" title="peddler" label="peddler"/>
<link wikidata="Q726" start="7360" end="7365" title="Horse" label="Horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q323961" start="7380" end="7391" title="Felix Silla" label="Felix Silla"/>
<link wikidata="Q212758" start="7567" end="7578" title="alarm clock" label="alarm clock"/>
<link wikidata="Q10781974" start="7681" end="7698" title="Grandfather clock" label="Grandfather Clock"/>
<link wikidata="Q207405" start="7958" end="7971" title="Zsa Zsa Gabor" label="Zsa Zsa Gabor"/>
<link wikidata="Q178794" start="8011" end="8021" title="Watch" label="wristwatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7386" start="8050" end="8053" title="ant" label="ant"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113" start="8130" end="8134" title="bird" label="bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q211526" start="8212" end="8221" title="The Byrds" label="The Byrds"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113" start="8296" end="8300" title="bird" label="bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q182580" start="8486" end="8500" title="Shirley Temple" label="Shirley Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q7559" start="8506" end="8512" title="dragon" label="dragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6453151" start="8640" end="8644" title="toad" label="toad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2526255" start="8660" end="8673" title="film director" label="film director"/>
<link wikidata="Q78508" start="8715" end="8733" title="Erich von Stroheim" label="Erich von Stroheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q418424" start="8749" end="8762" title="Akim Tamiroff" label="Akim Tamiroff"/>
<link wikidata="Q10884" start="8775" end="8779" title="Tree" label="Tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q422933" start="9237" end="9244" title="elitist" label="elitist"/>
<link wikidata="Q667291" start="9264" end="9273" title="lorgnette" label="lorgnette"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="9452" end="9467" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q10884" start="9677" end="9681" title="Tree" label="Tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q39473" start="9739" end="9751" title="Transylvania" label="Transylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q34529" start="9818" end="9829" title="Béla Lugosi" label="Béla Lugosi"/>
<link wikidata="Q78505" start="9921" end="9932" title="Peter Lorre" label="Peter Lorre"/>
<link wikidata="Q83093" start="10024" end="10032" title="Mushroom" label="Mushroom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1576" start="10167" end="10172" title="cigar" label="cigar"/>
<link wikidata="Q94041" start="10189" end="10201" title="James Cagney" label="James Cagney"/>
<link wikidata="Q40802" start="10298" end="10302" title="crab" label="crab"/>
<link wikidata="Q23413" start="10577" end="10583" title="Castle" label="Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3947" start="10774" end="10779" title="House" label="House"/>
<link wikidata="Q188669" start="11214" end="11223" title="fireplace" label="fireplace"/>
<link wikidata="Q83812" start="11241" end="11259" title="Edward G. Robinson" label="Edward G. Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q88399897" start="11264" end="11273" title="test tube" label="test tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q13147" start="11363" end="11374" title="human skull" label="human skull"/>
<link wikidata="Q203219" start="11392" end="11405" title="Boris Karloff" label="Boris Karloff"/>
<link wikidata="Q571" start="11425" end="11429" title="book" label="book"/>
<link wikidata="Q8094" start="11591" end="11595" title="Wind" label="Wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q21332443" start="11720" end="11730" title="North wind" label="North Wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356232" start="11785" end="11795" title="South wind" label="South Wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q3179586" start="11807" end="11818" title="Joan Gerber" label="Joan Gerber"/>
<link wikidata="Q2036212" start="11851" end="11860" title="East wind" label="East Wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q11030327" start="11918" end="11927" title="West wind" label="West Wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q40531" start="11968" end="11978" title="John Wayne" label="John Wayne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1111916" start="12072" end="12104" title="The Banana Splits Adventure Hour" label="The Banana Splits Adventure Hour"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="12209" end="12212" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2813" start="12316" end="12325" title="Coca-Cola" label="Coca-Cola"/>
<link wikidata="Q2467552" start="12342" end="12360" title="HemisFair &amp;#x27;68" label="HemisFair &amp;#x27;68"/>
<link wikidata="Q653916" start="12877" end="12882" title="television pilot" label="pilot"/>
<link wikidata="Q326299" start="12963" end="12974" title="Lionel Bart" label="Lionel Bart"/>
<link wikidata="Q141359" start="13038" end="13045" title="Oliver (film)" label="Oliver!"/>
<link wikidata="Q237659" start="13272" end="13286" title="Penny Marshall" label="Penny Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2903551" start="13302" end="13314" title="Billie Hayes" label="Billie Hayes"/>
<link wikidata="Q338177" start="13509" end="13518" title="Jack Wild" label="Jack Wild"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427463" start="13812" end="13823" title="laugh track" label="laugh track"/>
<link wikidata="Q7512513" start="14617" end="14645" title="Sigmund and the Sea Monsters" label="Sigmund and the Sea Monsters"/>
<link wikidata="Q892343" start="14692" end="14701" title="Lidsville" label="Lidsville"/>
<link wikidata="Q7744963" start="14850" end="14875" title="The Krofft Superstar Hour" label="The Krofft Superstar Hour"/>
<link wikidata="Q7756379" start="15188" end="15220" title="The Paul Lynde Halloween Special" label="The Paul Lynde Halloween Special"/>
<link wikidata="Q3822980" start="15270" end="15294" title="Wicked Witch of the West" label="Wicked Witch of the West"/>
<link wikidata="Q257756" start="15309" end="15326" title="Margaret Hamilton (actress)" label="Margaret Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15422" end="15433" title="Les Szarvas" label="Les Szarvas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4028" start="15458" end="15468" title="Paul Simon" label="Paul Simon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3605621" start="15599" end="15648" title="The 59th Street Bridge Song (Feelin&amp;#x27; Groovy)" label="The 59th Street Bridge Song (Feelin&amp;#x27; Groovy)"/>
<link wikidata="Q926231" start="15847" end="15858" title="The Murmurs" label="The Murmurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q482994" start="15884" end="15897" title="tribute album" label="tribute album"/>
<link wikidata="" start="15904" end="15950" title="Saturday Morning: Cartoons&amp;#x27; Greatest Hits (album)" label="Saturday Morning: Cartoons&amp;#x27; Greatest Hits"/>
<link wikidata="Q7288057" start="15970" end="15980" title="Ralph Sall" label="Ralph Sall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2338889" start="15985" end="15996" title="MCA Records" label="MCA Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q338177" start="16207" end="16216" title="Jack Wild" label="Jack Wild"/>
<link wikidata="Q2903551" start="16227" end="16239" title="Billie Hayes" label="Billie Hayes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4355500" start="16322" end="16336" title="Lennie Weinrib" label="Lennie Weinrib"/>
<link wikidata="Q4017804" start="16550" end="16565" title="Walker Edmiston" label="Walker Edmiston"/>
<link wikidata="Q3179586" start="16743" end="16754" title="Joan Gerber" label="Joan Gerber"/>
<link wikidata="Q168383" start="17005" end="17023" title="Universal Pictures" label="Universal Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q856897" start="17052" end="17073" title="Kellogg Company" label="Kellogg&amp;#x27;s Cereal"/>
<link wikidata="Q49734" start="17174" end="17185" title="Cass Elliot" label="Cass Elliot"/>
<link wikidata="Q435236" start="17205" end="17216" title="Martha Raye" label="Martha Raye"/>
<link wikidata="Q183976" start="17266" end="17269" title="VHS" label="VHS"/>
<link wikidata="Q168383" start="17281" end="17301" title="Universal Pictures" label="Universal Home Video"/>
<link wikidata="Q5294" start="17355" end="17358" title="DVD" label="DVD"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000075" start="17616" end="17628" title="Allan Melvin" label="Allan Melvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q645399" start="17633" end="17644" title="Don Messick" label="Don Messick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133638" start="18246" end="18257" title="Rose Parade" label="Rose Parade"/>
<link wikidata="Q627091" start="18698" end="18717" title="Rhino Entertainment" label="Rhino Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q168383" start="19042" end="19059" title="Universal Pictures" label="Universal Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q5516982" start="19069" end="19090" title="Vivendi Entertainment" label="Vivendi Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q9593" start="19412" end="19424" title="iTunes Store" label="iTunes Store"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="19434" end="19448" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1983457" start="19463" end="19478" title="PolyGram Filmed Entertainment" label="Channel 5 Video"/>
<link wikidata="Q194907" start="19616" end="19628" title="Federal judiciary of the United States" label="U.S. federal"/>
<link wikidata="Q697327" start="19629" end="19636" title="lawsuit" label="lawsuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q81799" start="19672" end="19681" title="fast food" label="fast food"/>
<link wikidata="Q38076" start="19693" end="19708" title="McDonald&amp;#x27;s" label="McDonald&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q3309036" start="19716" end="19728" title="McDonaldland" label="McDonaldland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297822" start="19785" end="19794" title="copyright" label="copyright"/>
<link wikidata="Q7507723" start="19812" end="19887" title="Sid &amp;amp; Marty Krofft Television Productions Inc. v. McDonald&amp;#x27;s Corp." label="Sid &amp;amp; Marty Krofft Television Productions Inc. v. McDonald&amp;#x27;s Corp."/>
<link wikidata="Q2358778" start="19929" end="19972" title="United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit" label="U.S. Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7708739" start="20101" end="20118" title="recreational drug" label="recreational drug"/>
<link wikidata="Q2845" start="20281" end="20290" title="cannabis (drug)" label="marijuana"/>
<link wikidata="Q4355500" start="20682" end="20696" title="Lennie Weinrib" label="Lennie Weinrib"/>
<link wikidata="Q3495288" start="21194" end="21217" title="St. Louis Post-Dispatch" label="St. Louis Post-Dispatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2030511" start="21753" end="21768" title="double entendre" label="double entendre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378320" start="22798" end="22816" title="Swarthmore College" label="Swarthmore College"/>
<link wikidata="Q2845" start="23150" end="23153" title="Cannabis (drug)" label="lid"/>
<link wikidata="Q892343" start="23180" end="23189" title="Lidsville" label="Lidsville"/>
<link wikidata="Q952732" start="23553" end="23560" title="Joint (cannabis)" label="Spliffy"/>
<link wikidata="Q502672" start="23565" end="23571" title="bong" label="Bong-O"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023688" start="23897" end="23902" title="CHiPs" label="CHiPs"/>
<link wikidata="Q706338" start="24022" end="24034" title="Erik Estrada" label="Erik Estrada"/>
<link wikidata="Q723783" start="24045" end="24057" title="Larry Wilcox" label="Larry Wilcox"/>
<link wikidata="Q23633" start="24506" end="24509" title="Home Box Office" label="HBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q257643" start="24530" end="24557" title="Mr. Show with Bob and David" label="Mr. Show with Bob and David"/>
<link wikidata="Q653916" start="24597" end="24613" title="television pilot" label="television pilot"/>
<link wikidata="Q888178" start="24700" end="24712" title="Bob Odenkirk" label="Bob Odenkirk"/>
<link wikidata="Q362332" start="24717" end="24728" title="David Cross" label="David Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q502672" start="24886" end="24890" title="bong" label="bong"/>
<link wikidata="Q483915" start="24986" end="24990" title="Nike, Inc." label="Nike"/>
<link wikidata="Q116195" start="25171" end="25182" title="Total Drama" label="Total Drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071154" start="25360" end="25373" title="Finger Eleven" label="Finger Eleven"/>
<link wikidata="Q34659" start="25630" end="25645" title="My Name Is Earl" label="My Name Is Earl"/>
<link wikidata="Q314610" start="25746" end="25758" title="Ethan Suplee" label="Ethan Suplee"/>
<link wikidata="Q20899512" start="25930" end="25946" title="Mutt &amp;amp; Stuff" label="Mutt &amp;amp; Stuff"/>
<link wikidata="Q5642125" start="26042" end="26055" title="Randy Credico" label="Randy Credico"/>
<link wikidata="Q6176072" start="26342" end="26356" title="Jeffrey Kripal" label="Jeffrey Kripal"/>
<link wikidata="Q25205882" start="26649" end="26656" title="Goliath (TV series)" label="Goliath"/>
<link wikidata="Q3273787" start="26709" end="26721" title="Mark Duplass" label="Mark Duplass"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="192205" wikidata="Q5344293" url="?curid=192205" title="Edward MacLysaght">
<text>Edgeworth Lysaght, later Edward Anthony Edgeworth Lysaght, and from 1920 Edward MacLysaght (; 6 November 1887 – 4 March 1986) was a genealogist of twentieth-century Ireland. His numerous books on Irish surnames built upon the work of Rev. Patrick Woulfe&#x27;s &quot;Irish Names and Surnames&quot; (1923).

==Early life and education==
Edgeworth Lysaght was born at Flax Bourton, Somerset (near Bristol), to Sidney Royse Lysaght, of Irish origin, a director of the family iron and steel firm John Lysaght and Co. and a writer of novels and poetry, and Katherine (died 1953), daughter of Joseph Clarke, of Waddington, Lincolnshire. Lysaght&#x27;s grandfather, Thomas Royse Lysaght, was an architect, and his great-grandfather, William Lysaght, a small landowner distantly connected with the Barons Lisle. Lysaght was named &quot;Edgeworth Lysaght&quot; after his father&#x27;s friend, the economist Francis Ysidro Edgeworth; &quot;Edward&quot; was added at baptism, and he was called &quot;Ned&quot;. &quot;Anthony&quot; was added at confirmation. He lost the sight in one eye after a childhood accident.

Lysaght was educated at Nash House preparatory school, Bristol, and at Rugby School, where he was unhappy, his parents&#x27; frequent absence due to his father&#x27;s business responsibilities necessitating travel to South America, South Africa, and Australia contributing to this. He was a contemporary there of Rupert Brooke, whose father was Lysaght&#x27;s housemaster. Eighteen months after leaving Rugby, on the advice of Francis Edgeworth, he then went to Corpus Christi College, Oxford, to study law, but, having on his own account &quot;had a wild time as part of the smart set&quot; and anticipating rustication after a drunken incident, he left after three terms.

==Life in Ireland==
Lysaght took up residence in a caravan at Lahinch, County Clare, Ireland, where he had previously holidayed and become friendly with local people. His father, himself strongly connected to his Irish boyhood and wanting to establish himself as a &quot;country gentleman&quot;, recognized his son&#x27;s enthusiasm for Ireland and in 1909 bought a 600-acre estate at Tuamgraney, at which Lysaght would farm until 1913, introducing an electrical generator and other forms of modernization including the development of a limekiln, nursery, and school where young men of means could learn the basics of farming. This was the beginning of a metamorphosis for Lysaght; although of English upbringing, he disliked the local gentry, considering them &quot;layabout rentiers&quot;, and preferred to make friendships amongst employees and his neighbours. 

He sought to replace his English accent with a Clare one, and eschewed his lack of religion (despite an Anglican upbringing) of a few years before in favour of Roman Catholicism, and became involved in the Gaelic League. An integral factor in Lysaght&#x27;s reinvention was his relationship with Mabel (&quot;Maureen&quot;) Pattison; five years his senior, they had met when Lysaght spent a period at a Dublin hospital. She was born and raised in South Africa, her father a civil servant there, but had an Irish family including a local postmistress. Lysaght&#x27;s family sought to avoid what they considered an unsuitable marriage, sending Lysaght and his brother Patrick on a world tour taking in Ceylon and Japan, but they were nevertheless married at the Brompton Oratory on 4 September 1913. They had two children. Mabel introduced him to friends in the Arts Club, and Lysaght entered Dublin literary society; his &quot;somewhat overdone&quot; attempts to &quot;give himself a new, more Irish identity&quot; were noticed by acquaintances. Lysaght&#x27;s father invested £300 in Maunsell&#x27;s publishers, who produced Lysaght&#x27;s book of poems &quot;Irish eclogues&quot;. As of the early 1930s, he served on the General Committee of the Munster Agricultural Society. He and Mabel later divorced in South Africa. Lysaght remarried to Mary Cuneen. He had three children with his second wife.

By 1915 Lysaght&#x27;s command of Irish had improved dramatically, and in that year he founded the Nua-Ghaeltacht at Raheen, County Clare.

He was an independent delegate to the 1917–1918 Irish Convention in which he opposed John Redmond&#x27;s compromise on Home Rule. By 1918 his involvement in all aspects of the Irish independence movement had deepened greatly. Although not known if he was actually a member of the Irish Republican Army (IRA), he was very active in the Irish War of Independence as a supporter, financially and otherwise, of the East Clare Brigade of the IRA.

In 1919, he published a largely autobiographical novel entitled &quot;The Gael&quot;. In 1920, Lysaght, along with others of the name, changed his name to &quot;MacLysaght&quot;, &quot;so as to emphasise its Gaelic origin&quot;.

His Raheen office served as a meeting place for the Volunteers and guns, documents and ammunition were stored there. However, the war led to a sharp decline in the fortunes of his farm. The execution of close friends such as Conor Clune of Quin in November 1920 and the subsequent devastating raids on his farm resulted in his playing a far more active role in Sinn Féin as a loyal supporter of the new TD for Clare, Éamon de Valera. For this, he was imprisoned following his return from Britain as part of a Sinn Féin delegation which was publicising the Black and Tans atrocities.

==Later life==
MacLysaght was elected to the Free State Seanad Éireann in 1922. He was appointed Inspector for the Irish Manuscripts Commission in 1938. MacLysaght was elected to the Royal Irish Academy in 1942 and in the same year was awarded a D.Litt. He was appointed Chief Herald of Ireland in 1943 and served in this post until 1954. MacLysaght served as Keeper of Manuscripts at the National Library of Ireland from 1948 to 1954 and was Chairman of the Irish Manuscripts Commission from 1956 to 1973.

==Death==
MacLysaght died on 4 March 1986, aged 98, and was interred in the graveyard of St. Cronan&#x27;s Church, Tuamgraney.

==Works==
* &quot;Irish Life in the Seventeenth Century&quot; (1939)
* &quot;The Surnames of Ireland&quot;
* &quot;Supplement to Irish Families&quot;
* &quot;More Irish Families&quot;
* &quot;More Irish Families&quot; incorporating &quot;Supplement to Irish Families&quot;
* &quot;The Gael&quot; (1919)
* &quot;Cursaí Thomáis&quot; (1927)
* &quot;Changing Times&quot; (1978)

==See also==
*Heraldry
*Office of the Chief Herald of Ireland

==References==
==Sources==
*, database of Irish writers; comprehensive listing of life and works. Retrieved 5 August 2010. Archived 2004.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5344293" start="0" end="17" title="Edward MacLysaght" label="Edgeworth Lysaght"/>
<link wikidata="Q5344293" start="25" end="57" title="Edward MacLysaght" label="Edward Anthony Edgeworth Lysaght"/>
<link wikidata="Q5344293" start="73" end="90" title="Edward MacLysaght" label="Edward MacLysaght"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="165" end="172" title="Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q170826" start="196" end="201" title="Irish people" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q2881181" start="366" end="378" title="Flax Bourton" label="Flax Bourton"/>
<link wikidata="Q23157" start="380" end="388" title="Somerset" label="Somerset"/>
<link wikidata="Q23154" start="395" end="402" title="Bristol" label="Bristol"/>
<link wikidata="Q7509318" start="408" end="428" title="Sidney Royse Lysaght" label="Sidney Royse Lysaght"/>
<link wikidata="Q6245653" start="492" end="512" title="John Lysaght and Co." label="John Lysaght and Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q991481" start="605" end="629" title="Waddington, Lincolnshire" label="Waddington, Lincolnshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6245651" start="790" end="802" title="John Lysaght, 1st Baron Lisle" label="Barons Lisle"/>
<link wikidata="Q355607" start="898" end="922" title="Francis Ysidro Edgeworth" label="Francis Ysidro Edgeworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143281" start="1176" end="1188" title="Rugby School" label="Rugby School"/>
<link wikidata="Q366086" start="1418" end="1431" title="Rupert Brooke" label="Rupert Brooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135137" start="1567" end="1597" title="Corpus Christi College, Oxford" label="Corpus Christi College, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q7382504" start="1714" end="1725" title="rustication (academia)" label="rustication"/>
<link wikidata="Q1800597" start="1842" end="1849" title="Lahinch" label="Lahinch"/>
<link wikidata="Q181862" start="1851" end="1863" title="County Clare" label="County Clare"/>
<link wikidata="Q1906588" start="2165" end="2175" title="Tuamgraney" label="Tuamgraney"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="2806" end="2823" title="Roman Catholicism" label="Roman Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q875645" start="2852" end="2865" title="Gaelic League" label="Gaelic League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1769288" start="3406" end="3422" title="Brompton Oratory" label="Brompton Oratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q107504787" start="3893" end="3921" title="Munster Agricultural Society" label="Munster Agricultural Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q181862" start="4172" end="4184" title="County Clare" label="County Clare"/>
<link wikidata="Q16257640" start="4235" end="4251" title="Irish Convention" label="Irish Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q225392" start="4272" end="4284" title="John Redmond" label="John Redmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q2279790" start="4306" end="4315" title="Government of Ireland Act 1914" label="Home Rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q175284" start="4467" end="4488" title="Irish Republican Army" label="Irish Republican Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q208297" start="4522" end="4547" title="Irish War of Independence" label="Irish War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q76382" start="5221" end="5230" title="Sinn Féin" label="Sinn Féin"/>
<link wikidata="Q654291" start="5263" end="5265" title="Teachta Dála" label="TD"/>
<link wikidata="Q181862" start="5270" end="5275" title="County Clare" label="Clare"/>
<link wikidata="Q173347" start="5277" end="5292" title="Éamon de Valera" label="Éamon de Valera"/>
<link wikidata="Q76382" start="5369" end="5378" title="Sinn Féin" label="Sinn Féin"/>
<link wikidata="Q880656" start="5416" end="5430" title="Black and Tans" label="Black and Tans"/>
<link wikidata="Q2262280" start="5489" end="5514" title="Seanad Éireann (Irish Free State)" label="Free State Seanad Éireann"/>
<link wikidata="Q16146922" start="5559" end="5587" title="Irish Manuscripts Commission" label="Irish Manuscripts Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q110587" start="5627" end="5646" title="Royal Irish Academy" label="Royal Irish Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q837343" start="5690" end="5696" title="D.Litt" label="D.Litt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5531582" start="5715" end="5738" title="Chief Herald of Ireland" label="Chief Herald of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672830" start="5833" end="5860" title="National Library of Ireland" label="National Library of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2317900" start="6041" end="6077" title="St. Cronan&amp;#x27;s Church, Tuamgraney" label="St. Cronan&amp;#x27;s Church, Tuamgraney"/>
<link wikidata="Q18336" start="6470" end="6478" title="Heraldry" label="Heraldry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5531582" start="6480" end="6517" title="Office of the Chief Herald of Ireland" label="Office of the Chief Herald of Ireland"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="192207" wikidata="Q1158157" url="?curid=192207" title="Ned Flanders">
<text>Nedward &quot;Ned&quot; Flanders Jr., commonly referred to by his surname, is a fictional character in the animated television series &quot;The Simpsons&quot;, voiced by Harry Shearer and first appearing in the series premiere episode &quot;Simpsons Roasting on an Open Fire.&quot; He is the good-natured, cheery next-door neighbor to the Simpson family and is generally loathed by Homer Simpson, though there are numerous instances where the two are portrayed as good friends. A scrupulous and devout Evangelical Christian, he is among the friendliest and most compassionate of Springfield&#x27;s residents and is generally considered a pillar of the Springfield community.

He was one of the first characters outside the immediate Simpson family to appear on the show, and has since been central to several episodes, the first being season two&#x27;s &quot;Dead Putting Society&quot;. As the series progressed, Flanders&#x27;s religious fanaticism increased immensely, prompting the coining of the term &quot;Flanderization&quot;. His last name comes from Flanders Street in Portland, Oregon, the hometown of &quot;Simpsons&quot; creator Matt Groening.

==Characterization==
===Creation===

Ned Flanders, who was designed by Rich Moore, first appeared in the season one episode &quot;Simpsons Roasting on an Open Fire&quot;. The episode was the series premiere, but not the first episode produced. The first episode in which Flanders and his family were prominent is season two&#x27;s &quot;Dead Putting Society&quot;, which also contained the first appearance of Maude and Rod Flanders. The character was named after Flanders Street in Portland, Oregon, the hometown of &quot;Simpsons&quot; creator Matt Groening. Groening described the inspiration for Flanders as &quot;just a guy who was truly nice, that Homer had no justifiable reason to loathe, but then did&quot;. It was not until after the first few episodes that it was decided Flanders would be a faithful Christian. Mike Scully noted that Flanders is &quot;everything Homer would love to be, although he&#x27;ll never admit it&quot;. Flanders had been meant to be just a neighbor that Homer was jealous of, but Harry Shearer used &quot;such a sweet voice&quot; and Flanders was broadened to become a Christian and a sweet guy that someone would prefer to live next to over Homer. Flanders is known for his nonsensical jabbering, such as &quot;Hi-diddly-ho, neighborino&quot; as a greeting. His first use of the word &quot;diddly&quot; was in &quot;The Call of the Simpsons&quot;.

===Development===

Ned Flanders&#x27; religion was not mentioned in his first few appearances and in the first few seasons he was only mildly religious and his primary role was to be so &quot;cloyingly perfect as to annoy and shame the Simpsons&quot;, whereas Homer Simpson has always hated Ned Flanders and always tries to undermine him. There has been a consistent effort among the show&#x27;s writers to make him not just a &quot;goody good and an unsympathetic person&quot;. In the later seasons, Flanders has become more of a caricature of the Christian right, and his role as a &quot;perfect neighbor&quot; has been lessened. For example, in some recent episodes Flanders has appeared to show rather prejudiced attitudes towards women, non-whites, homosexuals and people of religions other than Christianity. Though he only ever showed homophobic signs in non-canon episodes, notably &quot;Frinkenstein&quot; where he says &quot;I&#x27;m running to find a cure for homosexuality&quot;.

Ned&#x27;s store the Leftorium first appeared in &quot;When Flanders Failed&quot;. It was suggested by George Meyer, who had had a friend who had owned a left-handed specialty store which failed.

There have been at least two occasions where Ned was not voiced by Harry Shearer. In &quot;Bart of Darkness&quot;, Flanders&#x27;s high pitched scream was performed by Tress MacNeille and in &quot;Homer to the Max&quot;, Flanders comments about cartoons being easily able to change voice actors and on that occasion he was voiced by Karl Wiedergott.

===&quot;The Adventures of Ned Flanders&quot;===
&quot;The Adventures of Ned Flanders&quot; was a &quot;series&quot; of shorts starring Flanders, but only one episode, &quot;Love that God&quot;, was produced. It appears at the end of the fourth season episode &quot;The Front&quot; because the episode was too short and the producers had already tried &quot;every trick in the book&quot; to lengthen it. Although the episode was scripted by Adam I. Lapidus, &quot;Love That God&quot; was written by Mike Reiss, Al Jean and Sam Simon. In the 34-second-long segment, which comes complete with its own theme song, Ned walks into Rod and Todd&#x27;s room as they are praying and tells them it is time for church. He is upset when Todd replies that they are not going, until Todd reminds him it is Saturday, and Ned laughs at his mistake.

Most fans were confused by the short, but Bill Oakley and several other writers loved it so much that they wanted to do more. Later, Oakley and Josh Weinstein decided to produce an entire episode that was nothing but loosely associated shorts, which became the season seven episode &quot;22 Short Films About Springfield&quot;. The Flanders/Lovejoy segment of that episode was written by David X. Cohen. &quot;22 Short Films about Springfield&quot; in turn inspired the &quot;Futurama&quot; episode &quot;Three Hundred Big Boys&quot;.

==Role in &quot;The Simpsons&quot;==
Ned is very honest and sincere in carrying out the Christian doctrines of charity, kindness, and compassion. He is frequently shown doing volunteer work, and is rigorously honest and upright, even going so far as to spend an entire day tracking down a Leftorium customer in order to give him the extra change that he had forgotten to hand over.

In &quot;Homer&#x27;s Triple Bypass&quot;, he donates a kidney and a lung out of the goodness of his heart to whoever needs them first. He also is a good neighbor to the Simpsons, regularly offering his assistance. Ned&#x27;s dogged friendship inspires the loyalty of others; when his Leftorium shop appeared on the verge of bankruptcy shortly after it opened, Homer arranged a bailout with the help of many people in Springfield. Despite a meek outward appearance, Ned hides an exceptionally well-toned physique.

===The Simpsons&#x27; good neighbor===
In the early years of &quot;The Simpsons&quot;, Homer Simpson generally loathed Ned, because Ned&#x27;s family, job, health and self-discipline are of higher quality than he could ever hope to attain himself. Homer is often shown &quot;borrowing&quot; (stealing) items from Flanders, such as a weather vane, a camcorder, a diploma, a toothbrush and an air conditioning unit. Even the Simpsons&#x27; couch came from &quot;the curb outside Flanders&#x27; house&quot;.
Homer has since come to have a love-hate relationship with Ned, sometimes being his best friend, partly due to Ned&#x27;s selfless tolerance of him, and other times treating Ned with complete disregard. Homer seems to genuinely care for Ned, despite still expressing and often acting on feelings of loathing. Nowadays Homer seems to regard Ned as more of a nuisance. An early running joke was that Marge considers Flanders to be a perfect neighbor, and usually sides with him instead of her husband, which always enrages Homer. In &quot;Left Behind,&quot; Homer succinctly states, &quot;[Flanders] makes me feel so damn guilty!&quot;

===Religiosity===

Ned Flanders is a genuinely well-meaning good-natured person and is one of the few in Springfield to whom that description applies. Firmly religious, he can be timid and something of a pushover. He is a Republican and a devout Evangelical Christian who strictly follows the Bible literally and is easily shocked when challenged on any point of dogma. This causes frequent calls to Reverend Lovejoy, even over minuscule things, to the point that Lovejoy has stopped caring and has even suggested that Flanders try a different religion. This was a running joke in the early seasons, but has been used less in the later episodes. In the eighth season, the episode &quot;In Marge We Trust&quot; would examine the relationship between Lovejoy and Flanders, and shows the history of their relationship and how Lovejoy became increasingly uninterested in Flanders&#x27; problems. Flanders is shown to have a room in his house filled with memorabilia of The Beatles. He claims that this is because they were &quot;bigger than Jesus&quot;.

===Family and job===
Ned is a widower, having been married to the equally religious Maude. They had two children together; the sheltered and naïve Rod and Todd Flanders. In the eleventh season episode &quot;Alone Again, Natura-Diddily&quot;, Maude died an untimely death in a freak accident involving a T-shirt cannon, leaving Flanders alone and grieving. While still married to Maude, Ned married Ginger, while on a drunken bender in Las Vegas. Ginger came to live with Ned and his sons for a brief period following Maude&#x27;s death in a later episode, but she quickly grew tired of the Flanders&#x27; sickly-sweet personalities and fled. Despite his outward nerdishness, Flanders has also been connected romantically with a beautiful Christian-rock singer, Rachel Jordan, movie star Sara Sloane and eventually marrying local teacher Edna Krabappel until she died as well.

Ned got his diploma from Oral Roberts University in an unspecified field and worked as a salesman in the pharmaceuticals industry for the bulk of his adult life. Having saved much of his earnings, Flanders decided to quit his job and invested his family&#x27;s life savings into a store in the Springfield mall called the Leftorium specializing in products for left-handed people. In the fifth season episode, &quot;Sweet Seymour Skinner&#x27;s Baadasssss Song&quot;, Superintendent Chalmers fires Ned Flanders, who has become principal after Skinner being sacked, only because he freely expresses his religious views in the school. However in the Season 29 episode &quot;Left Behind&quot;, owing to declining sales, the Leftorium had been downsized from an outlet to a kiosk, eventually going out of business alongside the Sears outlet at Springfield Mall. Left unemployed, Flanders returned to Springfield Elementary School, finding a new job as Bart Simpson&#x27;s new teacher and substituting the void left by his deceased second wife Edna Krabappel, as well as honoring her life dream. Flanders remained Bart&#x27;s teacher until the Season 33 episode &quot;My Octopus and a Teacher&quot;, at which point the role was assumed by Rayshelle Peyton.

In the episode &quot;Hurricane Neddy&quot; a flashback to 30 years earlier shows Ned as a young child, despite the fact that in the episode &quot;Viva Ned Flanders&quot; he says to the church congregation that he was actually 60 years old, attributing his youthful appearance to his conformity to the &quot;three Cs&quot;—&quot;clean living, chewing thoroughly, and a daily dose of vitamin church&quot;. Ned grew up in New York City and was the son of &quot;freaky beatniks&quot; who did not discipline Ned (as they did not think it was right) and let him run wild. Eventually they took him to Dr. Foster, a psychiatrist, who put the young Ned through the University of Minnesota Spankalogical Protocol, which involved eight months of continuous spanking. The treatment worked so well that it rendered Flanders unable to express any anger at all and resulted in his trademark nonsensical jabbering at moments when he was particularly close to losing his temper, causing Ned to unknowingly repress his anger.
==Reception==
Although in more recent seasons Flanders has become a caricature of the Christian right, he is still a favorite of many Christian viewers. Rowan Williams, a former archbishop of Canterbury, is a confessed &quot;Simpsons&quot; fan, and is reportedly a Flanders fan. Ned&#x27;s &quot;unbearable piousness&quot; has been described as &quot;The Simpsons&quot;″ sharpest critique of organized religion: &quot;The show&#x27;s implicit argument seems to be that humorless obsessives like Ned have hijacked religious institutions, removing them from the center of society to a place where only those who know their brides of Beth Chedruharazzeb from their wells of Zohassadar can seek solace.&quot; Steve Goddard of the website &quot;Ship of Fools&quot; said, &quot;Ned is an innocent abroad in a world of cynicism and compromise. We love him because we know what it&#x27;s like to be classed as a nerd – and to come out smiling at the end of it.&quot; The February 5, 2001 edition of Billy Graham&#x27;s &quot;Christianity Today&quot;, titled &quot;Saint Flanders&quot;, featured Flanders, along with Homer and Marge, on the cover and described him as &quot;the most visible evangelical to many Americans.&quot;

=== Cultural impact ===
Flanders has been described as &quot;The United States&#x27; most well-known evangelical&quot;. According to &quot;Christianity Today&quot; in 2001, &quot;on American college and high school campuses, the name most associated with the word Christian—other than Jesus—is not the Pope or Mother Teresa or even Billy Graham. Instead, it&#x27;s a goofy-looking guy named Ned Flanders on the animated sitcom known as &quot;The Simpsons&quot;. The mustache, thick glasses, green sweater, and irrepressibly cheerful demeanor of Ned Flanders, Homer Simpson&#x27;s next-door neighbor, have made him an indelible figure, the evangelical known most intimately to nonevangelicals.&quot; In 2001 and 2002, the Greenbelt Festival, a British Christian music and arts fest, held a special &quot;Ned Flanders Night&quot;. The 2001 event featured a look-alike contest, as well as the tribute band &quot;Ned Zeppelin&quot;. It was held in a 500-seat venue that was filled to capacity, and an extra 1500 people were turned away at the door. A second event was held in 2002, with Ned Zeppelin reappearing. 

In 2017, after president Donald Trump insulted television host Mika Brzezinski on Twitter, Orrin Hatch responded and said, &quot;Every once in a while you get a dipsy-doodle,&quot; as Ned Flanders&#x27; term. In 2019, Trevor Noah on &quot;The Daily Show&quot; compared Mike Pence to Flanders when discussing the Ukraine scandal. Aaron Stonehouse, Western Australia&#x27;s first Liberal Democrat MP, made a comparison between the McGowan government and Ned Flanders&#x27; wife, Maude Flanders, a devout Christian who died after being knocked off a grandstand in a T-shirt cannon accident on &quot;The Simpsons&quot;. In 2022, &quot;Relevant&quot; claimed that Flanders was &quot;unapologetically not cool&quot; as a Christian, but overall &quot;decent&quot;.

Professional ice hockey goaltender Peter Budaj was known for having Ned Flanders painted on his mask during his hockey career. Another tribute band, Okilly Dokilly, plays heavy metal music. In 2018, MadeinTYO released a rap song about Flanders. The Ned Flanders Crossing, a pedestrian and bicycle bridge over Interstate 405 in Portland, Oregon, was named for the character in 2021. It connects two sections of Northwest Flanders Street, for whom the character is named.

===Flanderization===

Flanders&#x27; significant evolution of his Christian fanaticism has led to the term dubbed &quot;Flanderization&quot;, which refers to the increasingly exaggerated characterization of any character throughout a TV or a film series. The specific case of Flanders attracts special attention. Debate exists over whether Flanders is a consistently flanderized character or whether he later returned to a more complex, dynamic portrayal. The appropriateness of the term &quot;flanderization&quot; has also been disputed, as many characters in &quot;The Simpsons&quot; have undergone the caricaturizing process, and Flanders himself may not be the most extreme case. Flanders&#x27; shifting portrayal has also been controversial as representative of a shift in media portrayals of religious people. As both the primary representative of Christianity on &quot;The Simpsons&quot; and as one of the most significant Christian fictional characters in the real world, the simplification of Flanders as a character has been the subject of criticism, study, and reinterpretation.

=== Merchandise ===
Flanders has been included in &quot;The Simpsons&quot; merchandise. In 2008, the &quot;Flanders&#x27; Book of Faith&quot;, part of the Simpsons Library of Wisdom, was released by HarperCollins. The book takes a look at Flanders&#x27; life and his ever enduring faith. In 2021, Flanders got a sneaker line from Adidas.

== References ==
=== Bibliography ===

== External links ==
* Ned Flanders on IMDb</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1158157" start="0" end="7" title="Ned Flanders" label="Nedward"/>
<link wikidata="Q1158157" start="14" end="17" title="Ned Flanders" label="Ned"/>
<link wikidata="Q1158157" start="24" end="36" title="Ned Flanders" label="Flanders Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q886" start="140" end="152" title="The Simpsons" label="The Simpsons"/>
<link wikidata="Q345325" start="170" end="183" title="Harry Shearer" label="Harry Shearer"/>
<link wikidata="Q753507" start="241" end="274" title="Simpsons Roasting on an Open Fire" label="Simpsons Roasting on an Open Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q9762" start="339" end="353" title="Simpson family" label="Simpson family"/>
<link wikidata="Q7810" start="382" end="395" title="Homer Simpson" label="Homer Simpson"/>
<link wikidata="Q194253" start="502" end="523" title="Evangelicalism" label="Evangelical Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q151076" start="652" end="673" title="Springfield (The Simpsons)" label="Springfield community"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274105" start="835" end="845" title="The Simpsons (season 2)" label="season two"/>
<link wikidata="Q2459783" start="859" end="879" title="Dead Putting Society" label="Dead Putting Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q2639721" start="929" end="949" title="religious fanaticism" label="religious fanaticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q105727009" start="1011" end="1025" title="Flanderization" label="Flanderization"/>
<link wikidata="Q104843088" start="1058" end="1073" title="Ned Flanders Crossing" label="Flanders Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q6106" start="1077" end="1093" title="Portland, Oregon" label="Portland, Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q43994" start="1140" end="1153" title="Matt Groening" label="Matt Groening"/>
<link wikidata="Q2499079" start="1227" end="1237" title="Rich Moore" label="Rich Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q461483" start="1261" end="1271" title="The Simpsons (season 1)" label="season one"/>
<link wikidata="Q753507" start="1286" end="1319" title="Simpsons Roasting on an Open Fire" label="Simpsons Roasting on an Open Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274105" start="1469" end="1479" title="The Simpsons (season 2)" label="season two"/>
<link wikidata="Q2459783" start="1493" end="1513" title="Dead Putting Society" label="Dead Putting Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q6106" start="1639" end="1655" title="Portland, Oregon" label="Portland, Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q43994" start="1702" end="1715" title="Matt Groening" label="Matt Groening"/>
<link wikidata="Q655207" start="1979" end="1990" title="Mike Scully" label="Mike Scully"/>
<link wikidata="Q1782544" start="2511" end="2535" title="The Call of the Simpsons" label="The Call of the Simpsons"/>
<link wikidata="Q7810" start="2804" end="2817" title="Homer Simpson" label="Homer Simpson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322213" start="3093" end="3108" title="Christian right" label="Christian right"/>
<link wikidata="Q53815" start="3406" end="3415" title="Canon (fiction)" label="non-canon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3440" end="3452" title="Treehouse of Horror XIV#Frinkenstein" label="Frinkenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q2099673" start="3592" end="3612" title="When Flanders Failed" label="When Flanders Failed"/>
<link wikidata="Q3101773" start="3640" end="3652" title="George Meyer" label="George Meyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q345325" start="3801" end="3814" title="Harry Shearer" label="Harry Shearer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2498174" start="3825" end="3841" title="Bart of Darkness" label="Bart of Darkness"/>
<link wikidata="Q237530" start="3902" end="3917" title="Tress MacNeille" label="Tress MacNeille"/>
<link wikidata="Q2355616" start="3931" end="3947" title="Homer to the Max" label="Homer to the Max"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378202" start="4067" end="4082" title="Karl Wiedergott" label="Karl Wiedergott"/>
<link wikidata="Q11425" start="4205" end="4211" title="animated short" label="shorts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1670665" start="4323" end="4336" title="The Simpsons (season 4)" label="fourth season"/>
<link wikidata="Q2578618" start="4351" end="4360" title="The Front (The Simpsons)" label="The Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q2823961" start="4526" end="4541" title="Adam I. Lapidus" label="Adam I. Lapidus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2446929" start="4584" end="4594" title="Mike Reiss" label="Mike Reiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q2829373" start="4596" end="4603" title="Al Jean" label="Al Jean"/>
<link wikidata="Q365090" start="4608" end="4617" title="Sam Simon" label="Sam Simon"/>
<link wikidata="Q862352" start="4962" end="4973" title="Bill Oakley" label="Bill Oakley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2604225" start="5064" end="5078" title="Josh Weinstein" label="Josh Weinstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1670724" start="5181" end="5193" title="The Simpsons (season 7)" label="season seven"/>
<link wikidata="Q2603032" start="5208" end="5240" title="22 Short Films About Springfield" label="22 Short Films About Springfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q455743" start="5308" end="5322" title="David X. Cohen" label="David X. Cohen"/>
<link wikidata="Q73622" start="5396" end="5404" title="Futurama" label="Futurama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1994595" start="5425" end="5447" title="Three Hundred Big Boys" label="Three Hundred Big Boys"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5745" end="5754" title="Springfield (The Simpsons)#The Leftorium" label="Leftorium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2665424" start="5848" end="5874" title="Homer&amp;#x27;s Triple Bypass" label="Homer&amp;#x27;s Triple Bypass"/>
<link wikidata="Q524738" start="6687" end="6699" title="weather vane" label="weather vane"/>
<link wikidata="Q335234" start="6703" end="6712" title="camcorder" label="camcorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q134205" start="6727" end="6737" title="toothbrush" label="toothbrush"/>
<link wikidata="Q173725" start="6745" end="6761" title="air conditioning" label="air conditioning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030284" start="6890" end="6912" title="Love–hate relationship" label="love-hate relationship"/>
<link wikidata="Q7828" start="7257" end="7262" title="Marge Simpson" label="Marge"/>
<link wikidata="Q52788363" start="7396" end="7407" title="Left Behind (The Simpsons)" label="Left Behind"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="7716" end="7726" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q194253" start="7740" end="7761" title="Evangelical Christian" label="Evangelical Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845" start="7787" end="7792" title="Bible" label="Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q856690" start="7793" end="7802" title="Biblical literalism" label="literally"/>
<link wikidata="Q524177" start="7894" end="7910" title="Reverend Lovejoy" label="Reverend Lovejoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1670733" start="8147" end="8160" title="The Simpsons (season 8)" label="eighth season"/>
<link wikidata="Q2615410" start="8180" end="8197" title="In Marge We Trust" label="In Marge We Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="8459" end="8470" title="The Beatles" label="The Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266028" start="8519" end="8536" title="More popular than Jesus" label="bigger than Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2237599" start="8629" end="8634" title="Maude Flanders" label="Maude"/>
<link wikidata="Q2237599" start="8692" end="8695" title="Rod Flanders" label="Rod"/>
<link wikidata="Q2237599" start="8700" end="8713" title="Todd Flanders" label="Todd Flanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1670788" start="8722" end="8737" title="The Simpsons (season 11)" label="eleventh season"/>
<link wikidata="Q2617074" start="8752" end="8779" title="Alone Again, Natura-Diddily" label="Alone Again, Natura-Diddily"/>
<link wikidata="Q14911" start="8848" end="8862" title="T-shirt cannon" label="T-shirt cannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2624848" start="8980" end="8989" title="Las Vegas Valley" label="Las Vegas"/>
<link wikidata="Q753520" start="9283" end="9297" title="Christian rock" label="Christian-rock"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9306" end="9319" title="List of recurring The Simpsons characters#Rachel Jordan" label="Rachel Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511184" start="9382" end="9396" title="Edna Krabappel" label="Edna Krabappel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3121493" start="9447" end="9470" title="Oral Roberts University" label="Oral Roberts University"/>
<link wikidata="Q12140" start="9527" end="9542" title="pharmaceuticals" label="pharmaceuticals"/>
<link wikidata="Q2579729" start="9838" end="9882" title="Sweet Seymour Skinner&amp;#x27;s Baadasssss Song" label="Sweet Seymour Skinner&amp;#x27;s Baadasssss Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q52788363" start="10094" end="10105" title="Left Behind (The Simpsons)" label="Left Behind"/>
<link wikidata="Q6499202" start="10246" end="10251" title="Sears" label="Sears"/>
<link wikidata="Q111649326" start="10585" end="10609" title="My Octopus and a Teacher" label="My Octopus and a Teacher"/>
<link wikidata="Q2576676" start="10696" end="10711" title="Hurricane Neddy" label="Hurricane Neddy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2985805" start="10821" end="10838" title="Viva Ned Flanders" label="Viva Ned Flanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="11094" end="11107" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q622408" start="11140" end="11147" title="beatnik" label="beatnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q238101" start="11331" end="11354" title="University of Minnesota" label="University of Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322213" start="11769" end="11784" title="Christian right" label="Christian right"/>
<link wikidata="Q49615" start="11836" end="11850" title="Rowan Williams" label="Rowan Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q29282" start="11861" end="11885" title="archbishop of Canterbury" label="archbishop of Canterbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q10359138" start="12075" end="12093" title="organized religion" label="organized religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7497964" start="12423" end="12436" title="Ship of Fools (website)" label="Ship of Fools"/>
<link wikidata="Q213550" start="12674" end="12686" title="Billy Graham" label="Billy Graham"/>
<link wikidata="Q680794" start="12700" end="12718" title="Christianity Today" label="Christianity Today"/>
<link wikidata="Q680794" start="13042" end="13060" title="Christianity Today" label="Christianity Today"/>
<link wikidata="Q19546" start="13205" end="13209" title="Pope" label="Pope"/>
<link wikidata="Q30547" start="13213" end="13226" title="Mother Teresa" label="Mother Teresa"/>
<link wikidata="Q213550" start="13235" end="13247" title="Billy Graham" label="Billy Graham"/>
<link wikidata="Q5603707" start="13624" end="13642" title="Greenbelt Festival" label="Greenbelt Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="14039" end="14051" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q449013" start="14077" end="14092" title="Mika Brzezinski" label="Mika Brzezinski"/>
<link wikidata="Q918" start="14096" end="14103" title="Twitter" label="Twitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q381157" start="14105" end="14116" title="Orrin Hatch" label="Orrin Hatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7839350" start="14232" end="14243" title="Trevor Noah" label="Trevor Noah"/>
<link wikidata="Q824192" start="14253" end="14267" title="The Daily Show" label="The Daily Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q24313" start="14283" end="14293" title="Mike Pence" label="Mike Pence"/>
<link wikidata="Q29021191" start="14343" end="14359" title="Aaron Stonehouse" label="Aaron Stonehouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q6540624" start="14361" end="14411" title="Liberal Democratic Party (Australia)" label="Western Australia&amp;#x27;s first Liberal Democrat MP"/>
<link wikidata="Q16197112" start="14443" end="14450" title="Mark McGowan" label="McGowan"/>
<link wikidata="Q131151" start="14577" end="14584" title="T-shirt" label="T-shirt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7276343" start="14645" end="14653" title="Relevant (magazine)" label="Relevant"/>
<link wikidata="Q705612" start="14808" end="14819" title="Peter Budaj" label="Peter Budaj"/>
<link wikidata="Q22079462" start="14922" end="14936" title="Okilly Dokilly" label="Okilly Dokilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q24151039" start="14972" end="14981" title="MadeinTYO" label="MadeinTYO"/>
<link wikidata="Q104843088" start="15022" end="15043" title="Ned Flanders Crossing" label="Ned Flanders Crossing"/>
<link wikidata="Q934399" start="15082" end="15096" title="Interstate 405 (Oregon)" label="Interstate 405"/>
<link wikidata="Q6106" start="15100" end="15116" title="Portland, Oregon" label="Portland, Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q105727009" start="15364" end="15378" title="Flanderization" label="Flanderization"/>
<link wikidata="Q95149" start="16534" end="16547" title="HarperCollins" label="HarperCollins"/>
<link wikidata="Q3895" start="16665" end="16671" title="Adidas" label="Adidas"/>
<link wikidata="Q37312" start="16752" end="16756" title="IMDb" label="IMDb"/>
</links>
</doc>
