<doc id="29269" wikidata="Q156595" url="?curid=29269" title="Self-determination">
<text>Self-determination refers to a people&#x27;s right to form its own political entity, and internal self-determination is the right to representative government with full suffrage.

Self-determination is a cardinal principle in modern international law, binding, as such, on the United Nations as an authoritative interpretation of the Charter&#x27;s norms. The principle does not state how the decision is to be made, nor what the outcome should be (whether independence, federation, protection, some form of autonomy or full assimilation), and the right of self-determination does not necessarily include a right to an independent state for every ethnic group within a former colonial territory. Further, no right to secession is recognized under international law.

The concept emerged with the rise of nationalism in the 19th century and came into prominent use in the 1860s, spreading rapidly thereafter. During and after World War I, the principle was encouraged by both Soviet Premier Vladimir Lenin and United States President Woodrow Wilson. Having announced his Fourteen Points on 8 January 1918, on 11 February 1918 Wilson stated: &quot;National aspirations must be respected; people may now be dominated and governed only by their own consent. &#x27;Self determination&#x27; is not a mere phrase; it is an imperative principle of action.&quot; During World War II, the principle was included in the Atlantic Charter, jointly declared on 14 August 1941 by Franklin D. Roosevelt, President of the United States, and Winston Churchill, Prime Minister of the United Kingdom, who pledged The Eight Principal points of the Charter. It was recognized as an international legal right after it was explicitly listed as a right in the UN Charter.

Implementing the right to self-determination can be politically difficult, in part because there are multiple interpretations of what constitutes a people and which groups may legitimately claim the right to self-determination. As World Court judge Ivor Jennings put it: &quot;the people cannot decide until somebody decides who are the people&quot;.

== History ==
=== Pre-20th century ===
The norm of self-determination can be traced to the American and French revolutions, and the emergence of nationalism. The European revolutions of 1848, the post-World War I settlement at Versailles, and the decolonization movement after World War II shaped and established the norm in international law. The American example has been seen as the earliest assertion of the right of national self-determination, although this was argued primarily in terms of resistance to a despotic ruler rather than appeals to a &#x27;natural right&#x27; of peoples to determine their political fate, the latter emerging with the independence of Spanish colonies in Latin America.

These concepts were inspired particularly by earlier ideas from Hugo Grotius and Immanuel Kant, and by the mid-nineteenth century &#x27;self-determination&#x27; had evolved into a weapon for revolutionary nationalism. Thomas Jefferson further promoted the notion that the will of the people was supreme, especially through authorship of the United States Declaration of Independence, which became an inspiration for European nationalist movements during the 19th century. The French Revolution legitimatized the ideas of self-determination on that Old World continent.

Nationalist sentiments emerged inside traditional empires: Pan-Slavism in Russia; Ottomanism, Kemalist ideology and Arab nationalism in the Ottoman Empire; State Shintoism and Japanese identity in Japan; and Han identity in juxtaposition to the Manchurian ruling class in China. Meanwhile, in Europe itself, the rise of nationalism led to Greece, Hungary, Poland and Bulgaria all seeking or winning independence.

Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels supported some of these nationalist movements, believing nationalism might be a &quot;prior condition&quot; to social reform and international alliances. In 1914 Vladimir Lenin wrote: &quot;[It] would be wrong to interpret the right to self-determination as meaning anything but the right to existence as a separate state.&quot;

In contrast, Rosa Luxemburg called a &quot;right of nations to self-determination&quot;, valid for all countries and all times, &quot;nothing more than a metaphysical cliché&quot; that offers no &quot;practical solution of nationality problems&quot; and argued that the very concept of the nation as an &quot;homogenous social and political entity&quot; was derived from bourgeois ideology.

=== World Wars I and II ===

==== Europe, Asia and Africa ====

Woodrow Wilson revived America&#x27;s commitment to self-determination, at least for European states, during World War I. When the Bolsheviks came to power in Russia in the October Revolution, they called for Russia&#x27;s immediate withdrawal as a member of the Allies of World War I. Lenin had used &#x27;national self-determination&#x27; as a weapon against the Russian Empire, and after the Revolution the party supported the right of all nations, including colonies, to self-determination. The 1918 Constitution of the Soviet Union acknowledged the right of secession for its constituent republics.

In January 1918 Wilson issued his Fourteen Points of January 1918 which, among other things, called for adjustment of colonial claims, insofar as the interests of colonial powers had equal weight with the claims of subject peoples. The Treaty of Brest-Litovsk in March 1918 led to Soviet Russia&#x27;s exit from the war and the nominal independence of Armenia, Finland, Estonia, Latvia, Ukraine, Lithuania, Georgia and Poland, though in fact those territories were under German control. The end of the war led to the dissolution of the defeated Austro-Hungarian Empire and Czechoslovakia and the union of the State of Slovenes, Croats and Serbs and the Kingdom of Serbia as new states out of the wreckage of the Habsburg empire. However, this imposition of states where some nationalities (especially Poles, Czechs, and Serbs and Romanians) were given power over nationalities who disliked and distrusted them was eventually used as a pretext for German aggression in World War II.

The League of Nations was established as the symbol of the emerging postwar order. One of its earliest tasks was to legitimize the territorial boundaries of the new nation-states created in the territories of the former Ottoman Empire, Asia, and Africa. The League was not consistent in how it applied the principle in the post-war peace treaties and, in many places, had to compensate with highly complex arrangements to ensure protection of minorities. Nor did the principle of self-determination extend so far as to end colonialism, under the reasoning that the local populations were not civilized enough the League of Nations was to assign each of the post-Ottoman, Asian and African states and colonies to a European power by the grant of a League of Nations mandate.

One of the German objections to the Treaty of Versailles was a somewhat selective application of the principle of self-determination, as the Republic of German-Austria, which included the Sudetenland, was seen as representing the will to join Germany in those regions, while the majority of people in Danzig wanted to remain within the &quot;Reich&quot;. However, the Allies ignored the German objections. Wilson&#x27;s 14 Points had called for Polish independence to be restored and Poland to have &quot;secure access to the sea&quot;, which would imply that the German city of Danzig (modern Gdańsk, Poland) be ceded to Poland. At the Paris Peace Conference in 1919, the Polish delegation asked Wilson to honor point 14 of the 14 points by transferring Danzig to Poland, arguing the city was Polish until 1793, and that Poland would not be economically viable without it. During the First Partition of Poland in 1772, the inhabitants of Danzig fought fiercely for it to remain a part of Poland, but as a result of the Germanisation process in the 19th century, 90% of its inhabitants were German by 1919, which led to the creation of the Free City of Danzig, a city-state in which Poland had certain special rights. Through the city of Danzig was 90% German and 10% Polish, the surrounding countryside around Danzig was overwhelmingly Polish, and the ethnically Polish rural areas included in the Free City of Danzig objected, arguing that they wanted to be part of Poland. Neither the Poles nor the Germans were happy with this compromise and the Danzig issue became a flash-point of German-Polish tension throughout the interwar period.

During the 1920s and 1930s there were some successful movements for self-determination in the beginnings of the process of decolonization. The Statute of Westminster granted independence to Canada, New Zealand, Newfoundland, Australia, and the Union of South Africa after the British parliament declared itself incapable of passing laws over them without their consent. This statute built on the Balfour Declaration of 1926 which recognized the autonomy of these British dominions, representing the first phase of the creation of the British Commonwealth of Nations. Egypt, Afghanistan, and Iraq also achieved independence from Britain. Other efforts were unsuccessful, like the Indian independence movement. Meanwhile, Italy, Japan and Germany all initiated new efforts to bring certain territories under their control. In particular, the National Socialist Program invoked this right of nations, as it was publicly proclaimed on 24 February 1920 by Adolf Hitler.

In Asia, Japan became a rising power and gained more respect from Western powers after its victory in the Russo-Japanese War. Japan joined the Allied Powers in World War I and attacked German colonial possessions in the Far East, adding former German possessions to its own empire. In the 1930s, Japan gained significant influence in Inner Mongolia and Manchuria after it invaded Manchuria. It established Manchukuo, a puppet state in Manchuria and eastern Inner Mongolia. This was essentially the model Japan followed as it invaded other areas in Asia and established the Greater East Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere. Japan went to considerable trouble to argue that Manchukuo was justified by the principle of self-determination, claiming that people of Manchuria wanted to break away from China and asked the Kwantung Army to intervene on their behalf. However, the Lytton commission which had been appointed by the League of Nations to decide if Japan had committed aggression or not, stated the majority of people in Manchuria who were Han Chinese who did not wish to leave China.

In 1912, the Republic of China officially succeeded the Qing Dynasty, while Outer Mongolia, Tibet and Tuva proclaimed their independence. Independence was not accepted by the government of China. By the Treaty of Kyakhta (1915) Outer Mongolia recognized China&#x27;s sovereignty. However, the Soviet threat of seizing parts of Inner Mongolia induced China to recognize Outer Mongolia&#x27;s independence, provided that a referendum was held. The referendum took place on October 20, 1945, with (according to official numbers) 100% of the electorate voting for independence.

Many of East Asia&#x27;s current disputes to sovereignty and self-determination stem from unresolved disputes from World War II. After its fall, the Empire of Japan renounced control over many of its former possessions including Korea, Sakhalin Island, and Taiwan. In none of these areas were the opinions of affected people consulted, or given significant priority. Korea was specifically granted independence but the receiver of various other areas was not stated in the Treaty of San Francisco, giving Taiwan &quot;de facto&quot; independence although its political status continues to be ambiguous.

=== The Cold War world ===

==== The UN Charter and resolutions====

In 1941 Allies of World War II declared the Atlantic Charter and accepted the principle of self-determination. In January 1942 twenty-six states signed the Declaration by United Nations, which accepted those principles. The ratification of the United Nations Charter in 1945 at the end of World War II placed the right of self-determination into the framework of international law and diplomacy.

* Chapter 1, Article 1, part 2 states that purpose of the UN Charter is: &quot;To develop friendly relations among nations based on respect for the principle of equal rights and self-determination of peoples, and to take other appropriate measures to strengthen universal peace.&quot;
* Article 1 in both the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR) and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (ICESCR) reads: &quot;All peoples have the right of self-determination. By virtue of that right they freely determine their political status and freely pursue their economic, social and cultural development. &quot;
* The United Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights article 15 states that everyone has the right to a nationality and that no one should be arbitrarily deprived of a nationality or denied the right to change nationality.
On 14 December 1960, the United Nations General Assembly adopted United Nations General Assembly Resolution 1514 (XV) subtitled &quot;Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples&quot;, which supported the granting of independence to colonial countries and people by providing an inevitable legal linkage between self-determination and its goal of decolonisation. It postulated a new international law-based right of freedom to exercise economic self-determination. Article 5 states: Immediate steps shall be taken in Trust and Non-Self-Governing Territories, or all other territories which have not yet attained independence, to transfer all powers to the people of those territories, without any conditions or reservations, in accordance with their freely expressed will and desire, without any distinction as to race, creed or colour, in order to enable them to enjoy complete independence and freedom.

On 15 December 1960 the United Nations General Assembly adopted United Nations General Assembly Resolution 1541 (XV), subtitled &quot;Principles which should guide members in determining whether or nor an obligation exists to transmit the information called for under Article 73e of the United Nations Charter in Article 3&quot;, which provided that &quot;[t]he inadequacy of political, economic, social and educational preparedness should never serve as a pretext for delaying the right to self-determination and independence.&quot; To monitor the implementation of Resolution 1514, in 1961 the General Assembly created the Special Committee referred to popularly as the Special Committee on Decolonization to ensure decolonization complete compliance with the principles of self-determination in General Assembly Resolution 1541 (XV).

However, the charter and other resolutions did not insist on full independence as the best way of obtaining self-government, nor did they include an enforcement mechanism. Moreover, new states were recognized by the legal doctrine of uti possidetis juris, meaning that old administrative boundaries would become international boundaries upon independence if they had little relevance to linguistic, ethnic, and cultural boundaries. Nevertheless, justified by the language of self-determination, between 1946 and 1960, thirty-seven new nations in Asia, Africa, and the Middle East gained independence from colonial powers. The territoriality issue inevitably would lead to more conflicts and independence movements within many states and challenges to the assumption that territorial integrity is as important as self-determination.

==== The communist versus capitalist worlds ====
Decolonization in the world was contrasted by the Soviet Union&#x27;s successful post-war expansionism. Tuva and several regional states in Eastern Europe, the Baltic, and Central Asia had been fully annexed by the Soviet Union during World War II. Now, it extended its influence by establishing the satellite states of Eastern Germany and the countries of Eastern Europe, along with support for revolutionary movements in China and North Korea. Although satellite states were independent and possessed sovereignty, the Soviet Union violated principles of self-determination by suppressing the Hungarian revolution of 1956 and the Prague Spring Czechoslovak reforms of 1968. It invaded Afghanistan to support a communist government assailed by local tribal groups. However, Marxism–Leninism and its theory of imperialism were also strong influences in the national emancipation movements of Third World nations rebelling against colonial or puppet regimes. In many Third World countries, communism became an ideology that united groups to oppose imperialism or colonization.

Soviet actions were contained by the United States which saw communism as a menace to its interests. Throughout the cold war, the United States created, supported, and sponsored regimes with various success that served their economic and political interests, among them anti-communist regimes such as that of Augusto Pinochet in Chile and Suharto in Indonesia. To achieve this, a variety of means was implemented, including the orchestration of coups, sponsoring of anti-communist countries and military interventions. Consequently, many self-determination movements, which spurned some type of anti-communist government, were accused of being Soviet-inspired or controlled.

==== Asia ====
In Asia, the Soviet Union had already converted Mongolia into a satellite state but abandoned propping up the Second East Turkestan Republic and gave up its Manchurian claims to China. The new People&#x27;s Republic of China had gained control of mainland China in the Chinese Civil War. The Korean War shifted the focus of the Cold War from Europe to Asia, where competing superpowers took advantage of decolonization to spread their influence.

In 1947, India gained independence from the British Empire. The empire was in decline but adapted to these circumstances by creating the British Commonwealth—since 1949 the Commonwealth of Nations—which is a free association of equal states. As India obtained its independence, multiple ethnic conflicts emerged in relation to the formation of a statehood during the Partition of India which resulted in Islamic Pakistan and Secular India. Before the advent of the British, no empire based in mainland India had controlled any part of what now makes up the country&#x27;s Northeast, part of the reason for the ongoing insurgency in Northeast India. In 1971 Bangladesh obtained independence from Pakistan.

Burma also gained independence from the British Empire, but declined membership in the Commonwealth.

Indonesia gained independence from the Dutch Empire in 1949 after the latter failed to restore colonial control. As mentioned above, Indonesia also wanted a powerful position in the region that could be lessened by the creation of united Malaysia. The Netherlands retained its New Guinea part from the previous Dutch East Indies, but Indonesia threatened to invade and annex it. A vote was supposedly taken under the UN sponsored Act of Free Choice to allow West New Guineans to decide their fate, although many dispute its veracity. Later, Portugal relinquished control over East Timor in the aftermath of Carnation Revolution in 1975, at which time Indonesia promptly invaded and annexed it. In 1999, Indonesian president B. J. Habibie was pressured by Australia and the United Nations to give East Timor independence. The people of former Indonesian East Timor were given a choice of either greater autonomy within Indonesia or independence. 78.5% of East Timorese voted for independence, rejecting Indonesia&#x27;s special autonomy proposal.

=== After the Cold War ===

The Cold War began to wind down after Mikhail Gorbachev assumed power as Soviet General Secretary in March 1985. With the cooperation of the U.S. President Ronald Reagan, Gorbachev wound down the size of the Soviet Armed Forces and reduced nuclear arms in Europe, while liberalizing the Soviet economy.

In the revolutions of 1989–90, the communist regimes of Soviet satellite states collapsed in rapid succession in Poland, Hungary, Czechoslovakia, East Germany, Bulgaria, Romania, and Mongolia. East and West Germany united, Czechoslovakia peacefully split into Czech Republic and Slovakia, while in the 1990s Yugoslavia began a violent break up into 6 states. Macedonia became an independent nation and broke off from Yugoslavia peacefully. Kosovo, which was previously an autonomous unit of Serbia declared independence in 2008, but has received less international recognition.

In December 1991, Gorbachev resigned as president and the Soviet Union dissolved relatively peacefully into fifteen sovereign republics, all of which rejected Communism and most of which adopted democratic reforms and free-market economies. Inside those new republics, four major areas have claimed their own independence, but not received widespread international recognition.

After decades of civil war, Indonesia finally recognized the independence of East Timor in 2002.

In 1949, the Communist Party won the Chinese Civil War and established the People&#x27;s Republic of China in Mainland China. The Kuomintang-led Republic of China government retreated to Taipei, its jurisdiction now limited to Taiwan and several outlying islands. Since then, the People&#x27;s Republic of China has been involved in disputes with the ROC over issues of sovereignty and the political status of Taiwan.

As noted, self-determination movements remain strong in some areas of the world. Some areas possess &quot;de facto&quot; independence, such as Taiwan, North Cyprus, Kosovo, and South Ossetia, but their independence is disputed by one or more major states. Significant movements for self-determination also persist for locations that lack &quot;de facto&quot; independence, such as East Turkistan (&quot;Xinjiang&quot;), Kurdistan, Balochistan, Chechnya, and Palestine.

== Current issues ==

Since the early 1990s, the legitimatization of the principle of national self-determination has led to an increase in the number of conflicts within states, as sub-groups seek greater self-determination and full secession, and as their conflicts for leadership within groups and with other groups and with the dominant state become violent. The international reaction to these new movements has been uneven and often dictated more by politics than principle. The 2000 United Nations Millennium Declaration failed to deal with these new demands, mentioning only &quot;the right to self-determination of peoples which remain under colonial domination and foreign occupation.&quot;

In an issue of &quot;Macquarie University Law Journal&quot; Associate Professor Aleksandar Pavkovic and Senior Lecturer Peter Radan outlined current legal and political issues in self-determination.

=== Defining &quot;peoples&quot; ===
There is not a recognized legal definition of &quot;peoples&quot; in international law. Indeed, Ivor Jennings called Wilson&#x27;s doctrine &quot;ridiculous&quot; because, though on the surface it seems reasonable to &quot;let the people decide&quot;, in practice &quot;the people cannot decide until someone decides who are the people&quot;.

Reviewing various international judgements and UN resolutions, Vita Gudeleviciute of Vytautas Magnus University Law School finds that, in cases of non-self-governing peoples (colonized and/or indigenous) and foreign military occupation, &quot;a people&quot; is defined as the entire population of the occupied territorial unit, no matter their other differences. Meanwhile, in cases where people lack representation by a state&#x27;s government, the unrepresented become a defined as a separate people. Present international law does not recognize ethnic and other minorities as separate peoples, with the notable exception of cases in which such groups are systematically disenfranchised by the government of the state they live in.

Other definitions offered are &quot;peoples&quot; as self-evident (from ethnicity, language, history, etc.), or defined by &quot;ties of mutual affection or sentiment&quot; (&quot;loyalty&quot;, or by mutual obligations among peoples).

Professor Uriel Abulof suggests that self-determination entails the &quot;moral double helix&quot; of duality: 1. personal right to align with a people, and the people&#x27;s right to determine their politics; and 2. and mutuality (the right is as much the other&#x27;s as the self&#x27;s). Thus, self-determination grants individuals the right to form &quot;a people,&quot; which then has the right to establish an independent state, as long as they grant the same to all other individuals and peoples.

=== Self-determination versus territorial integrity ===
National self-determination appears to challenge the principle of territorial integrity (or sovereignty) of states as it is the will of the people that makes a state legitimate. This implies that people should be free to choose their own state and its territorial boundaries. However, there are far more self-identified nations than there are existing states and there is no legal process to redraw state boundaries according to the will of these peoples. According to the Helsinki Final Act of 1975, the UN, ICJ and international law experts, there is no contradiction between the principles of self-determination and territorial integrity, with the latter taking precedence.


Allen Buchanan, author of seven books on self-determination and secession, supports territorial integrity as a moral and legal aspect of constitutional democracy. However, he also advances a &quot;Remedial Rights Only Theory&quot; where a group has &quot;a general right to secede if and only if it has suffered certain injustices, for which secession is the appropriate remedy of last resort.&quot; He also would recognize secession if the state grants, or the constitution includes, a right to secede.

Vita Gudeleviciute holds that in cases of non-self-governing peoples and foreign military occupation the principle of self-determination trumps that of territorial integrity. In cases where people lack representation by a state&#x27;s government, they also may be considered a separate people, but under current law cannot claim the right to self-determination. On the other hand, she finds that secession within a single state is a domestic matter not covered by international law. Thus, there are no on what groups may constitute a seceding people.
A number of states have laid claim to territories, which they allege were removed from them as a result of colonialism. This is justified by reference to Paragraph 6 of UN Resolution 1514(XV), which states that any attempt &quot;aimed at partial or total disruption of the national unity and the territorial integrity of a country is incompatible with the purposes and principles of the Charter&quot;. This, it is claimed, applies to situations where the territorial integrity of a state had been disrupted by colonisation, so that the people of a territory subject to a historic territorial claim are prevented from exercising a right to self-determination. This interpretation is rejected by many states, who argue that Paragraph 2 of UN Resolution 1514(XV) states that &quot;all peoples have the right to self-determination&quot; and Paragraph 6 cannot be used to justify territorial claims. The original purpose of Paragraph 6 was &quot;to ensure that acts of self-determination occur within the established boundaries of colonies, rather than within sub-regions&quot;. Further, the use of the word &quot;attempt&quot; in Paragraph 6 denotes future action and cannot be construed to justify territorial redress for past action. An attempt sponsored by Spain and Argentina to qualify the right to self-determination in cases where there was a territorial dispute was rejected by the UN General Assembly, which re-iterated the right to self-determination was a universal right.

=== Methods of increasing minority rights ===

In order to accommodate demands for minority rights and avoid secession and the creation of a separate new state, many states decentralize or devolve greater decision-making power to new or existing subunits or autonomous areas.

=== Self-determination versus majority rule/equal rights ===
Self-determination can be at odds with the principle of majority rule and equal rights, especially when there is a sizable minority group. In democratic societies, majority rule is often used to determine the outcome in electoral and voting processes. However, a major critique of majority rule is that it may result in the tyranny of the majority, especially in cases in which a simple majority is used in order to determine outcome. This flaw is particularly poignant when there is a large minority group whose interests are not being represented, and who may then seek to secede.

The right to self-determination by a minority has long been contested in democracies with majority rule. For instance, in his first inaugural speech Abraham Lincoln argued that:Plainly the central idea of secession is the essence of anarchy. A majority held in restraint by constitutional checks and limitations, and always changing easily with deliberate changes of popular opinions and sentiments, is the only true sovereign of a free people. Whoever rejects it does of necessity fly to anarchy or to despotism. Unanimity is impossible. The rule of a minority, as a permanent arrangement, is wholly inadmissible; so that, rejecting the majority principle, anarchy or despotism in some form is all that is left.However, liberal proponents for the right to self-determination by minority groups contradict this notion by arguing that, in cases where the minority is not able to become the majority, and that minority is territorially concentrated and does not want to be governed by the majority, it may serve the best interest of the state to allow the secession of this group.

=== Constitutional law ===

Most sovereign states do not recognize the right to self-determination through secession in their constitutions. Many expressly forbid it. However, there are several existing models of self-determination through greater autonomy and through secession.

In liberal constitutional democracies the principle of majority rule has dictated whether a minority can secede. In the United States Abraham Lincoln acknowledged that secession might be possible through amending the United States Constitution. The Supreme Court in &quot;Texas v. White&quot; held secession could occur &quot;through revolution, or through consent of the States.&quot; The British Parliament in 1933 held that Western Australia only could secede from Australia upon vote of a majority of the country as a whole; the previous two-thirds majority vote for secession via referendum in Western Australia was insufficient.

The Chinese Communist Party followed the Soviet Union in including the right of secession in its 1931 constitution in order to entice ethnic nationalities and Tibet into joining. However, the Party eliminated the right to secession in later years and had anti-secession clause written into the Constitution before and after the founding the People&#x27;s Republic of China. The 1947 Constitution of the Union of Burma contained an express state right to secede from the union under a number of procedural conditions. It was eliminated in the 1974 constitution of the Socialist Republic of the Union of Burma (officially the &quot;Union of Myanmar&quot;). Burma still allows &quot;local autonomy under central leadership&quot;.

As of 1996 the constitutions of Austria, Ethiopia, France, and Saint Kitts and Nevis have express or implied rights to secession. Switzerland allows for the secession from current and the creation of new cantons. In the case of proposed Quebec separation from Canada the Supreme Court of Canada in 1998 ruled that only both a clear majority of the province and a constitutional amendment confirmed by all participants in the Canadian federation could allow secession.

The 2003 draft of the European Union Constitution allowed for the voluntary withdrawal of member states from the union, although the State which wanted to leave could not be involved in the vote deciding whether or not they can leave the Union. There was much discussion about such self-determination by minorities before the final document underwent the unsuccessful ratification process in 2005.

As a result of the successful constitutional referendum held in 2003, every municipality in the Principality of Liechtenstein has the right to secede from the Principality by a vote of a majority of the citizens residing in this municipality.

=== Drawing new borders ===
In determining international borders between sovereign states, self-determination has yielded to a number of other principles. Once groups exercise self-determination through secession, the issue of the proposed borders may prove more controversial than the fact of secession. The bloody Yugoslav Wars in the 1990s were related mostly to border issues because the international community applied a version of uti possidetis juris in transforming the existing internal borders of the various Yugoslav republics into international borders, despite the conflicts of ethnic groups within those boundaries. In the 1990s indigenous populations of the northern two-thirds of Quebec province opposed being incorporated into a Quebec nation and stated a determination to resist it by force.

The border between Northern Ireland and the Irish Free State was based on the borders of existing counties and did not include all of historic Ulster. A Boundary Commission was established to consider re-drawing it. Its proposals, which amounted to a small net transfer to the Free State, were leaked to the press and then not acted upon. In December 1925, the governments of the Irish Free State, Northern Ireland, and the United Kingdom agreed to accept the existing border.

== Notable cases ==
There have been a number of notable cases of self-determination. For more information on past movements see list of historical separatist movements and lists of decolonized nations. Also see list of autonomous areas by country and lists of active separatist movements.

=== Artsakh ===


The Republic of Artsakh (also known as the Nagorno-Karabakh Republic), in the Caucasus region, declared its independence in a 1991 referendum, which had an approval of 99% of voters; however, the breakaway state remained unrecognized by UN states and was disbanded on January 1, 2024, after Azerbaijan&#x27;s military offensive and the evacuation of 99% of the population. It was a member of the Community for Democracy and Rights of Nations along with three other Post-Soviet disputed republics.

=== Assyria ===
The Assyrian independence movement is a political movement and nationalist desire of the Assyrian people to live in their traditional Assyrian homeland under the self-governance of an Assyrian state. The Assyrian territory is currently in parts of Syria, Iraq, Iran, and Turkey.

=== Australia ===
Self-determination has become the topic of some debate in Australia in relation to Aboriginal Australians and Torres Strait Islanders. In the 1970s, Aboriginal requested the right to administer their own remote communities as part of the homelands movement, also known as the outstation movement. These grew in number through the 1980s, but funding dried up in the 2000s.

===Azawad===

The traditional homeland of the Tuareg peoples was divided up by the modern borders of Mali, Algeria and Niger. Numerous rebellions occurred over the decades, but in 2012 the Tuaregs succeeded in occupying their land and declaring the independence of Azawad. However, their movement was hijacked by the Islamist terrorist group Ansar Dine.

=== Basque Country ===
The Basque Country (, , ) as a cultural region (not to be confused with the homonym Autonomous Community of the Basque country) is a European region in the western Pyrenees that spans the border between France and Spain, on the Atlantic coast. It comprises the autonomous communities of the Basque Country and Navarre in Spain and the Northern Basque Country in France.
Since the 19th century, Basque nationalism has demanded the right of some kind of self-determination. This desire for independence is particularly stressed among leftist Basque nationalists. The right of self-determination was asserted by the Basque Parliament in 1990, 2002 and 2006.
Since self-determination is not recognized in the Spanish Constitution of 1978, some Basques abstained and some voted against it in the referendum of December 6 of that year. It was approved by a clear majority at the Spanish level, and with 74.6% of the votes in the Basque Country. However, the overall turnout in the Basque Country was 45% when the Spanish overall turnover was 67.9%. The derived autonomous regime for the BAC was approved by Spanish Parliament and also by the Basque citizens in referendum. The autonomous statute of Navarre (&quot;Amejoramiento del Fuero&quot;: &quot;improvement of the charter&quot;) was approved by the Spanish Parliament and, like the statutes of 13 out of 17 Spanish autonomous communities, it did not need a referendum to enter into force.

&quot;Euskadi Ta Askatasuna&quot; or ETA (; pronounced ), was an armed Basque nationalist, separatist and terrorist organization that killed more than 800 people. Founded in 1959, it evolved from a group advocating traditional cultural ways to a paramilitary group with the goal of Basque independence. Its ideology was Marxist–Leninist.

=== Biafra ===

The Nigerian Civil War was fought between Biafran secessionists of the Republic of Biafra and the Nigerian central government. From 1999 to the present day, the indigenous people of Biafra have been agitating for independence to revive their country. They have registered a human rights organization known as Bilie Human Rights Initiative both in Nigeria and in the United Nations to advocate for their right to self-determination and achieve independence by the rule of law.

=== Catalonia ===
After the 2012 Catalan march for independence, in which between 600,000 and 1.5 million citizens marched, the President of Catalonia, Artur Mas, called for new parliamentary elections on 25 November 2012 to elect a new parliament that would exercise the right of self-determination for Catalonia, a right not recognised under the Spanish Cortes Generales. The Parliament of Catalonia voted to hold a vote in the next four-year legislature on the question of self-determination. The parliamentary decision was approved by a large majority of MPs: 84 voted for, 21 voted against, and 25 abstained. The Catalan Parliament applied to the Spanish Parliament for the power to call a referendum to be devolved, but this was turned down. In December 2013 the President of the Generalitat Artur Mas and the governing coalition agreed to set the referendum for self-determination on 9 November 2014, and legislation specifically saying that the consultation would not be a &quot;referendum&quot; was enacted, only to be blocked by the Spanish Constitutional Court, at the request of the Spanish government. Given the block, the Government turned it into a simple &quot;consultation to the people&quot; instead.

The question in the consultation was &quot;Do you want Catalonia to be a State?&quot; and, if the answer to this question was yes, &quot;Do you want this State to be an independent State?&quot;. However, as the consultation was not a formal referendum, these (printed) answers were just suggestions and other answers were also accepted and catalogued as &quot;other answers&quot; instead as null votes. The turnout in this consultation was about 2·3m people out of 6·2m people that were called to vote (this figure does not coincide with the census figure of 5·3m for two main reasons: first, because organisers had no access to an official census due to the non-binding character of the consultation, and second, because the legal voting age was set to 16 rather than 18). Due to the lack of an official census, potential voters were assigned to electoral tables according to home address and first family name. Participants had to sign up first with their full name and national ID in a voter registry before casting their ballot, which prevented participants from potentially casting multiple ballots. The overall result was 80·76% in favor of both questions, 11% in favor of the first question but not of the second questions, 4·54% against both; the rest were classified as &quot;other answers&quot;. The voter turnout was around 37% (most people against the consultation did not go to vote). Four top members of Catalonia&#x27;s political leadership were barred from public office for having defied the Constitutional court&#x27;s last-minute ban.
Almost three years later (1 October 2017), the Catalan government called a referendum for independence under legislation adopted in September 2017, despite this legislation had been suspended by the Constitutional Court for &quot;violating fundamental rights of citizens&quot;, with the question &quot;Do you want Catalonia to become an independent state in the form of a Republic?&quot;. On polling day, the Catalan regional police, which had been accused in the past of police brutality and impunity during the 15-M protests, prevented voting in over 500 polling stations without incidents. In some voting stations, the Catalan regional police did not intervene, while in other stations they directly confronted the Spanish CNP (National Police Corps) to allow voters to participate. The CNP confiscated ballot boxes and closed down 92, voting centres with violent truncheon charges. The opposition parties had called for non-participation. The turnout (according to the votes that were counted) was 2.3m out of 5.3m (43.03% of the census), and 90.18% of the ballots were in favour of independence. The turnout, ballot count and results were similar to those of the 2014 &quot;consultation&quot;.

=== Chechnya ===
Under Dzhokhar Dudayev, Chechnya declared independence as the Chechen Republic of Ichkeria, using self-determination, Russia&#x27;s history of bad treatment of Chechens, and a history of independence before invasion by Russia as main motives. Russia has restored control over Chechnya, but the separatist government functions still in exile, though it has been split into two entities: the Akhmed Zakayev-run secular Chechen Republic (based in Poland, the United Kingdom, and the United States), and the Islamic Caucasus Emirate.

===East Turkistan===
On November 12, 1933, Uyghurs, Kazakhs, Kyrgyz, and Uzbeks declared independence, establishing the First East Turkestan Republic, and again on November 12, 1944, forming the Second East Turkestan Republic. Their primary motivations included self-determination, a history of Chinese colonization and oppression in East Turkistan, and a legacy of independence prior to the invasion by China (the Manchu Qing Dynasty). The People’s Republic of China assumed control over East Turkistan in late 1949. However, the Turkic peoples of East Turkistan, predominantly Uyghurs and Kazakhs, have persistently fought for their independence. There is a robust movement advocating East Turkistani sovereignty, challenging the Chinese occupation since 1949. The East Turkistan Government in Exile is at the forefront of the East Turkistan Independence Movement.

===Eastern Ukraine===
There is an active secessionist movement based on the self-determination of the residents of the eastern part of Donetsk and the south-eastern part of the Luhansk regions of eastern Ukraine. However, many in the international community assert that referendums held there in 2014 regarding independence from Ukraine were illegitimate and undemocratic. Similarly, there are reports that presidential elections in May 2014 were prevented from taking place in the two regions after armed gunmen took control of polling stations, kidnapped election officials, and stole lists of electors, thus denying the population the chance to express their will in a free, fair, and internationally recognised election. There are also arguments that the de facto separation of Eastern Ukraine from the rest of the country is not an expression of self-determination, but rather, motivated by revival of pro-Soviet sentiment and an invasion by neighbouring Russia, with Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko claiming in 2015 that up to 9,000 Russian soldiers were deployed in Ukraine. Related, Russian President Vladimir Putin defended the annexation of Crimea by citing self-determination of the Crimean people.

=== Ethiopia ===
The Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia is run as a federation of semi-self-governing nation states. The Constitution of Ethiopia firmly mentions the self-determining nature of its states. The actual implementation of its states self-governance is debate-able.

=== Falkland Islands ===
Self-determination is referred to in the Falkland Islands Constitution and is a factor in the Falkland Islands sovereignty dispute. The population has existed for over nine generations, continuously for over 190 years. In the 2013 referendum, organised by the Falkland Islands Government, 99.8% voted to remain British. As administering power, the British Government deemed that transfer of sovereignty to Argentina would be counter to the Falkland Islander right to self-determination, since the majority of Falkland Island inhabitants wished to remain British.
Argentina states the principle of self-determination is not applicable to the islands since the current inhabitants are not aboriginal and were brought to replace the Argentine population, which was expelled by an &#x27;act of force&#x27;, compelling the Argentinian inhabitants to directly leave the islands. This refers to the re-establishment of British rule in the year 1833 during which Argentina claims the existing population living in the islands was expelled. Argentina thus argues that, in the case of the Falkland Islands, the principle of territorial integrity should have precedence over self-determination. Historical records dispute Argentina&#x27;s claims and whilst acknowledging the garrison was expelled note the existing civilian population remained at Port Louis. and there was no attempt to settle the islands until 1841.

=== Gibraltar ===


The right to self-determination is referred to in the pre-amble of Chapter 1 of the Gibraltar constitution, and, since the United Kingdom also gave assurances that the right to self-determination of Gibraltarians would be respected in any transfer of sovereignty over the territory, is a factor in the dispute with Spain over the territory. The impact of the right to self-determination of Gibraltarians was seen in the 2002 Gibraltar sovereignty referendum, where Gibraltarian voters overwhelmingly rejected a plan to share sovereignty over Gibraltar between the UK and Spain. However, the UK government differs with the Gibraltarian government in that it considers Gibraltarian self-determination to be limited by the Treaty of Utrecht, which prevents Gibraltar achieving independence without the agreement of Spain, a position that the Gibraltarian government does not accept.

The Spanish government denies that Gibraltarians have the right to self-determination, considering them to be &quot;an artificial population without any genuine autonomy&quot; and not &quot;indigenous&quot;. However, the Partido Andalucista has agreed to recognise the right to self-determination of Gibraltarians.

===Greenland===
=== Hong Kong ===

Before the United Nations&#x27;s adoption of resolution 2908 (XXVII) on 2 November 1972, The People&#x27;s Republic of China vetoed the former British colony of Hong Kong&#x27;s right to self-determination on 8 March 1972. This sparked several nations&#x27; protest along with Great Britain&#x27;s declaration on 14 December that the decision is invalid. 
Decades later, an independence movement, dubbed as the Hong Kong independence movement emerged in the now Communist Chinese controlled territory. It advocates the autonomous region to become a fully independent sovereign state.

The city is considered a special administrative region (SAR) which, according to the PRC, enjoys a high degree of autonomy under the People&#x27;s Republic of China (PRC), guaranteed under Article 2 of Hong Kong Basic Law[1] (which is ratified under the Sino-British Joint Declaration), since the handover of Hong Kong from the United Kingdom to the PRC in 1997. Since the handover, many Hongkongers are increasingly concerned about Beijing&#x27;s growing encroachment on the territory&#x27;s freedoms and the failure of the Hong Kong government to deliver &#x27;true&#x27; democracy.[2]

The 2014–15 Hong Kong electoral reform package deeply divided the city, as it allowed Hongkongers to have universal suffrage, but Beijing would have authority to screen the candidates to restrict the electoral method for the Chief Executive of Hong Kong (CE), the highest-ranking official of the territory. This sparked the 79-day massive peaceful protests which was dubbed as the &quot;Umbrella Revolution&quot; and the pro-independence movement emerged on the Hong Kong political scene.[2]

Since then, localism has gained momentum, particularly after the failure of the peaceful Umbrella Movement. Young localist leaders have led numerous protest actions against pro-Chinese policies to raise awareness of social problems of Hong Kong under Chinese rule. These include the sit-in protest against the Bill to Strengthen Internet Censorship, demonstrations against Chinese political interference in the University of Hong Kong, the Recover Yuen Long protests and the 2016 Mong Kok civil unrest. According to a survey conducted by the Chinese University of Hong Kong (CUHK) in July 2016, 17.4% of respondents supported the city becoming an independent entity after 2047, while 3.6% stated that it is &quot;possible&quot;.[3]

=== Indigenous peoples ===

Indigenous peoples have claimed through the 2007 Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples the term peoples, and gaining with it the right to self-determination. Though it was also established that it is merely a right within existing sovereign states, after all peoples also need territory and a central government to reach sovereignty in international politics.

=== Israel ===
Zionism is a nationalist ideology founded by Theodor Herzl which claims a right of historic entitlement by descent as a nation, to exercise self-determination for all Jewish people in the region of Palestine/ancient Israel/land of Israel. The successful implementation of this vision led to the establishment of the State of Israel in 1948.

=== Kashmir ===

Ever since Pakistan and India&#x27;s inception in 1947 the legal state of Jammu and Kashmir, the land between India and Pakistan, has been contested as Britain was resigning from their rule over this land. Maharaja Hari Singh, the ruler of Kashmir at the time of accession, signed the Instrument of Accession Act on October 26, 1947, as his territory was being attacked by Pakistani tribesmen. The passing of this Act allowed Jammu and Kashmir to accede to India on legal terms. When this Act was taken to Lord Mountbatten, the last viceroy of British India, he agreed to it and stated that a referendum needed to be held by the citizens in India, Pakistan, and Kashmir so that they could vote as to where Kashmir should accede to. This referendum that Mountbatten called for never took place and framed one of the legal disputes for Kashmir. In 1948 the United Nations intervened and ordered a plebiscite to be taken in order to hear the voices of the Kashmiris if they would like to accede to Pakistan or India. This plebiscite left out the right for Kashmiris to have the right of self-determination and become an autonomous state. To this date the Kashmiris have been faced with numerous human rights violations committed by both India and Pakistan and have yet to gain complete autonomy which they have been seeking through self-determination. 

The insurgency in Kashmir against Indian rule has existed in various forms. A widespread armed insurgency started in Kashmir against India rule in 1989 after allegations of rigging by the Indian government in the 1987 Jammu and Kashmir state election. This led to some parties in the state assembly forming militant wings, which acted as a catalyst for the emergence of armed insurgency in the region. The conflict over Kashmir has resulted in tens of thousands of deaths.

The Inter-Services Intelligence of Pakistan has been accused by India of supporting and training both pro-Pakistan and pro-independence militants to fight Indian security forces in Jammu and Kashmir, a charge that Pakistan denies. According to official figures released in the Jammu and Kashmir assembly, there were 3,400 disappearance cases and the conflict has left more than 47,000 to 100,000 people dead as of July 2009. However, violence in the state had fallen sharply after the start of a slow-moving peace process between India and Pakistan. After the peace process failed in 2008, mass demonstrations against Indian rule, and low-scale militancy emerged again.

However, despite boycott calls by separatist leaders in 2014, the Jammu and Kashmir Assembly elections saw highest voters turnout in last 25 years since insurgency erupted. As per the Indian government, it recorded more than 65% of voters turnout which was more than usual voters turnout in other state assembly elections of India. It considered as increase in faith of Kashmiri people in democratic process of India. However, activists say that the voter turnout is highly exaggerated and that elections are held under duress. Votes are cast because the people want stable governance of the state and this cannot be mistaken as an endorsement of Indian rule.

=== Kurdistan ===

Kurdistan is a historical region primarily inhabited by the Kurdish people of the Middle East. The territory is currently part of Turkey, Iraq, Syria and Iran. There are Kurdish self-determination movements in each of the four states. Iraqi Kurdistan has to date achieved the largest degree of self-determination through the formation of the Kurdistan Regional Government, an entity recognised by the Iraqi Federal Constitution.

Although the right of the creation of a Kurdish state was recognized following World War I in the Treaty of Sèvres, the treaty was then annulled by the Treaty of Lausanne (1923). To date two separate Kurdish republics and one Kurdish Kingdom have declared sovereignty. The Republic of Ararat (Ağrı Province, Turkey), the Republic of Mehabad (West Azerbaijan Province, Iran) and the Kingdom of Kurdistan (Sulaymaniyah Governorate, Iraqi Kurdistan, Iraq), each of these fledgling states was crushed by military intervention. The Patriotic Union of Kurdistan which currently holds the Iraqi presidency and the Kurdistan Democratic Party which governs the Kurdistan Regional Government both explicitly commit themselves to the development of Kurdish self-determination, but opinions vary as to the question of self-determination sought within the current borders and countries.

Efforts towards Kurdish self-determination are considered illegal separatism by the governments of Turkey and Iran, and the movement is politically repressed in both states. This is intertwined with Kurdish nationalist insurgencies in Iran and in Turkey, which in turn justify and are justified by the repression of peaceful advocacy. In Syria, a self-governing local Kurdish-dominated polity was established in 2012, amongst the upheaval of the Syrian Civil War, but has not been recognized by any foreign state.

=== Nagalim ===
Naga refers to a vaguely defined conglomeration of distinct tribes living on the border of India and Burma. Each of these tribes lived in a sovereign village before the arrival of the British but developed a common identity as the area was Christianized. After the British left India, a section of Nagas under the leadership of Angami Zapu Phizo sought to establish a separate country for the Nagas. Phizo&#x27;s group, the Naga National Council (NNC), claimed that 99. 9% of the Nagas wanted an independent Naga country according to a referendum conducted by it. It waged a secessionist insurgency against the Government of India. The NNC collapsed after Phizo got his dissenters killed or forced them to seek refuge with the Government. Phizo escaped to London, while NNC&#x27;s successor secessionist groups continued to stage violent attacks against the Indian Government. The Naga People&#x27;s Convention (NPC), another major Naga organization, was opposed to the secessionists. Its efforts led to the creation of a separate Nagaland state within India in 1963. The secessionist violence declined considerably after the Shillong Accord of 1975. However, three factions of the National Socialist Council of Nagaland (NSCN) continue to seek an independent country which would include parts of India and Burma. They envisage a sovereign, predominantly Christian nation called &quot;Nagalim&quot;.

=== North Borneo and Sarawak ===

Another controversial episode with perhaps more relevance was the British beginning their exit from British Malaya. An experience concerned the findings of a &quot;United Nations Assessment Team&quot; that led the British territories of North Borneo and Sarawak in 1963 to determine whether or not the populations wished to become a part of the new Malaysia Federation. The United Nation Team&#x27;s mission followed on from an earlier assessment by the British-appointed Cobbold Commission which had arrived in the territories in 1962 and held hearings to determine public opinion. It also sifted through 1600 letters and memoranda submitted by individuals, organisations and political parties. Cobbold concluded that around two thirds of the population favoured to the formation of Malaysia while the remaining third wanted either independence or continuing control by the United Kingdom. The United Nations team largely confirmed these findings, which were later accepted by the General Assembly, and both territories subsequently wish to form the new Federation of Malaysia. The conclusions of both the Cobbold Commission and the United Nations team were arrived at without any referendums self-determination being held. Unlike in Singapore, however, no referendum was ever conducted in Sarawak and North Borneo. they sought to consolidate several of the previous ruled entities then there was Manila Accord, an agreement between the Philippines, Federation of Malaya and Indonesia on 31 July 1963 to abide by the wishes of the people of North Borneo and Sarawak within the context of United Nations General Assembly Resolution 1541 (XV), Principle 9 of the Annex taking into account referendums in North Borneo and Sarawak that would be free and without coercion. This also triggered the Indonesian confrontation because Indonesia opposed the violation of the agreements.

=== Northern Cyprus ===
Cyprus was settled by Mycenaean Greeks in two waves in the 2nd millennium BC. As a strategic location in the Middle East, it was subsequently occupied by several major powers, including the empires of the Assyrians, Egyptians and Persians, from whom the island was seized in 333 BC by Alexander the Great. Subsequent rule by Ptolemaic Egypt, the Classical and Eastern Roman Empire, Arab caliphates for a short period and the French Lusignan dynasty. Following the death in 1473 of James II, the last Lusignan king, the Republic of Venice assumed control of the island, while the late king&#x27;s Venetian widow, Queen Catherine Cornaro, reigned as figurehead. Venice formally annexed the Kingdom of Cyprus in 1489, following the abdication of Catherine. The Venetians fortified Nicosia by building the Walls of Nicosia, and used it as an important commercial hub.

Although the Lusignan French aristocracy remained the dominant social class in Cyprus throughout the medieval period, the former assumption that Greeks were treated only as serfs on the island is no longer considered by academics to be accurate. It is now accepted that the medieval period saw increasing numbers of Greek Cypriots elevated to the upper classes, a growing Greek middle ranks, and the Lusignan royal household even marrying Greeks. This included King John II of Cyprus who married Helena Palaiologina.

Throughout Venetian rule, the Ottoman Empire frequently raided Cyprus. In 1539 the Ottomans destroyed Limassol and so fearing the worst, the Venetians also fortified Famagusta and Kyrenia.

Having invaded in 1570, Turks controlled and solely governed all of the Cyprus island from 1571 until its leasing to the British Empire in 1878. Cyprus was placed under British administration based on Cyprus Convention in 1878 and formally annexed by Britain at the beginning of World War I in 1914. While Turkish Cypriots made up 18% of the population, the partition of Cyprus and creation of a Turkish state in the north became a policy of Turkish Cypriot leaders and the Republic of Turkey in the 1950s. Politically, there was no majority/minority relation between Greek Cypriots and Turkish Cypriots; and hence, in 1960, Republic of Cyprus was founded by the constituent communities in Cyprus (Greek Cypriots and Turkish Cypriots) as a non-unitary state; the 1960 Constitution set both Turkish and Greek as the official languages. During 1963–74, the island experienced ethnic clashes and turmoil, following the Greek nationalists&#x27; coup to unify the island to Greece, which led to the eventual Turkish invasion in 1974. Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus was declared in 1983 and recognized only by Turkey. Monroe Leigh, 1990, The Legal Status in International Law of the Turkish Cypriot and the Greek Cypriot Communities in Cyprus. The Greek Cypriot and Turkish Cypriot regimes participating in these negotiations, and the respective communities which they represent, are presently entitled to exercise equal rights under international law, including rights of self-determination. Before the Turkey&#x27;s invasion in 1974, Turkish Cypriots were concentrated in Turkish Cypriot enclaves in the island.

Northern Cyprus fulfills all the classical criteria of statehood. United Nations Peace Force in Cyprus (UNFICYP) operates based on the laws of Northern Cyprus in north of Cyprus island. According to European Court of Human Rights (ECtHR), the laws of Northern Cyprus is valid in the north of Cyprus. ECtHR did &quot;not&quot; accept the claim that the Courts of Northern Cyprus lacked &quot;independence and/or impartiality&quot;. ECtHR directed all Cypriots to exhaust &quot;domestic remedies&quot; applied by Northern Cyprus before taking their cases to ECtHR. In 2014, United States&#x27; Federal Court qualified Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus as a &quot;democratic country&quot;. In 2017, United Kingdom&#x27;s High Court decided that &quot;There was no duty in UK law upon the UK&#x27;s Government to refrain from recognising Northern Cyprus. The United Nations itself works with Northern Cyprus law enforcement agencies and facilitates cooperation between the two parts of the island.&quot; UK&#x27;s High Court also dismissed the claim that &quot;cooperation between UK police and law agencies in northern Cyprus was illegal&quot;.

=== Palestine ===
Palestinian self-determination is the aspiration of some Palestinians and Palestinian nationalists for increased autonomy and sovereign independence, as well as to the international right of self-determination applied to Palestine. Such sentiments are features of both the one state solution and the two state solution. In the two state solution this usually denotes territorial integrity initiatives, such as resisting occupation in the West Bank, annexation efforts in East Jerusalem or freedom of movement along borders, as well the preservation of important sites such as al-Aqsa mosque.

=== Quebec===
In Canada, many Francophone citizens in the Province of Quebec have wanted the province to separate from Confederation. The Parti Québécois has asserted Quebec&#x27;s &quot;right to self-determination. &quot; There is debate on under which conditions would this right be realized. French-speaking Quebec nationalism and support for maintaining Québécois culture would inspire Quebec nationalists, many of whom were supporters of the Quebec sovereignty movement during the late-20th century.

=== Sardinia ===

Sardinian nationalism or also Sardism (&quot;Sardismu&quot; in Sardinian; in Italian) is a social, cultural and political movement in Sardinia calling for the self-determination of the Sardinian people in a context of national devolution, further autonomy in Italy, or even outright independence from the latter. It also promotes the protection of the island&#x27;s environment and the preservation of its cultural heritage.

Even though the island has been characterized by periodical waves of ethnonationalist protests against Rome, the Sardinian movement has its origins on the left of the political spectrum; regionalism and attempts for Sardinian self-determination historically countered in fact the Rome-centric Italian nationalism and fascism (which eventually managed to contain the autonomist and separatist tendencies).

=== Scotland ===
Scotland ceased to exist as a sovereign state in 1707, as did England, when the Acts of Union (1707) created the unified Kingdom of Great Britain, but has a long-standing Scottish independence movement, with polls suggesting in January 2020 that 52% of eligible voters would vote for an independent Scotland. The country&#x27;s largest political party, the Scottish National Party, campaigns for Scottish independence. A referendum on independence was held in 2014, where it was rejected by 55% of voters. The Independence debate continued throughout the UK referendum on EU membership where the electorate in Scotland voted by 62% to remain a member of the EU, as did Northern Ireland. Results in England and Wales, however, led to the whole of the United Kingdom leaving the EU. In late 2019 the Scottish Government announced plans to demand a second referendum on Scottish Independence. This was given assent by the Scottish Parliament but, as of July 2022, British Prime Minister Boris Johnson has refused to grant the Section 30 powers required to hold another referendum on the argument that both sides accepted beforehand that the 2014 vote would settle the matter for a generation.

=== South Africa ===
Section 235 of the South African Constitution allows for the right to self-determination of a community, within the framework of &quot;the right of the South African people as a whole to self-determination&quot;, and pursuant to national legislation. This section of the constitution was one of the negotiated settlements during the handing over of political power in 1994. Supporters of an independent Afrikaner homeland have argued that their goals are reasonable under this new legislation.

=== South Tyrol ===
In Italy, South Tyrol/Alto Adige was annexed after the First World War. The German-speaking inhabitants of South Tyrol are protected by the Gruber-De Gasperi Agreement, but there are still supporters of the self determination of South Tyrol, e.g. the party Die Freiheitlichen and the South Tyrolean independence movement. At the end of WWII, Italian resistance troops entered South Tyrol and took over the administration against the wishes of the South Tyrolean resistance movement. The Allies subsequently granted South Tyrol to Italy, with the British foreign minister remarking that &quot;in theory the Austrians have the better argument, however handing over the power stations of South Tyrol to them could openly give the Russians a helping hand with which they could pressurise Italy&quot;. The Allies pushed Italy to grant the region a high degree of autonomy, culminating in the Gruber–De Gasperi Agreement of 1946.

=== Székely Land ===

Following the First World War, large areas of the Kingdom of Hungary were annexed by Romania. Some of these areas were inhabited by an ethnic Hungarian population called Székelys. Ever since their homes were integrated into Romania, these people were trying to achieve some form of autonomy or self-governance.

=== Taiwan ===
=== Tibet ===

There are several movements in advocacy of the Tibetan sovereignty from the Chinese occupation since 1950. The Tibetan Government in-Exile is a notable example.

=== United States ===

The colonization of the North American continent and its Native American population has been the source of legal battles since the early 19th century. Many Native American tribes were resettled onto separate tracts of land (reservations), which have retained a certain degree of autonomy within the United States. The federal government recognizes Tribal Sovereignty and has established a number of laws attempting to clarify the relationship among the federal, state, and tribal governments. The Constitution and later federal laws recognize the local sovereignty of tribal nations, but do not recognize full sovereignty equivalent to that of foreign nations, hence the term &quot;domestic dependent nations&quot; to qualify the federally recognized tribes.

Certain Chicano nationalist groups seek to &quot;recreate&quot; an ethnic-based state to be called Aztlán, after the legendary homeland of the Aztecs. It would comprise the Southwestern United States, historic territory of indigenous peoples and their descendants, as well as colonists and later settlers under the Spanish colonial and Mexican governments. Supporters of the proposed state of New Afrika argue that the history of African-Americans living in and making productive of several U.S. states in the Black Belt entitles them to establish an African-American republic in the area, alongside $400 billion as reparations for slavery.

There are several active Hawaiian autonomy or independence movements, each with the goal of realizing some level of political control over single or several islands. The groups range from those seeking territorial units similar to Indian reservations under the United States, with the least amount of independent control, to the Hawaiian sovereignty movement, which is projected to have the most independence. The Hawaiian Sovereignty movement seeks to revive the Hawaiian nation under the Hawaiian constitution.
Since 1972, the U.N. Decolonization Committee has called for Puerto Rico&#x27;s &quot;decolonization&quot; and for the US to recognize the island&#x27;s right to self-determination and independence. In 2007 the Decolonization Subcommittee called for the United Nations General Assembly to review the political status of Puerto Rico, a power reserved by the 1953 Resolution. This followed the 1967 passage of a plebiscite act that provided for a vote on the status of Puerto Rico with three status options: continued commonwealth, statehood, and independence. In the first plebiscite, the commonwealth option won with 60.4% of the votes, but US congressional committees failed to enact legislation to address the status issue. In subsequent plebiscites in 1993 and 1998, the status quo was favored.

In a referendum that took place in November 2012, a majority of Puerto Rican residents voted to change the territory&#x27;s relationship with the United States, with the statehood option being the preferred option. But a large number of ballots—one-third of all votes cast—were left blank on the question of preferred alternative status. Supporters of the commonwealth status had urged voters to blank their ballots. When the blank votes are counted as anti-statehood votes, the statehood option would have received less than 50% of all ballots received. As of January 2014, Washington has not taken action to address the results of this plebiscite.

Many current U.S. state, regional and city secession groups use the language of self-determination. A 2008 Zogby International poll revealed that 22% of Americans believe that &quot;any state or region has the right to peaceably secede and become an independent republic.&quot;

On December 15, 2022, the U.S. House of Representatives voted in favor of the Puerto Rico Status Act. The act sought to resolve Puerto Rico&#x27;s status and its relationship to the United States through a binding plebiscite.

Since the late 20th century, some states periodically discuss desires to secede from the United States. Unilateral secession was ruled unconstitutional by the U.S. Supreme Court in &quot;Texas v. White&quot; (1869).

===Western Sahara===
There is an active movement based on the self-determination of the Sahrawi people in the Western Saharan region. Morocco also claims the entire territory, and maintains control of about two-thirds of the region.

===West Papua===
The self-determination of the West Papuan people has been violently suppressed by the Indonesian Government since the withdrawal of Dutch colonial rule under the Dutch New Guinea in 1962.

=== Western Cape ===
Since the late 2000s there has been growing calls for the people of the Western Cape province of South Africa to become an independent state. South Africa in its current form was created in 1910 after the South Africa Act 1909 was passed in the British parliament. The Cape Colony ceased to exist, however many of its unique political and cultural quirks such as the Cape Liberal Tradition nevertheless continued to exist. Recent polling has shown that over 46% of Western Cape voters back independence outright.

== See also ==

*Anti-imperialism
*Boundary problem (political science)
*Community for Democracy and Rights of Nations
*Decolonization
**Special Committee on Decolonization
**United Nations list of non-self-governing territories
*Ethnic separatism
*Ethnonationalism
*Ethnopluralism
*Independence movement
*Indigenous peoples
*Informational self-determination (German)
*International relations theory
*Irredentism
*Legitimacy
*List of countries that have gained independence from the United Kingdom
*List of historical unrecognized states and dependencies
*List of national liberation movements recognized by intergovernmental organizations
*Lists of active separatist movements
*National delimitation in the Soviet Union
*National personal autonomy
*Nation-state
*Non-Intervention
*Plurinationalism
*Religious nationalism
*Right to exist
*Consent of the governed
*Popular sovereignty
*Self-governance
*Separatism
*Stateless nation
*Territorial integrity
*Unrepresented Nations and Peoples Organization
*Wars of national liberation
== References ==
== Bibliography ==

* Rudolf A. Mark, &quot;National Self-Determination, as Understood by Lenin and the Bolsheviks.&quot; &quot;Lithuanian Historical Studies&quot; (2008), Vol. 13, p 21–39. Online
* Abulof, Uriel and Cordell, Karl (eds.) (2015). Special Issue: Self-determination—A Double-edged Principle, Ethnopolitics 14(5).
* Danspeckgruber, Wolfgang F., ed. &quot;The Self-Determination of Peoples: Community, Nation, and State in an Interdependent World&quot;, Boulder: Lynne Rienner Publishers, 2002.
* Danspeckgruber, Wolfgang F., and Arthur Watts, eds. &quot;Self-Determination and Self-Administration: A Sourcebook&quot;, Boulder: Lynne Rienner Publishers, 1997.
* Allen Buchanan, &quot;Justice, Legitimacy, and Self-Determination: Moral Foundations for International Law (Oxford Political Theory)&quot;, Oxford University Press, US, 2007.
* Annalisa Zinn, &quot;Globalization and Self-Determination (Kindle Edition)&quot;, Taylor &amp; Francis, 2007.
* Marc Weller, &quot;Autonomy, Self Governance and Conflict Resolution (Kindle Edition)&quot;, Taylor &amp; Francis, 2007.
* Valpy Fitzgerald, Frances Stewart, Rajesh Venugopal (Editors), &quot;Globalization, Violent Conflict and Self-Determination&quot;, Palgrave Macmillan, 2006.
* Joanne Barker (Editor), &quot;Sovereignty Matters: Locations of Contestation and Possibility in Indigenous Struggles for Self-Determination&quot;, University of Nebraska Press, 2005.
* David Raic, &quot;Statehood and the Law of Self-Determination (Developments in International Law, V. 43) (Developments in International Law, V. 43)&quot;, Springer, 2002.
* Y.N. Kly and D. Kly, &quot;In pursuit of The Right to Self-determination&quot;, Collected Papers &amp; Proceedings of the First International Conference on the Right to Self-Determination &amp; the United Nations, Geneva 2000, Clarity Press, 2001.
* Antonio Cassese, &quot;Self-Determination of Peoples: A Legal Reappraisal (Hersch Lauterpacht Memorial Lectures)&quot;, Cambridge University Press, 1999.
* Percy Lehning, &quot;Theories of Secession&quot;, Routledge, 1998.
* Hurst Hannum, &quot;Autonomy, Sovereignty, and Self-Determination: The Accommodation of Conflicting Rights&quot;, University of Pennsylvania Press, 1996.
* Temesgen Muleta-Erena, &quot;The political and Cultural Locations of National Self-determination: The Oromia Case&quot;, Oromia Quarterly, Vol. II, No. 2, 1999. .
== External links ==
* Thürer, Daniel, Burri, Thomas. Self-determination, &quot;Max Planck Encyclopedia of Public International Law&quot;
* United Nations General Assembly Resolution 1514(XV). &quot;Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples&quot;
* United Nations Charter.
* Text of International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.
* Text of International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights.
* Jacob T. Levy, Self-Determination, Non-Domination, and Federalism, published in Hypatia: A Journal of Feminist Philosophy.
* &quot;Winds of Change or Hot Air? Decolonization, Self-determination and the Salt Water Test, &quot; Legal Frontiers International Law Blog
* The Right of Nations to Self-Determination Vladimir Lenin February – May 1914.
* Parliamentarians for National Self-Determination Unofficial page for London-based Parliamentary lobby group.
* United Nations Trust Territories that have achieved self-determination </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q156595" start="0" end="18" title="Self-determination" label="Self-determination"/>
<link wikidata="Q2472587" start="31" end="37" title="people" label="people"/>
<link wikidata="Q185387" start="164" end="177" title="full suffrage" label="full suffrage"/>
<link wikidata="Q4394526" start="233" end="250" title="international law" label="international law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="277" end="291" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q171328" start="334" end="341" title="Charter of the United Nations" label="Charter"/>
<link wikidata="Q37055" start="457" end="469" title="independence" label="independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q43702" start="471" end="481" title="federation" label="federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q164142" start="483" end="493" title="protectorate" label="protection"/>
<link wikidata="Q484105" start="508" end="516" title="autonomy" label="autonomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q193579" start="525" end="537" title="Cultural assimilation" label="assimilation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6235" start="804" end="815" title="nationalism" label="nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="925" end="936" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q462189" start="975" end="989" title="Premier of the Soviet Union" label="Soviet Premier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394" start="990" end="1004" title="Vladimir Lenin" label="Vladimir Lenin"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="1009" end="1032" title="President of the United States" label="United States President"/>
<link wikidata="Q34296" start="1033" end="1047" title="Woodrow Wilson" label="Woodrow Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q157648" start="1070" end="1085" title="Fourteen Points" label="Fourteen Points"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1361" end="1373" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q181978" start="1409" end="1425" title="Atlantic Charter" label="Atlantic Charter"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="1465" end="1486" title="Franklin D. Roosevelt" label="Franklin D. Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016" start="1524" end="1541" title="Winston Churchill" label="Winston Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q171328" start="1735" end="1745" title="UN Charter" label="UN Charter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752412" start="1882" end="1902" title="Nation-building" label="constitutes a people"/>
<link wikidata="Q6099426" start="1997" end="2010" title="Ivor Jennings" label="Ivor Jennings"/>
<link wikidata="Q192769" start="2191" end="2199" title="American Revolution" label="American"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="2204" end="2210" title="French Revolution" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q6235" start="2245" end="2256" title="nationalism" label="nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3588" start="2271" end="2290" title="revolutions of 1848" label="revolutions of 1848"/>
<link wikidata="Q199820" start="2313" end="2337" title="Paris Peace Conference (1919–1920)" label="settlement at Versailles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123201" start="2754" end="2803" title="Spanish American wars of independence" label="independence of Spanish colonies in Latin America"/>
<link wikidata="Q154959" start="2870" end="2882" title="Hugo Grotius" label="Hugo Grotius"/>
<link wikidata="Q9312" start="2887" end="2900" title="Immanuel Kant" label="Immanuel Kant"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812" start="3024" end="3040" title="Thomas Jefferson" label="Thomas Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q127912" start="3147" end="3188" title="United States Declaration of Independence" label="United States Declaration of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q174807" start="3354" end="3363" title="Old World" label="Old World"/>
<link wikidata="Q182267" start="3435" end="3446" title="Pan-Slavism" label="Pan-Slavism"/>
<link wikidata="Q120304" start="3458" end="3468" title="Ottomanism" label="Ottomanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q269443" start="3470" end="3487" title="Kemalist ideology" label="Kemalist ideology"/>
<link wikidata="Q114213" start="3492" end="3508" title="Arab nationalism" label="Arab nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197248" start="3532" end="3547" title="State Shintoism" label="State Shintoism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331440" start="3552" end="3569" title="Japanese nationalism" label="Japanese identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q3058841" start="3584" end="3596" title="Chinese nationalism" label="Han identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q145665" start="3621" end="3644" title="Manchu people" label="Manchurian ruling class"/>
<link wikidata="Q7335948" start="3688" end="3707" title="Rise of nationalism in Europe" label="rise of nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q182062" start="3715" end="3721" title="Greek War of Independence" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q473716" start="3723" end="3730" title="Hungarian Revolution of 1848" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q835649" start="3732" end="3738" title="Greater Poland Uprising (1848)" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q275683" start="3743" end="3751" title="Bulgarian unification" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q9061" start="3790" end="3799" title="Karl Marx" label="Karl Marx"/>
<link wikidata="Q34787" start="3804" end="3820" title="Friedrich Engels" label="Friedrich Engels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394" start="3983" end="3997" title="Vladimir Lenin" label="Vladimir Lenin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231" start="4164" end="4178" title="Rosa Luxemburg" label="Rosa Luxemburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q52090" start="4522" end="4531" title="Bourgeoisie" label="bourgeois"/>
<link wikidata="Q34296" start="4607" end="4621" title="Woodrow Wilson" label="Woodrow Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q83372" start="4738" end="4748" title="Bolsheviks" label="Bolsheviks"/>
<link wikidata="Q42976" start="4780" end="4798" title="October Revolution" label="October Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q215669" start="4870" end="4891" title="Allies of World War I" label="Allies of World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="4972" end="4986" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2465592" start="5111" end="5143" title="Soviet Russia Constitution of 1918" label="Constitution of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q687031" start="5170" end="5179" title="secession" label="secession"/>
<link wikidata="Q157648" start="5246" end="5261" title="Fourteen Points" label="Fourteen Points"/>
<link wikidata="Q122371" start="5448" end="5471" title="Treaty of Brest-Litovsk (Russia–Central Powers)" label="Treaty of Brest-Litovsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2184" start="5493" end="5506" title="Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic" label="Soviet Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q28513" start="5757" end="5780" title="Austro-Hungarian Empire" label="Austro-Hungarian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q33946" start="5785" end="5799" title="Czechoslovakia" label="Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q718374" start="5821" end="5856" title="State of Slovenes, Croats and Serbs" label="State of Slovenes, Croats and Serbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q241748" start="5865" end="5882" title="Kingdom of Serbia" label="Kingdom of Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q153136" start="5924" end="5939" title="Habsburg monarchy" label="Habsburg empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026" start="6013" end="6018" title="Polish people" label="Poles"/>
<link wikidata="Q170217" start="6020" end="6026" title="Czechs" label="Czechs"/>
<link wikidata="Q127885" start="6032" end="6037" title="Serbs" label="Serbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q485150" start="6042" end="6051" title="Romanians" label="Romanians"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="6180" end="6192" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q38130" start="6199" end="6216" title="League of Nations" label="League of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q179671" start="6360" end="6373" title="Nation state" label="nation-states"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="6415" end="6429" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q426759" start="6942" end="6967" title="League of Nations mandate" label="League of Nations mandate"/>
<link wikidata="Q8736" start="7006" end="7026" title="Treaty of Versailles" label="Treaty of Versailles"/>
<link wikidata="Q268970" start="7111" end="7137" title="Republic of German-Austria" label="Republic of German-Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q194242" start="7158" end="7169" title="Sudetenland" label="Sudetenland"/>
<link wikidata="Q216173" start="7271" end="7277" title="Free City of Danzig" label="Danzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q9292715" start="7415" end="7434" title="History of Poland (1918–1939)" label="Polish independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1792" start="7564" end="7570" title="Gdańsk" label="Gdańsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="7572" end="7578" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q199820" start="7607" end="7629" title="Paris Peace Conference (1919–1920)" label="Paris Peace Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q152006" start="7855" end="7870" title="Partitions of Poland" label="First Partition"/>
<link wikidata="Q326128" start="7990" end="8003" title="Germanisation" label="Germanisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q42884" start="8061" end="8067" title="Germans" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q216173" start="8110" end="8129" title="Free City of Danzig" label="Free City of Danzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q230533" start="8735" end="8749" title="decolonization" label="decolonization"/>
<link wikidata="Q719883" start="8755" end="8777" title="Statute of Westminster 1931" label="Statute of Westminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="8802" end="8808" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2594990" start="8810" end="8821" title="Dominion of New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003" start="8823" end="8835" title="Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Newfoundland"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="8837" end="8846" title="Commonwealth of Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q193619" start="8856" end="8877" title="Union of South Africa" label="Union of South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q11010" start="8888" end="8906" title="British parliament" label="British parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q195559" start="9008" end="9035" title="Balfour Declaration of 1926" label="Balfour Declaration of 1926"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="9146" end="9177" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="British Commonwealth of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q124943" start="9179" end="9184" title="Kingdom of Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138904" start="9186" end="9197" title="Kingdom of Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q149805" start="9203" end="9207" title="Kingdom of Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q12444025" start="9291" end="9319" title="Indian independence movement" label="Indian independence movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q217334" start="9452" end="9478" title="National Socialist Program" label="National Socialist Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="9563" end="9575" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q159950" start="9684" end="9702" title="Russo-Japanese War" label="Russo-Japanese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q973422" start="9754" end="9790" title="Japan during World War I" label="attacked German colonial possessions"/>
<link wikidata="Q42225" start="9798" end="9806" title="Far East" label="Far East"/>
<link wikidata="Q41079" start="9912" end="9926" title="Inner Mongolia" label="Inner Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q81126" start="9931" end="9940" title="Manchuria" label="Manchuria"/>
<link wikidata="Q242099" start="9950" end="9967" title="Mukden Incident" label="invaded Manchuria"/>
<link wikidata="Q30623" start="9984" end="9993" title="Manchukuo" label="Manchukuo"/>
<link wikidata="Q208164" start="9997" end="10009" title="puppet state" label="puppet state"/>
<link wikidata="Q81126" start="10013" end="10022" title="Manchuria" label="Manchuria"/>
<link wikidata="Q41079" start="10035" end="10049" title="Inner Mongolia" label="Inner Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q696192" start="10151" end="10189" title="Greater East Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere" label="Greater East Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q646394" start="10384" end="10397" title="Kwantung Army" label="Kwantung Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q700443" start="10441" end="10458" title="Lytton Report" label="Lytton commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q42740" start="10613" end="10624" title="Han Chinese" label="Han Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q13426199" start="10672" end="10689" title="Republic of China (1912–1949)" label="Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054283" start="10701" end="10710" title="successor state" label="succeeded"/>
<link wikidata="Q909566" start="10735" end="10749" title="Outer Mongolia" label="Outer Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2444884" start="10751" end="10756" title="Tibet (1912–1951)" label="Tibet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326878" start="10761" end="10765" title="Tannu Uriankhai" label="Tuva"/>
<link wikidata="Q814959" start="10834" end="10853" title="Beiyang government" label="government of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q7837109" start="10862" end="10886" title="Treaty of Kyakhta (1915)" label="Treaty of Kyakhta (1915)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2475921" start="10887" end="10901" title="Outer Mongolia, 1911-1919" label="Outer Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="10952" end="10958" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q212056" start="11028" end="11062" title="Mongolian People&amp;#x27;s Republic" label="Outer Mongolia&amp;#x27;s independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q27231" start="11242" end="11251" title="East Asia" label="East Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q188712" start="11383" end="11398" title="Empire of Japan" label="Empire of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q18097" start="11463" end="11468" title="Korea" label="Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q7792" start="11470" end="11485" title="Sakhalin Island" label="Sakhalin Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="11491" end="11497" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q392541" start="11707" end="11730" title="Treaty of San Francisco" label="Treaty of San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="11915" end="11937" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allies of World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q181978" start="11951" end="11967" title="Atlantic Charter" label="Atlantic Charter"/>
<link wikidata="Q176930" start="12063" end="12092" title="Declaration by United Nations" label="Declaration by United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q171328" start="12151" end="12173" title="Charter of the United Nations" label="United Nations Charter"/>
<link wikidata="Q392119" start="12613" end="12665" title="International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights" label="International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q457862" start="12682" end="12744" title="International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights" label="International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q7813" start="12981" end="13018" title="Universal Declaration of Human Rights" label="Universal Declaration of Human Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q47423" start="13214" end="13245" title="United Nations General Assembly" label="United Nations General Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2629473" start="13254" end="13306" title="United Nations General Assembly Resolution 1514 (XV)" label="United Nations General Assembly Resolution 1514 (XV)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2629473" start="13323" end="13400" title="Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples" label="Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q37055" start="13440" end="13452" title="independence" label="independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q7167" start="13456" end="13464" title="Colonialism" label="colonial"/>
<link wikidata="Q2979" start="13639" end="13646" title="Liberty" label="freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q900119" start="13740" end="13780" title="United Nations list of non-self-governing territories" label="Trust and Non-Self-Governing Territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888393" start="14193" end="14245" title="United Nations General Assembly Resolution 1541 (XV)" label="United Nations General Assembly Resolution 1541 (XV)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5073521" start="14397" end="14408" title="Chapter XI of the United Nations Charter" label="Article 73e"/>
<link wikidata="Q171328" start="14416" end="14438" title="United Nations Charter" label="United Nations Charter"/>
<link wikidata="Q530843" start="14801" end="14836" title="Special Committee on Decolonization" label="Special Committee on Decolonization"/>
<link wikidata="Q230533" start="14847" end="14861" title="decolonization" label="decolonization"/>
<link wikidata="Q417633" start="15075" end="15090" title="self-government" label="self-government"/>
<link wikidata="Q17053226" start="15201" end="15221" title="uti possidetis juris" label="uti possidetis juris"/>
<link wikidata="Q526594" start="15738" end="15759" title="territorial integrity" label="territorial integrity"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="15899" end="15911" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q816709" start="15953" end="15957" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of Tuva" label="Tuva"/>
<link wikidata="Q27468" start="15989" end="16003" title="Eastern Europe" label="Eastern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q39731" start="16009" end="16015" title="Baltic states" label="Baltic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211919" start="16021" end="16033" title="Soviet Central Asia" label="Central Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q325261" start="16149" end="16165" title="satellite states" label="satellite states"/>
<link wikidata="Q16957" start="16169" end="16184" title="East Germany" label="Eastern Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q170541" start="16206" end="16220" title="Eastern Bloc" label="Eastern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="16272" end="16277" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q423" start="16282" end="16293" title="North Korea" label="North Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q164348" start="16443" end="16471" title="Hungarian revolution of 1956" label="Hungarian revolution of 1956"/>
<link wikidata="Q162401" start="16480" end="16493" title="Prague Spring" label="Prague Spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q83085" start="16527" end="16546" title="Soviet–Afghan War" label="invaded Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q211930" start="16623" end="16639" title="Marxism–Leninism" label="Marxism–Leninism"/>
<link wikidata="Q180194" start="16740" end="16751" title="Third World" label="Third World"/>
<link wikidata="Q180194" start="16814" end="16825" title="Third World" label="Third World"/>
<link wikidata="Q29071" start="16945" end="16954" title="Containment" label="contained"/>
<link wikidata="Q182121" start="17195" end="17209" title="anti-communist" label="anti-communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q368" start="17234" end="17250" title="Augusto Pinochet" label="Augusto Pinochet"/>
<link wikidata="Q298" start="17254" end="17259" title="Chile" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q44819" start="17264" end="17271" title="Suharto" label="Suharto"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="17275" end="17284" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q10988528" start="17726" end="17756" title="Second East Turkestan Republic" label="Second East Turkestan Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6165880" start="17773" end="17790" title="Soviet invasion of Manchuria" label="Manchurian claims"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="17809" end="17840" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q179975" start="17885" end="17902" title="Chinese Civil War" label="Chinese Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q8663" start="17908" end="17918" title="Korean War" label="Korean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q230533" start="18020" end="18034" title="decolonization" label="decolonization"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="18107" end="18121" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="18200" end="18220" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="British Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="18236" end="18259" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q129053" start="18430" end="18448" title="Partition of India" label="Partition of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q129286" start="18514" end="18535" title="British Raj" label="advent of the British"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125513" start="18681" end="18710" title="insurgency in Northeast India" label="insurgency in Northeast India"/>
<link wikidata="Q371394" start="18720" end="18752" title="Bangladesh Liberation War" label="Bangladesh obtained independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q836" start="18769" end="18774" title="Myanmar" label="Burma"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="18871" end="18880" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q130654" start="18910" end="18922" title="Dutch Empire" label="Dutch Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q833" start="19109" end="19117" title="Malaysia" label="Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q941881" start="19144" end="19163" title="Dutch New Guinea" label="its New Guinea part"/>
<link wikidata="Q188161" start="19182" end="19199" title="Dutch East Indies" label="Dutch East Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q4272542" start="19229" end="19248" title="Operation Trikora" label="invade and annex it"/>
<link wikidata="Q343049" start="19301" end="19319" title="Act of Free Choice" label="Act of Free Choice"/>
<link wikidata="Q200464" start="19412" end="19420" title="Portuguese Empire" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q574" start="19447" end="19457" title="East Timor" label="East Timor"/>
<link wikidata="Q193245" start="19478" end="19498" title="Carnation Revolution" label="Carnation Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2583734" start="19522" end="19563" title="Indonesian invasion of East Timor" label="Indonesia promptly invaded and annexed it"/>
<link wikidata="Q76156" start="19595" end="19608" title="B. J. Habibie" label="B. J. Habibie"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="19626" end="19635" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="19644" end="19658" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="19789" end="19798" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q97168325" start="19802" end="19814" title="East Timor independence" label="independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q30487" start="19984" end="20001" title="Mikhail Gorbachev" label="Mikhail Gorbachev"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048744" start="20019" end="20043" title="General Secretary of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union" label="Soviet General Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="20102" end="20115" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7915590" start="20154" end="20173" title="Soviet Armed Forces" label="Soviet Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q1994254" start="20233" end="20247" title="economy of the Soviet Union" label="Soviet economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q382861" start="20257" end="20279" title="Revolutions of 1989" label="revolutions of 1989–90"/>
<link wikidata="Q213" start="20510" end="20524" title="Czech Republic" label="Czech Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q214" start="20529" end="20537" title="Slovakia" label="Slovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4390259" start="20577" end="20593" title="Breakup of Yugoslavia" label="violent break up"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246" start="20690" end="20696" title="Kosovo" label="Kosovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5167679" start="20887" end="20909" title="Dissolution of the Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union dissolved"/>
<link wikidata="Q302045" start="20937" end="20964" title="Post-Soviet states" label="fifteen sovereign republics"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="20988" end="20997" title="Communism" label="Communism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500985" start="21098" end="21114" title="Commonwealth of Unrecognized States" label="four major areas"/>
<link wikidata="Q574" start="21285" end="21295" title="East Timor" label="East Timor"/>
<link wikidata="Q17427" start="21319" end="21334" title="Chinese Communist Party" label="Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q179975" start="21343" end="21360" title="Chinese Civil War" label="Chinese Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="21381" end="21412" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q19188" start="21416" end="21430" title="Mainland China" label="Mainland China"/>
<link wikidata="Q31113" start="21436" end="21446" title="Kuomintang" label="Kuomintang"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="21451" end="21468" title="Republic of China" label="Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q1867" start="21493" end="21499" title="Taipei" label="Taipei"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="21533" end="21539" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142999" start="21771" end="21804" title="List of active autonomist and secessionist movements" label="strong in some areas of the world"/>
<link wikidata="Q23681" start="21876" end="21888" title="North Cyprus" label="North Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246" start="21890" end="21896" title="Kosovo" label="Kosovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q23427" start="21902" end="21915" title="South Ossetia" label="South Ossetia"/>
<link wikidata="Q840601" start="22106" end="22120" title="East Turkistan" label="East Turkistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q41470" start="22145" end="22154" title="Kurdistan" label="Kurdistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q181103" start="22156" end="22167" title="Balochistan" label="Balochistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5187" start="22169" end="22177" title="Chechnya" label="Chechnya"/>
<link wikidata="Q219060" start="22183" end="22192" title="State of Palestine" label="Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2639272" start="22685" end="22722" title="United Nations Millennium Declaration" label="United Nations Millennium Declaration"/>
<link wikidata="Q741082" start="22918" end="22938" title="Macquarie University" label="Macquarie University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6099426" start="23230" end="23243" title="Ivor Jennings" label="Ivor Jennings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756541" start="23563" end="23589" title="Vytautas Magnus University" label="Vytautas Magnus University"/>
<link wikidata="Q526594" start="25077" end="25098" title="territorial integrity" label="territorial integrity"/>
<link wikidata="Q42008" start="25103" end="25114" title="sovereignty" label="sovereignty"/>
<link wikidata="Q4731555" start="25690" end="25704" title="Allen Buchanan" label="Allen Buchanan"/>
<link wikidata="Q188961" start="28400" end="28412" title="decentralization" label="decentralize"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139955" start="28416" end="28423" title="devolution" label="devolve"/>
<link wikidata="Q788176" start="28485" end="28500" title="autonomous area" label="autonomous area"/>
<link wikidata="Q27636" start="28621" end="28634" title="majority rule" label="majority rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q922903" start="28889" end="28912" title="tyranny of the majority" label="tyranny of the majority"/>
<link wikidata="Q91" start="29298" end="29313" title="Abraham Lincoln" label="Abraham Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q3624078" start="30262" end="30277" title="sovereign state" label="sovereign state"/>
<link wikidata="Q27636" start="30565" end="30578" title="majority rule" label="majority rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q91" start="30644" end="30659" title="Abraham Lincoln" label="Abraham Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q230698" start="30714" end="30722" title="List of amendments to the United States Constitution" label="amending"/>
<link wikidata="Q11698" start="30727" end="30753" title="United States Constitution" label="United States Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="30759" end="30772" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407695" start="30782" end="30796" title="Texas v. White" label="Texas v. White"/>
<link wikidata="Q11010" start="30900" end="30918" title="Parliament of the United Kingdom" label="British Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q3206" start="30937" end="30954" title="Western Australia" label="Western Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q17427" start="31150" end="31173" title="Communist Party of China" label="Chinese Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q836" start="31549" end="31563" title="Burma" label="Union of Burma"/>
<link wikidata="Q700706" start="31889" end="31913" title="Constitution of Austria" label="constitutions of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q934696" start="31915" end="31923" title="Constitutions of Ethiopia" label="Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q832508" start="31925" end="31931" title="Constitution of France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q19903874" start="31937" end="31958" title="Constitution of Saint Kitts and Nevis" label="Saint Kitts and Nevis"/>
<link wikidata="Q23058" start="32078" end="32085" title="Cantons of Switzerland" label="cantons"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="32111" end="32117" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q196615" start="32145" end="32168" title="Supreme Court of Canada" label="Supreme Court of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q53463" start="32237" end="32261" title="constitutional amendment" label="constitutional amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q189066" start="32365" end="32392" title="Treaty establishing a Constitution for Europe" label="European Union Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q16932702" start="32772" end="32797" title="2003 Liechtenstein constitutional referendum" label="constitutional referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q347" start="32838" end="32867" title="Liechtenstein" label="Principality of Liechtenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q242352" start="33302" end="33315" title="Yugoslav Wars" label="Yugoslav Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q17053226" start="33423" end="33443" title="uti possidetis juris" label="uti possidetis juris"/>
<link wikidata="Q26" start="33816" end="33832" title="Northern Ireland" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q31747" start="33841" end="33857" title="Irish Free State" label="Irish Free State"/>
<link wikidata="Q93195" start="33940" end="33946" title="Ulster" label="Ulster"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778369" start="33950" end="33969" title="Irish Boundary Commission" label="Boundary Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q24836931" start="34403" end="34442" title="list of historical separatist movements" label="list of historical separatist movements"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="34447" end="34475" title="Decolonization#Timeline of independence" label="lists of decolonized nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1864837" start="34486" end="34521" title="list of autonomous areas by country" label="list of autonomous areas by country"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142999" start="34526" end="34562" title="lists of active separatist movements" label="lists of active separatist movements"/>
<link wikidata="Q244165" start="34587" end="34606" title="Republic of Artsakh" label="Republic of Artsakh"/>
<link wikidata="Q18869" start="34661" end="34669" title="Caucasus" label="Caucasus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3537730" start="34709" end="34724" title="1991 Nagorno-Karabakh independence referendum" label="1991 referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q122700456" start="34892" end="34910" title="2023 Azerbaijani offensive in Nagorno-Karabakh" label="military offensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q122839698" start="34919" end="34954" title="Flight of Nagorno-Karabakh Armenians" label="evacuation of 99% of the population"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500985" start="34979" end="35024" title="Community for Democracy and Rights of Nations" label="Community for Democracy and Rights of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q302045" start="35048" end="35059" title="Post-Soviet" label="Post-Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4810460" start="35101" end="35131" title="Assyrian independence movement" label="Assyrian independence movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q377085" start="35186" end="35201" title="Assyrian people" label="Assyrian people"/>
<link wikidata="Q858" start="35345" end="35350" title="Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="35352" end="35356" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="35358" end="35362" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="35368" end="35374" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q12060728" start="35478" end="35500" title="Aboriginal Australians" label="Aboriginal Australians"/>
<link wikidata="Q379636" start="35505" end="35528" title="Torres Strait Islanders" label="Torres Strait Islanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q2042115" start="35633" end="35651" title="homelands movement" label="homelands movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q58843" start="35814" end="35820" title="Tuareg people" label="Tuareg"/>
<link wikidata="Q912" start="35869" end="35873" title="Mali" label="Mali"/>
<link wikidata="Q262" start="35875" end="35882" title="Algeria" label="Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032" start="35887" end="35892" title="Niger" label="Niger"/>
<link wikidata="Q43937" start="36033" end="36039" title="Azawad" label="Azawad"/>
<link wikidata="Q568900" start="36110" end="36120" title="Ansar Dine" label="Ansar Dine"/>
<link wikidata="Q518261" start="36177" end="36192" title="cultural region" label="cultural region"/>
<link wikidata="Q10742" start="36230" end="36250" title="Autonomous Community" label="Autonomous Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q3995" start="36258" end="36272" title="Basque Country (autonomous community)" label="Basque country"/>
<link wikidata="Q12431" start="36310" end="36318" title="Pyrenees" label="Pyrenees"/>
<link wikidata="Q4018" start="36456" end="36463" title="Navarre" label="Navarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q98405" start="36481" end="36504" title="Northern Basque Country" label="Northern Basque Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q3336983" start="36540" end="36558" title="Basque nationalism" label="Basque nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q164597" start="36678" end="36685" title="left-wing politics" label="leftist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253965" start="36759" end="36776" title="Basque Parliament" label="Basque Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q847664" start="36851" end="36879" title="Spanish Constitution of 1978" label="Spanish Constitution of 1978"/>
<link wikidata="Q42814" start="37592" end="37613" title="Euskadi Ta Askatasuna" label="Euskadi Ta Askatasuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q194236" start="37677" end="37687" title="separatist" label="separatist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7283" start="37692" end="37701" title="terrorist" label="terrorist"/>
<link wikidata="Q207320" start="37832" end="37844" title="paramilitary" label="paramilitary"/>
<link wikidata="Q123021127" start="37868" end="37887" title="Basque independence" label="Basque independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q211930" start="37906" end="37922" title="Marxist–Leninist" label="Marxist–Leninist"/>
<link wikidata="Q829875" start="37945" end="37963" title="Nigerian Civil War" label="Nigerian Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q178469" start="38012" end="38030" title="Biafra" label="Republic of Biafra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154364" start="38039" end="38066" title="Federal government of Nigeria" label="Nigerian central government"/>
<link wikidata="Q35629" start="38446" end="38481" title="2012 Catalan march for independence" label="2012 Catalan march for independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q16933549" start="38546" end="38568" title="President of the Generalitat of Catalonia" label="President of Catalonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8015" start="38570" end="38579" title="Artur Mas" label="Artur Mas"/>
<link wikidata="Q117868" start="38596" end="38639" title="2012 Catalonian parliamentary election" label="parliamentary elections on 25 November 2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q135630" start="38655" end="38665" title="Parliament of Catalonia" label="parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q219692" start="38766" end="38790" title="Cortes Generales" label="Spanish Cortes Generales"/>
<link wikidata="Q135630" start="38796" end="38819" title="Parliament of Catalonia" label="Parliament of Catalonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566394" start="39461" end="39489" title="Constitutional Court of Spain" label="Spanish Constitutional Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q27145747" start="41267" end="41294" title="2017 Catalan independence referendum" label="referendum for independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1996993" start="41664" end="41680" title="police brutality" label="police brutality"/>
<link wikidata="Q179846" start="42415" end="42431" title="Dzhokhar Dudayev" label="Dzhokhar Dudayev"/>
<link wikidata="Q5187" start="42433" end="42441" title="Chechnya" label="Chechnya"/>
<link wikidata="Q210036" start="42471" end="42499" title="Chechen Republic of Ichkeria" label="Chechen Republic of Ichkeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q31230" start="42569" end="42577" title="Chechens" label="Chechens"/>
<link wikidata="Q340556" start="42799" end="42813" title="Akhmed Zakayev" label="Akhmed Zakayev"/>
<link wikidata="Q58826" start="42921" end="42937" title="Caucasus Emirate" label="Caucasus Emirate"/>
<link wikidata="Q986665" start="43060" end="43089" title="First East Turkestan Republic" label="First East Turkestan Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q10988528" start="43135" end="43165" title="Second East Turkestan Republic" label="Second East Turkestan Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q8733" start="43362" end="43374" title="Qing Dynasty" label="Qing Dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="43381" end="43407" title="People’s Republic of China" label="People’s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q46118" start="43519" end="43526" title="Uyghurs" label="Uyghurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q11103925" start="43707" end="43741" title="East Turkistan Government in Exile" label="East Turkistan Government in Exile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339134" start="43769" end="43805" title="East Turkistan Independence Movement" label="East Turkistan Independence Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2012050" start="43943" end="43950" title="Donetsk Oblast" label="Donetsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q171965" start="43985" end="43992" title="Luhansk Oblast" label="Luhansk"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="44012" end="44019" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q17347560" start="44078" end="44108" title="2014 Donbass status referendums" label="referendums held there in 2014"/>
<link wikidata="Q4376819" start="44215" end="44249" title="2014 Ukrainian presidential election" label="presidential elections in May 2014"/>
<link wikidata="Q181386" start="44590" end="44605" title="Eastern Ukraine" label="Eastern Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q16932762" start="44715" end="44735" title="Neo-Sovietism" label="pro-Soviet sentiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="44768" end="44774" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q58077" start="44801" end="44817" title="Petro Poroshenko" label="Petro Poroshenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031386" start="44852" end="44868" title="Russian Ground Forces" label="Russian soldiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7747" start="44922" end="44936" title="Vladimir Putin" label="Vladimir Putin"/>
<link wikidata="Q15920546" start="44946" end="44970" title="Annexation of Crimea by the Russian Federation" label="the annexation of Crimea"/>
<link wikidata="Q115" start="45045" end="45084" title="Ethiopia" label="Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q179671" start="45131" end="45143" title="nation state" label="nation state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135135" start="45150" end="45174" title="1995 Constitution of Ethiopia" label="Constitution of Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164252" start="45373" end="45402" title="Falkland Islands Constitution" label="Falkland Islands Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q4379537" start="45426" end="45462" title="Falkland Islands sovereignty dispute" label="Falkland Islands sovereignty dispute"/>
<link wikidata="Q2359115" start="45558" end="45573" title="2013 Falkland Islands sovereignty referendum" label="2013 referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2074460" start="45592" end="45619" title="Falkland Islands Government" label="Falkland Islands Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q6063" start="45680" end="45698" title="Government of the United Kingdom" label="British Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q414" start="45738" end="45747" title="Argentina" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q7301548" start="46224" end="46256" title="Reassertion of British sovereignty over the Falkland Islands (1833)" label="re-establishment of British rule"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="46468" end="46490" title="#Self-determination versus territorial integrity" label="should have precedence"/>
<link wikidata="Q3435209" start="46668" end="46678" title="Port Louis, Falkland Islands" label="Port Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5559140" start="46844" end="46866" title="Gibraltar Constitution Order 2006" label="Gibraltar constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q170110" start="47180" end="47217" title="2002 Gibraltar sovereignty referendum" label="2002 Gibraltar sovereignty referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q154674" start="47480" end="47497" title="Treaty of Utrecht" label="Treaty of Utrecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278980" start="47862" end="47881" title="Partido Andalucista" label="Partido Andalucista"/>
<link wikidata="Q779415" start="48602" end="48631" title="Special administrative regions of China" label="special administrative region"/>
<link wikidata="Q15165" start="48779" end="48798" title="Hong Kong Basic Law" label="Hong Kong Basic Law"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="48798" end="48800" title="Hong Kong independence#cite note-1" label="[1"/>
<link wikidata="Q671479" start="48831" end="48861" title="Sino-British Joint Declaration" label="Sino-British Joint Declaration"/>
<link wikidata="Q15251" start="48874" end="48895" title="handover of Hong Kong" label="handover of Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="49161" end="49163" title="Hong Kong independence#cite note-rally-2" label="[2"/>
<link wikidata="Q15584096" start="49170" end="49204" title="2014–15 Hong Kong electoral reform" label="2014–15 Hong Kong electoral reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q2741486" start="49391" end="49419" title="Chief Executive of Hong Kong" label="Chief Executive of Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q18145420" start="49553" end="49572" title="Umbrella Revolution" label="Umbrella Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="49654" end="49656" title="Hong Kong independence#cite note-rally-2" label="[2"/>
<link wikidata="Q19854226" start="49671" end="49679" title="Localism in Hong Kong" label="localism"/>
<link wikidata="Q18694653" start="49748" end="49765" title="Umbrella Movement" label="Umbrella Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q17004748" start="49969" end="50007" title="Copyright (Amendment) Bill 2014" label="Bill to Strengthen Internet Censorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q21073073" start="50032" end="50093" title="University of Hong Kong pro-vice-chancellor selection controversy" label="Chinese political interference in the University of Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q19639593" start="50099" end="50116" title="2015 Yuen Long protest" label="Recover Yuen Long"/>
<link wikidata="Q22673238" start="50134" end="50160" title="2016 Mong Kok civil unrest" label="2016 Mong Kok civil unrest"/>
<link wikidata="Q15570" start="50201" end="50232" title="Chinese University of Hong Kong" label="Chinese University of Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="50387" end="50389" title="Hong Kong independence#cite note-3" label="[3"/>
<link wikidata="Q103817" start="50420" end="50438" title="Indigenous peoples" label="Indigenous peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138309" start="50469" end="50516" title="Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples" label="Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q3624078" start="50661" end="50676" title="sovereign state" label="sovereign state"/>
<link wikidata="Q42008" start="50751" end="50762" title="sovereignty" label="sovereignty"/>
<link wikidata="Q42388" start="50806" end="50813" title="Zionism" label="Zionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q44003" start="50851" end="50864" title="Theodor Herzl" label="Theodor Herzl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412733" start="50969" end="50986" title="Jewish diaspora" label="all Jewish people"/>
<link wikidata="Q23792" start="51004" end="51013" title="Palestine (region)" label="Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q193748" start="51014" end="51028" title="ancient Israel" label="ancient Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q155321" start="51029" end="51043" title="land of Israel" label="land of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="51122" end="51137" title="Israel" label="State of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2571484" start="51239" end="51256" title="Jammu and Kashmir (princely state)" label="Jammu and Kashmir"/>
<link wikidata="Q12446053" start="51371" end="51390" title="Hari Singh" label="Maharaja Hari Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1180" start="51591" end="51608" title="Jammu and Kashmir (state)" label="Jammu and Kashmir"/>
<link wikidata="Q157068" start="51671" end="51687" title="Louis Mountbatten, 1st Earl Mountbatten of Burma" label="Lord Mountbatten"/>
<link wikidata="Q129286" start="51709" end="51722" title="British Raj" label="British India"/>
<link wikidata="Q749970" start="52520" end="52541" title="Insurgency in Jammu and Kashmir" label="insurgency in Kashmir"/>
<link wikidata="Q19892124" start="52729" end="52766" title="1987 Jammu and Kashmir Legislative Assembly election" label="1987 Jammu and Kashmir state election"/>
<link wikidata="Q274564" start="52994" end="53021" title="Inter-Services Intelligence" label="Inter-Services Intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="53025" end="53033" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q18358898" start="53727" end="53763" title="2014 Jammu and Kashmir Legislative Assembly election" label="Jammu and Kashmir Assembly elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q41470" start="54341" end="54350" title="Kurdistan" label="Kurdistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q12223" start="54401" end="54415" title="Kurdish people" label="Kurdish people"/>
<link wikidata="Q66711956" start="54576" end="54591" title="Iraqi Kurdistan" label="Iraqi Kurdistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2037304" start="54683" end="54712" title="Kurdistan Regional Government" label="Kurdistan Regional Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672358" start="54742" end="54768" title="Constitution of Iraq" label="Iraqi Federal Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q182515" start="54869" end="54885" title="Treaty of Sèvres" label="Treaty of Sèvres"/>
<link wikidata="Q193258" start="54923" end="54948" title="Treaty of Lausanne (1923)" label="Treaty of Lausanne (1923)"/>
<link wikidata="Q150061" start="55044" end="55062" title="Republic of Ararat" label="Republic of Ararat"/>
<link wikidata="Q80051" start="55064" end="55077" title="Ağrı Province" label="Ağrı Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q332232" start="55092" end="55111" title="Republic of Mehabad" label="Republic of Mehabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q134411" start="55113" end="55137" title="West Azerbaijan Province" label="West Azerbaijan Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q149832" start="55153" end="55173" title="Kingdom of Kurdistan" label="Kingdom of Kurdistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q213182" start="55175" end="55199" title="Sulaymaniyah Governorate" label="Sulaymaniyah Governorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q66711956" start="55201" end="55216" title="Iraqi Kurdistan" label="Iraqi Kurdistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q677505" start="55298" end="55326" title="Patriotic Union of Kurdistan" label="Patriotic Union of Kurdistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q889817" start="55353" end="55369" title="President of Iraq" label="Iraqi presidency"/>
<link wikidata="Q781221" start="55378" end="55404" title="Kurdistan Democratic Party" label="Kurdistan Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2037304" start="55423" end="55452" title="Kurdistan Regional Government" label="Kurdistan Regional Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q6445769" start="55878" end="55885" title="Kurdish separatism in Iran" label="in Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q619749" start="55890" end="55899" title="Kurdish–Turkish conflict (1978–present)" label="in Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q619829" start="56008" end="56038" title="Autonomous Administration of North and East Syria" label="local Kurdish-dominated polity"/>
<link wikidata="Q178810" start="56092" end="56108" title="Syrian Civil War" label="Syrian Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130145" start="56177" end="56181" title="Naga people" label="Naga"/>
<link wikidata="Q2385925" start="56361" end="56368" title="British India" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q4761940" start="56505" end="56522" title="Angami Zapu Phizo" label="Angami Zapu Phizo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128551" start="56601" end="56622" title="Naga National Council" label="Naga National Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q7496679" start="57303" end="57326" title="Shillong Accord of 1975" label="Shillong Accord of 1975"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246849" start="57359" end="57397" title="National Socialist Council of Nagaland" label="National Socialist Council of Nagaland"/>
<link wikidata="Q871091" start="57712" end="57726" title="British Malaya" label="British Malaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q16933920" start="57849" end="57861" title="Crown Colony of North Borneo" label="North Borneo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589708" start="57866" end="57873" title="Crown Colony of Sarawak" label="Sarawak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479726" start="57961" end="57980" title="Federation of Malaya" label="Malaysia Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1104639" start="58084" end="58102" title="Cobbold Commission" label="Cobbold Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q833" start="58681" end="58689" title="Malaysia" label="Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q43109" start="58794" end="58805" title="referendums" label="referendums"/>
<link wikidata="Q7523303" start="58837" end="58856" title="1962 Singaporean national referendum" label="Unlike in Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589708" start="58903" end="58910" title="Crown Colony of Sarawak" label="Sarawak"/>
<link wikidata="Q16933920" start="58915" end="58927" title="Crown Colony of North Borneo" label="North Borneo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783730" start="59010" end="59023" title="Manila Accord" label="Manila Accord"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479726" start="59063" end="59083" title="Federation of Malaya" label="Federation of Malaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q16933920" start="59154" end="59166" title="Crown Colony of North Borneo" label="North Borneo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589708" start="59171" end="59178" title="Crown Colony of Sarawak" label="Sarawak"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888393" start="59201" end="59253" title="United Nations General Assembly Resolution 1541 (XV)" label="United Nations General Assembly Resolution 1541 (XV)"/>
<link wikidata="Q43109" start="59300" end="59310" title="referendum" label="referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361929" start="59405" end="59429" title="Indonesia–Malaysia confrontation" label="Indonesian confrontation"/>
<link wikidata="Q181264" start="59536" end="59552" title="Mycenaean Greece" label="Mycenaean Greeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q26257" start="59573" end="59590" title="2nd millennium BC" label="2nd millennium BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="59623" end="59634" title="Middle East" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q41137" start="59719" end="59726" title="Assyria" label="Assyria"/>
<link wikidata="Q11768" start="59730" end="59739" title="Ancient Egypt" label="Egyptians"/>
<link wikidata="Q389688" start="59744" end="59752" title="Achaemenid Empire" label="Persians"/>
<link wikidata="Q8409" start="59799" end="59818" title="Alexander the Great" label="Alexander the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q2320005" start="59839" end="59854" title="Ptolemaic Kingdom" label="Ptolemaic Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="59860" end="59869" title="Roman Empire" label="Classical"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="59874" end="59894" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Eastern Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q131401" start="59896" end="59911" title="Caliphate" label="Arab caliphates"/>
<link wikidata="Q378193" start="59939" end="59962" title="House of Lusignan" label="French Lusignan dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q878977" start="59995" end="60003" title="James II of Cyprus" label="James II"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948" start="60033" end="60051" title="Republic of Venice" label="Republic of Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q149192" start="60132" end="60149" title="Catherine Cornaro" label="Catherine Cornaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q213638" start="60202" end="60219" title="Kingdom of Cyprus" label="Kingdom of Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3856" start="60292" end="60299" title="Nicosia" label="Nicosia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7919752" start="60316" end="60332" title="Walls of Nicosia" label="Walls of Nicosia"/>
<link wikidata="Q103350" start="60552" end="60557" title="Serfdom" label="serfs"/>
<link wikidata="Q245794" start="60695" end="60709" title="Greek Cypriots" label="Greek Cypriots"/>
<link wikidata="Q878962" start="60845" end="60862" title="John II of Cyprus" label="John II of Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q948443" start="60875" end="60894" title="Helena Palaiologina" label="Helena Palaiologina"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="60927" end="60941" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q185632" start="60999" end="61007" title="Limassol" label="Limassol"/>
<link wikidata="Q193190" start="61063" end="61072" title="Famagusta" label="Famagusta"/>
<link wikidata="Q206760" start="61077" end="61084" title="Kyrenia" label="Kyrenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q245807" start="61111" end="61116" title="Turkish Cypriots" label="Turks"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="61208" end="61222" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q15240466" start="61256" end="61278" title="British Cyprus" label="British administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q3555069" start="61288" end="61305" title="Cyprus Convention" label="Cyprus Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="61366" end="61377" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="61561" end="61579" title="Turkey" label="Republic of Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q245794" start="61655" end="61669" title="Greek Cypriots" label="Greek Cypriots"/>
<link wikidata="Q245807" start="61674" end="61690" title="Turkish Cypriots" label="Turkish Cypriots"/>
<link wikidata="Q229" start="61712" end="61730" title="Cyprus" label="Republic of Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q256" start="61877" end="61884" title="Turkish language" label="Turkish"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="61889" end="61894" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q3555771" start="62003" end="62021" title="Greek nationalism" label="Greek nationalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050999" start="62090" end="62106" title="Turkish invasion of Cyprus" label="Turkish invasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q23681" start="62116" end="62151" title="Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus" label="Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="62590" end="62596" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7855262" start="62660" end="62684" title="Turkish Cypriot enclaves" label="Turkish Cypriot enclaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q122880" start="62900" end="62938" title="European Court of Human Rights" label="European Court of Human Rights (ECtHR)"/>
<link wikidata="Q194907" start="63273" end="63306" title="Federal judiciary of the United States" label="United States&amp;#x27; Federal Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q23681" start="63317" end="63352" title="Northern Cyprus" label="Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617747" start="63713" end="63723" title="High Court of Justice" label="High Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q1616403" start="63938" end="63962" title="Palestinian nationalists" label="Palestinian nationalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q484105" start="63977" end="63985" title="autonomy" label="autonomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3624078" start="63990" end="64012" title="Sovereign state" label="sovereign independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q219060" start="64085" end="64094" title="State of Palestine" label="Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150983" start="64137" end="64155" title="one state solution" label="one state solution"/>
<link wikidata="Q719543" start="64164" end="64182" title="two state solution" label="two state solution"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="64284" end="64311" title="Israeli-occupied territories#West Bank" label="occupation in the West Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q7127411" start="64353" end="64372" title="Palestinian freedom of movement" label="freedom of movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q12192963" start="64440" end="64454" title="Qibli Mosque" label="al-Aqsa mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q857880" start="64487" end="64498" title="French Canadians" label="Francophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="64515" end="64533" title="Quebec" label="Province of Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q170156" start="64576" end="64589" title="Confederation" label="Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q950356" start="64595" end="64610" title="Parti Québécois" label="Parti Québécois"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="64752" end="64767" title="French-speaking" label="French-speaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141508" start="64768" end="64786" title="Quebec nationalism" label="Quebec nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3007454" start="64815" end="64832" title="Culture of Quebec" label="Québécois culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141508" start="64847" end="64866" title="Quebec nationalism" label="Quebec nationalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321476" start="64904" end="64931" title="Quebec sovereignty movement" label="Quebec sovereignty movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q33976" start="65044" end="65053" title="Sardinian language" label="Sardinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462" start="65115" end="65123" title="Sardinia" label="Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140968" start="65166" end="65182" title="Sardinian people" label="Sardinian people"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139955" start="65208" end="65218" title="devolution" label="devolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398958" start="65228" end="65236" title="Autonomism (political doctrine)" label="autonomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q832237" start="65315" end="65325" title="Environmental protection" label="protection"/>
<link wikidata="Q2855609" start="65326" end="65358" title="Environmentalism" label="of the island&amp;#x27;s environment"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="65387" end="65404" title="Sardinia#Culture" label="cultural heritage"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="65510" end="65514" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q164597" start="65562" end="65566" title="Left-wing politics" label="left"/>
<link wikidata="Q2684060" start="65594" end="65605" title="regionalism (politics)" label="regionalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6093359" start="65700" end="65719" title="Italian nationalism" label="Italian nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6223" start="65724" end="65731" title="fascism" label="fascism"/>
<link wikidata="Q230791" start="65830" end="65838" title="Kingdom of Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q179876" start="65892" end="65899" title="Kingdom of England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q193515" start="65910" end="65923" title="Acts of Union 1707" label="Acts of Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q161885" start="65951" end="65975" title="Kingdom of Great Britain" label="Kingdom of Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q891905" start="66001" end="66031" title="Scottish independence movement" label="Scottish independence movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q10658" start="66187" end="66210" title="Scottish National Party" label="Scottish National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458570" start="66251" end="66294" title="2014 Scottish independence referendum" label="referendum on independence was held in 2014"/>
<link wikidata="Q21812812" start="66385" end="66415" title="2016 United Kingdom European Union membership referendum" label="UK referendum on EU membership"/>
<link wikidata="Q32521" start="66628" end="66647" title="Scottish Government" label="Scottish Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q206171" start="66749" end="66768" title="Scottish Parliament" label="Scottish Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q180589" start="66814" end="66827" title="Boris Johnson" label="Boris Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q60567" start="67061" end="67087" title="Constitution of South Africa" label="South African Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q97704261" start="67194" end="67214" title="South Africans" label="South African people"/>
<link wikidata="Q385799" start="67445" end="67454" title="Afrikaner" label="Afrikaner"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="67560" end="67565" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q15124" start="67567" end="67589" title="South Tyrol" label="South Tyrol/Alto Adige"/>
<link wikidata="Q3804314" start="67594" end="67601" title="Italianization of South Tyrol" label="annexed"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="67612" end="67627" title="World War I" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q701092" start="67697" end="67724" title="Gruber–De Gasperi Agreement" label="Gruber-De Gasperi Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1212753" start="67814" end="67832" title="Die Freiheitlichen" label="Die Freiheitlichen"/>
<link wikidata="Q16010017" start="67841" end="67877" title="South Tyrolean independence movement" label="South Tyrolean independence movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q701092" start="68444" end="68471" title="Gruber–De Gasperi Agreement" label="Gruber–De Gasperi Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="68518" end="68533" title="World War I" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q171150" start="68554" end="68572" title="Kingdom of Hungary" label="Kingdom of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q181902" start="68578" end="68585" title="Treaty of Trianon" label="annexed"/>
<link wikidata="Q133032" start="68646" end="68655" title="Hungarians" label="Hungarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q147540" start="68674" end="68682" title="Székelys" label="Székelys"/>
<link wikidata="Q2483609" start="68893" end="68912" title="Tibetan sovereignty debate" label="Tibetan sovereignty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2778757" start="68922" end="68951" title="History of Tibet (1950-present)" label="Chinese occupation since 1950"/>
<link wikidata="Q326343" start="68957" end="68984" title="Central Tibetan Administration" label="Tibetan Government in-Exile"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="69055" end="69068" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="69088" end="69103" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q5398059" start="69255" end="69267" title="Indian reservation" label="reservations"/>
<link wikidata="Q484105" start="69310" end="69318" title="autonomy" label="autonomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="69330" end="69343" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q48525" start="69349" end="69367" title="Federal government of the United States" label="federal government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770058" start="69379" end="69397" title="Tribal sovereignty in the United States" label="Tribal Sovereignty"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603694" start="69493" end="69498" title="State governments of the United States" label="state"/>
<link wikidata="Q11698" start="69528" end="69540" title="Constitution of the United States" label="Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q5095943" start="69799" end="69818" title="Chicano nationalism" label="Chicano nationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q740961" start="69890" end="69896" title="Aztlán" label="Aztlán"/>
<link wikidata="Q12542" start="69934" end="69940" title="Aztecs" label="Aztecs"/>
<link wikidata="Q858847" start="69964" end="69990" title="Southwestern United States" label="Southwestern United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q36747" start="70014" end="70032" title="Indigenous peoples of the Americas" label="indigenous peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q80702" start="70106" end="70122" title="Spanish Empire" label="Spanish colonial"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="70127" end="70134" title="Mexico" label="Mexican"/>
<link wikidata="Q2458580" start="70184" end="70194" title="Republic of New Afrika" label="New Afrika"/>
<link wikidata="Q880087" start="70301" end="70311" title="Black Belt in the American South" label="Black Belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283606" start="70458" end="70466" title="Native Hawaiians" label="Hawaiian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5398059" start="70664" end="70682" title="Indian reservation" label="Indian reservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q839030" start="70762" end="70791" title="Hawaiian sovereignty movement" label="Hawaiian sovereignty movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q12113272" start="70923" end="70944" title="1840 Constitution of the Hawaiian Kingdom" label="Hawaiian constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q530843" start="70962" end="70991" title="Special Committee on Decolonization" label="U.N. Decolonization Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183" start="71007" end="71018" title="Puerto Rico" label="Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q4859434" start="71246" end="71277" title="political status of Puerto Rico" label="political status of Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q43109" start="71356" end="71366" title="plebiscite" label="plebiscite"/>
<link wikidata="Q609591" start="71462" end="71474" title="Commonwealth (U.S. insular area)" label="commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q77642" start="71476" end="71485" title="Statehood movement in Puerto Rico" label="statehood"/>
<link wikidata="Q6016263" start="71491" end="71503" title="Independence movement in Puerto Rico" label="independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q16930" start="71750" end="71760" title="2012 Puerto Rican status referendum" label="referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115346" start="72414" end="72455" title="Secession in the United States" label="state, regional and city secession groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q6265340" start="72503" end="72522" title="Zogby International" label="Zogby International"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115346" start="72975" end="73004" title="secession in the United States" label="secede from the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q2515622" start="73037" end="73053" title="constitutionality" label="unconstitutional"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407695" start="73089" end="73103" title="Texas v. White" label="Texas v. White"/>
<link wikidata="Q577055" start="73207" end="73221" title="Sahrawi people" label="Sahrawi people"/>
<link wikidata="Q6250" start="73229" end="73243" title="Western Sahara" label="Western Sahara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028" start="73253" end="73260" title="Morocco" label="Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q3845" start="73400" end="73411" title="Western New Guinea" label="West Papuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q20716634" start="73456" end="73477" title="government of Indonesia" label="Indonesian Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q130654" start="73502" end="73521" title="Dutch colonial empire" label="Dutch colonial rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q941881" start="73532" end="73548" title="Dutch New Guinea" label="Dutch New Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q127167" start="73652" end="73664" title="Western Cape" label="Western Cape"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="73677" end="73689" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2593116" start="73785" end="73806" title="South Africa Act 1909" label="South Africa Act 1909"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="73947" end="73969" title="Cape Qualified Franchise#The Cape Liberal Tradition" label="Cape Liberal Tradition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144178" start="74111" end="74127" title="Anti-imperialism" label="Anti-imperialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4949969" start="74129" end="74165" title="Boundary problem" label="Boundary problem (political science)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500985" start="74167" end="74212" title="Community for Democracy and Rights of Nations" label="Community for Democracy and Rights of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q230533" start="74214" end="74228" title="Decolonization" label="Decolonization"/>
<link wikidata="Q530843" start="74231" end="74266" title="Special Committee on Decolonization" label="Special Committee on Decolonization"/>
<link wikidata="Q900119" start="74269" end="74322" title="United Nations list of non-self-governing territories" label="United Nations list of non-self-governing territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q194236" start="74324" end="74341" title="Ethnic separatism" label="Ethnic separatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q637251" start="74343" end="74359" title="Ethnonationalism" label="Ethnonationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q365143" start="74361" end="74375" title="Ethnopluralism" label="Ethnopluralism"/>
<link wikidata="Q194236" start="74377" end="74398" title="Independence movement" label="Independence movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q103817" start="74400" end="74418" title="Indigenous peoples" label="Indigenous peoples"/>
<link wikidata="" start="74420" end="74461" title=":De:Informationelle Selbstbestimmung" label="Informational self-determination (German)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785609" start="74463" end="74493" title="International relations theory" label="International relations theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q182274" start="74495" end="74506" title="Irredentism" label="Irredentism"/>
<link wikidata="Q207982" start="74508" end="74518" title="Legitimacy (political)" label="Legitimacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2583705" start="74520" end="74591" title="List of countries that have gained independence from the United Kingdom" label="List of countries that have gained independence from the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818345" start="74593" end="74648" title="List of historical unrecognized states and dependencies" label="List of historical unrecognized states and dependencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q6604979" start="74650" end="74733" title="List of national liberation movements recognized by intergovernmental organizations" label="List of national liberation movements recognized by intergovernmental organizations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142999" start="74735" end="74771" title="Lists of active separatist movements" label="Lists of active separatist movements"/>
<link wikidata="Q56558925" start="74773" end="74814" title="National delimitation in the Soviet Union" label="National delimitation in the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q2896512" start="74816" end="74842" title="National personal autonomy" label="National personal autonomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q179671" start="74844" end="74856" title="Nation-state" label="Nation-state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203128" start="74858" end="74874" title="Non-Intervention" label="Non-Intervention"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205561" start="74876" end="74892" title="Plurinationalism" label="Plurinationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2019152" start="74894" end="74915" title="Religious nationalism" label="Religious nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1383852" start="74917" end="74931" title="Right to exist" label="Right to exist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5162861" start="74933" end="74956" title="Consent of the governed" label="Consent of the governed"/>
<link wikidata="Q285950" start="74958" end="74977" title="Popular sovereignty" label="Popular sovereignty"/>
<link wikidata="Q417633" start="74979" end="74994" title="Self-governance" label="Self-governance"/>
<link wikidata="Q194236" start="74996" end="75006" title="Separatism" label="Separatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151616" start="75008" end="75024" title="Stateless nation" label="Stateless nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q526594" start="75026" end="75047" title="Territorial integrity" label="Territorial integrity"/>
<link wikidata="Q215613" start="75049" end="75095" title="Unrepresented Nations and Peoples Organization" label="Unrepresented Nations and Peoples Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006311" start="75097" end="75124" title="Wars of national liberation" label="Wars of national liberation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6709412" start="75617" end="75641" title="Lynne Rienner Publishers" label="Lynne Rienner Publishers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6709412" start="75782" end="75806" title="Lynne Rienner Publishers" label="Lynne Rienner Publishers"/>
<link wikidata="Q217595" start="75956" end="75979" title="Oxford University Press" label="Oxford University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q880582" start="76075" end="76095" title="Taylor &amp;amp; Francis" label="Taylor &amp;amp; Francis"/>
<link wikidata="Q880582" start="76198" end="76218" title="Taylor &amp;amp; Francis" label="Taylor &amp;amp; Francis"/>
<link wikidata="Q125924795" start="76228" end="76244" title="Valpy Fitzgerald" label="Valpy Fitzgerald"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551355" start="76534" end="76562" title="University of Nebraska Press" label="University of Nebraska Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q176916" start="76727" end="76735" title="Springer Science+Business Media" label="Springer"/>
<link wikidata="Q912887" start="77115" end="77141" title="Cambridge University Press" label="Cambridge University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q2037236" start="77334" end="77366" title="University of Pennsylvania Press" label="University of Pennsylvania Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q101208467" start="77988" end="78001" title="Jacob T. Levy" label="Jacob T. Levy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394" start="78298" end="78312" title="Vladimir Lenin" label="Vladimir Lenin"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="29271" wikidata="Q393789" url="?curid=29271" title="Scale">
<text>Scale or scales may refer to:
==Mathematics==
* Scale (descriptive set theory), an object defined on a set of points
* Scale (ratio), the ratio of a linear dimension of a model to the corresponding dimension of the original
* Scale factor, a number which scales, or multiplies, some quantity
* Long and short scales, how powers of ten are named and grouped in large numbers
* Scale parameter, a description of the spread or dispersion of a probability distribution
* Feature scaling, a method used to normalize the range of independent variables or features of data
* Scale (analytical tool)

==Measurements==
* Scale (map), the ratio of the distance on a map to the corresponding actual distance
* Scale (geography)
* Weighing scale, an instrument used to measure mass
* Scale (ratio), the ratio of the linear dimension of the model to the same dimension of the original
* Spatial scale, a classification of sizes
* Scale ruler, a tool for measuring lengths and transferring measurements at a fixed ratio of length
* Vernier scale, the scale on calipers

==Music==
* Scale (music), a sequence of ordered musical notes
* Scale (string instruments), the sounding length of the strings of an instrument
* &quot;Scale&quot; (album), a 2006 album by electronic artist Matthew Herbert
* &quot;The Scale&quot;, a song from &quot;Our Love to Admire&quot; by Interpol

==Film and television==
* &quot;Scale&quot; (film), an animated short film directed by Joseph Pierce
* &quot;Scales&quot; (film), a 2019 Saudi Arabian film
* &quot;Scales&quot; (&quot;The Cape&quot;), a 2011 television episode

==Science ==
===Biology===
* Scale (zoology), a rigid plate which grows out of the skin of various animals
**Fish scale
**Reptile scale
***Snake scale
* Scale (dermatology), a secondary skin lesion in humans that resembles animal scales
* Scale (insect anatomy), a feature of the wings of moths and butterflies
* Scale, a type of trichome, any flat epidermal outgrowth in botany
* Bulb scale, the storage layers of a plant bulb
* Scale insect, a waxy coated animal that resembles a fish scale

===Chemistry and materials science===
* Fouling, sometimes called , a buildup of unwanted substances on a submerged surface
* Limescale, a hard, chalky deposit that often builds up inside kettles, hot water boilers, and pipework
* Mill scale, the flaky surface on hot rolled steel, consisting of iron oxides
* Scale (chemistry), the range of mass or volume of a chemical reaction or process

===Social sciences===
* Rating scale, a type of informational measurement scale
* Scale (analytical tool), a concept in the study of complex systems and hierarchy theory
* Scale (social sciences), a tool for ordering entities by quantitative attributes

==Places==
* Scales, California, a community in the United States
* Scales, Lancashire, part of the village of Newton-with-Scales
* Scales, near Kirkoswald, Cumbria, a hamlet
* Scales, Aldingham, Cumbria, England, a village
* &quot;The Scales&quot;, the initial climb of the Chilkoot Pass

==Other uses==
* Scales (surname)
* Baron Scales, a title in the Peerage of England
* Libra (constellation), also known as &quot;the scales&quot;, or the namesake astrological sign
* &quot;Mizan&quot; (&quot;Scale&quot; in English), a treatise on Islam by Javed Ahmed Ghamidi
* Pay scale, a system or structure of compensation for work
* Scale armour, an early form of armor
* Southern California Linux Expo, an open-source software conference held in Los Angeles, California

==See also==
* Scala (disambiguation)
* Scalability, a concept in business, computer science, and electronics
* Scali (disambiguation)
* Scaling (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q393789" start="0" end="5" title="Scale" label="Scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q393789" start="9" end="15" title="Scale" label="scales"/>
<link wikidata="Q7429715" start="48" end="78" title="Scale (descriptive set theory)" label="Scale (descriptive set theory)"/>
<link wikidata="Q10858537" start="119" end="132" title="Scale (ratio)" label="Scale (ratio)"/>
<link wikidata="Q102441924" start="226" end="238" title="Scale factor" label="Scale factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q725503" start="294" end="315" title="Long and short scales" label="Long and short scales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1289366" start="376" end="391" title="Scale parameter" label="Scale parameter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5439686" start="467" end="482" title="Feature scaling" label="Feature scaling"/>
<link wikidata="Q25203999" start="568" end="591" title="Scale (analytical tool)" label="Scale (analytical tool)"/>
<link wikidata="Q193642" start="612" end="623" title="Scale (map)" label="Scale (map)"/>
<link wikidata="Q24833355" start="699" end="716" title="Scale (geography)" label="Scale (geography)"/>
<link wikidata="Q134566" start="719" end="733" title="Weighing scale" label="Weighing scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q10858537" start="772" end="785" title="Scale (ratio)" label="Scale (ratio)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3577459" start="874" end="887" title="Spatial scale" label="Spatial scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1257896" start="917" end="928" title="Scale ruler" label="Scale ruler"/>
<link wikidata="Q14946576" start="1018" end="1031" title="Vernier scale" label="Vernier scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q179651" start="1068" end="1081" title="Scale (music)" label="Scale (music)"/>
<link wikidata="Q942813" start="1121" end="1147" title="Scale (string instruments)" label="Scale (string instruments)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7429714" start="1203" end="1228" title="Scale (album)" label="&amp;quot;Scale&amp;quot; (album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422991" start="1323" end="1341" title="Our Love to Admire" label="Our Love to Admire"/>
<link wikidata="Q115593368" start="1387" end="1411" title="Scale (film)" label="&amp;quot;Scale&amp;quot; (film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q80934407" start="1464" end="1489" title="Scales (film)" label="&amp;quot;Scales&amp;quot; (film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q947319" start="1519" end="1560" title="Scales (The Cape)" label="&amp;quot;Scales&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;The Cape&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q188488" start="1618" end="1633" title="Scale (zoology)" label="Scale (zoology)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5454665" start="1698" end="1708" title="Fish scale" label="Fish scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q682153" start="1711" end="1724" title="Reptile scale" label="Reptile scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536366" start="1728" end="1739" title="Snake scale" label="Snake scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q949302" start="1742" end="1761" title="Scale (dermatology)" label="Scale (dermatology)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7429713" start="1828" end="1850" title="Scale (insect anatomy)" label="Scale (insect anatomy)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125215" start="1919" end="1927" title="trichome" label="trichome"/>
<link wikidata="Q188748" start="1970" end="1974" title="Bulb" label="Bulb"/>
<link wikidata="Q209602" start="2019" end="2031" title="Scale insect" label="Scale insect"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439803" start="2123" end="2130" title="Fouling" label="Fouling"/>
<link wikidata="Q747404" start="2209" end="2218" title="Limescale" label="Limescale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1844333" start="2314" end="2324" title="Mill scale" label="Mill scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q25210863" start="2393" end="2410" title="Scale (chemistry)" label="Scale (chemistry)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7295720" start="2499" end="2511" title="Rating scale" label="Rating scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q25203999" start="2557" end="2580" title="Scale (analytical tool)" label="Scale (analytical tool)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16155171" start="2647" end="2670" title="Scale (social sciences)" label="Scale (social sciences)"/>
<link wikidata="Q18355771" start="2742" end="2760" title="Scales, California" label="Scales, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q11790945" start="2797" end="2815" title="Scales, Lancashire" label="Scales, Lancashire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2566509" start="2861" end="2884" title="Scales, near Kirkoswald" label="Scales, near Kirkoswald"/>
<link wikidata="Q7429759" start="2906" end="2923" title="Scales, Aldingham" label="Scales, Aldingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072958" start="3004" end="3017" title="Chilkoot Pass" label="Chilkoot Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q21498652" start="3036" end="3052" title="Scales (surname)" label="Scales (surname)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4862785" start="3055" end="3067" title="Baron Scales" label="Baron Scales"/>
<link wikidata="Q10580" start="3105" end="3126" title="Libra (constellation)" label="Libra (constellation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q12637113" start="3208" end="3213" title="Mizan" label="Mizan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2640178" start="3297" end="3306" title="Pay scale" label="Pay scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q574602" start="3357" end="3369" title="Scale armour" label="Scale armour"/>
<link wikidata="Q4262320" start="3396" end="3426" title="Southern California Linux Expo" label="Southern California Linux Expo"/>
<link wikidata="Q225791" start="3511" end="3533" title="Scala (disambiguation)" label="Scala (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q727490" start="3536" end="3547" title="Scalability" label="Scalability"/>
<link wikidata="Q2228773" start="3608" end="3630" title="Scali (disambiguation)" label="Scali (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2291388" start="3633" end="3657" title="Scaling (disambiguation)" label="Scaling (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="29275" wikidata="Q572018" url="?curid=29275" title="Southcentral Alaska">
<text>Southcentral Alaska (), also known as the Gulf Coast Region, is the portion of the U.S. state of Alaska consisting of the shorelines and uplands of the central Gulf of Alaska. More than half of the state&#x27;s entire population lives in this region, concentrated in and around the city of Anchorage. The region is Alaska’s best-connected region, with the Port of Anchorage, Ted Stevens, Anchorage International Airport, and the Alaska Railroad servicing the area.

The area includes Cook Inlet, the Matanuska-Susitna Valley, the Kenai Peninsula, Prince William Sound, and the Copper River Valley. Tourism, fisheries, and petroleum production are important economic activities.

==Cities==
The major city is Anchorage. Other major towns include Palmer, Wasilla, Kenai, Soldotna, Homer, Seward, Valdez, and Cordova.

==Climate==
The climate of Southcentral Alaska is subarctic. Temperatures range from an average high of in July to an average low of in December. The hours of daylight per day vary from 20 hours in June and July to 6 hours in December and January. The coastal areas consist of temperate rainforests and alder shrublands. The interior areas are covered by boreal forests.

==Mountains==
The terrain of Southcentral Alaska is shaped by seven mountain ranges:
*Alaska Range
*Talkeetna Mountains
*Wrangell Mountains
*Chugach Mountains
*Kenai Mountains
*Tordrillo Mountains
*Aleutian Range

Southcentral Alaska contains several dormant and active volcanoes. The Wrangell Volcanoes are older, lie in the East, and include Mount Blackburn, Mount Bona, Mount Churchill, Mount Drum, Mount Gordon, Mount Jarvis, Mount Sanford, and Mount Wrangell. The Cook Inlet volcanoes, located in the Tordrillo Mountains and at the north end of the Aleutian Range, are newer, lie in the West, and include Mount Redoubt, Mount Iliamna, Hayes Volcano, Mount Augustine, Fourpeaked Mountain, and Mount Spurr. Most recently, Augustine and Fourpeaked erupted in 2006, and Mount Redoubt erupted in March 2009, resulting in airplane flight cancellations.

==See also==
*Anchorage Metropolitan Area
*Chugach Census Area, Alaska
*Copper River Census Area, Alaska
*Matanuska-Susitna Valley
*Kenai Peninsula Borough, Alaska

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q572018" start="0" end="19" title="Southcentral Alaska" label="Southcentral Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q572018" start="42" end="59" title="Southcentral Alaska" label="Gulf Coast Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="83" end="93" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="97" end="103" title="Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q180531" start="160" end="174" title="Gulf of Alaska" label="Gulf of Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q39450" start="290" end="299" title="Anchorage, Alaska" label="Anchorage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129590" start="484" end="494" title="Cook Inlet" label="Cook Inlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q11246118" start="500" end="524" title="Matanuska-Susitna Valley" label="Matanuska-Susitna Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q60010" start="530" end="545" title="Kenai Peninsula" label="Kenai Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q631282" start="547" end="567" title="Prince William Sound" label="Prince William Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131444" start="577" end="596" title="Copper River (Alaska)" label="Copper River Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q39450" start="708" end="717" title="Anchorage, Alaska" label="Anchorage"/>
<link wikidata="Q79849" start="745" end="751" title="Palmer, Alaska" label="Palmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q79957" start="753" end="760" title="Wasilla, Alaska" label="Wasilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q79422" start="762" end="767" title="Kenai, Alaska" label="Kenai"/>
<link wikidata="Q79393" start="769" end="777" title="Soldotna, Alaska" label="Soldotna"/>
<link wikidata="Q79441" start="779" end="784" title="Homer, Alaska" label="Homer"/>
<link wikidata="Q79919" start="786" end="792" title="Seward, Alaska" label="Seward"/>
<link wikidata="Q80037" start="794" end="800" title="Valdez, Alaska" label="Valdez"/>
<link wikidata="Q79607" start="806" end="813" title="Cordova, Alaska" label="Cordova"/>
<link wikidata="Q5967371" start="866" end="875" title="subarctic climate" label="subarctic"/>
<link wikidata="Q156684" start="1274" end="1286" title="Alaska Range" label="Alaska Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q783415" start="1288" end="1307" title="Talkeetna Mountains" label="Talkeetna Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q616559" start="1309" end="1327" title="Wrangell Mountains" label="Wrangell Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089367" start="1329" end="1346" title="Chugach Mountains" label="Chugach Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514701" start="1348" end="1363" title="Kenai Mountains" label="Kenai Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q828541" start="1365" end="1384" title="Tordrillo Mountains" label="Tordrillo Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q678687" start="1386" end="1400" title="Aleutian Range" label="Aleutian Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520855" start="1532" end="1547" title="Mount Blackburn" label="Mount Blackburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q48691" start="1549" end="1559" title="Mount Bona" label="Mount Bona"/>
<link wikidata="Q48689" start="1561" end="1576" title="Mount Churchill" label="Mount Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q3467623" start="1578" end="1588" title="Mount Drum" label="Mount Drum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3467669" start="1590" end="1602" title="Mount Gordon" label="Mount Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q391440" start="1604" end="1616" title="Mount Jarvis" label="Mount Jarvis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638692" start="1618" end="1631" title="Mount Sanford (Alaska)" label="Mount Sanford"/>
<link wikidata="Q185847" start="1637" end="1651" title="Mount Wrangell" label="Mount Wrangell"/>
<link wikidata="Q840735" start="1798" end="1811" title="Mount Redoubt" label="Mount Redoubt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1950549" start="1813" end="1826" title="Mount Iliamna" label="Mount Iliamna"/>
<link wikidata="Q3467801" start="1828" end="1841" title="Hayes Volcano" label="Hayes Volcano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193964" start="1843" end="1858" title="Mount Augustine" label="Mount Augustine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058950" start="1860" end="1879" title="Fourpeaked Mountain" label="Fourpeaked Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189330" start="1885" end="1896" title="Mount Spurr" label="Mount Spurr"/>
<link wikidata="Q4752744" start="2055" end="2082" title="Anchorage metropolitan area" label="Anchorage Metropolitan Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q91481098" start="2084" end="2111" title="Chugach Census Area, Alaska" label="Chugach Census Area, Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q91481796" start="2113" end="2145" title="Copper River Census Area, Alaska" label="Copper River Census Area, Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q11246118" start="2147" end="2171" title="Matanuska-Susitna Valley" label="Matanuska-Susitna Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q512713" start="2173" end="2204" title="Kenai Peninsula Borough, Alaska" label="Kenai Peninsula Borough, Alaska"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="29276" wikidata="Q604907" url="?curid=29276" title="Spinor">
<text>In geometry and physics, spinors (pronounced &quot;spinner&quot; IPA ) are elements of a complex vector space that can be associated with Euclidean space. A spinor transforms linearly when the Euclidean space is subjected to a slight (infinitesimal) rotation, but unlike geometric vectors and tensors, a spinor transforms to its negative when the 
space rotates through 360° (see picture). It takes a rotation of 720° for a spinor to go back to its original state. This property characterizes spinors: spinors can be viewed as the &quot;square roots&quot; of vectors (although this is inaccurate and may be misleading; they are better viewed as &quot;square roots&quot; of sections of vector bundles – in the case of the exterior algebra bundle of the cotangent bundle, they thus become &quot;square roots&quot; of differential forms).

It is also possible to associate a substantially similar notion of spinor to Minkowski space, in which case the Lorentz transformations of special relativity play the role of rotations. Spinors were introduced in geometry by Élie Cartan in 1913. In the 1920s physicists discovered that spinors are essential to describe the intrinsic angular momentum, or &quot;spin&quot;, of the electron and other subatomic particles.

Spinors are characterized by the specific way in which they behave under rotations. They change in different ways depending not just on the overall final rotation, but the details of how that rotation was achieved (by a continuous path in the rotation group). There are two topologically distinguishable classes (homotopy classes) of paths through rotations that result in the same overall rotation, as illustrated by the belt trick puzzle. These two inequivalent classes yield spinor transformations of opposite sign. The spin group is the group of all rotations keeping track of the class. It doubly covers the rotation group, since each rotation can be obtained in two inequivalent ways as the endpoint of a path. The space of spinors by definition is equipped with a (complex) linear representation of the spin group, meaning that elements of the spin group act as linear transformations on the space of spinors, in a way that genuinely depends on the homotopy class. In mathematical terms, spinors are described by a double-valued projective representation of the rotation group SO(3).

Although spinors can be defined purely as elements of a representation space of the spin group (or its Lie algebra of infinitesimal rotations), they are typically defined as elements of a vector space that carries a linear representation of the Clifford algebra. The Clifford algebra is an associative algebra that can be constructed from Euclidean space and its inner product in a basis-independent way. Both the spin group and its Lie algebra are embedded inside the Clifford algebra in a natural way, and in applications the Clifford algebra is often the easiest to work with. A Clifford space operates on a spinor space, and the elements of a spinor space are spinors. After choosing an orthonormal basis of Euclidean space, a representation of the Clifford algebra is generated by gamma matrices, matrices that satisfy a set of canonical anti-commutation relations. The spinors are the column vectors on which these matrices act. In three Euclidean dimensions, for instance, the Pauli spin matrices are a set of gamma matrices, and the two-component complex column vectors on which these matrices act are spinors. However, the particular matrix representation of the Clifford algebra, hence what precisely constitutes a &quot;column vector&quot; (or spinor), involves the choice of basis and gamma matrices in an essential way. As a representation of the spin group, this realization of spinors as (complex) column vectors will either be irreducible if the dimension is odd, or it will decompose into a pair of so-called &quot;half-spin&quot; or Weyl representations if the dimension is even.

== Introduction ==


What characterizes spinors and distinguishes them from geometric vectors and other tensors is subtle. Consider applying a rotation to the coordinates of a system. No object in the system itself has moved, only the coordinates have, so there will always be a compensating change in those coordinate values when applied to any object of the system. Geometrical vectors, for example, have components that will undergo &quot;the same&quot; rotation as the coordinates. More broadly, any tensor associated with the system (for instance, the stress of some medium) also has coordinate descriptions that adjust to compensate for changes to the coordinate system itself.

Spinors do not appear at this level of the description of a physical system, when one is concerned only with the properties of a single isolated rotation of the coordinates. Rather, spinors appear when we imagine that instead of a single rotation, the coordinate system is gradually (continuously) rotated between some initial and final configuration. For any of the familiar and intuitive (&quot;tensorial&quot;) quantities associated with the system, the transformation law does not depend on the precise details of how the coordinates arrived at their final configuration. Spinors, on the other hand, are constructed in such a way that makes them &quot;sensitive&quot; to how the gradual rotation of the coordinates arrived there: They exhibit path-dependence. It turns out that, for any final configuration of the coordinates, there are actually two (&quot;topologically&quot;) inequivalent &quot;gradual&quot; (continuous) rotations of the coordinate system that result in this same configuration. This ambiguity is called the homotopy class of the gradual rotation. The belt trick (shown, in which both ends of the rotated object are physically tethered to an external reference) demonstrates two different rotations, one through an angle of 2 and the other through an angle of 4, having the same final configurations but different classes. Spinors actually exhibit a sign-reversal that genuinely depends on this homotopy class. This distinguishes them from vectors and other tensors, none of which can feel the class.

Spinors can be exhibited as concrete objects using a choice of Cartesian coordinates. In three Euclidean dimensions, for instance, spinors can be constructed by making a choice of Pauli spin matrices corresponding to (angular momenta about) the three coordinate axes. These are 2×2 matrices with complex entries, and the two-component complex column vectors on which these matrices act by matrix multiplication are the spinors. In this case, the spin group is isomorphic to the group of 2×2 unitary matrices with determinant one, which naturally sits inside the matrix algebra. This group acts by conjugation on the real vector space spanned by the Pauli matrices themselves, realizing it as a group of rotations among them, but it also acts on the column vectors (that is, the spinors).

More generally, a Clifford algebra can be constructed from any vector space &quot;V&quot; equipped with a (nondegenerate) quadratic form, such as Euclidean space with its standard dot product or Minkowski space with its standard Lorentz metric. The space of spinors is the space of column vectors with formula_1 components. The orthogonal Lie algebra (i.e., the infinitesimal &quot;rotations&quot;) and the spin group associated to the quadratic form are both (canonically) contained in the Clifford algebra, so every Clifford algebra representation also defines a representation of the Lie algebra and the spin group. Depending on the dimension and metric signature, this realization of spinors as column vectors may be irreducible or it may decompose into a pair of so-called &quot;half-spin&quot; or Weyl representations. When the vector space &quot;V&quot; is four-dimensional, the algebra is described by the gamma matrices.

== Mathematical definition ==
The space of spinors is formally defined as the fundamental representation of the Clifford algebra. (This may or may not decompose into irreducible representations.) The space of spinors may also be defined as a spin representation of the orthogonal Lie algebra. These spin representations are also characterized as the finite-dimensional projective representations of the special orthogonal group that do not factor through linear representations. Equivalently, a spinor is an element of a finite-dimensional group representation of the spin group on which the center acts non-trivially.

=== Overview ===
There are essentially two frameworks for viewing the notion of a spinor: the &quot;representation theoretic point of view&quot; and the &quot;geometric point of view&quot;.

====Representation theoretic point of view====
From a representation theoretic point of view, one knows beforehand that there are some representations of the Lie algebra of the orthogonal group that cannot be formed by the usual tensor constructions. These missing representations are then labeled the spin representations, and their constituents &quot;spinors&quot;. From this view, a spinor must belong to a representation of the double cover of the rotation group , or more generally of a double cover of the generalized special orthogonal group on spaces with a metric signature of . These double covers are Lie groups, called the spin groups or . All the properties of spinors, and their applications and derived objects, are manifested first in the spin group. Representations of the double covers of these groups yield double-valued projective representations of the groups themselves. (This means that the action of a particular rotation on vectors in the quantum Hilbert space is only defined up to a sign.)

In summary, given a representation specified by the data formula_2 where formula_3 is a vector space over formula_4 or formula_5 and formula_6 is a homomorphism formula_7, a spinor is an element of the vector space formula_3.

====Geometric point of view====
From a geometrical point of view, one can explicitly construct the spinors and then examine how they behave under the action of the relevant Lie groups. This latter approach has the advantage of providing a concrete and elementary description of what a spinor is. However, such a description becomes unwieldy when complicated properties of the spinors, such as Fierz identities, are needed.

=== Clifford algebras ===
The language of Clifford algebras (sometimes called geometric algebras) provides a complete picture of the spin representations of all the spin groups, and the various relationships between those representations, via the classification of Clifford algebras. It largely removes the need for &quot;ad hoc&quot; constructions.

In detail, let &quot;V&quot; be a finite-dimensional complex vector space with nondegenerate symmetric bilinear form &quot;g&quot;. The Clifford algebra is the algebra generated by &quot;V&quot; along with the anticommutation relation . It is an abstract version of the algebra generated by the gamma or Pauli matrices. If &quot;V&quot; = formula_9, with the standard form we denote the Clifford algebra by Cℓ&quot;n&quot;(formula_10). Since by the choice of an orthonormal basis every complex vector space with non-degenerate form is isomorphic to this standard example, this notation is abused more generally if . If is even, is isomorphic as an algebra (in a non-unique way) to the algebra of complex matrices (by the Artin–Wedderburn theorem and the easy to prove fact that the Clifford algebra is central simple). If is odd, is isomorphic to the algebra of two copies of the complex matrices. Therefore, in either case has a unique (up to isomorphism) irreducible representation (also called simple Clifford module), commonly denoted by Δ, of dimension 2[&quot;n&quot;/2]. Since the Lie algebra is embedded as a Lie subalgebra in equipped with the Clifford algebra commutator as Lie bracket, the space Δ is also a Lie algebra representation of called a spin representation. If &quot;n&quot; is odd, this Lie algebra representation is irreducible. If &quot;n&quot; is even, it splits further into two irreducible representations called the Weyl or &quot;half-spin representations&quot;.

Irreducible representations over the reals in the case when &quot;V&quot; is a real vector space are much more intricate, and the reader is referred to the Clifford algebra article for more details.

=== Spin groups ===

Spinors form a vector space, usually over the complex numbers, equipped with a linear group representation of the spin group that does not factor through a representation of the group of rotations (see diagram). The spin group is the group of rotations keeping track of the homotopy class. Spinors are needed to encode basic information about the topology of the group of rotations because that group is not simply connected, but the simply connected spin group is its double cover. So for every rotation there are two elements of the spin group that represent it. Geometric vectors and other tensors cannot feel the difference between these two elements, but they produce &quot;opposite&quot; signs when they affect any spinor under the representation. Thinking of the elements of the spin group as homotopy classes of one-parameter families of rotations, each rotation is represented by two distinct homotopy classes of paths to the identity. If a one-parameter family of rotations is visualized as a ribbon in space, with the arc length parameter of that ribbon being the parameter (its tangent, normal, binormal frame actually gives the rotation), then these two distinct homotopy classes are visualized in the two states of the belt trick puzzle (above). The space of spinors is an auxiliary vector space that can be constructed explicitly in coordinates, but ultimately only exists up to isomorphism in that there is no &quot;natural&quot; construction of them that does not rely on arbitrary choices such as coordinate systems. A notion of spinors can be associated, as such an auxiliary mathematical object, with any vector space equipped with a quadratic form such as Euclidean space with its standard dot product, or Minkowski space with its Lorentz metric. In the latter case, the &quot;rotations&quot; include the Lorentz boosts, but otherwise the theory is substantially similar.

=== Spinor fields in physics ===
The constructions given above, in terms of Clifford algebra or representation theory, can be thought of as defining spinors as geometric objects in zero-dimensional space-time. To obtain the spinors of physics, such as the Dirac spinor, one extends the construction to obtain a spin structure on 4-dimensional space-time (Minkowski space). Effectively, one starts with the tangent manifold of space-time, each point of which is a 4-dimensional vector space with SO(3,1) symmetry, and then builds the spin group at each point. The neighborhoods of points are endowed with concepts of smoothness and differentiability: the standard construction is one of a fiber bundle, the fibers of which are affine spaces transforming under the spin group. After constructing the fiber bundle, one may then consider differential equations, such as the Dirac equation, or the Weyl equation on the fiber bundle. These equations (Dirac or Weyl) have solutions that are plane waves, having symmetries characteristic of the fibers, &quot;i.e.&quot; having the symmetries of spinors, as obtained from the (zero-dimensional) Clifford algebra/spin representation theory described above. Such plane-wave solutions (or other solutions) of the differential equations can then properly be called fermions; fermions have the algebraic qualities of spinors. By general convention, the terms &quot;fermion&quot; and &quot;spinor&quot; are often used interchangeably in physics, as synonyms of one-another.

It appears that all fundamental particles in nature that are spin-1/2 are described by the Dirac equation, with the possible exception of the neutrino. There does not seem to be any &quot;a priori&quot; reason why this would be the case. A perfectly valid choice for spinors would be the non-complexified version of , the Majorana spinor. There also does not seem to be any particular prohibition to having Weyl spinors appear in nature as fundamental particles.

The Dirac, Weyl, and Majorana spinors are interrelated, and their relation can be elucidated on the basis of real geometric algebra. Dirac and Weyl spinors are complex representations while Majorana spinors are real representations.

Weyl spinors are insufficient to describe massive particles, such as electrons, since the Weyl plane-wave solutions necessarily travel at the speed of light; for massive particles, the Dirac equation is needed. The initial construction of the Standard Model of particle physics starts with both the electron and the neutrino as massless Weyl spinors; the Higgs mechanism gives electrons a mass; the classical neutrino remained massless, and was thus an example of a Weyl spinor. However, because of observed neutrino oscillation, it is now believed that they are not Weyl spinors, but perhaps instead Majorana spinors. It is not known whether Weyl spinor fundamental particles exist in nature.

The situation for condensed matter physics is different: one can construct two and three-dimensional &quot;spacetimes&quot; in a large variety of different physical materials, ranging from semiconductors to far more exotic materials. In 2015, an international team led by Princeton University scientists announced that they had found a quasiparticle that behaves as a Weyl fermion.

=== Spinors in representation theory ===
One major mathematical application of the construction of spinors is to make possible the explicit construction of linear representations of the Lie algebras of the special orthogonal groups, and consequently spinor representations of the groups themselves. At a more profound level, spinors have been found to be at the heart of approaches to the Atiyah–Singer index theorem, and to provide constructions in particular for discrete series representations of semisimple groups.

The spin representations of the special orthogonal Lie algebras are distinguished from the tensor representations given by Weyl&#x27;s construction by the weights. Whereas the weights of the tensor representations are integer linear combinations of the roots of the Lie algebra, those of the spin representations are half-integer linear combinations thereof. Explicit details can be found in the spin representation article.

=== Attempts at intuitive understanding ===
The spinor can be described, in simple terms, as &quot;vectors of a space the transformations of which are related in a particular way to rotations in physical space&quot;. Stated differently:
Several ways of illustrating everyday analogies have been formulated in terms of the plate trick, tangloids and other examples of orientation entanglement.

Nonetheless, the concept is generally considered notoriously difficult to understand, as illustrated by Michael Atiyah&#x27;s statement that is recounted by Dirac&#x27;s biographer Graham Farmelo:
== History ==
The most general mathematical form of spinors was discovered by Élie Cartan in 1913. The word &quot;spinor&quot; was coined by Paul Ehrenfest in his work on quantum physics.

Spinors were first applied to mathematical physics by Wolfgang Pauli in 1927, when he introduced his spin matrices. The following year, Paul Dirac discovered the fully relativistic theory of electron spin by showing the connection between spinors and the Lorentz group. By the 1930s, Dirac, Piet Hein and others at the Niels Bohr Institute (then known as the Institute for Theoretical Physics of the University of Copenhagen) created toys such as Tangloids to teach and model the calculus of spinors.

Spinor spaces were represented as left ideals of a matrix algebra in 1930, by Gustave Juvett and by Fritz Sauter. More specifically, instead of representing spinors as complex-valued 2D column vectors as Pauli had done, they represented them as complex-valued 2 × 2 matrices in which only the elements of the left column are non-zero. In this manner the spinor space became a minimal left ideal in .

In 1947 Marcel Riesz constructed spinor spaces as elements of a minimal left ideal of Clifford algebras. In 1966/1967, David Hestenes replaced spinor spaces by the even subalgebra Cℓ01,3(formula_11) of the spacetime algebra Cℓ1,3(formula_11). As of the 1980s, the theoretical physics group at Birkbeck College around David Bohm and Basil Hiley has been developing algebraic approaches to quantum theory that build on Sauter and Riesz&#x27; identification of spinors with minimal left ideals.

== Examples ==
Some simple examples of spinors in low dimensions arise from considering the even-graded subalgebras of the Clifford algebra . This is an algebra built up from an orthonormal basis of mutually orthogonal vectors under addition and multiplication, &quot;p&quot; of which have norm +1 and &quot;q&quot; of which have norm −1, with the product rule for the basis vectors
formula_13

=== Two dimensions ===
The Clifford algebra Cℓ2,0(formula_11) is built up from a basis of one unit scalar, 1, two orthogonal unit vectors, &quot;σ&quot;1 and &quot;σ&quot;2, and one unit pseudoscalar . From the definitions above, it is evident that , and .

The even subalgebra Cℓ02,0(formula_11), spanned by &quot;even-graded&quot; basis elements of Cℓ2,0(formula_11), determines the space of spinors via its representations. It is made up of real linear combinations of 1 and &quot;σ&quot;1&quot;σ&quot;2. As a real algebra, Cℓ02,0(formula_11) is isomorphic to the field of complex numbers . As a result, it admits a conjugation operation (analogous to complex conjugation), sometimes called the &quot;reverse&quot; of a Clifford element, defined by
formula_18
which, by the Clifford relations, can be written
formula_19

The action of an even Clifford element on vectors, regarded as 1-graded elements of Cℓ2,0(formula_11), is determined by mapping a general vector to the vector
formula_21
where formula_22 is the conjugate of formula_23, and the product is Clifford multiplication. In this situation, a spinor is an ordinary complex number. The action of formula_23 on a spinor formula_25 is given by ordinary complex multiplication:
formula_26

An important feature of this definition is the distinction between ordinary vectors and spinors, manifested in how the even-graded elements act on each of them in different ways. In general, a quick check of the Clifford relations reveals that even-graded elements conjugate-commute with ordinary vectors:
formula_27

On the other hand, in comparison with its action on spinors formula_28, the action of formula_23 on ordinary vectors appears as the &quot;square&quot; of its action on spinors.

Consider, for example, the implication this has for plane rotations. Rotating a vector through an angle of &quot;θ&quot; corresponds to , so that the corresponding action on spinors is via . In general, because of logarithmic branching, it is impossible to choose a sign in a consistent way. Thus the representation of plane rotations on spinors is two-valued.

In applications of spinors in two dimensions, it is common to exploit the fact that the algebra of even-graded elements (that is just the ring of complex numbers) is identical to the space of spinors. So, by abuse of language, the two are often conflated. One may then talk about &quot;the action of a spinor on a vector&quot;. In a general setting, such statements are meaningless. But in dimensions 2 and 3 (as applied, for example, to computer graphics) they make sense.

====Examples====

* The even-graded element formula_30 corresponds to a vector rotation of 90° from &quot;σ&quot;1 around towards &quot;σ&quot;2, which can be checked by confirming that formula_31 It corresponds to a spinor rotation of only 45°, however: formula_32
* Similarly the even-graded element corresponds to a vector rotation of 180°: formula_33 but a spinor rotation of only 90°:formula_34
* Continuing on further, the even-graded element corresponds to a vector rotation of 360°: formula_35 but a spinor rotation of 180°.

=== Three dimensions ===
The Clifford algebra Cℓ3,0(formula_11) is built up from a basis of one unit scalar, 1, three orthogonal unit vectors, &quot;σ&quot;1, &quot;σ&quot;2 and &quot;σ&quot;3, the three unit bivectors &quot;σ&quot;1&quot;σ&quot;2, &quot;σ&quot;2&quot;σ&quot;3, &quot;σ&quot;3&quot;σ&quot;1 and the pseudoscalar . It is straightforward to show that , and .

The sub-algebra of even-graded elements is made up of scalar dilations,
formula_37
and vector rotations
formula_38
where

corresponds to a vector rotation through an angle &quot;θ&quot; about an axis defined by a unit vector .

As a special case, it is easy to see that, if , this reproduces the &quot;σ&quot;1&quot;σ&quot;2 rotation considered in the previous section; and that such rotation leaves the coefficients of vectors in the &quot;σ&quot;3 direction invariant, since

formula_39

The bivectors &quot;σ&quot;2&quot;σ&quot;3, &quot;σ&quot;3&quot;σ&quot;1 and &quot;σ&quot;1&quot;σ&quot;2 are in fact Hamilton&#x27;s quaternions i, j, and k, discovered in 1843:

formula_40

With the identification of the even-graded elements with the algebra formula_41 of quaternions, as in the case of two dimensions the only representation of the algebra of even-graded elements is on itself. Thus the (real) spinors in three-dimensions are quaternions, and the action of an even-graded element on a spinor is given by ordinary quaternionic multiplication.

Note that the expression (1) for a vector rotation through an angle , &quot;the angle appearing in γ was halved&quot;. Thus the spinor rotation (ordinary quaternionic multiplication) will rotate the spinor through an angle one-half the measure of the angle of the corresponding vector rotation. Once again, the problem of lifting a vector rotation to a spinor rotation is two-valued: the expression (1) with in place of &quot;θ&quot;/2 will produce the same vector rotation, but the negative of the spinor rotation.

The spinor/quaternion representation of rotations in 3D is becoming increasingly prevalent in computer geometry and other applications, because of the notable brevity of the corresponding spin matrix, and the simplicity with which they can be multiplied together to calculate the combined effect of successive rotations about different axes.

== Explicit constructions ==

A space of spinors can be constructed explicitly with concrete and abstract constructions. The
equivalence of these constructions is a consequence of the uniqueness of the spinor representation of the complex Clifford algebra. For a complete example in dimension 3, see spinors in three dimensions.

=== Component spinors ===

Given a vector space &quot;V&quot; and a quadratic form &quot;g&quot; an explicit matrix representation of the Clifford algebra can be defined as follows. Choose an orthonormal basis for &quot;V&quot; i.e. where and for . Let . Fix a set of matrices such that (i.e. fix a convention for the gamma matrices). Then the assignment extends uniquely to an algebra homomorphism by sending the monomial in the Clifford algebra to the product of matrices and extending linearly. The space formula_42 on which the gamma matrices act is now a space of spinors. One needs to construct such matrices explicitly, however. In dimension 3, defining the gamma matrices to be the Pauli sigma matrices gives rise to the familiar two component spinors used in non relativistic quantum mechanics. Likewise using the Dirac gamma matrices gives rise to the 4 component Dirac spinors used in 3+1 dimensional relativistic quantum field theory. In general, in order to define gamma matrices of the required kind, one can use the Weyl–Brauer matrices.

In this construction the representation of the Clifford algebra , the Lie algebra , and the Spin group , all depend on the choice of the orthonormal basis and the choice of the gamma matrices. This can cause confusion over conventions, but invariants like traces are independent of choices. In particular, all physically observable quantities must be independent of such choices. In this construction a spinor can be represented as a vector of 2&quot;k&quot; complex numbers and is denoted with spinor indices (usually &quot;α&quot;, &quot;β&quot;, &quot;γ&quot;). In the physics literature, such indices are often used to denote spinors even when an abstract spinor construction is used.

=== Abstract spinors ===
There are at least two different, but essentially equivalent, ways to define spinors abstractly. One approach seeks to identify the minimal ideals for the left action of on itself. These are subspaces of the Clifford algebra of the form , admitting the evident action of by left-multiplication: . There are two variations on this theme: one can either find a primitive element that is a nilpotent element of the Clifford algebra, or one that is an idempotent. The construction via nilpotent elements is more fundamental in the sense that an idempotent may then be produced from it. In this way, the spinor representations are identified with certain subspaces of the Clifford algebra itself. The second approach is to construct a vector space using a distinguished subspace of , and then specify the action of the Clifford algebra &quot;externally&quot; to that vector space.

In either approach, the fundamental notion is that of an isotropic subspace . Each construction depends on an initial freedom in choosing this subspace. In physical terms, this corresponds to the fact that there is no measurement protocol that can specify a basis of the spin space, even if a preferred basis of is given.

As above, we let be an -dimensional complex vector space equipped with a nondegenerate bilinear form. If is a real vector space, then we replace by its complexification formula_43 and let denote the induced bilinear form on formula_43. Let be a maximal isotropic subspace, i.e. a maximal subspace of such that . If is even, then let be an isotropic subspace complementary to . If is odd, let be a maximal isotropic subspace with , and let be the orthogonal complement of . In both the even- and odd-dimensional cases and have dimension . In the odd-dimensional case, is one-dimensional, spanned by a unit vector .

=== Minimal ideals ===
Since &quot;W&quot; is isotropic, multiplication of elements of &quot;W&quot; inside is skew. Hence vectors in &quot;W&quot; anti-commute, and is just the exterior algebra Λ∗&quot;W&quot;. Consequently, the &quot;k&quot;-fold product of &quot;W&quot; with itself, &quot;W&quot;&quot;k&quot;, is one-dimensional. Let &quot;ω&quot; be a generator of &quot;W&quot;&quot;k&quot;. In terms of a basis of in &quot;W&quot;, one possibility is to set
formula_45

Note that (i.e., &quot;ω&quot; is nilpotent of order 2), and moreover, for all . The following facts can be proven easily:
# If , then the left ideal is a minimal left ideal. Furthermore, this splits into the two spin spaces and on restriction to the action of the even Clifford algebra.
# If , then the action of the unit vector &quot;u&quot; on the left ideal decomposes the space into a pair of isomorphic irreducible eigenspaces (both denoted by Δ), corresponding to the respective eigenvalues +1 and −1.

In detail, suppose for instance that &quot;n&quot; is even. Suppose that &quot;I&quot; is a non-zero left ideal contained in . We shall show that &quot;I&quot; must be equal to by proving that it contains a nonzero scalar multiple of &quot;ω&quot;.

Fix a basis &quot;w&quot;&quot;i&quot; of &quot;W&quot; and a complementary basis &quot;w&quot;&quot;i&quot;′ of &quot;W&quot; so that

Note that any element of &quot;I&quot; must have the form &quot;αω&quot;, by virtue of our assumption that . Let be any such element. Using the chosen basis, we may write
formula_46
where the &quot;a&quot;&quot;i&quot;1...&quot;i&quot;&quot;p&quot; are scalars, and the &quot;B&quot;&quot;j&quot; are auxiliary elements of the Clifford algebra. Observe now that the product
formula_47
Pick any nonzero monomial &quot;a&quot; in the expansion of &quot;α&quot; with maximal homogeneous degree in the elements &quot;w&quot;i:
formula_48 (no summation implied),
then
formula_49
is a nonzero scalar multiple of &quot;ω&quot;, as required.

Note that for &quot;n&quot; even, this computation also shows that
formula_50
as a vector space. In the last equality we again used that &quot;W&quot; is isotropic. In physics terms, this shows that Δ is built up like a Fock space by creating spinors using anti-commuting creation operators in &quot;W&quot; acting on a vacuum &quot;ω&quot;.

=== Exterior algebra construction ===
The computations with the minimal ideal construction suggest that a spinor representation can
also be defined directly using the exterior algebra of the isotropic subspace &quot;W&quot;.
Let denote the exterior algebra of &quot;W&quot; considered as vector space only. This will be the spin representation, and its elements will be referred to as spinors.

The action of the Clifford algebra on Δ is defined first by giving the action of an element of &quot;V&quot; on Δ, and then showing that this action respects the Clifford relation and so extends to a homomorphism of the full Clifford algebra into the endomorphism ring End(Δ) by the universal property of Clifford algebras. The details differ slightly according to whether the dimension of &quot;V&quot; is even or odd.

When dim() is even, where &quot;W&quot; is the chosen isotropic complement. Hence any decomposes uniquely as with and . The action of on a spinor is given by
formula_51
where &quot;i&quot;(&quot;w&quot;) is interior product with &quot;w&quot; using the nondegenerate quadratic form to identify &quot;V&quot; with &quot;V&quot;∗, and &quot;ε&quot;(&quot;w&quot;) denotes the exterior product. This action is sometimes called the Clifford product. It may be verified that
formula_52
and so respects the Clifford relations and extends to a homomorphism from the Clifford algebra to End(Δ).

The spin representation Δ further decomposes into a pair of irreducible complex representations of the Spin group (the half-spin representations, or Weyl spinors) via
formula_53

When dim(&quot;V&quot;) is odd, , where &quot;U&quot; is spanned by a unit vector &quot;u&quot; orthogonal to &quot;W&quot;. The Clifford action &quot;c&quot; is defined as before on , while the Clifford action of (multiples of) &quot;u&quot; is defined by
formula_54
As before, one verifies that &quot;c&quot; respects the Clifford relations, and so induces a homomorphism.

=== Hermitian vector spaces and spinors ===
If the vector space &quot;V&quot; has extra structure that provides a decomposition of its complexification into two maximal isotropic subspaces, then the definition of spinors (by either method) becomes natural.

The main example is the case that the real vector space &quot;V&quot; is a hermitian vector space , i.e., &quot;V&quot; is equipped with a complex structure &quot;J&quot; that is an orthogonal transformation with respect to the inner product &quot;g&quot; on &quot;V&quot;. Then formula_43 splits in the eigenspaces of &quot;J&quot;. These eigenspaces are isotropic for the complexification of &quot;g&quot; and can be identified with the complex vector space and its complex conjugate . Therefore, for a hermitian vector space the vector space formula_56 (as well as its complex conjugate formula_57) is a spinor space for the underlying real euclidean vector space.

With the Clifford action as above but with contraction using the hermitian form, this construction gives a spinor space at every point of an almost Hermitian manifold and is the reason why every almost complex manifold (in particular every symplectic manifold) has a Spinc structure. Likewise, every complex vector bundle on a manifold carries a Spinc structure.

== Clebsch–Gordan decomposition ==
A number of Clebsch–Gordan decompositions are possible on the tensor product of one spin representation with another. These decompositions express the tensor product in terms of the alternating representations of the orthogonal group.

For the real or complex case, the alternating representations are
* , the representation of the orthogonal group on skew tensors of rank &quot;r&quot;.

In addition, for the real orthogonal groups, there are three characters (one-dimensional representations)
* &quot;σ&quot;+ : O(&quot;p&quot;, &quot;q&quot;) → {−1, +1} given by , if &quot;R&quot; reverses the spatial orientation of &quot;V&quot;, +1, if &quot;R&quot; preserves the spatial orientation of &quot;V&quot;. (&quot;The spatial character&quot;.)
* &quot;σ&quot;− : O(&quot;p&quot;, &quot;q&quot;) → {−1, +1} given by , if &quot;R&quot; reverses the temporal orientation of &quot;V&quot;, +1, if &quot;R&quot; preserves the temporal orientation of &quot;V&quot;. (&quot;The temporal character&quot;.)
* &quot;σ&quot; = &quot;σ&quot;+&quot;σ&quot;− . (&quot;The orientation character&quot;.)

The Clebsch–Gordan decomposition allows one to define, among other things:
* An action of spinors on vectors.
* A Hermitian metric on the complex representations of the real spin groups.
* A Dirac operator on each spin representation.

=== Even dimensions ===
If is even, then the tensor product of Δ with the contragredient representation decomposes as
formula_58
which can be seen explicitly by considering (in the Explicit construction) the action of the Clifford algebra on decomposable elements . The rightmost formulation follows from the transformation properties of the Hodge star operator. Note that on restriction to the even Clifford algebra, the paired summands are isomorphic, but under the full Clifford algebra they are not.

There is a natural identification of Δ with its contragredient representation via the conjugation in the Clifford algebra:
formula_59
So also decomposes in the above manner. Furthermore, under the even Clifford algebra, the half-spin representations decompose
formula_60

For the complex representations of the real Clifford algebras, the associated reality structure on the complex Clifford algebra descends to the space of spinors (via the explicit construction in terms of minimal ideals, for instance). In this way, we obtain the complex conjugate of the representation Δ, and the following isomorphism is seen to hold:
formula_61

In particular, note that the representation Δ of the orthochronous spin group is a unitary representation. In general, there are Clebsch–Gordan decompositions
formula_62

In metric signature , the following isomorphisms hold for the conjugate half-spin representations
* If &quot;q&quot; is even, then formula_63 and formula_64
* If &quot;q&quot; is odd, then formula_65 and formula_66
Using these isomorphisms, one can deduce analogous decompositions for the tensor products of the half-spin representations .

=== Odd dimensions ===
If is odd, then
formula_67
In the real case, once again the isomorphism holds
formula_68
Hence there is a Clebsch–Gordan decomposition (again using the Hodge star to dualize) given by
formula_69

=== Consequences ===
There are many far-reaching consequences of the Clebsch–Gordan decompositions of the spinor spaces. The most fundamental of these pertain to Dirac&#x27;s theory of the electron, among whose basic requirements are
* A manner of regarding the product of two spinors &quot;ψ&quot; as a scalar. In physical terms, a spinor should determine a probability amplitude for the quantum state.
* A manner of regarding the product &quot;ψ&quot; as a vector. This is an essential feature of Dirac&#x27;s theory, which ties the spinor formalism to the geometry of physical space.
* A manner of regarding a spinor as acting upon a vector, by an expression such as &quot;ψv&quot;. In physical terms, this represents an electric current of Maxwell&#x27;s electromagnetic theory, or more generally a probability current.

== Summary in low dimensions ==
* In 1 dimension (a trivial example), the single spinor representation is formally Majorana, a real 1-dimensional representation that does not transform.
* In 2 Euclidean dimensions, the left-handed and the right-handed Weyl spinor are 1-component complex representations, i.e. complex numbers that get multiplied by &quot;e&quot;±&quot;iφ&quot;/2 under a rotation by angle &quot;φ&quot;.
* In 3 Euclidean dimensions, the single spinor representation is 2-dimensional and quaternionic. The existence of spinors in 3 dimensions follows from the isomorphism of the groups that allows us to define the action of Spin(3) on a complex 2-component column (a spinor); the generators of SU(2) can be written as Pauli matrices.
* In 4 Euclidean dimensions, the corresponding isomorphism is . There are two inequivalent quaternionic 2-component Weyl spinors and each of them transforms under one of the SU(2) factors only.
* In 5 Euclidean dimensions, the relevant isomorphism is that implies that the single spinor representation is 4-dimensional and quaternionic.
* In 6 Euclidean dimensions, the isomorphism guarantees that there are two 4-dimensional complex Weyl representations that are complex conjugates of one another.
* In 7 Euclidean dimensions, the single spinor representation is 8-dimensional and real; no isomorphisms to a Lie algebra from another series (A or C) exist from this dimension on.
* In 8 Euclidean dimensions, there are two Weyl–Majorana real 8-dimensional representations that are related to the 8-dimensional real vector representation by a special property of Spin(8) called triality.
* In dimensions, the number of distinct irreducible spinor representations and their reality (whether they are real, pseudoreal, or complex) mimics the structure in &quot;d&quot; dimensions, but their dimensions are 16 times larger; this allows one to understand all remaining cases. See Bott periodicity.
* In spacetimes with &quot;p&quot; spatial and &quot;q&quot; time-like directions, the dimensions viewed as dimensions over the complex numbers coincide with the case of the -dimensional Euclidean space, but the reality projections mimic the structure in Euclidean dimensions. For example, in dimensions there are two non-equivalent Weyl complex (like in 2 dimensions) 2-component (like in 4 dimensions) spinors, which follows from the isomorphism .

== See also ==

* Anyon
* Dirac equation in the algebra of physical space
* Eigenspinor
* Einstein–Cartan theory
* Projective representation
* Pure spinor
* Spin-1/2
* Spinor bundle
* Supercharge
* Twistor theory
* Spacetime algebra
== Notes ==
== References ==
== Works cited ==
* 
* 
* 
* 

==Further reading==
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q604907" start="25" end="32" title="Spinor" label="spinors"/>
<link wikidata="Q11567" start="89" end="96" title="complex numbers" label="complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q125977" start="97" end="109" title="vector space" label="vector space"/>
<link wikidata="Q17295" start="138" end="153" title="Euclidean space" label="Euclidean space"/>
<link wikidata="Q10310534" start="235" end="248" title="infinitesimal transformation" label="infinitesimal"/>
<link wikidata="Q44528" start="271" end="288" title="Euclidean vector" label="geometric vectors"/>
<link wikidata="Q188524" start="293" end="299" title="tensor" label="tensor"/>
<link wikidata="Q11703678" start="673" end="681" title="Section (fiber bundle)" label="sections"/>
<link wikidata="Q658429" start="685" end="698" title="vector bundle" label="vector bundle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196652" start="721" end="737" title="exterior algebra" label="exterior algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142143" start="752" end="768" title="cotangent bundle" label="cotangent bundle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047080" start="815" end="832" title="differential form" label="differential form"/>
<link wikidata="Q464794" start="914" end="929" title="Minkowski space" label="Minkowski space"/>
<link wikidata="Q217255" start="949" end="971" title="Lorentz transformation" label="Lorentz transformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11455" start="976" end="994" title="special relativity" label="special relativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q274639" start="1062" end="1073" title="Élie Cartan" label="Élie Cartan"/>
<link wikidata="Q133673" start="1161" end="1187" title="intrinsic angular momentum" label="intrinsic angular momentum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2225" start="1217" end="1225" title="electron" label="electron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783179" start="1501" end="1515" title="rotation group" label="rotation group"/>
<link wikidata="Q746083" start="1571" end="1585" title="homotopy class" label="homotopy class"/>
<link wikidata="Q17099574" start="1680" end="1690" title="belt trick" label="belt trick"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031467" start="1781" end="1791" title="spin group" label="spin group"/>
<link wikidata="Q13220368" start="2039" end="2060" title="linear representation" label="linear representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q288465" start="2120" end="2123" title="Group action (mathematics)" label="act"/>
<link wikidata="Q7249476" start="2294" end="2319" title="projective representation" label="projective representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256500" start="2342" end="2347" title="SO(3)" label="SO(3)"/>
<link wikidata="Q664495" start="2453" end="2464" title="Lie algebra" label="Lie algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q674689" start="2595" end="2611" title="Clifford algebra" label="Clifford algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q744960" start="2640" end="2659" title="associative algebra" label="associative algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411166" start="3041" end="3052" title="Orthonormality" label="orthonormal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151645" start="3136" end="3150" title="gamma matrices" label="gamma matrices"/>
<link wikidata="Q20294235" start="3241" end="3255" title="column vectors" label="column vectors"/>
<link wikidata="Q336233" start="3334" end="3353" title="Pauli spin matrices" label="Pauli spin matrices"/>
<link wikidata="Q13690522" start="3793" end="3804" title="irreducible representation" label="irreducible"/>
<link wikidata="Q44528" start="4025" end="4041" title="geometric vector" label="geometric vector"/>
<link wikidata="Q188524" start="4453" end="4459" title="tensor" label="tensor"/>
<link wikidata="Q13409892" start="4506" end="4512" title="Cauchy stress tensor" label="stress"/>
<link wikidata="Q170058" start="4918" end="4930" title="continuous function" label="continuously"/>
<link wikidata="Q42989" start="5495" end="5508" title="topology" label="topologically"/>
<link wikidata="Q746083" start="5666" end="5680" title="homotopy class" label="homotopy class"/>
<link wikidata="Q17099574" start="5710" end="5720" title="belt trick" label="belt trick"/>
<link wikidata="Q62912" start="6223" end="6244" title="Cartesian coordinates" label="Cartesian coordinates"/>
<link wikidata="Q336233" start="6340" end="6359" title="Pauli spin matrices" label="Pauli spin matrices"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190143" start="6378" end="6393" title="angular momentum operator" label="angular momenta"/>
<link wikidata="Q11567" start="6456" end="6463" title="complex number" label="complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q20294235" start="6503" end="6516" title="column vector" label="column vector"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049914" start="6549" end="6570" title="matrix multiplication" label="matrix multiplication"/>
<link wikidata="Q727103" start="6651" end="6667" title="unitary matrix" label="unitary matrices"/>
<link wikidata="Q178546" start="6673" end="6684" title="determinant" label="determinant"/>
<link wikidata="Q736753" start="7071" end="7085" title="quadratic form" label="quadratic form"/>
<link wikidata="Q17295" start="7095" end="7110" title="Euclidean space" label="Euclidean space"/>
<link wikidata="Q464794" start="7144" end="7159" title="Minkowski space" label="Minkowski space"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031467" start="7198" end="7214" title="spin group" label="space of spinors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142562" start="7599" end="7615" title="metric signature" label="metric signature"/>
<link wikidata="Q13690522" start="7670" end="7681" title="irreducible representation" label="irreducible"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151645" start="7863" end="7877" title="gamma matrices" label="gamma matrices"/>
<link wikidata="Q3427416" start="7958" end="7984" title="fundamental representation" label="fundamental representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q674689" start="7992" end="8008" title="Clifford algebra" label="Clifford algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q17103552" start="8122" end="8141" title="spin representation" label="spin representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783179" start="8149" end="8171" title="orthogonal Lie algebra" label="orthogonal Lie algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055807" start="8420" end="8440" title="group representation" label="group representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031467" start="8448" end="8458" title="spin group" label="spin group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195852" start="8472" end="8478" title="center of a group" label="center"/>
<link wikidata="Q13220368" start="8745" end="8769" title="representation theory" label="representation theoretic"/>
<link wikidata="Q664495" start="8849" end="8860" title="Lie algebra" label="Lie algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783179" start="8868" end="8884" title="orthogonal group" label="orthogonal group"/>
<link wikidata="Q17103552" start="8993" end="9012" title="spin representation" label="spin representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055807" start="9101" end="9115" title="group representation" label="representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q332648" start="9123" end="9135" title="covering space" label="double cover"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783179" start="9143" end="9157" title="special orthogonal group" label="rotation group"/>
<link wikidata="Q11061828" start="9203" end="9239" title="generalized special orthogonal group" label="generalized special orthogonal group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142562" start="9257" end="9273" title="metric signature" label="metric signature"/>
<link wikidata="Q622679" start="9303" end="9313" title="Lie groups" label="Lie groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031467" start="9326" end="9336" title="spin group" label="spin group"/>
<link wikidata="Q7249476" start="9531" end="9556" title="projective representation" label="projective representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5447297" start="10329" end="10345" title="Fierz identity" label="Fierz identities"/>
<link wikidata="Q674689" start="10402" end="10418" title="Clifford algebra" label="Clifford algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186649" start="10438" end="10455" title="geometric algebra" label="geometric algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q662523" start="10607" end="10642" title="classification of Clifford algebras" label="classification of Clifford algebras"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151645" start="11006" end="11011" title="gamma matrices" label="gamma"/>
<link wikidata="Q336233" start="11015" end="11029" title="Pauli matrices" label="Pauli matrices"/>
<link wikidata="Q776578" start="11432" end="11456" title="Artin–Wedderburn theorem" label="Artin–Wedderburn theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q2428439" start="11513" end="11527" title="central simple algebra" label="central simple"/>
<link wikidata="Q7879936" start="11715" end="11730" title="Clifford module" label="Clifford module"/>
<link wikidata="Q2989763" start="11881" end="11891" title="commutator" label="commutator"/>
<link wikidata="Q17103552" start="11969" end="11988" title="spin representation" label="spin representation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12359" end="12375" title="Clifford algebra#Spinors" label="Clifford algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q125977" start="12439" end="12451" title="vector space" label="vector space"/>
<link wikidata="Q11567" start="12470" end="12485" title="complex numbers" label="complex numbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055807" start="12510" end="12530" title="group representation" label="group representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031467" start="12538" end="12548" title="spin group" label="spin group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783179" start="12658" end="12676" title="special orthogonal group" label="group of rotations"/>
<link wikidata="Q912058" start="12832" end="12848" title="simply connected" label="simply connected"/>
<link wikidata="Q5179253" start="12893" end="12905" title="Double covering group" label="double cover"/>
<link wikidata="Q44528" start="12989" end="13005" title="Geometric vector" label="Geometric vector"/>
<link wikidata="Q188524" start="13017" end="13023" title="tensor" label="tensor"/>
<link wikidata="Q746083" start="13224" end="13240" title="homotopy classes" label="homotopy classes"/>
<link wikidata="Q17099574" start="13657" end="13667" title="belt trick" label="belt trick"/>
<link wikidata="Q736753" start="14078" end="14092" title="quadratic form" label="quadratic form"/>
<link wikidata="Q17295" start="14101" end="14116" title="Euclidean space" label="Euclidean space"/>
<link wikidata="Q181365" start="14135" end="14146" title="dot product" label="dot product"/>
<link wikidata="Q464794" start="14151" end="14166" title="Minkowski space" label="Minkowski space"/>
<link wikidata="Q1510587" start="14176" end="14190" title="Lorentz metric" label="Lorentz metric"/>
<link wikidata="Q217255" start="14250" end="14263" title="Lorentz boost" label="Lorentz boost"/>
<link wikidata="Q133327" start="14516" end="14526" title="space-time" label="space-time"/>
<link wikidata="Q688945" start="14574" end="14586" title="Dirac spinor" label="Dirac spinor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7577418" start="14629" end="14643" title="spin structure" label="spin structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q464794" start="14673" end="14688" title="Minkowski space" label="Minkowski space"/>
<link wikidata="Q746550" start="14724" end="14740" title="tangent manifold" label="tangent manifold"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031467" start="14851" end="14861" title="spin group" label="spin group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154996" start="15006" end="15018" title="fiber bundle" label="fiber bundle"/>
<link wikidata="Q272621" start="15188" end="15202" title="Dirac equation" label="Dirac equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2566340" start="15211" end="15224" title="Weyl equation" label="Weyl equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q122518" start="15302" end="15312" title="plane wave" label="plane wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q44363" start="15620" end="15627" title="fermion" label="fermion"/>
<link wikidata="Q43116" start="15848" end="15868" title="fundamental particle" label="fundamental particle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2126" start="15970" end="15978" title="neutrino" label="neutrino"/>
<link wikidata="Q2727849" start="16150" end="16165" title="Majorana spinor" label="Majorana spinor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2566340" start="16235" end="16246" title="Weyl spinor" label="Weyl spinor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2225" start="16595" end="16603" title="electron" label="electron"/>
<link wikidata="Q272621" start="16711" end="16725" title="Dirac equation" label="Dirac equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q18338" start="16769" end="16783" title="Standard Model" label="Standard Model"/>
<link wikidata="Q747702" start="16881" end="16896" title="Higgs mechanism" label="Higgs mechanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2126" start="16935" end="16943" title="neutrino" label="neutrino"/>
<link wikidata="Q509021" start="17034" end="17054" title="neutrino oscillation" label="neutrino oscillation"/>
<link wikidata="Q214781" start="17239" end="17263" title="condensed matter physics" label="condensed matter physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q11456" start="17410" end="17423" title="semiconductor" label="semiconductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q21578" start="17493" end="17513" title="Princeton University" label="Princeton University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047683" start="17557" end="17570" title="quasiparticle" label="quasiparticle"/>
<link wikidata="Q13220368" start="17760" end="17781" title="linear representation" label="linear representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q664495" start="17790" end="17801" title="Lie algebra" label="Lie algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783179" start="17810" end="17834" title="special orthogonal group" label="special orthogonal group"/>
<link wikidata="Q755991" start="17993" end="18020" title="Atiyah–Singer index theorem" label="Atiyah–Singer index theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282059" start="18069" end="18084" title="discrete series" label="discrete series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006450" start="18104" end="18120" title="semisimple group" label="semisimple group"/>
<link wikidata="Q188524" start="18215" end="18221" title="tensor" label="tensor"/>
<link wikidata="Q8058560" start="18247" end="18271" title="Young symmetrizer" label="Weyl&amp;#x27;s construction"/>
<link wikidata="Q7979858" start="18279" end="18286" title="weight (representation theory)" label="weights"/>
<link wikidata="Q17103552" start="18520" end="18539" title="spin representation" label="spin representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q17099574" start="18872" end="18883" title="plate trick" label="plate trick"/>
<link wikidata="Q7683062" start="18885" end="18894" title="tangloids" label="tangloids"/>
<link wikidata="Q7102407" start="18917" end="18941" title="orientation entanglement" label="orientation entanglement"/>
<link wikidata="Q208356" start="19048" end="19062" title="Michael Atiyah" label="Michael Atiyah"/>
<link wikidata="Q274639" start="19219" end="19230" title="Élie Cartan" label="Élie Cartan"/>
<link wikidata="Q84227" start="19282" end="19296" title="Paul Ehrenfest" label="Paul Ehrenfest"/>
<link wikidata="Q944" start="19312" end="19327" title="quantum physics" label="quantum physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q156495" start="19360" end="19380" title="mathematical physics" label="mathematical physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q65989" start="19384" end="19398" title="Wolfgang Pauli" label="Wolfgang Pauli"/>
<link wikidata="Q336233" start="19431" end="19444" title="Pauli matrices" label="spin matrices"/>
<link wikidata="Q47480" start="19466" end="19476" title="Paul Dirac" label="Paul Dirac"/>
<link wikidata="Q11455" start="19498" end="19510" title="special relativity" label="relativistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2225" start="19521" end="19529" title="electron" label="electron"/>
<link wikidata="Q133673" start="19530" end="19534" title="Spin (physics)" label="spin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334417" start="19585" end="19598" title="Lorentz group" label="Lorentz group"/>
<link wikidata="Q359592" start="19621" end="19630" title="Piet Hein (Denmark)" label="Piet Hein"/>
<link wikidata="Q263761" start="19649" end="19669" title="Niels Bohr Institute" label="Niels Bohr Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q7683062" start="19777" end="19786" title="Tangloids" label="Tangloids"/>
<link wikidata="Q44649" start="19866" end="19876" title="left ideal" label="left ideal"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19910" end="19924" title="Gustave Juvett" label="Gustave Juvett"/>
<link wikidata="Q86211" start="19932" end="19944" title="Fritz Sauter" label="Fritz Sauter"/>
<link wikidata="Q17098947" start="20208" end="20226" title="minimal ideal" label="minimal left ideal"/>
<link wikidata="Q45099" start="20241" end="20253" title="Marcel Riesz" label="Marcel Riesz"/>
<link wikidata="Q674689" start="20319" end="20335" title="Clifford algebra" label="Clifford algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1174726" start="20352" end="20366" title="David Hestenes" label="David Hestenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3977654" start="20397" end="20412" title="even subalgebra" label="even subalgebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q7572735" start="20439" end="20456" title="spacetime algebra" label="spacetime algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q375606" start="20526" end="20542" title="Birkbeck College" label="Birkbeck College"/>
<link wikidata="Q310765" start="20550" end="20560" title="David Bohm" label="David Bohm"/>
<link wikidata="Q4867187" start="20565" end="20576" title="Basil Hiley" label="Basil Hiley"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20597" end="20635" title="Basil Hiley#Implicate orders, pre-space and algebraic structures" label="algebraic approaches to quantum theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748985" start="21308" end="21320" title="pseudoscalar" label="pseudoscalar"/>
<link wikidata="Q11567" start="21697" end="21712" title="complex numbers" label="complex numbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q381040" start="21776" end="21795" title="complex conjugate" label="complex conjugation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625091" start="23082" end="23103" title="branch cut" label="logarithmic branching"/>
<link wikidata="Q842159" start="23438" end="23455" title="abuse of notation" label="abuse of language"/>
<link wikidata="Q7600677" start="23668" end="23685" title="computer graphics" label="computer graphics"/>
<link wikidata="Q336233" start="24382" end="24431" title="Pauli matrices" label="&amp;quot;σ&amp;quot;1, &amp;quot;σ&amp;quot;2 and &amp;quot;σ&amp;quot;3"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748985" start="24555" end="24567" title="pseudoscalar" label="pseudoscalar"/>
<link wikidata="Q11887" start="25222" end="25237" title="William Rowan Hamilton" label="Hamilton&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q173853" start="25238" end="25248" title="quaternion" label="quaternion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7577646" start="26827" end="26854" title="spinors in three dimensions" label="spinors in three dimensions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151645" start="27175" end="27189" title="gamma matrices" label="gamma matrices"/>
<link wikidata="Q336233" start="27547" end="27567" title="Pauli matrices" label="Pauli sigma matrices"/>
<link wikidata="Q944" start="27642" end="27659" title="quantum mechanics" label="quantum mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q54505" start="27782" end="27802" title="quantum field theory" label="quantum field theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7990340" start="27888" end="27908" title="Weyl–Brauer matrices" label="Weyl–Brauer matrices"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166872" start="28508" end="28515" title="abstract indices" label="indices"/>
<link wikidata="Q840023" start="29013" end="29022" title="nilpotent" label="nilpotent"/>
<link wikidata="Q368988" start="29074" end="29084" title="idempotent" label="idempotent"/>
<link wikidata="Q4968811" start="29560" end="29578" title="isotropic subspace" label="isotropic subspace"/>
<link wikidata="Q445569" start="29978" end="29994" title="complexification" label="complexification"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165111" start="30552" end="30556" title="alternative algebra" label="skew"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196652" start="30619" end="30635" title="exterior algebra" label="exterior algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q899044" start="32670" end="32680" title="Fock space" label="Fock space"/>
<link wikidata="Q902336" start="32684" end="32692" title="creation and annihilation" label="creating"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196652" start="32960" end="32976" title="exterior algebra" label="exterior algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q215111" start="33388" end="33400" title="homomorphism" label="homomorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2896709" start="33439" end="33456" title="endomorphism ring" label="endomorphism ring"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="33471" end="33510" title="Clifford algebra#Universal property and construction" label="universal property of Clifford algebras"/>
<link wikidata="Q767667" start="33816" end="33832" title="interior product" label="interior product"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196652" start="33983" end="33999" title="exterior product" label="exterior product"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931224" start="35085" end="35107" title="hermitian form" label="hermitian vector space"/>
<link wikidata="Q6553426" start="35149" end="35166" title="Linear complex structure" label="complex structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q3997740" start="35192" end="35217" title="orthogonal transformation" label="orthogonal transformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5741935" start="35820" end="35845" title="almost Hermitian manifold" label="almost Hermitian manifold"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995691" start="35874" end="35897" title="almost complex manifold" label="almost complex manifold"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064500" start="35919" end="35938" title="symplectic manifold" label="symplectic manifold"/>
<link wikidata="Q7577418" start="35946" end="35961" title="Spin-c structure" label="Spinc structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q898619" start="36090" end="36119" title="Clebsch–Gordan coefficients" label="Clebsch–Gordan decompositions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163016" start="36140" end="36154" title="tensor product" label="tensor product"/>
<link wikidata="Q600043" start="36528" end="36538" title="character theory" label="characters"/>
<link wikidata="Q5741935" start="37283" end="37299" title="Hermitian metric" label="Hermitian metric"/>
<link wikidata="Q907439" start="37360" end="37374" title="Dirac operator" label="Dirac operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q3427408" start="37479" end="37508" title="contragredient representation" label="contragredient representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1622692" start="37747" end="37766" title="Hodge star operator" label="Hodge star operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q7301171" start="38260" end="38277" title="reality structure" label="reality structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q10359539" start="38629" end="38651" title="unitary representation" label="unitary representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q653850" start="39636" end="39657" title="probability amplitude" label="probability amplitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q230883" start="39666" end="39679" title="quantum state" label="quantum state"/>
<link wikidata="Q11651" start="40001" end="40017" title="electric current" label="electric current"/>
<link wikidata="Q11406" start="40036" end="40058" title="electromagnetic theory" label="electromagnetic theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q903501" start="40080" end="40099" title="probability current" label="probability current"/>
<link wikidata="Q7301169" start="40229" end="40233" title="real representation" label="real"/>
<link wikidata="Q5156598" start="40382" end="40404" title="complex representation" label="complex representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7269569" start="40606" end="40618" title="quaternionic representation" label="quaternionic"/>
<link wikidata="Q83478" start="40697" end="40703" title="group (mathematics)" label="groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q336233" start="40837" end="40851" title="Pauli matrices" label="Pauli matrices"/>
<link wikidata="Q7269569" start="40944" end="40956" title="quaternionic representation" label="quaternionic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7391963" start="41715" end="41722" title="Spin(8)" label="Spin(8)"/>
<link wikidata="Q17104294" start="41730" end="41738" title="triality" label="triality"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948983" start="42028" end="42044" title="Bott periodicity" label="Bott periodicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q5528" start="42515" end="42520" title="Anyon" label="Anyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2893020" start="42523" end="42570" title="Dirac equation in the algebra of physical space" label="Dirac equation in the algebra of physical space"/>
<link wikidata="Q5348912" start="42573" end="42584" title="Eigenspinor" label="Eigenspinor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067602" start="42587" end="42609" title="Einstein–Cartan theory" label="Einstein–Cartan theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7249476" start="42612" end="42637" title="Projective representation" label="Projective representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7261160" start="42640" end="42651" title="Pure spinor" label="Pure spinor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118037" start="42654" end="42662" title="Spin-1/2" label="Spin-1/2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049915" start="42665" end="42678" title="Spinor bundle" label="Spinor bundle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3977695" start="42681" end="42692" title="Supercharge" label="Supercharge"/>
<link wikidata="Q279082" start="42695" end="42709" title="Twistor theory" label="Twistor theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7572735" start="42712" end="42729" title="Spacetime algebra" label="Spacetime algebra"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="29278" wikidata="Q6496962" url="?curid=29278" title="Safety engineering">
<text>Safety engineering is an engineering discipline which assures that engineered systems provide acceptable levels of safety. It is strongly related to industrial engineering/systems engineering, and the subset system safety engineering. Safety engineering assures that a life-critical system behaves as needed, even when components fail.

==Analysis techniques==
Analysis techniques can be split into two categories: qualitative and quantitative methods. Both approaches share the goal of finding causal dependencies between a hazard on system level and failures of individual components. Qualitative approaches focus on the question &quot;What must go wrong, such that a system hazard may occur?&quot;, while quantitative methods aim at providing estimations about probabilities, rates and/or severity of consequences.

The complexity of the technical systems such as Improvements of Design and Materials, Planned Inspections, Fool-proof design, and Backup Redundancy decreases risk and increases the cost. The risk can be decreased to ALARA (as low as reasonably achievable) or ALAPA (as low as practically achievable) levels.

Traditionally, safety analysis techniques rely solely on skill and expertise of the safety engineer. In the last decade model-based approaches, like STPA (Systems Theoretic Process Analysis), have become prominent. In contrast to traditional methods, model-based techniques try to derive relationships between causes and consequences from some sort of model of the system.

===Traditional methods for safety analysis===
The two most common fault modeling techniques are called failure mode and effects analysis (FMEA) and fault tree analysis (FTA). These techniques are just ways of finding problems and of making plans to cope with failures, as in probabilistic risk assessment. One of the earliest complete studies using this technique on a commercial nuclear plant was the WASH-1400 study, also known as the Reactor Safety Study or the Rasmussen Report.

====Failure modes and effects analysis====

Failure Mode and Effects Analysis (FMEA) is a bottom-up, inductive analytical method which may be performed at either the functional or piece-part level. For functional FMEA, failure modes are identified for each function in a system or equipment item, usually with the help of a functional block diagram. For piece-part FMEA, failure modes are identified for each piece-part component (such as a valve, connector, resistor, or diode). The effects of the failure mode are described, and assigned a probability based on the failure rate and failure mode ratio of the function or component. This quantization is difficult for software ---a bug exists or not, and the failure models used for hardware components do not apply. Temperature and age and manufacturing variability affect a resistor; they do not affect software.

Failure modes with identical effects can be combined and summarized in a Failure Mode Effects Summary. When combined with criticality analysis, FMEA is known as Failure Mode, Effects, and Criticality Analysis or FMECA.

====Fault tree analysis====

Fault tree analysis (FTA) is a top-down, deductive analytical method. In FTA, initiating primary events such as component failures, human errors, and external events are traced through Boolean logic gates to an undesired top event such as an aircraft crash or nuclear reactor core melt. The intent is to identify ways to make top events less probable, and verify that safety goals have been achieved.

Fault trees are a logical inverse of success trees, and may be obtained by applying de Morgan&#x27;s theorem to success trees (which are directly related to reliability block diagrams).

FTA may be qualitative or quantitative. When failure and event probabilities are unknown, qualitative fault trees may be analyzed for minimal cut sets. For example, if any minimal cut set contains a single base event, then the top event may be caused by a single failure. Quantitative FTA is used to compute top event probability, and usually requires computer software such as CAFTA from the Electric Power Research Institute or SAPHIRE from the Idaho National Laboratory.

Some industries use both fault trees and event trees. An event tree starts from an undesired initiator (loss of critical supply, component failure etc.) and follows possible further system events through to a series of final consequences. As each new event is considered, a new node on the tree is added with a split of probabilities of taking either branch. The probabilities of a range of &quot;top events&quot; arising from the initial event can then be seen.

=== Oil and gas industry offshore (API 14C; ISO 10418) ===
The offshore oil and gas industry uses a qualitative safety systems analysis technique to ensure the protection of offshore production systems and platforms. The analysis is used during the design phase to identify process engineering hazards together with risk mitigation measures. The methodology is described in the American Petroleum Institute Recommended Practice 14C &quot;Analysis, Design, Installation, and Testing of Basic Surface Safety Systems for Offshore Production Platforms.&quot;

The technique uses system analysis methods to determine the safety requirements to protect any individual process component, e.g. a vessel, pipeline, or pump. The safety requirements of individual components are integrated into a complete platform safety system, including liquid containment and emergency support systems such as fire and gas detection.

The first stage of the analysis identifies individual process components, these can include: flowlines, headers, pressure vessels, atmospheric vessels, fired heaters, exhaust heated components, pumps, compressors, pipelines and heat exchangers. Each component is subject to a safety analysis to identify undesirable events (equipment failure, process upsets, etc.) for which protection must be provided. The analysis also identifies a detectable condition (e.g. high pressure) which is used to initiate actions to prevent or minimize the effect of undesirable events. A Safety Analysis Table (SAT) for pressure vessels includes the following details.

Other undesirable events for a pressure vessel are under-pressure, gas blowby, leak, and excess temperature together with their associated causes and detectable conditions.

Once the events, causes and detectable conditions have been identified the next stage of the methodology uses a Safety Analysis Checklist (SAC) for each component. This lists the safety devices that may be required or factors that negate the need for such a device. For example, for the case of liquid overflow from a vessel (as above) the SAC identifies:

* A4.2d - High level sensor (LSH)
** 1. LSH installed.
** 2. Equipment downstream of gas outlet is not a flare or vent system and can safely handle maximum liquid carry-over.
** 3. Vessel function does not require handling of separate fluid phases.
** 4. Vessel is a small trap from which liquids are manually drained.

The analysis ensures that two levels of protection are provided to mitigate each undesirable event. For example, for a pressure vessel subjected to over-pressure the primary protection would be a PSH (pressure switch high) to shut off inflow to the vessel, secondary protection would be provided by a pressure safety valve (PSV) on the vessel.

The next stage of the analysis relates all the sensing devices, shutdown valves (ESVs), trip systems and emergency support systems in the form of a Safety Analysis Function Evaluation (SAFE) chart.

X denotes that the detection device on the left (e.g. PSH) initiates the shutdown or warning action on the top right (e.g. ESV closure).

The SAFE chart constitutes the basis of Cause and Effect Charts which relate the sensing devices to shutdown valves and plant trips which defines the functional architecture of the process shutdown system.

The methodology also specifies the systems testing that is necessary to ensure the functionality of the protection systems.

API RP 14C was first published in June 1974. The 8th edition was published in February 2017. API RP 14C was adapted as ISO standard ISO 10418 in 1993 entitled &quot;Petroleum and natural gas industries — Offshore production installations — Analysis, design, installation and testing of basic surface process safety systems.&quot; The latest edition of ISO 10418 was published in 2019. 

==Safety certification==
Typically, safety guidelines prescribe a set of steps, deliverable documents, and exit criterion focused around planning, analysis and design, implementation, verification and validation, configuration management, and quality assurance activities for the development of a safety-critical system. In addition, they typically formulate expectations regarding the creation and use of traceability in the project. For example, depending upon the criticality level of a requirement, the US Federal Aviation Administration guideline DO-178B/C requires traceability from requirements to design, and from requirements to source code and executable object code for software components of a system. Thereby, higher quality traceability information can simplify the certification process and help to establish trust in the maturity of the applied development process.

Usually a failure in safety-certified systems is acceptable if, on average, less than one life per 109 hours of continuous operation is lost to failure.{as per FAA document AC 25.1309-1A} Most Western nuclear reactors, medical equipment, and commercial aircraft are certified to this level. The cost versus loss of lives has been considered appropriate at this level (by FAA for aircraft systems under Federal Aviation Regulations).

==Preventing failure==
Once a failure mode is identified, it can usually be mitigated by adding extra or redundant equipment to the system. For example, nuclear reactors contain dangerous radiation, and nuclear reactions can cause so much heat that no substance might contain them. Therefore, reactors have emergency core cooling systems to keep the temperature down, shielding to contain the radiation, and engineered barriers (usually several, nested, surmounted by a containment building) to prevent accidental leakage. Safety-critical systems are commonly required to permit no single event or component failure to result in a catastrophic failure mode.

Most biological organisms have a certain amount of redundancy: multiple organs, multiple limbs, etc.

For any given failure, a fail-over or redundancy can almost always be designed and incorporated into a system.

There are two categories of techniques to reduce the probability of failure:
Fault avoidance techniques increase the reliability of individual items (increased design margin, de-rating, etc.).
Fault tolerance techniques increase the reliability of the system as a whole (redundancies, barriers, etc.).

== Safety and reliability ==
Safety engineering and reliability engineering have much in common, but safety is not reliability. If a medical device fails, it should fail safely; other alternatives will be available to the surgeon. If the engine on a single-engine aircraft fails, there is no backup. Electrical power grids are designed for both safety and reliability; telephone systems are designed for reliability, which becomes a safety issue when emergency (e.g. US 911) calls are placed.

Probabilistic risk assessment has created a close relationship between safety and reliability. Component reliability, generally defined in terms of component failure rate, and external event probability are both used in quantitative safety assessment methods such as FTA. Related probabilistic methods are used to determine system Mean Time Between Failure (MTBF), system availability, or probability of mission success or failure. Reliability analysis has a broader scope than safety analysis, in that non-critical failures are considered. On the other hand, higher failure rates are considered acceptable for non-critical systems.

Safety generally cannot be achieved through component reliability alone. Catastrophic failure probabilities of 10−9 per hour correspond to the failure rates of very simple components such as resistors or capacitors. A complex system containing hundreds or thousands of components might be able to achieve a MTBF of 10,000 to 100,000 hours, meaning it would fail at 10−4 or 10−5 per hour. If a system failure is catastrophic, usually the only practical way to achieve 10−9 per hour failure rate is through redundancy.

When adding equipment is impractical (usually because of expense), then the least expensive form of design is often &quot;inherently fail-safe&quot;. That is, change the system design so its failure modes are not catastrophic. Inherent fail-safes are common in medical equipment, traffic and railway signals, communications equipment, and safety equipment.

The typical approach is to arrange the system so that ordinary single failures cause the mechanism to shut down in a safe way (for nuclear power plants, this is termed a passively safe design, although more than ordinary failures are covered). Alternately, if the system contains a hazard source such as a battery or rotor, then it may be possible to remove the hazard from the system so that its failure modes cannot be catastrophic. The U.S. Department of Defense Standard Practice for System Safety (MIL–STD–882) places the highest priority on elimination of hazards through design selection.

One of the most common fail-safe systems is the overflow tube in baths and kitchen sinks. If the valve sticks open, rather than causing an overflow and damage, the tank spills into an overflow. Another common example is that in an elevator the cable supporting the car keeps spring-loaded brakes open. If the cable breaks, the brakes grab rails, and the elevator cabin does not fall.

Some systems can never be made fail safe, as continuous availability is needed. For example, loss of engine thrust in flight is dangerous. Redundancy, fault tolerance, or recovery procedures are used for these situations (e.g. multiple independent controlled and fuel fed engines). This also makes the system less sensitive for the reliability prediction errors or quality induced uncertainty for the separate items. On the other hand, failure detection &amp; correction and avoidance of common cause failures becomes here increasingly important to ensure system level reliability.

==See also==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

===Associations===
*International System Safety Society
==References==

===Notes===
===Sources===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

== External links ==
* U.S. Army Pamphlet 385-16 System Safety Management Guide</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6496962" start="0" end="18" title="Safety engineering" label="Safety engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q11023" start="25" end="36" title="engineering" label="engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q2465832" start="37" end="47" title="Branches of science" label="discipline"/>
<link wikidata="Q58778" start="78" end="85" title="System" label="systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q10566551" start="115" end="121" title="safety" label="safety"/>
<link wikidata="Q4489420" start="149" end="171" title="industrial engineering" label="industrial engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q682496" start="172" end="191" title="systems engineering" label="systems engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q7663745" start="208" end="221" title="system safety" label="system safety"/>
<link wikidata="Q1996307" start="269" end="289" title="life-critical system" label="life-critical system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121708" start="330" end="334" title="Failure" label="fail"/>
<link wikidata="Q839486" start="415" end="426" title="Qualitative research" label="qualitative"/>
<link wikidata="Q730675" start="431" end="443" title="Quantitative research" label="quantitative"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132455" start="525" end="531" title="hazard" label="hazard"/>
<link wikidata="Q23807984" start="1248" end="1259" title="Model-based systems engineering" label="model-based"/>
<link wikidata="Q1389268" start="1605" end="1638" title="failure mode and effects analysis" label="failure mode and effects analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q428453" start="1650" end="1669" title="fault tree analysis" label="fault tree analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1082833" start="1777" end="1806" title="probabilistic risk assessment" label="probabilistic risk assessment"/>
<link wikidata="Q865978" start="1904" end="1913" title="WASH-1400" label="WASH-1400"/>
<link wikidata="Q484511" start="2087" end="2096" title="inductive reasoning" label="inductive"/>
<link wikidata="Q884718" start="2321" end="2334" title="block diagram" label="block diagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q2737027" start="2553" end="2565" title="failure rate" label="failure rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q909342" start="3013" end="3060" title="Failure Mode, Effects, and Criticality Analysis" label="Failure Mode, Effects, and Criticality Analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q484284" start="3142" end="3151" title="deductive reasoning" label="deductive"/>
<link wikidata="Q173183" start="3286" end="3299" title="Boolean logic" label="Boolean logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q173300" start="3587" end="3611" title="de Morgan&amp;#x27;s laws" label="de Morgan&amp;#x27;s theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310986" start="3660" end="3685" title="reliability block diagram" label="reliability block diagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q490303" start="4083" end="4116" title="Electric Power Research Institute" label="Electric Power Research Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q7388695" start="4120" end="4127" title="SAPHIRE" label="SAPHIRE"/>
<link wikidata="Q1314158" start="4137" end="4162" title="Idaho National Laboratory" label="Idaho National Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q574852" start="4206" end="4216" title="event tree" label="event tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q466043" start="5007" end="5035" title="American Petroleum Institute" label="American Petroleum Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q104841394" start="5325" end="5333" title="Pipeline transport" label="pipeline"/>
<link wikidata="Q134574" start="5338" end="5342" title="pump" label="pump"/>
<link wikidata="Q740460" start="5653" end="5668" title="pressure vessel" label="pressure vessel"/>
<link wikidata="Q28136626" start="5692" end="5705" title="Industrial furnace" label="fired heaters"/>
<link wikidata="Q178898" start="5741" end="5751" title="compressor" label="compressor"/>
<link wikidata="Q189124" start="5768" end="5782" title="heat exchanger" label="heat exchanger"/>
<link wikidata="Q5757669" start="6002" end="6015" title="high pressure" label="high pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q730458" start="7344" end="7365" title="Safety valve" label="pressure safety valve"/>
<link wikidata="Q2281187" start="7825" end="7840" title="Shut down valve" label="shutdown valves"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7906" end="7922" title="Plant process and emergency shutdown systems#Process shutdown (PSD)" label="process shutdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q848201" start="8850" end="8862" title="Requirements traceability" label="traceability"/>
<link wikidata="Q335357" start="8951" end="8985" title="Federal Aviation Administration" label="US Federal Aviation Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q5205827" start="8996" end="9005" title="DO-178C" label="DO-178B/C"/>
<link wikidata="Q848201" start="9015" end="9027" title="Requirements traceability" label="traceability"/>
<link wikidata="Q774228" start="9033" end="9044" title="requirement" label="requirement"/>
<link wikidata="Q82604" start="9049" end="9055" title="design" label="design"/>
<link wikidata="Q774228" start="9066" end="9077" title="requirement" label="requirement"/>
<link wikidata="Q128751" start="9082" end="9093" title="source code" label="source code"/>
<link wikidata="Q157965" start="9109" end="9120" title="object code" label="object code"/>
<link wikidata="Q16155280" start="9355" end="9364" title="product certification" label="certified"/>
<link wikidata="Q80877" start="9528" end="9544" title="nuclear reactors" label="nuclear reactors"/>
<link wikidata="Q11436" start="9580" end="9588" title="aircraft" label="aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q335357" start="9698" end="9701" title="FAA" label="FAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q464490" start="9729" end="9757" title="Federal Aviation Regulations" label="Federal Aviation Regulations"/>
<link wikidata="Q18335" start="9949" end="9958" title="radiation" label="radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q44432" start="10000" end="10004" title="heat" label="heat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1309811" start="10231" end="10251" title="containment building" label="containment building"/>
<link wikidata="Q1996307" start="10284" end="10306" title="Safety-critical system" label="Safety-critical system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363179" start="10343" end="10376" title="single point of failure" label="single event or component failure"/>
<link wikidata="Q420" start="10425" end="10435" title="biology" label="biological"/>
<link wikidata="Q533806" start="11407" end="11410" title="911 (emergency telephone number)" label="911"/>
<link wikidata="Q1082833" start="11431" end="11460" title="Probabilistic risk assessment" label="Probabilistic risk assessment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2737027" start="11589" end="11601" title="failure rate" label="failure rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q754940" start="11762" end="11794" title="Mean time between failures" label="Mean Time Between Failure (MTBF)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5321" start="12256" end="12264" title="resistor" label="resistor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5322" start="12269" end="12278" title="capacitor" label="capacitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3524720" start="13111" end="13125" title="Passive nuclear safety" label="passively safe"/>
<link wikidata="Q132911" start="13769" end="13777" title="elevator" label="elevator"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13813" end="13832" title="spring-loaded brake" label="spring-loaded brake"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="29279" wikidata="Q679325" url="?curid=29279" title="SIGGRAPH">
<text>SIGGRAPH (Special Interest Group on Computer Graphics and Interactive Techniques) is an annual conference centered around computer graphics organized by ACM, starting in 1974 in Boulder, CO. The main conference is usually held in North America though is not limited in location possibilities; SIGGRAPH Asia, a second conference held annually, has been held since 2008 in countries throughout Asia.

==Overview==
The conference incorporates both academic presentations as well as an industry trade show. Other events at the conference include educational courses and panel discussions on recent topics in computer graphics and interactive techniques. 

===SIGGRAPH Proceedings===
The SIGGRAPH conference proceedings, which are published in the ACM Transactions on Graphics, has one of the highest impact factors among academic publications in the field of computer graphics. The paper acceptance rate for SIGGRAPH has historically been between 17% and 29%, with the average acceptance rate between 2015 and 2019 of 27%. The submitted papers are peer-reviewed under a process that was historically single-blind, but was changed in 2018 to double-blind. The papers accepted for presentation at SIGGRAPH are printed since 2003 in a special issue of the &quot;ACM Transactions on Graphics&quot; journal.
Prior to 1992, SIGGRAPH papers were printed as part of the &quot;Computer Graphics&quot; publication; between 1993 and 2001, there was a dedicated &quot;SIGGRAPH Conference Proceedings&quot; series of publications.

===Awards programs===
SIGGRAPH has several awards programs to recognize contributions to computer graphics. The most prestigious is the Steven Anson Coons Award for Outstanding Creative Contributions to Computer Graphics. It has been awarded every two years since 1983 to recognize an individual&#x27;s lifetime achievement in computer graphics.

==Conference==
The SIGGRAPH conference experienced significant growth starting in the 1970s, peaking around the turn of the century. A second conference, SIGGRAPH Asia, started in 2008.

===SIGGRAPH===

=== SIGGRAPH Asia ===
===Sponsored Conference===
SIGGRAPH sponsored a number of conferences related to the field of computer graphics, including the ACM SIGGRAPH/Eurographics Symposium on Computer Animation, the ACM SIGGRAPH Conference on Motion, Interaction and Games (formerly known as Motion in Games).

==See also==
* Association for Computing Machinery
* ACM SIGGRAPH
* &quot;ACM Transactions on Graphics&quot;
* &quot;Computer Graphics&quot;, a publication of ACM SIGGRAPH
* The list of computer science conferences contains other academic conferences in computer science.

==References==
==External links==

* ACM SIGGRAPH website
* ACM SIGGRAPH conference publications (ACM Digital Library)
* ACM SIGGRAPH YouTube
* SIGGRAPH 2017 Conference, Los Angeles, CA
* SIGGRAPH Asia 2017 Conference, Bangkok, Thailand</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q679325" start="0" end="8" title="SIGGRAPH" label="SIGGRAPH"/>
<link wikidata="Q679325" start="10" end="80" title="SIGGRAPH" label="Special Interest Group on Computer Graphics and Interactive Techniques"/>
<link wikidata="Q2761147" start="95" end="105" title="Meeting" label="conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q7600677" start="122" end="139" title="computer graphics" label="computer graphics"/>
<link wikidata="Q127992" start="153" end="156" title="Association for Computing Machinery" label="ACM"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="230" end="243" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q48" start="392" end="396" title="Asia" label="Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q215028" start="1044" end="1057" title="Peer review" label="peer-reviewed"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1096" end="1108" title="Blinded experiment#Terminology" label="single-blind"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1137" end="1149" title="Blinded experiment#Terminology" label="double-blind"/>
<link wikidata="Q4650735" start="1255" end="1283" title="ACM Transactions on Graphics" label="ACM Transactions on Graphics"/>
<link wikidata="Q27715073" start="1364" end="1381" title="Computer Graphics (publication)" label="Computer Graphics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7614452" start="1651" end="1669" title="Steven Anson Coons" label="Steven Anson Coons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375006" start="2227" end="2239" title="Eurographics" label="Eurographics"/>
<link wikidata="Q127992" start="2387" end="2422" title="Association for Computing Machinery" label="Association for Computing Machinery"/>
<link wikidata="Q3412169" start="2425" end="2437" title="ACM SIGGRAPH" label="ACM SIGGRAPH"/>
<link wikidata="Q4650735" start="2446" end="2474" title="ACM Transactions on Graphics" label="ACM Transactions on Graphics"/>
<link wikidata="Q27715073" start="2489" end="2506" title="Computer Graphics (publication)" label="Computer Graphics"/>
<link wikidata="Q12802499" start="2550" end="2586" title="list of computer science conferences" label="list of computer science conferences"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="29285" wikidata="Q62627" url="?curid=29285" title="Semtex">
<text>Semtex is a general-purpose plastic explosive containing RDX and PETN. It is used in commercial blasting, demolition, and in certain military applications.

Semtex was developed and manufactured in Czechoslovakia, originally under the name B 1 and then under the &quot;Semtex&quot; designation since 1964, labeled as &quot;SEMTEX 1A&quot;, since 1967 as &quot;SEMTEX H&quot;, and since 1987 as &quot;SEMTEX 10&quot;.

Originally developed for Czechoslovak military use and export, Semtex eventually became popular with armed groups and insurgents because, prior to the 2000s, it was extremely difficult to detect, as in the case of Pan Am Flight 103.

==Composition==
The composition of the two most common variants differ according to their use. The 1A (or 10) variant is used for mining, and is based mostly on crystalline PETN. The versions 1AP and 2P are formed as hexagonal booster charges; a special assembly of PETN and wax inside the charge assures high reliability for detonating cord or detonator. The H (or SE) variant is intended for explosion hardening.

==History==
Semtex was invented in the late 1950s by Stanislav Brebera and Radim Fukátko, chemists at VCHZ Synthesia, Czechoslovakia (now Czech Republic). The explosive is named after Semtín, a suburb of Pardubice where the mixture was first manufactured starting in 1964. The plant was later renamed to become Explosia a.s., a subsidiary of Synthesia.

Semtex was very similar to other plastic explosives, especially C-4, in being highly malleable; but it is usable over a greater temperature range than other plastic explosives, since it stays plastic between −40 and +60 °C. It is also waterproof. There are visual differences between Semtex and other plastic explosives, too: while C-4 is off-white in colour, Semtex is red or brick-orange.

The new explosive was widely exported, notably to the government of North Vietnam, which received 14 tons during the Vietnam War. However, the main consumer was Libya; about 700 tons of Semtex were exported to Libya between 1975 and 1981 by Omnipol. It has also been used by Islamic militants in the Middle East and by the Provisional Irish Republican Army (PIRA) and the Irish National Liberation Army in Northern Ireland. On 21 December 1988, 340 g (12 ounces) of Semtex brought down a Boeing 747 over Lockerbie, Scotland killing all 259 passengers and crew aboard the aircraft and 11 bystanders on the ground.

Sales declined after Semtex became closely associated with terrorist attacks. Rules governing the explosive&#x27;s export were progressively tightened over the years, and since 2002 all of Explosia&#x27;s trading has been controlled by a government ministry. , only approximately 10 tons of Semtex were produced annually, almost all for domestic use. 

Also in response to international agreements, Semtex has a detection taggant added to produce a distinctive vapor signature to aid detection. First, ethylene glycol dinitrate was used, but was later switched to 2,3-dimethyl-2,3-dinitrobutane (DMDNB) or &quot;p&quot;-mononitrotoluene (1-methyl-4-nitrobenzene), which is used currently. According to the manufacturer, the taggant agent was voluntarily being added by 1991, years before the protocol became compulsory. Batches of Semtex made before 1990, however, are untagged, though it is not known whether there are still major stocks of such old batches of Semtex. According to the manufacturer, even this untagged Semtex can now be detected. The shelf life of Semtex was reduced from ten years before the 1990s to five years now. Explosia states that there is no compulsory tagging allowing reliable post-detonation detection of a certain plastic explosive (such as incorporating a unique metallic code into the mass of the explosive), so Semtex is not tagged in this way.

On 25 May 1997, Bohumil Šole, a scientist who claimed to have been involved with inventing Semtex, blew himself up with explosives at a spa in Jeseník. Šole, 63, was being treated there for psychological problems. It was unclear what explosives were used. Twenty other people were hurt in the explosion, while six were seriously injured. According to the manufacturer, Explosia, he was not a member of the team that developed the explosive in the 1960s.

According to the producer&#x27;s 2017 catalog, several variants of Semtex are offered: Semtex 1A, Semtex 1H, Semtex 10, Semtex 10-SE, Semtex S 30, Semtex C-4, Semtex PW 4, and Semtex 90.

== Explanatory notes ==
==References==
==External links==
* Website of the manufacturer with a brief history of Semtex
* Manufacturer&#x27;s rebuttal of various alleged misapprehensions, including involvement of Bohumil Sole</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q62627" start="0" end="6" title="Semtex" label="Semtex"/>
<link wikidata="Q898359" start="28" end="45" title="plastic explosive" label="plastic explosive"/>
<link wikidata="Q190020" start="57" end="60" title="RDX" label="RDX"/>
<link wikidata="Q189334" start="65" end="69" title="Pentaerythritol tetranitrate" label="PETN"/>
<link wikidata="Q331483" start="106" end="116" title="demolition" label="demolition"/>
<link wikidata="Q8473" start="133" end="141" title="military" label="military"/>
<link wikidata="Q33946" start="198" end="212" title="Czechoslovakia" label="Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q62627" start="240" end="243" title="Semtex" label="B 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q211087" start="632" end="649" title="Pan Am Flight 103" label="Pan Am Flight 103"/>
<link wikidata="Q2891954" start="782" end="788" title="drilling and blasting" label="mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q189334" start="825" end="829" title="Pentaerythritol tetranitrate" label="PETN"/>
<link wikidata="Q2428580" start="879" end="894" title="Explosive booster" label="booster charges"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472852" start="978" end="993" title="detonating cord" label="detonating cord"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088842" start="997" end="1006" title="detonator" label="detonator"/>
<link wikidata="Q7499867" start="1046" end="1065" title="Shock hardening" label="explosion hardening"/>
<link wikidata="Q705292" start="1121" end="1138" title="Stanislav Brebera" label="Stanislav Brebera"/>
<link wikidata="Q33946" start="1186" end="1200" title="Czechoslovakia" label="Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q213" start="1206" end="1220" title="Czech Republic" label="Czech Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q36989" start="1272" end="1281" title="Pardubice" label="Pardubice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1443995" start="1379" end="1392" title="Explosia a.s." label="Explosia a.s."/>
<link wikidata="Q220775" start="1486" end="1489" title="C-4 (explosive)" label="C-4"/>
<link wikidata="Q211702" start="1507" end="1516" title="malleable" label="malleable"/>
<link wikidata="Q172640" start="1882" end="1895" title="North Vietnam" label="North Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="1931" end="1942" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016" start="1975" end="1980" title="Libya" label="Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q3494875" start="2055" end="2062" title="Omnipol" label="Omnipol"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="2114" end="2125" title="Middle East" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q504628" start="2137" end="2170" title="Provisional Irish Republican Army" label="Provisional Irish Republican Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146230" start="2186" end="2216" title="Irish National Liberation Army" label="Irish National Liberation Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q26" start="2220" end="2236" title="Northern Ireland" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q211087" start="2287" end="2312" title="Pan Am Flight 103" label="brought down a Boeing 747"/>
<link wikidata="Q3525805" start="2840" end="2857" title="taggant" label="detection taggant"/>
<link wikidata="Q572774" start="2930" end="2955" title="ethylene glycol dinitrate" label="ethylene glycol dinitrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3267064" start="2992" end="3022" title="DMDNB" label="2,3-dimethyl-2,3-dinitrobutane"/>
<link wikidata="Q2048380" start="3034" end="3064" title="4-nitrotoluene" label="&amp;quot;p&amp;quot;-mononitrotoluene"/>
<link wikidata="Q407290" start="3077" end="3089" title="nitrobenzene" label="nitrobenzene"/>
<link wikidata="Q1689021" start="3480" end="3490" title="shelf life" label="shelf life"/>
<link wikidata="Q10737" start="3907" end="3922" title="suicide" label="blew himself up"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341387" start="3944" end="3947" title="spa" label="spa"/>
<link wikidata="Q954611" start="3951" end="3958" title="Jeseník" label="Jeseník"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="29286" wikidata="Q56246074" url="?curid=29286" title="Schedl">
<text>Schedl is a German surname. Notable people with the surname include: 

* Gerhard Schedl (1957−2000), an Austrian composer
* Karl E. Schedl (1898–1979), an Austrian entomologist, specialist on Coleoptera
* Klaus Schedl (born 1966), a German composer
* Paul Schedl (born 1947), an American Professor of Molecular Biology at Princeton University
* Timothy Schedl (born 1955), an American professor of genetics at Washington University in St. Louis</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1512429" start="73" end="87" title="Gerhard Schedl" label="Gerhard Schedl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1730790" start="124" end="138" title="Karl E. Schedl" label="Karl E. Schedl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479364" start="205" end="217" title="Klaus Schedl" label="Klaus Schedl"/>
<link wikidata="Q7153454" start="251" end="262" title="Paul Schedl" label="Paul Schedl"/>
<link wikidata="Q7807505" start="345" end="359" title="Timothy Schedl" label="Timothy Schedl"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="29287" wikidata="Q293332" url="?curid=29287" title="Lehi (militant group)">
<text>Lehi (; , sometimes abbreviated &quot;LHI&quot;), officially the Fighters for the Freedom of Israel () and often known pejoratively as the Stern Gang, was a Zionist paramilitary militant organization founded by Avraham (&quot;Yair&quot;) Stern in Mandatory Palestine. Its avowed aim was to evict the British authorities from Palestine by use of violence, allowing unrestricted immigration of Jews and the formation of a Jewish state. It was initially called the National Military Organization in Israel, upon being founded in August 1940, but was renamed Lehi one month later. The group referred to its members as terrorists and admitted to having carried out acts of terrorism.

Lehi split from the Irgun militant group in 1940 in order to continue fighting the British during World War II. It initially sought an alliance with Fascist Italy and Nazi Germany. Believing that Nazi Germany was a lesser enemy of the Jews than Britain, Lehi twice attempted to form an alliance with the Nazis, proposing a Jewish state based on &quot;nationalist and totalitarian principles, and linked to the German Reich by an alliance&quot;. After Stern&#x27;s death in 1942, the new leadership of Lehi began to move towards support for Joseph Stalin&#x27;s Soviet Union and the ideology of National Bolshevism, which was considered an amalgam of both right and left. Regarding themselves as &quot;revolutionary Socialists&quot;, the new Lehi developed a highly original ideology combining an &quot;almost mystical&quot; belief in Greater Israel with support for the Arab liberation struggle. This sophisticated ideology failed to gain public support and Lehi fared poorly in the first Israeli elections.

In April 1948, Lehi and the Irgun were jointly responsible for the massacre in Deir Yassin of at least 107 Palestinian Arab villagers, including women and children. Lehi assassinated Lord Moyne, British Minister Resident in the Middle East, and made many other attacks on the British in Palestine. On 29 May 1948, the government of Israel, having inducted its activist members into the Israel Defense Forces, formally disbanded Lehi, though some of its members carried out one more terrorist act, the assassination of Folke Bernadotte some months later, an act condemned by Bernadotte&#x27;s replacement as mediator, Ralph Bunche. After the assassination, the new Israeli government declared Lehi a terrorist organization, arresting some 200 members and convicting some of the leaders. Just before the first Israeli elections in January 1949, a general amnesty to Lehi members was granted by the government. In 1980, Israel instituted a military decoration, an &quot;award for activity in the struggle for the establishment of Israel&quot;, the Lehi ribbon. Former Lehi leader Yitzhak Shamir became Prime Minister of Israel in 1983.

==Founding of Lehi==
Lehi was created in August 1940 by Avraham Stern. Stern had been a member of the Irgun (&quot;Irgun Tsvai Leumi&quot; – &quot;National Military Organization&quot;) high command. Zeev Jabotinsky, then the Irgun&#x27;s supreme commander, had decided that diplomacy and working with Britain would best serve the Zionist cause. World War II was in progress, and Britain was fighting Nazi Germany. The Irgun suspended its underground military activities against the British for the duration of the war.

Stern argued that the time for Zionist diplomacy was over and that it was time for an armed struggle against the British. Like other Zionists, he objected to the White Paper of 1939, which restricted both Jewish immigration and Jewish land purchases in Palestine. For Stern, &quot;no difference existed between Hitler and Chamberlain, between Dachau or Buchenwald and sealing the gates of Eretz Israel.&quot;

Stern wanted to open Palestine to all Jewish refugees from Europe and considered this to be the most important issue of the day. Britain would not allow this. Therefore, he concluded, the &quot;Yishuv&quot; (Jews of Palestine) should fight the British rather than support them in the war. When the Irgun made a truce with the British, Stern left the Irgun to form his own group, which he called &quot;Irgun Tsvai Leumi B&#x27;Yisrael&quot; (&quot;National Military Organization in Israel&quot;), later &quot;Lohamei Herut Israel&quot; (&quot;Fighters for the Freedom of Israel&quot;). In September 1940, the organization was officially named &quot;Lehi&quot;, the Hebrew acronym of the latter name.

Stern and his followers believed that dying for the &quot;foreign occupier&quot; who was obstructing the creation of the Jewish State was useless. They differentiated between &quot;enemies of the Jewish people&quot; (the British) and &quot;Jew haters&quot; (the Nazis), believing that the former needed to be defeated and the latter manipulated.

In 1940, the idea of the Final Solution was still &quot;unthinkable&quot;, and Stern believed that Hitler wanted to make Germany &quot;judenrein&quot; through emigration, as opposed to extermination. In December 1940, Lehi contacted Germany with a proposal to aid German conquest in the Middle East in return for recognition of a Jewish state open to unlimited immigration.
==Goals and ideology==

Lehi had three main goals:
* To bring together all those interested in liberation (that is, those willing to join in active fighting against the British).
* To appear before the world as the only active Jewish military organization.
* To take over &quot;Eretz Yisrael&quot; (the Land of Israel) by armed force.

Lehi believed in its early years that its goals would be achieved by finding a strong international ally that would expel the British from Palestine, in return for Jewish military help; this would require the creation of a broad and organised military force &quot;demonstrating its desire for freedom through military operations.&quot;

Lehi also referred to themselves as &#x27;terrorists&#x27; and may have been one of the last organizations to do so.

An article titled &quot;Terror&quot; in the Lehi underground newspaper &quot;He Khazit&quot; (&quot;The Front&quot;) argued as follows:

Neither Jewish ethics nor Jewish tradition can disqualify terrorism as a means of combat. We are very far from having any moral qualms as far as our national war goes. We have before us the command of the Torah, whose morality surpasses that of any other body of laws in the world: &quot;Ye shall blot them out to the last man.&quot;
But first and foremost, terrorism is for us a part of the political battle being conducted under the present circumstances, and it has a great part to play: speaking in a clear voice to the whole world, as well as to our wretched brethren outside this land, it proclaims our war against the occupier.
We are particularly far from this sort of hesitation in regard to an enemy whose moral perversion is admitted by all.

The article described the goals of terror:

* It demonstrates ... against the true terrorist who hides behind his piles of papers and the laws he has legislated.
* It is not directed against people, it is directed against representatives. Therefore it is effective.
* If it also shakes the &quot;Yishuv&quot; from their complacency, good and well.

Yitzhak Shamir, one of the three leaders of Lehi after Avraham Stern&#x27;s assassination, argued for the legitimacy of Lehi&#x27;s actions:
There are those who say that to kill Martin is terrorism, but to attack an army camp is guerrilla warfare and to bomb civilians is professional warfare. But I think it is the same from the moral point of view. Is it better to drop an atomic bomb on a city than to kill a handful of persons? I don&#x27;t think so. But nobody says that President Truman was a terrorist. All the men we went for individually – Wilkin, Martin, MacMichael and others – were personally interested in succeeding in the fight against us.

So it was more efficient and more moral to go for selected targets. In any case, it was the only way we could operate, because we were so small. For us it was not a question of the professional honour of a soldier, it was the question of an idea, an aim that had to be achieved. We were aiming at a political goal. There are many examples of what we did to be found in the Bible – Gideon and Samson, for instance. This had an influence on our thinking. And we also learned from the history of other peoples who fought for their freedom – the Russian and Irish revolutionaries, Giuseppe Garibaldi and Josip Broz Tito.
=== Relationship with fascism and socialism ===
Unlike the left-wing Haganah and right-wing Irgun, Lehi members were not a homogeneous collective with a single political, religious, or economic ideology. They were a combination of militants united by the goal of liberating the land of Israel from British rule. Most Lehi leaders defined their organization as an anti-imperialist movement and stated that their opposition to British colonial rule in Palestine was not based on a particular policy but rather on the presence of a foreign power over the homeland of the Jewish people.

Avraham Stern defined the British Mandate as &quot;foreign rule&quot; regardless of British policies and took a radical position against such imperialism even if it were to be benevolent. In a pamphlet entitled &quot;18 Principles of Rebirth&quot;, Stern noted the need to &quot;solve the problem&quot; of the &quot;alien population&quot; and called for the &#x27;conquest&#x27; of Palestine. It also emphasized the need to gather the Jewish Diaspora into a new sovereign state, revive the Hebrew language as a spoken language, and build a Third Temple as a symbol of the &#x27;new era&#x27;.

In the early years of the state of Israel, Lehi veterans could be found supporting nearly all political parties and some Lehi leaders founded a left-wing political party called the Fighters&#x27; List with Natan Yellin-Mor as its head. The party took part in the elections in January 1949 and won a single parliamentary seat. A number of Lehi veterans established the Semitic Action movement in 1956 which sought the creation of a regional federation encompassing Israel and its Arab neighbours on the basis of an anti-colonialist alliance with other indigenous inhabitants of the Middle East.

Some writers have stated that Lehi&#x27;s true goals were the creation of a totalitarian state. Perliger and Weinberg write that the organisation&#x27;s ideology placed &quot;its world view in the quasi-fascist radical Right, which is characterised by xenophobia, a national egotism that completely subordinates the individual to the needs of the nation, anti-liberalism, total denial of democracy and a highly centralised government.&quot; Perliger and Weinberg state that most Lehi members were admirers of the Italian Fascist movement. According to Kaplan and Penslar, Lehi&#x27;s ideology was a mix of fascist and communist thought combined with racism and universalism.

Others counter these claims. They note that when Lehi founder Avraham Stern went to study in fascist Italy, he refused to join the Gruppo Universitario Fascista for foreign students, even though members got large reductions in tuition.

===Political racism===

According to Yaacov Shavit, professor at the Department of Jewish History, Tel Aviv University, articles in Lehi publications contained references to a Jewish &quot;master race&quot;, contrasting the Jews with Arabs who were seen as a &quot;nation of slaves&quot;. American journalist Sasha Polakow-Suransky writes that &quot;Lehi was also unabashedly racist towards Arabs. Their publications described Jews as a master race and Arabs as a slave race.&quot; Lehi advocated mass expulsion of all Arabs from Palestine and Transjordan, or even their physical annihilation.

In contrast, a number of Lehi veterans, including co-leader Nathan Yellin-Mor, went on to establish the Semitic Action movement which sought the creation of a regional federation encompassing Israel and its Arab neighbours on the basis of an anti-colonialist alliance with other indigenous inhabitants of the Middle East. Yaakov Yardaur, another former Lehi militant, was a strong advocate for equal rights for Arab citizens of Israel.

== Evolution, tactics and organization ==

Many Lehi combatants had received military training. Some had attended the Military Engineers School in Civitavecchia, in Fascist Italy. Others received military training from instructors of the Polish Armed Forces in 1938–1939. This training was conducted in Trochenbrod (Zofiówka) in Wołyń Voivodeship, Podębin near Łódź, and the forests around Andrychów. They were taught how to use explosives. One of them reported later: &quot;Poles treated terrorism as a science. We have mastered mathematical principles of demolishing constructions made of concrete, iron, wood, bricks and dirt.&quot;

The group was initially unsuccessful. Early attempts to raise funds through criminal activities, including a bank robbery in Tel Aviv in 1940 and another robbery on 9 January 1942 in which Jewish passers-by were killed, brought about the temporary collapse of the group. An attempt to assassinate the head of the British secret police in Lod in which three police personnel were killed, two Jewish and one British, elicited a severe response from the British and Jewish establishments who collaborated against Lehi.

Stern&#x27;s group was seen as a terrorist organisation by the British authorities, who instructed the Defence Security Office (the colonial branch of MI5) to track down its leaders. In 1942, Stern, after he was arrested, was shot dead in disputed circumstances by Inspector Geoffrey J. Morton of the CID. The arrest of several other members led momentarily to the group&#x27;s eclipse, until it was revived after the September 1942 escape of two of its leaders, Yitzhak Shamir and Eliyahu Giladi, aided by two other escapees Natan Yellin-Mor (Friedman) and Israel Eldad (Sheib). (Giladi was later killed by Lehi under circumstances that remain mysterious.) Shamir&#x27;s codename was &quot;Michael&quot;, a reference to one of Shamir&#x27;s heroes, Michael Collins. Lehi was guided by spiritual and philosophical leaders such as Uri Zvi Greenberg and Israel Eldad. After the killing of Giladi, the organization was led by a triumvirate of Eldad, Shamir, and Yellin-Mor.

Lehi adopted a non-socialist platform of anti-imperialist ideology. It viewed the continued British rule of Palestine as a violation of the Mandate&#x27;s provision generally, and its restrictions on Jewish immigration to be an intolerable breach of international law. However they also targeted Jews whom they regarded as traitors, and during the 1948 Arab-Israeli War they joined in operations with the Haganah and Irgun against Arab targets, for example Deir Yassin.

According to a compilation by Nachman Ben-Yehuda, Lehi was responsible for 42 assassinations, more than twice as many as the Irgun and Haganah combined during the same period. Of those Lehi assassinations that Ben-Yehuda classified as political, more than half the victims were Jews.

Lehi also rejected the authority of the Jewish Agency for Israel and related organizations, operating entirely on its own throughout nearly all of its existence.

Lehi prisoners captured by the British generally refused to employ lawyers in their defence. The defendants would conduct their own defence, and would deny the right of the military court to try them, saying that in accordance with the Hague Convention they should be accorded the status of prisoners of war. For the same reason, Lehi prisoners refused to plead for amnesty, even when it was clear that this would have spared them the death penalty. Moshe Barazani, a Lehi member, and Meir Feinstein, an Irgun member, took their own lives in prison with a grenade smuggled inside an orange so the British could not hang them.

== Activities and operations during World War II==

=== Wartime contacts with Italy and Nazi Germany ===

==== Italy ====

In mid-1940, Stern became convinced that the Italians were interested in the establishment of a fascist Jewish state in Palestine. He conducted negotiations, he thought, with the Italians via an intermediary Moshe Rotstein, and drew up a document that became known as the &quot;Jerusalem Agreement&quot;. In exchange for Italy&#x27;s recognition of, and aid in obtaining, Jewish sovereignty over Palestine, Stern promised that Zionism would come under the aegis of Italian fascism, with Haifa as its base, and the Old City of Jerusalem under Vatican control, except for the Jewish quarter. In Heller&#x27;s words, Stern&#x27;s proposal would &quot;turn the &#x27;Kingdom of Israel&#x27; into a satellite of the Axis powers.&quot;

However, the &quot;intermediary&quot; Rotstein was in fact an agent of the Irgun, conducting a sting operation under the direction of the Irgun intelligence leader in Haifa, Israel Pritzker, in cooperation with the British. Secret British documents about the affair were uncovered by historian Eldad Harouvi (now director of the Palmach Archives) and confirmed by former Irgun intelligence officer Yitzhak Berman. When Rotstein&#x27;s role later became clear, Lehi sentenced him to death and assigned Yaacov Eliav to kill him, but the assassination never took place. However, Pritzker was killed by Lehi in 1943.

==== Nazi Germany ====

Late in 1940, Lehi, having identified a common interest between the intentions of the new German order and Jewish national aspirations, proposed forming an alliance in World War II with Nazi Germany. The organization offered cooperation in the following terms: Lehi would rebel against the British, while Germany would recognize an independent Jewish state in Palestine/Eretz Israel, and all Jews leaving their homes in Europe, by their own will or because of government injunctions, could enter Palestine with no restriction of numbers. Late in 1940, Lehi representative Naftali Lubenchik went to Beirut to meet German official Werner Otto von Hentig. The Lehi documents outlined that its rule would be authoritarian and indicated similarities between the organization and Nazis. Israel Eldad, one of the leading members of Lehi, wrote about Hitler &quot;it is not Hitler who is the hater of the kingdom of Israel and the return to Zion, it is not Hitler who subjects us to the cruel fate of falling a second and a third time into Hitler&#x27;s hands, but the British.&quot;

Stern also proposed recruiting 40,000 Jews from occupied Europe to invade Palestine with German support to oust the British. On 11 January 1941, Vice Admiral Ralf von der Marwitz, the German naval attaché in Turkey, filed a report (the &quot;Ankara document&quot;) conveying an offer by Lehi to &quot;actively take part in the war on Germany&#x27;s side&quot; in return for German support for &quot;the establishment of the historic Jewish state on a national and totalitarian basis, bound by a treaty with the German Reich.&quot;

According to Yellin-Mor:Lubenchik did not take along any written memorandum for the German representatives. Had there been a need for one, he would have formulated it on the spot, since he was familiar with the episode of the Italian &quot;intermediary&quot; and with the numerous drafts connected with it. Apparently one of von Hentig&#x27;s secretaries noted down the essence of the proposal in his own words.According to Joseph Heller, &quot;The memorandum arising from their conversation is an entirely authentic document, on which the stamp of the &#x27;IZL in Israel&#x27; is clearly embossed.&quot; Von der Marwitz delivered the offer, classified as secret, to the German Ambassador in Turkey and on 21 January 1941 it was sent to Berlin. There was never any response. A second attempt to contact the Nazis was made at the end of 1941, but it was even less successful. The emissary Yellin-Mor was arrested in Syria before he could carry out his mission. 

This proposed alliance with Nazi Germany cost Lehi and Stern much support. The Stern Gang also had links with, and support from, the Vichy France Sûreté&#x27;s Lebanese offices. Even as the full scale of Nazi atrocities became more evident in 1943, Lehi refused to accept Hitler as the main foe (as opposed to Great Britain).

=== Assassination of Lord Moyne ===
On 6 November 1944, Lehi assassinated Lord Moyne, the British Minister Resident in the Middle East, in Cairo. Moyne was the highest ranking British official in the region. Yitzhak Shamir claimed later that Moyne was assassinated because of his support for a Middle Eastern Arab Federation and anti-Semitic lectures in which Arabs were held to be racially superior to Jews. The assassination rocked the British government, and outraged Winston Churchill, the British Prime Minister. The two assassins, Eliyahu Bet-Zuri and Eliyahu Hakim were captured and used their trial as a platform to make public their political propaganda. They were both found guilty and executed. In 1975, their bodies were returned to Israel, with Egypt exchanging them for 20 Arab prisoners, and given a state funeral. In 1982, postage stamps were issued for 20 Olei Hagardom, including Bet-Zouri and Hakim, in a souvenir sheet called &quot;Martyrs of the struggle for Israel&#x27;s independence.&quot;

== Post war terrorist campaign and insurgency ==

As a group that never had more than a few hundred members, Lehi relied on audacious but small-scale operations to drive its message home. They adopted the tactics of groups such as the Socialist Revolutionaries and the Combat Organization of the Polish Socialist Party in Czarist Russia, and the Irish Republican Army. To this end, Lehi conducted small-scale operations such as individual assassinations of British officials (notable targets included Lord Moyne, CID detectives, and Jewish &quot;collaborators&quot;), and random shootings against soldiers and police officers. Another strategy, adopted in 1946, was to send bombs in the mail to British politicians. Other actions included sabotaging infrastructure targets: bridges, railroads, telephone and telegraph lines, and oil refineries, as well as the use of vehicle bombs against British military, police, and administrative targets. Lehi financed its operations from private donations, extortion, and bank robbery. Its campaign of violence lasted from 1944 to 1948. Initially conducted together with the Irgun, it included a six-month suspension to avoid being targeted by the Haganah during the Hunting Season, and later operated jointly with the Haganah and Irgun under the Jewish Resistance Movement. After the Jewish Resistance Movement was dissolved, it operated independently as part of the general Jewish insurgency in Palestine.

=== Tel Aviv car park raid ===

On 25 April 1946, a Lehi unit attacked a car park in Tel Aviv occupied by the British 6th Airborne Division. Under a barrage of heavy covering fire, Lehi fighters broke into the car park, shot soldiers they encountered at close range, stole rifles from arms racks, laid mines to cover the retreat, and withdrew. Seven soldiers were killed in the attack, which caused widespread outrage among the British security forces in Palestine. It resulted in retaliatory anti-Jewish violence by British troops and a punitive curfew imposed on Tel Aviv&#x27;s roads and the closure of places of entertainment in the city by the British Army.

===British police station in Haifa===
On 12 January 1947, Lehi members drove a truckload of explosives into a British police station in Haifa, killing four and injuring 140, in what has been called &#x27;the world&#x27;s first true truck bomb&#x27;.

=== Operations in Europe ===

Following the bombing of the British embassy in Rome, in October 1946, a series of operations against targets in the United Kingdom were launched. On 7 March 1947, Lehi&#x27;s only successful operation in Britain was carried out when a Lehi bomb severely damaged the British Colonial Club, a London recreational facility for soldiers and students from Britain&#x27;s colonies in Africa and the West Indies. On 15 April 1947 a bomb consisting of twenty-four sticks of explosives was planted in the Colonial Office, Whitehall. It failed to explode due to a fault in the timer. Five weeks later, on 22 May, five alleged Lehi members were arrested in Paris with bomb making material including explosives of the same type as found in London. On 2 June, two Lehi members, Betty Knouth and Yaakov Levstein, were arrested crossing from Belgium to France. Envelopes addressed to British officials, with detonators, batteries and a time fuse were found in one of Knouth&#x27;s suitcases. The British Security Services identified Knouth as the person who planted the bomb in the Colonial Office. Shortly after their arrest, 21 letter bombs addressed to senior British figures were intercepted. The letters had been posted in Italy. The intended recipients included Bevin, Attlee, Churchill and Eden. Eden carried a letter bomb in his suitcase for a whole day, thinking it was a Whitehall pamphlet that he would read later in the day. He only realized it was a bomb after being warned by the police, who were informed by MI5.

Knouth was also known as Gilberte/Elizabeth Lazarus. Levstein was travelling as Jacob Elias; his fingerprints connected him to the deaths of several Palestine Policemen as well as an attempt on the life of the British High Commissioner. In September 1947, a Belgian court sentenced Knouth to one year in prison and Levstein to eight months in prison for illegally transporting explosives with intent to commit a felony. In 1973, Margaret Truman wrote that letter bombs were also posted to her father, U.S. President Harry S. Truman, in 1947. Former Lehi leader Yellin-Mor admitted that letter bombs had been sent to British targets but denied that any had been sent to Truman.

=== Death threat against Hugh Trevor-Roper ===

Shortly after the 1947 publication of &quot;The Last Days of Hitler&quot;, Lehi issued a death threat against the author, Hugh Trevor-Roper, for his portrayal of Hitler, feeling that Trevor-Roper had attempted to exonerate the German populace from responsibility.

=== Cairo-Haifa train bombings ===
During the lead-up to the 1948 Arab–Israeli War, Lehi mined the Cairo–Haifa train several times. On 29 February 1948, Lehi mined the train north of Rehovot, killing 28 British soldiers and wounding 35. On 31 March, Lehi mined the train near Binyamina, killing 40 civilians and wounding 60.

=== Attempted Nablus terror attack ===

Shlomo Sand writes that as a method of applying pressure on Arab villagers to abandon their settlements, Lehi planned a terror attack on Nablus and its Arab city headquarters; Lehi fighter Elisha Ibzov (Avraham Cohen) was captured with a truck filled with explosives on his way to the city. Lehi fighters in return abducted four adult villagers and youth from al-Sheikh Muwannis with no connection to Ibzov&#x27;s capture and threatened to kill them. As rumours spread that they were already murdered, panic set out in the villagers and the settlement became increasingly abandoned, despite the eventual release of the hostages

===Deir Yassin massacre===

One of the most widely known acts of Lehi was the attack on the Palestinian-Arab village of Deir Yassin.

In the months before the British evacuation from Palestine, the Arab League-sponsored Arab Liberation Army (ALA) occupied several strategic points along the road between Jerusalem and Tel Aviv, cutting off supplies to the Jewish part of Jerusalem. One of these points was Deir Yassin. By March 1948, the road was cut off and Jewish Jerusalem was under siege. The Haganah launched Operation Nachshon to break the siege.

On 6 April, the Haganah attacked al-Qastal, a village two kilometres north of Deir Yassin, also overlooking the Jerusalem-Tel Aviv road.

Then on 9 April 1948, about 120 Lehi and Irgun fighters, acting in cooperation with the Haganah, attacked and captured Deir Yassin. The attack was at night, the fighting was confused, and many civilian inhabitants of the village were killed. This action had great consequences for the war, and remains a cause célèbre for Palestinians ever since.

Exactly what happened has never been established clearly. The Arab League reported a great massacre: 254 killed, with rape and lurid mutilations. Israeli investigations claimed the actual number of dead was between 100 and 120, and there were no mass rapes, but most of the dead were civilians and admitted some were killed deliberately. Lehi and Irgun both denied an organized massacre. Accounts by Lehi veterans such as Ezra Yakhin note that many of the attackers were killed or wounded, assert that Arabs fired from every building and that Iraqi and Syrian soldiers were among the dead, and even that some Arab fighters dressed as women.

However, Jewish authorities, including Haganah, the Chief Rabbinate, the Jewish Agency, and David Ben-Gurion, also condemned the attack, lending credence to the charge of massacre. The Jewish Agency even sent a letter of condemnation, apology, and condolence to King Abdullah I of Jordan.

Both the Arab reports and Jewish responses had hidden motives: the Arab leaders wanted to encourage Palestinian Arabs to fight rather than surrender, to discredit the Zionists with international opinion, and to increase popular support in their countries for an invasion of Palestine. The Jewish leaders wanted to discredit Irgun and Lehi.

Ironically, the Arab reports backfired in one respect: frightened Palestinian Arabs did not surrender, but did not fight either – they fled, allowing Israel to gain much territory with little fighting and also without absorbing many Arabs.

Lehi similarly interpreted events at Deir Yassin as turning the tide of war in favour of the Jews. Lehi leader Israel Eldad later wrote in his memoirs from the underground period that &quot;without Deir Yassin the State of Israel could never have been established&quot;.

The Deir Yassin story did not much sway international opinion. It did increase, not only support but pressure on Arab governments to intervene. Abdullah of Jordan was now compelled to join the invasion of Palestine after Israel&#x27;s declaration of independence on 14 May.

=== Assassination of Count Folke Bernadotte ===

Although Lehi had stopped operating nationally after May 1948, the group continued to function in Jerusalem. On 17 September 1948, Lehi assassinated UN mediator Count Folke Bernadotte. The assassination was directed by Yehoshua Zettler and carried out by a four-man team led by Meshulam Makover. The fatal shots were fired by Yehoshua Cohen. The Security Council described the assassination as a &quot;cowardly act which appears to have been committed by a criminal group of terrorists&quot;.

Three days after the assassination, the Israeli government passed the Ordinance to Prevent Terrorism and declared Lehi to be a terrorist organization. Many Lehi members were arrested, including leaders Nathan Yellin-Mor and Matityahu Shmulevitz who were arrested on 29 September. Eldad and Shamir managed to escape arrest. Yellin-Mor and Schmulevitz were charged with leadership of a terrorist organization and on 10 February 1949 were sentenced to 8 years and 5 years imprisonment, respectively. However the State (Temporary) Council soon announced a general amnesty for Lehi members and they were released.

=== The Lehi trial and the Fighters&#x27; Party ===
Between 5 December 1948 and 25 January 1949, Yellin-Mor and Shmuelevitz were tried in a military court on terrorism charges. The prosecution accused them of the murder of Bernadotte, though they were not specifically charged with it. Senior officers of the IDF, including Yisrael Galili and David Shaltiel, told the court that Lehi had hindered, rather than assisted the fight against the British and the Arabs.

While the trial was in progress, some of the Lehi leadership founded a USSR-leaning political party called the Fighters&#x27; List with Yellin-Mor as its leader. The party took part in the elections in January 1949 with Yellin-Mor and Shmuelevitz heading the list. The trial verdict was handed down on 10 February, soon after the Fighters&#x27; List had won one seat with only 1.2% of the vote. Yellin-Mor was sentenced to 8 years and Shmuelevitz to 5 years imprisonment, but the court agreed to remit the sentences if the prisoners agreed to a list of conditions. The Provisional State Council then authorised their pardon. The party disbanded after several years and did not contest the 1951 elections.

In 1956, some Lehi veterans established the Semitic Action movement, which sought the creation of a regional federation encompassing Israel and its Arab neighbours on the basis of an anti-colonialist alliance with other indigenous inhabitants of the Middle East.

Not all Lehi alumni gave up political violence after independence: former members were involved in the activities of the Kingdom of Israel militant group, the 1957 assassination of Rudolf Kastner, and likely the 1952 attempted assassination of David-Zvi Pinkas.

==Publications==

Lehi produced a range of publications containing unabashedly racist literature referring to Jews as a &quot;master race&quot; and Arabs as a &quot;slave race&quot;. Prominent publications included &quot;Hamaas&quot; (Ahe Action), a weekly publication, as well as the monthly &quot;HaKhazit&quot; (The Front), daily &quot;Mivrak&quot; (Telegram), and &quot;BaMahteret&quot; (Underground).

== Service ribbon ==

In 1980, Israel instituted the Lehi ribbon, red, black, grey, pale blue and white, which is awarded to former members of the Lehi underground who wished to carry it, &quot;for military service towards the establishment of the State of Israel&quot;.

== &quot;Unknown Soldiers&quot; anthem ==

The words and music of a song &quot;Unknown Soldiers&quot; (also translated &quot;Anonymous Soldiers&quot;) were written by Avraham Stern in 1932 during the early days of the Irgun. It became the Irgun&#x27;s anthem until the split with Lehi in 1940, after which it became the Lehi anthem.

== Prominent members of Lehi ==

A number of Lehi&#x27;s members went on to play important roles in Israel&#x27;s public life.
* Shaltiel Ben-Yair, explosives expert, organised together with Amos Kenan the assassination attempt against the Transportation Minister in 1952
* Eliyahu Bet-Zuri, executed in 1945 for his part in the assassination of Lord Moyne
* Geula Cohen, member of the Knesset
* Israel Eldad, leader in the Israeli national camp
* Boaz Evron, left-wing journalist
* Maxim Ghilan, Israeli journalist, author and peace activist
* Eliyahu Giladi, killed in 1943 by his Lehi comrades for arguing in favour of committing acts considered too extreme even by them
* Uri Zvi Greenberg, Israeli poet and journalist
* Eliyahu Hakim, executed in 1945 for assassinating Lord Moyne
* Amos Kenan, writer
* Baruch Korff, Orthodox rabbi
* Yitzhak Shamir, Israeli prime minister 1983–1984 and 1986–1992
* Avraham Stern, leader and ideologist
* Shimon Tzabar, author, painter, mycologist and anti-Zionist activist
* Yaakov Yardaur, lawyer and advocate for equal rights for the Arab citizens of Israel
* Natan Yellin-Mor, member of the Knesset 1949–1951, leftist advocate of peace with Arabs.

==See also==

* List of Lehi operations
* List of Lehi members
* Jewish insurgency in Palestine
* Roy Farran, letter bomb incident

==References==
Notes
Citations
Bibliography

* Amichal Yevin, Ada (1986). &quot;In purple: the life of Yair-Abraham Stern&quot;. Tel Aviv: Hadar Publishing House.
* Bell, J. Bowyer (1977). &quot;Terror Out of Zion: Irgun Zvai Leumi, Lehi, and the Palestine Underground, 1929–1949&quot;. Avon. 
* Ben-Yehuda, Nachman (1998). &quot;Political Violence: Political Assassinations as a Quest for Justice.&quot; In Robert R. Friedmann (Ed.). &quot;Crime and Criminal Justice in Israel: Assessing The Knowledge base Toward The Twenty-first Century&quot; (pp. 139–184). SUNY Press. .
* Golan, Zev (2003). &quot;Free Jerusalem: Heroes, Heroines and Rogues Who Created the State of Israel&quot;. Devora. 
* Golan, Zev (2011). &quot;Stern: The Man and His Gang&quot;. Yair. 
* Heller, J. (1995). &quot;The Stern Gang&quot;. Frank Cass. 
* Hyams, Edward (1975) &quot;Terrorists and Terrorism&quot; 
* Iviansky, Z. (1986) &quot;Lechi&#x27;s Share in the Struggle for Israel&#x27;s Liberation,&quot; in: Ely Tavin and Yonah Alexander (Ed.).&quot;Terrorists or Freedom Fighters&quot;, Fairfax, Va.: HERO Books.
* Katz, E. (1987). &quot;LECHI: Fighters for the freedom of Israel&quot;, Tel Aviv: Yair Publishers
* Lustick, Ian S. (1994). &quot;Terrorism in the Arab–Israeli Conflict: Targets and Audiences.&quot; In Crenshaw, Martha (ed). &quot;Terrorism in Context&quot; (pp. 514–552). University Park, PA: Pennsylvania State University Press. 
* Marton, K. (1994). &quot;A Death in Jerusalem&quot;. Pantheon. — Bernadotte assassination
* 


==External links==

* British wanted poster from 1940s</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q293332" start="0" end="4" title="Lehi (militant group)" label="Lehi"/>
<link wikidata="Q293332" start="65" end="99" title="Lehi (militant group)" label="Fighters for the Freedom of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q293332" start="139" end="149" title="Lehi (militant group)" label="Stern Gang"/>
<link wikidata="Q42388" start="157" end="164" title="Zionism" label="Zionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q207320" start="165" end="177" title="paramilitary" label="paramilitary"/>
<link wikidata="Q17010072" start="178" end="186" title="militant" label="militant"/>
<link wikidata="Q461846" start="211" end="243" title="Avraham Stern" label="Avraham (&amp;quot;Yair&amp;quot;) Stern"/>
<link wikidata="Q193714" start="247" end="266" title="Mandatory Palestine" label="Mandatory Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q597260" start="377" end="388" title="aliyah" label="immigration"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="392" end="396" title="Jews" label="Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q293332" start="462" end="502" title="Lehi (militant group)" label="National Military Organization in Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7283" start="614" end="624" title="Terrorism" label="terrorists"/>
<link wikidata="Q207913" start="700" end="705" title="Irgun" label="Irgun"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="763" end="770" title="United Kingdom" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="778" end="790" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="829" end="842" title="Kingdom of Italy#Fascist regime (1922–1943)" label="Fascist Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="847" end="859" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q855" start="1220" end="1233" title="Joseph Stalin" label="Joseph Stalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="1241" end="1253" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q571627" start="1274" end="1293" title="National Bolshevism" label="National Bolshevism"/>
<link wikidata="Q44526" start="1514" end="1528" title="Greater Israel" label="Greater Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1674684" start="1663" end="1686" title="1949 Israeli Constituent Assembly election" label="first Israeli elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126268" start="1756" end="1779" title="Deir Yassin massacre" label="massacre in Deir Yassin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1872" end="1882" title="Walter Guinness, 1st Baron Moyne#Assassination" label="Lord Moyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q58967" start="2075" end="2096" title="Israel Defense Forces" label="Israel Defense Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q212163" start="2207" end="2223" title="Folke Bernadotte" label="Folke Bernadotte"/>
<link wikidata="Q213500" start="2306" end="2318" title="Ralph Bunche" label="Ralph Bunche"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2734" end="2745" title="Israeli military decorations#Service ribbons" label="Lehi ribbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q184351" start="2766" end="2780" title="Yitzhak Shamir" label="Yitzhak Shamir"/>
<link wikidata="Q208487" start="2788" end="2812" title="Prime Minister of Israel" label="Prime Minister of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q461846" start="2879" end="2892" title="Avraham Stern" label="Avraham Stern"/>
<link wikidata="Q207913" start="2925" end="2930" title="Irgun" label="Irgun"/>
<link wikidata="Q319896" start="3022" end="3037" title="Zeev Jabotinsky" label="Zeev Jabotinsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="3168" end="3180" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="3223" end="3235" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501775" start="3505" end="3524" title="White Paper of 1939" label="White Paper of 1939"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="3654" end="3660" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q10664" start="3665" end="3676" title="Neville Chamberlain" label="Chamberlain"/>
<link wikidata="Q151198" start="3686" end="3692" title="Dachau concentration camp" label="Dachau"/>
<link wikidata="Q152802" start="3696" end="3706" title="Buchenwald concentration camp" label="Buchenwald"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356549" start="3947" end="3953" title="Yishuv" label="Yishuv"/>
<link wikidata="Q101244" start="4424" end="4431" title="acronym" label="acronym"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="4715" end="4720" title="Nazism" label="Nazis"/>
<link wikidata="Q127013" start="4825" end="4839" title="Final Solution" label="Final Solution"/>
<link wikidata="Q375916" start="4935" end="4944" title="judenrein" label="judenrein"/>
<link wikidata="Q155321" start="5452" end="5465" title="Eretz Yisrael" label="Eretz Yisrael"/>
<link wikidata="Q7283" start="6160" end="6169" title="terrorism" label="terrorism"/>
<link wikidata="Q34990" start="6307" end="6312" title="Torah" label="Torah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356549" start="7152" end="7158" title="Yishuv" label="Yishuv"/>
<link wikidata="Q184351" start="7205" end="7219" title="Yitzhak Shamir" label="Yitzhak Shamir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352190" start="7770" end="7780" title="Harold MacMichael" label="MacMichael"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845" start="8234" end="8239" title="Bible" label="Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q176125" start="8242" end="8248" title="Gideon" label="Gideon"/>
<link wikidata="Q214648" start="8253" end="8259" title="Samson" label="Samson"/>
<link wikidata="Q539" start="8438" end="8456" title="Giuseppe Garibaldi" label="Giuseppe Garibaldi"/>
<link wikidata="Q9161" start="8461" end="8476" title="Josip Broz Tito" label="Josip Broz Tito"/>
<link wikidata="Q193714" start="9088" end="9103" title="Mandatory Palestine" label="British Mandate"/>
<link wikidata="Q597260" start="9486" end="9492" title="aliyah" label="gather"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412733" start="9497" end="9512" title="Jewish Diaspora" label="Jewish Diaspora"/>
<link wikidata="Q9288" start="9552" end="9567" title="Hebrew language" label="Hebrew language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415267" start="9602" end="9614" title="Third Temple" label="Third Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916226" start="9837" end="9856" title="Fighters&amp;#x27; List" label="Fighters&amp;#x27; List"/>
<link wikidata="Q1674684" start="9919" end="9944" title="1949 Israeli legislative election" label="elections in January 1949"/>
<link wikidata="Q7449677" start="10024" end="10038" title="Semitic Action" label="Semitic Action"/>
<link wikidata="Q6223" start="10454" end="10475" title="fascism" label="fascist radical Right"/>
<link wikidata="Q6223" start="10857" end="10864" title="Fascism" label="fascist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="10869" end="10878" title="Communism" label="communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q8461" start="10901" end="10907" title="racism" label="racism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6223" start="11020" end="11027" title="Fascism" label="fascist"/>
<link wikidata="" start="11058" end="11087" title=":it:Gruppo Universitario Fascista" label="Gruppo Universitario Fascista"/>
<link wikidata="Q8046270" start="11201" end="11214" title="Yaacov Shavit" label="Yaacov Shavit"/>
<link wikidata="Q319239" start="11263" end="11282" title="Tel Aviv University" label="Tel Aviv University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638758" start="11473" end="11495" title="Sasha Polakow-Suransky" label="Sasha Polakow-Suransky"/>
<link wikidata="Q23792" start="11694" end="11703" title="Palestine (region)" label="Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7834492" start="11708" end="11719" title="Transjordan (region)" label="Transjordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367843" start="11819" end="11836" title="Nathan Yellin-Mor" label="Nathan Yellin-Mor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7449677" start="11863" end="11877" title="Semitic Action" label="Semitic Action"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12081" end="12095" title="Yaakov Yardaur" label="Yaakov Yardaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q204333" start="12170" end="12193" title="Arab citizens of Israel" label="Arab citizens of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q242533" start="12343" end="12356" title="Civitavecchia" label="Civitavecchia"/>
<link wikidata="Q282696" start="12434" end="12453" title="Polish Armed Forces" label="Polish Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q702450" start="12499" end="12510" title="Trochenbrod" label="Trochenbrod"/>
<link wikidata="Q1940320" start="12525" end="12542" title="Wołyń Voivodeship (1921–1939)" label="Wołyń Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q580" start="12557" end="12561" title="Łódź" label="Łódź"/>
<link wikidata="Q984857" start="12586" end="12595" title="Andrychów" label="Andrychów"/>
<link wikidata="Q207540" start="13171" end="13174" title="Lod" label="Lod"/>
<link wikidata="Q210175" start="13501" end="13504" title="MI5" label="MI5"/>
<link wikidata="Q5534704" start="13625" end="13643" title="Geoffrey J. Morton" label="Geoffrey J. Morton"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13651" end="13654" title="Criminal Investigation Department (Mandatory Palestine)" label="CID"/>
<link wikidata="Q184351" start="13813" end="13827" title="Yitzhak Shamir" label="Yitzhak Shamir"/>
<link wikidata="Q12016611" start="13832" end="13846" title="Eliyahu Giladi" label="Eliyahu Giladi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367843" start="13876" end="13892" title="Natan Yellin-Mor" label="Natan Yellin-Mor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367305" start="13908" end="13920" title="Israel Eldad" label="Israel Eldad"/>
<link wikidata="Q173196" start="14100" end="14115" title="Michael Collins (Irish leader)" label="Michael Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q162793" start="14180" end="14197" title="Uri Zvi Greenberg" label="Uri Zvi Greenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367305" start="14202" end="14214" title="Israel Eldad" label="Israel Eldad"/>
<link wikidata="Q7260" start="14368" end="14379" title="Imperialism" label="imperialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q4394526" start="14572" end="14589" title="international law" label="international law"/>
<link wikidata="Q252054" start="14727" end="14734" title="Haganah" label="Haganah"/>
<link wikidata="Q207913" start="14739" end="14744" title="Irgun" label="Irgun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770995" start="14779" end="14790" title="Deir Yassin" label="Deir Yassin"/>
<link wikidata="Q41189" start="15118" end="15142" title="Jewish Agency for Israel" label="Jewish Agency for Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2893194" start="15691" end="15705" title="Moshe Barazani" label="Moshe Barazani"/>
<link wikidata="Q2777695" start="15726" end="15740" title="Meir Feinstein" label="Meir Feinstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186403" start="16565" end="16579" title="Jewish Quarter (Jerusalem)" label="Jewish quarter"/>
<link wikidata="Q983112" start="17120" end="17134" title="Yitzhak Berman" label="Yitzhak Berman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="17546" end="17558" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17932" end="17949" title="Naftali Lubenchik" label="Naftali Lubenchik"/>
<link wikidata="Q3820" start="17958" end="17964" title="Beirut" label="Beirut"/>
<link wikidata="Q214112" start="17989" end="18011" title="Werner Otto von Hentig" label="Werner Otto von Hentig"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367305" start="18141" end="18153" title="Israel Eldad" label="Israel Eldad"/>
<link wikidata="Q544178" start="18634" end="18641" title="attaché" label="attaché"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="18645" end="18651" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q69808" start="20065" end="20077" title="Vichy France" label="Vichy France"/>
<link wikidata="Q626389" start="20078" end="20084" title="Sûreté" label="Sûreté"/>
<link wikidata="Q332475" start="20333" end="20343" title="Walter Guinness, 1st Baron Moyne" label="Lord Moyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q85" start="20398" end="20403" title="Cairo" label="Cairo"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016" start="20730" end="20747" title="Winston Churchill" label="Winston Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q14212" start="20761" end="20775" title="Prime Minister" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q2365699" start="20796" end="20812" title="Eliyahu Bet-Zuri" label="Eliyahu Bet-Zuri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1961122" start="20817" end="20830" title="Eliyahu Hakim" label="Eliyahu Hakim"/>
<link wikidata="Q2890904" start="21132" end="21145" title="Olei Hagardom" label="Olei Hagardom"/>
<link wikidata="Q217009" start="21509" end="21534" title="Socialist Revolutionaries" label="Socialist Revolutionaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q5150659" start="21543" end="21592" title="Combat Organization of the Polish Socialist Party" label="Combat Organization of the Polish Socialist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q175284" start="21620" end="21641" title="Irish Republican Army" label="Irish Republican Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q332475" start="21775" end="21785" title="Walter Guinness, 1st Baron Moyne" label="Lord Moyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q18197265" start="21787" end="21790" title="Criminal Investigation Department" label="CID"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565868" start="22057" end="22065" title="railroad" label="railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q22656" start="22103" end="22106" title="Petroleum" label="oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q6452087" start="22270" end="22279" title="extortion" label="extortion"/>
<link wikidata="Q806824" start="22285" end="22297" title="bank robbery" label="bank robbery"/>
<link wikidata="Q252054" start="22461" end="22468" title="Haganah" label="Haganah"/>
<link wikidata="Q2911372" start="22480" end="22494" title="The Hunting Season" label="Hunting Season"/>
<link wikidata="Q2891566" start="22560" end="22586" title="Jewish Resistance Movement" label="Jewish Resistance Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q6190058" start="22689" end="22719" title="Jewish insurgency in Palestine" label="Jewish insurgency in Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q33935" start="22807" end="22815" title="Tel Aviv" label="Tel Aviv"/>
<link wikidata="Q245557" start="22840" end="22861" title="6th Airborne Division (United Kingdom)" label="6th Airborne Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q41621" start="23522" end="23527" title="Haifa" label="Haifa"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="23959" end="23965" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q214820" start="24181" end="24190" title="Whitehall" label="Whitehall"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="24495" end="24502" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="24506" end="24512" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q332365" start="24921" end="24926" title="Ernest Bevin" label="Bevin"/>
<link wikidata="Q129006" start="24928" end="24934" title="Clement Attlee" label="Attlee"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016" start="24936" end="24945" title="Winston Churchill" label="Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q128995" start="24950" end="24954" title="Anthony Eden" label="Eden"/>
<link wikidata="Q266959" start="25611" end="25626" title="Margaret Truman" label="Margaret Truman"/>
<link wikidata="Q11613" start="25698" end="25713" title="Harry S. Truman" label="Harry S. Truman"/>
<link wikidata="Q335087" start="26030" end="26047" title="Hugh Trevor-Roper" label="Hugh Trevor-Roper"/>
<link wikidata="Q49092" start="26234" end="26255" title="1948 Arab–Israeli War" label="1948 Arab–Israeli War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5017800" start="26262" end="26289" title="Cairo–Haifa train bombings 1948" label="mined the Cairo–Haifa train"/>
<link wikidata="Q207350" start="26356" end="26363" title="Rehovot" label="Rehovot"/>
<link wikidata="Q863890" start="26449" end="26458" title="Binyamina" label="Binyamina"/>
<link wikidata="Q718329" start="26539" end="26550" title="Shlomo Sand" label="Shlomo Sand"/>
<link wikidata="Q214178" start="26676" end="26682" title="Nablus" label="Nablus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770995" start="27288" end="27299" title="Deir Yassin" label="Deir Yassin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7172" start="27366" end="27377" title="Arab League" label="Arab League"/>
<link wikidata="Q623911" start="27388" end="27408" title="Arab Liberation Army" label="Arab Liberation Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218" start="27472" end="27481" title="Jerusalem" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q33935" start="27486" end="27494" title="Tel Aviv" label="Tel Aviv"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375894" start="27682" end="27700" title="Operation Nachshon" label="Operation Nachshon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048597" start="27755" end="27764" title="Al Qastal, Jerusalem" label="al-Qastal"/>
<link wikidata="Q37610" start="28942" end="28958" title="David Ben-Gurion" label="David Ben-Gurion"/>
<link wikidata="Q192780" start="29117" end="29137" title="Abdullah I of Jordan" label="Abdullah I of Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q13220089" start="29611" end="29620" title="1948 Palestinian expulsion and flight" label="they fled"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367305" start="29833" end="29845" title="Israel Eldad" label="Israel Eldad"/>
<link wikidata="Q223732" start="30215" end="30256" title="Declaration of Independence (Israel)" label="Israel&amp;#x27;s declaration of independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q212163" start="30485" end="30501" title="Folke Bernadotte" label="Folke Bernadotte"/>
<link wikidata="Q2904138" start="30537" end="30553" title="Yehoshua Zettler" label="Yehoshua Zettler"/>
<link wikidata="Q2777380" start="30644" end="30658" title="Yehoshua Cohen" label="Yehoshua Cohen"/>
<link wikidata="Q37470" start="30664" end="30680" title="United Nations Security Council" label="Security Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367843" start="31014" end="31031" title="Nathan Yellin-Mor" label="Nathan Yellin-Mor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1386714" start="31746" end="31760" title="Yisrael Galili" label="Yisrael Galili"/>
<link wikidata="Q2573074" start="31765" end="31779" title="David Shaltiel" label="David Shaltiel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916226" start="31998" end="32017" title="Fighters&amp;#x27; List" label="Fighters&amp;#x27; List"/>
<link wikidata="Q1674684" start="32076" end="32101" title="1949 Israeli legislative election" label="elections in January 1949"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915671" start="32576" end="32590" title="1951 Israeli legislative election" label="1951 elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7449677" start="32637" end="32651" title="Semitic Action" label="Semitic Action"/>
<link wikidata="Q3399774" start="32885" end="32903" title="political violence" label="political violence"/>
<link wikidata="Q6412606" start="32978" end="32995" title="Kingdom of Israel (group)" label="Kingdom of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q557665" start="33038" end="33052" title="Rudolf Kastner" label="Rudolf Kastner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2587814" start="33101" end="33117" title="David-Zvi Pinkas" label="David-Zvi Pinkas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5643924" start="33341" end="33347" title="Hamaas" label="Hamaas"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="33580" end="33591" title="Israeli Military decorations#Service ribbons" label="Lehi ribbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2365699" start="34407" end="34423" title="Eliyahu Bet-Zuri" label="Eliyahu Bet-Zuri"/>
<link wikidata="Q2889981" start="34492" end="34503" title="Geula Cohen" label="Geula Cohen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367305" start="34529" end="34541" title="Israel Eldad" label="Israel Eldad"/>
<link wikidata="Q4931559" start="34581" end="34591" title="Boaz Evron" label="Boaz Evron"/>
<link wikidata="Q6795583" start="34616" end="34628" title="Maxim Ghilan" label="Maxim Ghilan"/>
<link wikidata="Q12016611" start="34678" end="34692" title="Eliyahu Giladi" label="Eliyahu Giladi"/>
<link wikidata="Q162793" start="34809" end="34826" title="Uri Zvi Greenberg" label="Uri Zvi Greenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1961122" start="34858" end="34871" title="Eliyahu Hakim" label="Eliyahu Hakim"/>
<link wikidata="Q2891201" start="34921" end="34931" title="Amos Kenan" label="Amos Kenan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3635479" start="34942" end="34954" title="Baruch Korff" label="Baruch Korff"/>
<link wikidata="Q184351" start="34973" end="34987" title="Yitzhak Shamir" label="Yitzhak Shamir"/>
<link wikidata="Q461846" start="35038" end="35051" title="Avraham Stern" label="Avraham Stern"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376044" start="35077" end="35090" title="Shimon Tzabar" label="Shimon Tzabar"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35148" end="35162" title="Yaakov Yardaur" label="Yaakov Yardaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q204333" start="35209" end="35232" title="Arab citizens of Israel" label="Arab citizens of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367843" start="35235" end="35251" title="Natan Yellin-Mor" label="Natan Yellin-Mor"/>
<link wikidata="Q30688311" start="35341" end="35364" title="List of Lehi operations" label="List of Lehi operations"/>
<link wikidata="Q30325362" start="35367" end="35387" title="List of Lehi members" label="List of Lehi members"/>
<link wikidata="Q6190058" start="35390" end="35420" title="Jewish insurgency in Palestine" label="Jewish insurgency in Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2904005" start="35423" end="35433" title="Roy Farran" label="Roy Farran"/>
<link wikidata="Q6104844" start="35622" end="35637" title="J. Bowyer Bell" label="Bell, J. Bowyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5343574" start="36284" end="36297" title="Edward Hyams" label="Hyams, Edward"/>
<link wikidata="Q8068148" start="36345" end="36357" title="Ze&amp;#x27;ev Iviansky" label="Iviansky, Z."/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="29288" wikidata="Q1209289" url="?curid=29288" title="Server-side scripting">
<text>Server-side scripting is a technique used in web development which involves employing scripts on a web server which produces a response customized for each user&#x27;s (client&#x27;s) request to the website. Scripts can be written in any of a number of server-side scripting languages that are available. Server-side scripting is distinguished from client-side scripting where embedded scripts, such as JavaScript, are run client-side in a web browser, but both techniques are often used together. The alternative to either or both types of scripting is for the web server itself to deliver a static web page.

Server-side scripting is often used to provide a customized interface for the user. These scripts may assemble client characteristics for use in customizing the response based on those characteristics, the user&#x27;s requirements, access rights, etc. Server-side scripting also enables the website owner to hide the source code that generates the interface, whereas, with client-side scripting, the user has access to all the code received by the client. A downside to the use of server-side scripting is that the client needs to make further requests over the network to the server in order to show new information to the user via the web browser. These requests can slow down the experience for the user, place more load on the server, and prevent the use of the application when the user is disconnected from the server.

When the server serves data in a commonly used manner, for example, according to the HTTP or FTP protocols, users may have their choice of a number of client programs (most modern web browsers can request and receive data using both of those protocols). In the case of more specialized applications, programmers may write their own server, client, and communications protocol, that can only be used with one another.

Programs that run on a user&#x27;s local computer without ever sending or receiving data over a network are not considered clients, and so the operations of such programs would not be considered client-side operations.

== History ==
Netscape introduced an implementation of JavaScript for server-side scripting with Netscape Enterprise Server, first released in December, 1994 (soon after releasing JavaScript for browsers).

Server-side scripting was later used in early 1996 by Fred Dufresne while developing the first website for Boston, MA television station WCVB. The technology is described in US patent 5835712. The patent was issued in 1998 and is now owned by Open Invention Network (OIN). In 2010, OIN named Fred DuFresne a &quot;Distinguished Inventor&quot; for his work on server-side scripting.

== Explanation ==
In the earlier days of the web, server-side scripting was almost exclusively performed by using a combination of C programs, Perl scripts, and shell scripts using the Common Gateway Interface (CGI). Those scripts were executed by the operating system, and the results were served back by the web server. Many modern web servers can directly execute on-line scripting languages such as ASP, JSP, Perl, PHP and Ruby either by the web server itself or via extension modules (e.g. mod_perl or mod_php) to the webserver. For example, WebDNA includes its own embedded database system. Either form of scripting (i.e., CGI or direct execution) can be used to build up complex multi-page sites, but direct execution usually results in less overhead because of the lower number of calls to external interpreters.

Dynamic websites sometimes use custom web application servers, such as Glassfish, Plack and Python&#x27;s &quot;Base HTTP Server&quot; library, although some may not consider this to be server-side scripting. When using dynamic web-based scripting techniques, developers must have a keen understanding of the logical, temporal, and physical separation between the client and the server. For a user&#x27;s action to trigger the execution of server-side code, for example, a developer working with classic ASP must explicitly cause the user&#x27;s browser to make a request back to the webserver.

Server-side scripts are completely processed by the servers instead of clients. When clients request a page containing server-side scripts, the application server processes the scripts and returns an HTML page to the client.

== Server-side rendering ==
With the advent of single-page applications, an updated approach to server-side scripting was introduced, known as server-side rendering. With server-side rendering, static HTML can be sent from the server to the client, and client-side JavaScript then makes the web page dynamic by attaching event handlers to the HTML elements in a process called hydration. Examples of frameworks that support server-side rendering are Next.js, Nuxt.js, Angular, and React.

An alternative to server-side rendering is static site generation. With server-side rendering, the page is generally assembled on the server once per each request. By contrast, with static site generation, the application generates all the static HTML pages at build time. These pre-built pages are then sent to the client at each request, without having to build them again. This leads to faster rendering times, since a new page doesn&#x27;t have to be generated on every request; the server simply hands over a file it already generated in the past. The downside is that when some data on the page changes, it needs to be rebuilt. Examples of static site generation tools are Jekyll and Gatsby. Sites generated by static site generation tools are often hosted on Netlify, Vercel or GitHub pages.

== Languages ==

There are a number of server-side scripting languages available, including:
* ActiveVFP (*.avfp)
* ASP (*.asp)
* ASP.NET Web Forms (*.aspx)
* ASP.NET Web Pages (*.cshtml, *.vbhtml)
* ColdFusion Markup Language (*.cfm)
* Go (*.go)
* Google Apps Script (*.gs)
* Hack (*.php)
* Haskell (*.hs) (example: Yesod)
* Java (*.jsp, *.do) via JavaServer Pages
* JavaScript using Server-side JavaScript (*.ssjs, *.js) (example: Node.js)
* Lasso (*.lasso)
* Lua (*.lp *.op *.lua)
* Parser (*.p)
* Perl via the CGI.pm module (*.cgi, *.ipl, *.pl)
* PHP (*.php, *.php3, *.php4, *.phtml)
* Python (*.py) (examples: Pyramid, Flask, Django)
* R (*.rhtml)
* Ruby (*.rb, *.rbw) (example: Ruby on Rails)
* Tcl (*.tcl)
* WebDNA (*.dna,*.tpl)
* Progress WebSpeed (*.r,*.w)

== See also ==
* Client-side scripting
* Content management system (CMS)
* Edge Side Includes
* JSP
* Node.js
* Next.js
* Outline of web design and web development
* Perl/Plack
* PHP
* Server Side Includes (SSI)
* Web development

== References ==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1209289" start="0" end="21" title="Server-side scripting" label="Server-side scripting"/>
<link wikidata="Q386275" start="45" end="60" title="web development" label="web development"/>
<link wikidata="Q187432" start="86" end="92" title="Scripting language" label="script"/>
<link wikidata="Q11288" start="99" end="109" title="web server" label="web server"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650567" start="349" end="370" title="client-side scripting" label="client-side scripting"/>
<link wikidata="Q2005" start="403" end="413" title="JavaScript" label="JavaScript"/>
<link wikidata="Q6368" start="440" end="451" title="web browser" label="web browser"/>
<link wikidata="Q2641220" start="593" end="608" title="static web page" label="static web page"/>
<link wikidata="Q47146" start="671" end="693" title="User interface" label="interface for the user"/>
<link wikidata="Q128751" start="928" end="939" title="source code" label="source code"/>
<link wikidata="Q6368" start="1248" end="1259" title="web browser" label="web browser"/>
<link wikidata="Q8777" start="1522" end="1526" title="Hypertext Transfer Protocol" label="HTTP"/>
<link wikidata="Q42283" start="1530" end="1533" title="File Transfer Protocol" label="FTP"/>
<link wikidata="Q132364" start="1534" end="1543" title="Protocol (computing)" label="protocols"/>
<link wikidata="Q210057" start="2089" end="2097" title="Netscape" label="Netscape"/>
<link wikidata="Q2005" start="2130" end="2140" title="JavaScript" label="JavaScript"/>
<link wikidata="Q1225115" start="2172" end="2198" title="Netscape Enterprise Server" label="Netscape Enterprise Server"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2336" end="2349" title="Fred Dufresne" label="Fred Dufresne"/>
<link wikidata="Q7948158" start="2419" end="2423" title="WCVB-TV" label="WCVB"/>
<link wikidata="Q2025721" start="2525" end="2547" title="Open Invention Network" label="Open Invention Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q15777" start="2796" end="2797" title="C (programming language)" label="C"/>
<link wikidata="Q42478" start="2808" end="2812" title="Perl" label="Perl"/>
<link wikidata="Q959549" start="2826" end="2838" title="shell script" label="shell script"/>
<link wikidata="Q264364" start="2850" end="2874" title="Common Gateway Interface" label="Common Gateway Interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q9135" start="2917" end="2933" title="operating system" label="operating system"/>
<link wikidata="Q11288" start="2975" end="2985" title="web server" label="web server"/>
<link wikidata="Q187432" start="3040" end="3058" title="scripting language" label="scripting language"/>
<link wikidata="Q344266" start="3068" end="3071" title="Active Server Pages" label="ASP"/>
<link wikidata="Q183169" start="3073" end="3076" title="JavaServer Pages" label="JSP"/>
<link wikidata="Q42478" start="3078" end="3082" title="Perl" label="Perl"/>
<link wikidata="Q59" start="3084" end="3087" title="PHP" label="PHP"/>
<link wikidata="Q161053" start="3092" end="3096" title="Ruby (programming language)" label="Ruby"/>
<link wikidata="Q292390" start="3160" end="3168" title="mod_perl" label="mod_perl"/>
<link wikidata="Q6561788" start="3172" end="3179" title="mod_php" label="mod_php"/>
<link wikidata="Q7978443" start="3212" end="3218" title="WebDNA" label="WebDNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q68847" start="3558" end="3567" title="GlassFish" label="Glassfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q7200393" start="3569" end="3574" title="Plack (software)" label="Plack"/>
<link wikidata="Q28865" start="3579" end="3585" title="Python (programming language)" label="Python"/>
<link wikidata="Q1990286" start="4356" end="4379" title="single-page application" label="single-page application"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650567" start="4609" end="4616" title="Dynamic web page" label="dynamic"/>
<link wikidata="Q104880139" start="4686" end="4695" title="Hydration (web development)" label="hydration"/>
<link wikidata="Q56062435" start="4759" end="4766" title="Next.js" label="Next.js"/>
<link wikidata="Q55641291" start="4768" end="4775" title="Nuxt.js" label="Nuxt.js"/>
<link wikidata="Q28925578" start="4777" end="4784" title="Angular (web framework)" label="Angular"/>
<link wikidata="Q19399674" start="4790" end="4795" title="React (JavaScript library)" label="React"/>
<link wikidata="Q77916592" start="4841" end="4863" title="Static site generator" label="static site generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q17067385" start="5477" end="5483" title="Jekyll (software)" label="Jekyll"/>
<link wikidata="Q95972615" start="5488" end="5494" title="Gatsby (software)" label="Gatsby"/>
<link wikidata="Q56102498" start="5564" end="5571" title="Netlify" label="Netlify"/>
<link wikidata="Q56069184" start="5573" end="5579" title="Vercel" label="Vercel"/>
<link wikidata="Q364" start="5583" end="5589" title="GitHub" label="GitHub"/>
<link wikidata="Q4677478" start="5693" end="5702" title="ActiveVFP" label="ActiveVFP"/>
<link wikidata="Q344266" start="5714" end="5717" title="Active Server Pages" label="ASP"/>
<link wikidata="Q55602973" start="5728" end="5745" title="ASP.NET Web Forms" label="ASP.NET Web Forms"/>
<link wikidata="Q6840077" start="5757" end="5774" title="ASP.NET Web Pages" label="ASP.NET Web Pages"/>
<link wikidata="Q2524362" start="5798" end="5824" title="ColdFusion Markup Language" label="ColdFusion Markup Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q37227" start="5835" end="5837" title="Go (programming language)" label="Go"/>
<link wikidata="Q5583799" start="5847" end="5865" title="Google Apps Script" label="Google Apps Script"/>
<link wikidata="Q15971618" start="5875" end="5879" title="Hack (programming language)" label="Hack"/>
<link wikidata="Q34010" start="5890" end="5897" title="Haskell (programming language)" label="Haskell"/>
<link wikidata="Q8052925" start="5915" end="5920" title="Yesod (web framework)" label="Yesod"/>
<link wikidata="Q251" start="5924" end="5928" title="Java (programming language)" label="Java"/>
<link wikidata="Q183169" start="5947" end="5963" title="JavaServer Pages" label="JavaServer Pages"/>
<link wikidata="Q2005" start="5966" end="5976" title="JavaScript" label="JavaScript"/>
<link wikidata="Q2005" start="5983" end="6005" title="Server-side JavaScript" label="Server-side JavaScript"/>
<link wikidata="Q756100" start="6031" end="6038" title="Node.js" label="Node.js"/>
<link wikidata="Q3218363" start="6042" end="6047" title="Lasso (programming language)" label="Lasso"/>
<link wikidata="Q207316" start="6060" end="6063" title="Lua (programming language)" label="Lua"/>
<link wikidata="Q3501043" start="6084" end="6090" title="Parser (programming language)" label="Parser"/>
<link wikidata="Q42478" start="6099" end="6103" title="Perl" label="Perl"/>
<link wikidata="Q5010968" start="6112" end="6118" title="CGI.pm" label="CGI.pm"/>
<link wikidata="Q59" start="6149" end="6152" title="PHP" label="PHP"/>
<link wikidata="Q28865" start="6188" end="6194" title="Python (programming language)" label="Python"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6213" end="6220" title="Pyramid (web framework)#Pyramid" label="Pyramid"/>
<link wikidata="Q289281" start="6222" end="6227" title="Flask (web framework)" label="Flask"/>
<link wikidata="Q842014" start="6229" end="6235" title="Django (Web framework)" label="Django"/>
<link wikidata="Q206904" start="6239" end="6240" title="R (programming language)" label="R"/>
<link wikidata="Q161053" start="6253" end="6257" title="Ruby (programming language)" label="Ruby"/>
<link wikidata="Q190478" start="6282" end="6295" title="Ruby on Rails" label="Ruby on Rails"/>
<link wikidata="Q5288" start="6299" end="6302" title="Tcl (programming language)" label="Tcl"/>
<link wikidata="Q7978443" start="6313" end="6319" title="WebDNA" label="WebDNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1963461" start="6336" end="6353" title="OpenEdge Advanced Business Language" label="Progress WebSpeed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650567" start="6382" end="6403" title="Client-side scripting" label="Client-side scripting"/>
<link wikidata="Q131093" start="6406" end="6431" title="Content management system" label="Content management system"/>
<link wikidata="Q140171" start="6440" end="6458" title="Edge Side Includes" label="Edge Side Includes"/>
<link wikidata="Q183169" start="6461" end="6464" title="JavaServer Pages" label="JSP"/>
<link wikidata="Q756100" start="6467" end="6474" title="Node.js" label="Node.js"/>
<link wikidata="Q56062435" start="6477" end="6484" title="Next.js" label="Next.js"/>
<link wikidata="Q85791462" start="6487" end="6528" title="Outline of web design and web development" label="Outline of web design and web development"/>
<link wikidata="Q7200393" start="6531" end="6541" title="Plack (software)" label="Perl/Plack"/>
<link wikidata="Q59" start="6544" end="6547" title="PHP" label="PHP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411939" start="6550" end="6570" title="Server Side Includes" label="Server Side Includes"/>
<link wikidata="Q386275" start="6579" end="6594" title="Web development" label="Web development"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="29290" wikidata="Q414296" url="?curid=29290" title="Samuel Huntington">
<text>Samuel Huntington may refer to:

* Samuel Huntington (Connecticut politician) (1731–1796), American jurist, statesman, and revolutionary leader, 18th Governor of Connecticut
* Samuel Huntington (Ohio politician) (1765–1817), American jurist, third Governor of Ohio 
* Samuel P. Huntington (1927–2008), American political scientist and historian
* SS &quot;Samuel Huntington&quot;, an American liberty ship

==See also==
*Sam Huntington (born 1982), American actor</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q414296" start="0" end="17" title="Samuel Huntington" label="Samuel Huntington"/>
<link wikidata="Q887130" start="35" end="77" title="Samuel Huntington (Connecticut politician)" label="Samuel Huntington (Connecticut politician)"/>
<link wikidata="Q881023" start="176" end="211" title="Samuel Huntington (Ohio politician)" label="Samuel Huntington (Ohio politician)"/>
<link wikidata="Q19074" start="268" end="288" title="Samuel P. Huntington" label="Samuel P. Huntington"/>
<link wikidata="Q7394324" start="347" end="379" title="SS Samuel Huntington" label="SS &amp;quot;Samuel Huntington&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q355361" start="421" end="435" title="Sam Huntington" label="Sam Huntington"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="29292" wikidata="Q230273" url="?curid=29292" title="Script">
<text>Script may refer to:

==Writing systems==
* Script, a distinctive writing system, based on a repertoire of specific elements or symbols, or that repertoire
* Script (styles of handwriting)
** Script typeface, a typeface with characteristics of handwriting
* Script (Unicode), historical and modern scripts as organised in Unicode glyph encoding

==Arts, entertainment, and media==
* Script (comics), the story and dialogue for a comic book or comic strip
* Script (video games), the narrative and text of a video game
* Manuscript, any written document, often story-based and unpublished
* Play (theatre), the dialogue and stage directions for a theatrical production
* Rob Wagner&#x27;s &quot;Script&quot;, a defunct literary magazine edited by Rob Wagner
* Screenplay, the story, dialogue, action and locations for film or television
* Scripted sequence, a predefined series of events in a video game triggered by player location or actions
* The Script, an Irish band
** &quot;The Script&quot; (album), their 2008 debut album

==Computing and technology==
* Scripting language, in which computer programming scripts are written
* SCRIPT (markup), a text formatting language developed by IBM
* script (Unix), a command that records a terminal session
* Script, a description of procedural knowledge used in script theory, also used in artificial intelligence

==Medicine and psychology==
* SCRIPT (medicine), a standard for electronically transmitted medical prescriptions
* SCRIPT (mnemonic), a memory aid related to heart murmurs
* Behavioral script, a sequence of expected behaviors
* Life (or childhood) script, in transactional analysis
* Medical prescription (abbreviated Rx, scrip, or script), official health instructions

==Other uses==
* SCRIPT (AHRC Centre), the Scottish Centre for Research in Intellectual Property and Technologies
* ”Scripted”, a song by Zayn from Icarus Falls

==See also==
* Transcript (disambiguation)
* Scrip, any currency substitute
* Scripps (disambiguation)
* Scripted (company), an online marketplace for businesses and freelance writers
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q230273" start="0" end="6" title="Script" label="Script"/>
<link wikidata="Q8192" start="66" end="80" title="writing system" label="writing system"/>
<link wikidata="Q33260112" start="158" end="188" title="Script (styles of handwriting)" label="Script (styles of handwriting)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2249794" start="192" end="207" title="Script typeface" label="Script typeface"/>
<link wikidata="Q7439210" start="258" end="274" title="Script (Unicode)" label="Script (Unicode)"/>
<link wikidata="Q8819" start="322" end="329" title="Unicode" label="Unicode"/>
<link wikidata="Q452961" start="383" end="398" title="Script (comics)" label="Script (comics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q12336660" start="457" end="477" title="Script (video games)" label="Script (video games)"/>
<link wikidata="Q87167" start="520" end="530" title="Manuscript" label="Manuscript"/>
<link wikidata="Q25379" start="590" end="604" title="Play (theatre)" label="Play (theatre)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7340625" start="670" end="706" title="Rob Wagner&amp;#x27;s Script" label="Rob Wagner&amp;#x27;s &amp;quot;Script&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q103076" start="759" end="769" title="Screenplay" label="Screenplay"/>
<link wikidata="Q600399" start="838" end="855" title="Scripted sequence" label="Scripted sequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q459585" start="945" end="955" title="The Script" label="The Script"/>
<link wikidata="Q644834" start="974" end="1004" title="The Script (album)" label="&amp;quot;The Script&amp;quot; (album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q187432" start="1061" end="1079" title="Scripting language" label="Scripting language"/>
<link wikidata="Q7389283" start="1133" end="1148" title="SCRIPT (markup)" label="SCRIPT (markup)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2261620" start="1196" end="1209" title="script (Unix)" label="script (Unix)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7439224" start="1309" end="1322" title="script theory" label="script theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7389282" start="1392" end="1409" title="SCRIPT (medicine)" label="SCRIPT (medicine)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060911" start="1477" end="1494" title="SCRIPT (mnemonic)" label="SCRIPT (mnemonic)"/>
<link wikidata="Q779085" start="1536" end="1553" title="Behavioral script" label="Behavioral script"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1621" end="1643" title="transactional analysis#Life (or childhood) script" label="transactional analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3355478" start="1646" end="1666" title="Medical prescription" label="Medical prescription"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895368" start="1750" end="1770" title="SCRIPT (AHRC Centre)" label="SCRIPT (AHRC Centre)"/>
<link wikidata="Q59358027" start="1881" end="1893" title="Icarus Falls" label="Icarus Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q4462003" start="1910" end="1937" title="Transcript (disambiguation)" label="Transcript (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2902809" start="1940" end="1945" title="Scrip" label="Scrip"/>
<link wikidata="Q3476466" start="1973" end="1997" title="Scripps (disambiguation)" label="Scripps (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7439230" start="2000" end="2018" title="Scripted (company)" label="Scripted (company)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="29293" wikidata="Q912034" url="?curid=29293" title="Optical spectrometer">
<text>An optical spectrometer (spectrophotometer, spectrograph or spectroscope) is an instrument used to measure properties of light over a specific portion of the electromagnetic spectrum, typically used in spectroscopic analysis to identify materials. The variable measured is most often the irradiance of the light but could also, for instance, be the polarization state. The independent variable is usually the wavelength of the light or a closely derived physical quantity, such as the corresponding wavenumber or the photon energy, in units of measurement such as centimeters, reciprocal centimeters, or electron volts, respectively.

A spectrometer is used in spectroscopy for producing spectral lines and measuring their wavelengths and intensities. Spectrometers may operate over a wide range of non-optical wavelengths, from gamma rays and X-rays into the far infrared. If the instrument is designed to measure the spectrum on an absolute scale rather than a relative one, then it is typically called a spectrophotometer. The majority of spectrophotometers are used in spectral regions near the visible spectrum.

A spectrometer that is calibrated for measurement of the incident optical power is called a spectroradiometer.

In general, any particular instrument will operate over a small portion of this total range because of the different techniques used to measure different portions of the spectrum. Below optical frequencies (that is, at microwave and radio frequencies), the spectrum analyzer is a closely related electronic device.

Spectrometers are used in many fields. For example, they are used in astronomy to analyze the radiation from objects and deduce their chemical composition. The spectrometer uses a prism or a grating to spread the light into a spectrum. This allows astronomers to detect many of the chemical elements by their characteristic spectral lines. These lines are named for the elements which cause them, such as the hydrogen alpha, beta, and gamma lines. A glowing object will show bright spectral lines. Dark lines are made by absorption, for example by light passing through a gas cloud, and these absorption lines can also identify chemical compounds. Much of our knowledge of the chemical makeup of the universe comes from spectra.

==Spectroscopes==
Spectroscopes are often used in astronomy and some branches of chemistry. Early spectroscopes were simply prisms with graduations marking wavelengths of light. Modern spectroscopes generally use a diffraction grating, a movable slit, and some kind of photodetector, all automated and controlled by a computer. Recent advances have seen increasing reliance of computational algorithms in a range of miniaturised spectrometers without diffraction gratings, for example, through the use of quantum dot-based filter arrays on to a CCD chip or a series of photodetectors realised on a single nanostructure.

Joseph von Fraunhofer developed the first modern spectroscope by combining a prism, diffraction slit and telescope in a manner that increased the spectral resolution and was reproducible in other laboratories. Fraunhofer also went on to invent the first diffraction spectroscope. Gustav Robert Kirchhoff and Robert Bunsen discovered the application of spectroscopes to chemical analysis and used this approach to discover caesium and rubidium. Kirchhoff and Bunsen&#x27;s analysis also enabled a chemical explanation of stellar spectra, including Fraunhofer lines.

When a material is heated to incandescence it emits light that is characteristic of the atomic makeup of the material.
Particular light frequencies give rise to sharply defined bands on the scale which can be thought of as fingerprints. For example, the element sodium has a very characteristic double yellow band known as the Sodium D-lines at 588.9950 and 589.5924 nanometers, the color of which will be familiar to anyone who has seen a low pressure sodium vapor lamp.

In the original spectroscope design in the early 19th century, light entered a slit and a collimating lens transformed the light into a thin beam of parallel rays. The light then passed through a prism (in hand-held spectroscopes, usually an Amici prism) that refracted the beam into a spectrum because different wavelengths were refracted different amounts due to dispersion. This image was then viewed through a tube with a scale that was transposed upon the spectral image, enabling its direct measurement.

With the development of photographic film, the more accurate spectrograph was created. It was based on the same principle as the spectroscope, but it had a camera in place of the viewing tube. In recent years, the electronic circuits built around the photomultiplier tube have replaced the camera, allowing real-time spectrographic analysis with far greater accuracy. Arrays of photosensors are also used in place of film in spectrographic systems. Such spectral analysis, or spectroscopy, has become an important scientific tool for analyzing the composition of unknown material and for studying astronomical phenomena and testing astronomical theories.

In modern spectrographs in the UV, visible, and near-IR spectral ranges, the spectrum is generally given in the form of photon number per unit wavelength (nm or μm), wavenumber (μm−1, cm−1), frequency (THz), or energy (eV), with the units indicated by the abscissa. In the mid- to far-IR, spectra are typically expressed in units of Watts per unit wavelength (μm) or wavenumber (cm−1). In many cases, the spectrum is displayed with the units left implied (such as &quot;digital counts&quot; per spectral channel).


=== In Gemology ===
Gemologists frequently use spectroscopes to determine the absorption spectra of gemstones, thereby allowing them to make inferences about what kind of gem they are examining. A gemologist may compare the absorption spectrum they observe with a catalogue of spectra for various gems to help narrow down the exact identity of the gem.

==Spectrographs==


A spectrograph is an instrument that separates light into its wavelengths and records the data. A spectrograph typically has a multi-channel detector system or camera that detects and records the spectrum of light.

The term was first used in 1876 by Dr. Henry Draper when he invented the earliest version of this device, and which he used to take several photographs of the spectrum of Vega. This earliest version of the spectrograph was cumbersome to use and difficult to manage.

There are several kinds of machines referred to as &quot;spectrographs&quot;, depending on the precise nature of the waves. The first spectrographs used photographic paper as the detector. The plant pigment phytochrome was discovered using a spectrograph that used living plants as the detector. More recent spectrographs use electronic detectors, such as CCDs which can be used for both visible and UV light. The exact choice of detector depends on the wavelengths of light to be recorded.

A spectrograph is sometimes called polychromator, as an analogy to monochromator.

===Stellar and solar spectrograph=== 
The star spectral classification and discovery of the main sequence, Hubble&#x27;s law and the Hubble sequence were all made with spectrographs that used photographic paper. James Webb Space Telescope contains both a near-infrared spectrograph (NIRSpec) and a mid-infrared spectrograph (MIRI).

===Echelle spectrograph===
An echelle-based spectrograph uses two diffraction gratings, rotated 90 degrees with respect to each other and placed close to one another. Therefore, an entrance point and not a slit is used and a CCD-chip records the spectrum. Both gratings have a wide spacing, and one is blazed so that only the first order is visible and the other is blazed with many higher orders visible, so a very fine spectrum is presented to the CCD.

===Slitless spectrograph===
In conventional spectrographs, a slit is inserted into the beam to limit the image extent in the dispersion direction. A slitless spectrograph omits the slit; this results in images that convolve the image information with spectral information along the direction of dispersion. If the field is not sufficiently sparse, then spectra from different sources in the image field will overlap. The trade is that slitless spectrographs can produce spectral images much more quickly than scanning a conventional spectrograph. That is useful in applications such as solar physics where time evolution is important.

== See also ==

* Circular dichroism
* Cosmic Origins Spectrograph
* Czerny-Turner monochromator
* Imaging spectrometer
* List of astronomical instruments
* List of light sources
* Long-slit spectroscopy
* Prism spectrometer
* Scanning mobility particle sizer
* Spectrogram
* Spectrometer
* Spectroradiometer
* Spectroscopy
*Virtually imaged phased array
== References ==
== Bibliography ==
* J. F. James and R. S. Sternberg (1969), &quot;The Design of Optical Spectrometers&quot; (Chapman and Hall Ltd)
* James, John (2007), &quot;Spectrograph Design Fundamentals&quot; (Cambridge University Press) 
* Browning, John (1882), &quot;How to work with the spectroscope : a manual of practical manipulation with spectroscopes of all kinds&quot;

== External links ==
*Spectrograph for astronomical Spectra
*Photographs of spectrographs used in the Lick Observatory from the Lick Observatory Records Digital Archive, UC Santa Cruz Library&#x27;s Digital Collections</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q912034" start="3" end="23" title="Optical spectrometer" label="optical spectrometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q912034" start="25" end="42" title="Optical spectrometer" label="spectrophotometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q912034" start="44" end="56" title="Optical spectrometer" label="spectrograph"/>
<link wikidata="Q912034" start="60" end="72" title="Optical spectrometer" label="spectroscope"/>
<link wikidata="Q9128" start="121" end="126" title="light" label="light"/>
<link wikidata="Q133139" start="158" end="182" title="electromagnetic spectrum" label="electromagnetic spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q483666" start="202" end="224" title="spectroscopic analysis" label="spectroscopic analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q830654" start="288" end="298" title="irradiance" label="irradiance"/>
<link wikidata="Q193760" start="349" end="361" title="Polarization (waves)" label="polarization"/>
<link wikidata="Q41364" start="409" end="419" title="wavelength" label="wavelength"/>
<link wikidata="Q192510" start="499" end="509" title="wavenumber" label="wavenumber"/>
<link wikidata="Q3198" start="517" end="523" title="photon" label="photon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028259" start="577" end="599" title="reciprocal centimeters" label="reciprocal centimeters"/>
<link wikidata="Q83327" start="604" end="617" title="electron volt" label="electron volt"/>
<link wikidata="Q188463" start="637" end="649" title="spectrometer" label="spectrometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q483666" start="661" end="673" title="spectroscopy" label="spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q212111" start="688" end="701" title="spectral line" label="spectral line"/>
<link wikidata="Q41364" start="723" end="733" title="wavelength" label="wavelength"/>
<link wikidata="Q11523" start="829" end="838" title="gamma ray" label="gamma ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q34777" start="844" end="849" title="X-ray" label="X-ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q5434654" start="860" end="872" title="far infrared" label="far infrared"/>
<link wikidata="Q332729" start="934" end="948" title="absolute scale" label="absolute scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q332084" start="1007" end="1024" title="spectrophotometer" label="spectrophotometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q680509" start="1210" end="1227" title="spectroradiometer" label="spectroradiometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q127995" start="1449" end="1458" title="microwave" label="microwave"/>
<link wikidata="Q872" start="1463" end="1468" title="radio" label="radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055222" start="1487" end="1504" title="spectrum analyzer" label="spectrum analyzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q585943" start="1955" end="1969" title="hydrogen alpha" label="hydrogen alpha"/>
<link wikidata="Q333" start="2326" end="2335" title="astronomy" label="astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2329" start="2357" end="2366" title="chemistry" label="chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q181477" start="2400" end="2406" title="Triangular prism (optics)" label="prisms"/>
<link wikidata="Q653294" start="2491" end="2510" title="diffraction grating" label="diffraction grating"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2522" end="2526" title="Diffraction#Single-slit diffraction" label="slit"/>
<link wikidata="Q210765" start="2545" end="2558" title="photodetector" label="photodetector"/>
<link wikidata="Q68" start="2594" end="2602" title="computer" label="computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q43948" start="2897" end="2918" title="Joseph von Fraunhofer" label="Joseph von Fraunhofer"/>
<link wikidata="Q216778" start="3002" end="3011" title="refracting telescope" label="telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q60052" start="3177" end="3200" title="Gustav Robert Kirchhoff" label="Gustav Robert Kirchhoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q71031" start="3205" end="3218" title="Robert Bunsen" label="Robert Bunsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108" start="3319" end="3326" title="caesium" label="caesium"/>
<link wikidata="Q895" start="3331" end="3339" title="rubidium" label="rubidium"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3417" end="3432" title="Astronomical spectroscopy#Stars and their properties" label="stellar spectra"/>
<link wikidata="Q311552" start="3444" end="3460" title="Fraunhofer lines" label="Fraunhofer lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q192593" start="3492" end="3505" title="incandescence" label="incandescence"/>
<link wikidata="Q9128" start="3515" end="3520" title="light" label="light"/>
<link wikidata="Q658" start="3725" end="3731" title="sodium" label="sodium"/>
<link wikidata="Q743231" start="3916" end="3933" title="sodium vapor lamp" label="sodium vapor lamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164658" start="4026" end="4042" title="collimating lens" label="collimating lens"/>
<link wikidata="Q586325" start="4178" end="4189" title="Amici prism" label="Amici prism"/>
<link wikidata="Q72277" start="4196" end="4205" title="refraction" label="refracted"/>
<link wikidata="Q182893" start="4301" end="4311" title="dispersion (optics)" label="dispersion"/>
<link wikidata="Q6293" start="4471" end="4488" title="photographic film" label="photographic film"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4508" end="4520" title="#Spectrographs" label="spectrograph"/>
<link wikidata="Q61897384" start="4698" end="4713" title="photomultiplier" label="photomultiplier"/>
<link wikidata="Q58485726" start="5359" end="5367" title="abscissa" label="abscissa"/>
<link wikidata="Q243330" start="5639" end="5650" title="Gemology" label="Gemologists"/>
<link wikidata="Q125515" start="6244" end="6260" title="Henry Draper" label="Dr. Henry Draper"/>
<link wikidata="Q3427" start="6380" end="6384" title="Vega" label="Vega"/>
<link wikidata="Q912760" start="6629" end="6647" title="photographic paper" label="photographic paper"/>
<link wikidata="Q24779306" start="6683" end="6694" title="phytochrome" label="phytochrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q189880" start="6832" end="6835" title="Charge-coupled device" label="CCD"/>
<link wikidata="Q11391" start="6876" end="6878" title="ultraviolet" label="UV"/>
<link wikidata="Q576255" start="7003" end="7016" title="polychromator" label="polychromator"/>
<link wikidata="Q898306" start="7035" end="7048" title="monochromator" label="monochromator"/>
<link wikidata="Q25377588" start="7098" end="7121" title="stellar classification" label="spectral classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q3450" start="7143" end="7156" title="main sequence" label="main sequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q179916" start="7158" end="7175" title="Hubble&amp;#x27;s law" label="Hubble&amp;#x27;s law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1648748" start="7184" end="7199" title="Galaxy morphological classification" label="Hubble sequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q186447" start="7263" end="7289" title="James Webb Space Telescope" label="James Webb Space Telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q16153509" start="7334" end="7341" title="NIRSpec (Near-Infrared Spectrograph)" label="NIRSpec"/>
<link wikidata="Q1881516" start="7376" end="7380" title="MIRI (Mid-Infrared Instrument)" label="MIRI"/>
<link wikidata="Q910407" start="7414" end="7421" title="echelle grating" label="echelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q653294" start="7450" end="7469" title="diffraction grating" label="diffraction grating"/>
<link wikidata="Q883195" start="7686" end="7692" title="Blazed grating" label="blazed"/>
<link wikidata="Q7540986" start="7989" end="8010" title="slitless spectrograph" label="slitless spectrograph"/>
<link wikidata="Q210857" start="8055" end="8063" title="convolution" label="convolve"/>
<link wikidata="Q7575196" start="8310" end="8325" title="spectral imaging" label="spectral images"/>
<link wikidata="Q2043698" start="8426" end="8439" title="solar physics" label="solar physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q899102" start="8494" end="8512" title="Circular dichroism" label="Circular dichroism"/>
<link wikidata="Q844316" start="8515" end="8542" title="Cosmic Origins Spectrograph" label="Cosmic Origins Spectrograph"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8545" end="8572" title="Monochromator#Czerny-Turner monochromator" label="Czerny-Turner monochromator"/>
<link wikidata="Q6002848" start="8575" end="8595" title="Imaging spectrometer" label="Imaging spectrometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q100564159" start="8598" end="8630" title="List of astronomical instruments" label="List of astronomical instruments"/>
<link wikidata="Q65037198" start="8633" end="8654" title="List of light sources" label="List of light sources"/>
<link wikidata="Q6672021" start="8657" end="8679" title="Long-slit spectroscopy" label="Long-slit spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2110932" start="8682" end="8700" title="Prism spectrometer" label="Prism spectrometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430071" start="8703" end="8735" title="Scanning mobility particle sizer" label="Scanning mobility particle sizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q578970" start="8738" end="8749" title="Spectrogram" label="Spectrogram"/>
<link wikidata="Q188463" start="8752" end="8764" title="Spectrometer" label="Spectrometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q680509" start="8767" end="8784" title="Spectroradiometer" label="Spectroradiometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q483666" start="8787" end="8799" title="Spectroscopy" label="Spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q15708455" start="8801" end="8830" title="Virtually imaged phased array" label="Virtually imaged phased array"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="29294" wikidata="Q609843" url="?curid=29294" title="IBM System/360">
<text>The IBM System/360 (S/360) is a family of mainframe computer systems announced by IBM on April 7, 1964, and delivered between 1965 and 1978. System/360 was the first family of computers designed to cover both commercial and scientific applications and a complete range of applications from small to large. The design distinguished between architecture and implementation, allowing IBM to release a suite of compatible designs at different prices. All but the only partially compatible Model 44 and the most expensive systems use microcode to implement the instruction set, featuring 8-bit byte addressing and fixed-point binary, fixed-point decimal and hexadecimal floating-point calculations. The System/360 family introduced IBM&#x27;s Solid Logic Technology (SLT), which packed more transistors onto a circuit card, allowing more powerful but smaller computers.

System/360&#x27;s chief architect was Gene Amdahl, and the project was managed by Fred Brooks, responsible to Chairman Thomas J. Watson Jr. The commercial release was piloted by another of Watson&#x27;s lieutenants, John R. Opel, who managed the launch of IBM&#x27;s System 360 mainframe family in 1964. The slowest System/360 model announced in 1964, the Model 30, could perform up to 34,500 instructions per second, with memory from 8 to 64 KB. High-performance models came later. The 1967 IBM System/360 Model 91 could execute up to 16.6 million instructions per second. The larger 360 models could have up to 8 MB of main memory, though that much memory was unusual; a large installation might have as little as 256 KB of main storage, but 512 KB, 768 KB or 1024 KB was more common. Up to 8 megabytes of slower (8 microsecond) Large Capacity Storage (LCS) was also available for some models.

The IBM 360 was extremely successful, allowing customers to purchase a smaller system knowing they could expand it, if their needs grew, without reprogramming application software or replacing peripheral devices. It influenced computer design for years to come; many consider it one of history&#x27;s most successful computers. Application-level compatibility (with some restrictions) for System/360 software is maintained to the present day with the System z mainframe servers.

==System/360 history==

===Background===
By the early 1960s, IBM was struggling with the load of supporting and upgrading five separate lines of computers. These were aimed at different market segments and were entirely different from each other. A customer who purchased a machine to handle accounting, such as the IBM 1401, that was now looking for a machine for engineering calculations, such as the IBM 7040, had no reason to select IBM – the 7040 was incompatible with the 1401 and they might as well have been from different companies. Customers were frustrated that major investments, often entirely new machines and programs, were required when seemingly small performance improvements were needed.

In 1961, IBM assembled a task force to chart their developments for the 1960s, known as SPREAD, for Systems Programming, Research, Engineering and Development. In meetings at the New Englander Motor Hotel in Greenwich, Connecticut, SPREAD developed a new concept for the next generation of IBM machines. At the time, new technologies were coming into the market including the introduction of replacement of individual transistors with small-scale integrated circuits and the move to an 8-bit byte from the former 6-bit oriented words. These were going to lead to a new generation of machines, today known as the third generation, from all of the existing vendors.

Where SPREAD differed significantly from previous concepts was what features would be supported. Instead of machines aimed at different market niches, the new concept was effectively the union of all of these designs. A single instruction set architecture (ISA) included instructions for binary, floating-point, and decimal arithmetic, string processing, conversion between character sets (a major issue before the widespread use of ASCII) and extensive support for file handling, among many other features.

This would mean IBM would be introducing yet another line of machines, once again incompatible with their earlier machines. But the new systems would be able to run all of the programs that formerly required different machines. A concern was that there was a risk that their customers, facing the purchase of yet another new and incompatible platform, would simply choose some other vendor. Yet the concept steadily gained support, and six months after being formed, the company decided to implement the SPREAD concept.

A new team was organized under the direction of Bob Evans, who personally persuaded CEO Thomas J. Watson Jr. to develop the new system. Gene Amdahl was the chief architect of the computers themselves, while Fred Brooks was the project lead for the software and Erich Bloch led the development of IBM&#x27;s hybrid integrated circuit designs, Solid Logic Technology.

===&quot;Family&quot; concept===
Producing a single machine with support for all of these features would border on impossible. Instead, the SPREAD concept was based on the separation of the defined feature set from its internal operation, with a family of machines with different performance and different internal designs. Specifically, depending on the machine, some instructions might not be directly supported in hardware, and would instead be completed using small programs, in an internal machine-specific code, stored in read only memory, or what today is known as microcode.

So a model intended for use with accounting might choose to implement the decimal math directly in hardware, and leave the floating-point instructions to be handled by the subprograms. This would make floating point on such a system run (much) more slowly, but, critically, it &quot;would&quot; run. Likewise, a company purchasing a system for engineering support would choose a model with floating-point hardware, and might use it from time to time to run their payroll. Using previous designs, the system that performed floating point would generally not have any support for decimal math at all, and would require the customer to write such a package or buy another machine.

This meant that a single lineup could have machines tailored to match the price and performance niches that formerly demanded entirely separate computer systems. This flexibility greatly lowered barriers to entry. With most other vendors customers had to choose between machines they might outgrow or machines that were potentially too powerful and thus too costly. In practice, this meant that many companies simply did not buy computers. Now, a customer could purchase a machine that solved a particular requirement, knowing they could change the models as their needs changed, without losing support for the programs they were already running.

For instance, in the case of a firm that purchased an accounting system and was now looking to expand their computer support into engineering, this meant they could develop and test their engineering program on the machine they already used. If they ever needed more performance, they could purchase a machine with floating-point hardware, knowing that nothing else would change, it would simply get faster. Even the same peripherals could be used, allowing, for instance, data from the engineering system to be written to tape and then printed using a high-speed line printer already connected to their accounting system. Or they might replace the accounting system outright with a system with the performance to run both tasks.

The idea that a single design could address all the myriad ways that the machines could be used gave rise to the name, &quot;360&quot; is a reference to 360 degrees in a circle, and circles of machines and components featured prominently in IBM&#x27;s advertising.

===Models===
IBM initially announced a series of six computers and forty common peripherals. IBM eventually delivered fourteen models, including rare one-off models for NASA. The least expensive model was the Model 20 with as little as 4096 bytes of core memory, eight 16-bit registers instead of the sixteen 32-bit registers of other System/360 models, and an instruction set that was a subset of that used by the rest of the range.

The initial announcement in 1964 included Models 30, 40, 50, 60, 62, and 70. The first three were low- to middle-range systems aimed at the IBM 1400 series market. All three first shipped in mid-1965. The last three, intended to replace the 7000 series machines, never shipped and were replaced with the 65 and 75, which were first delivered in November 1965, and January 1966, respectively.

Later additions to the low-end included models 20 (1966, mentioned above), 22 (1971), and 25 (1968). The Model 20 had several sub-models; sub-model 5 was at the higher end of the model. The Model 22 was a recycled Model 30 with minor limitations: a smaller maximum memory configuration, and slower I/O channels, which limited it to slower and lower-capacity disk and tape devices than on the 30.

The Model 44 (1966) was a specialized model, designed for scientific computing and for real-time computing and process control, featuring some additional instructions, and with all storage-to-storage instructions and five other complex instructions eliminated.

A succession of high-end machines included the Model 67 (1966, mentioned below, briefly anticipated as the 64 and 66), 85 (1969), 91 (1967, anticipated as the 92), 95 (1968), and 195 (1971). The 85 design was intermediate between the System/360 line and the follow-on System/370 and was the basis for the 370/165. There was a System/370 version of the 195, but it did not include Dynamic Address Translation.

The implementations differed substantially, using different native data path widths, presence or absence of microcode, yet were extremely compatible. Except where specifically documented, the models were architecturally compatible. The 91, for example, was designed for scientific computing and provided out-of-order instruction execution (and could yield &quot;imprecise interrupts&quot; if a program trap occurred while several instructions were being read), but lacked the decimal instruction set used in commercial applications. New features could be added without violating architectural definitions: the 65 had a dual-processor version (M65MP) with extensions for inter-CPU signalling; the 85 introduced cache memory. Models 44, 75, 91, 95, and 195 were implemented with hardwired logic, rather than microcoded as all other models.

The Model 67, announced in August 1965, was the first production IBM system to offer dynamic address translation (virtual memory) hardware to support time-sharing. &quot;DAT&quot; is now more commonly referred to as an MMU. An experimental one-off unit was built based on a model 40. Before the 67, IBM had announced models 64 and 66, DAT versions of the 60 and 62, but they were almost immediately replaced with the 67 at the same time that the 60 and 62 were replaced with the 65. DAT hardware would reappear in the S/370 series in 1972, though it was initially absent from the series. Like its close relative, the 65, the 67 also offered dual CPUs.

IBM stopped marketing all System/360 models by the end of 1977.

===Backward compatibility===
IBM&#x27;s existing customers had a large investment in software that ran on second-generation machines. Several System/360 models had the option of emulating the customer&#x27;s existing computer using special hardware and microcode, and an emulation program that enabled existing programs to run on the new machine.

Customers initially had to halt the computer and load the emulation program.
IBM later added features and modified emulator programs to allow emulation of the 1401, 1440, 1460, 1410 and 7010 under the control of an operating system.
The Model 85 and later System/370 maintained the precedent, retaining emulation options and allowing emulators to run under OS control alongside native programs.

===Successors and variants===
System/360 (excepting the Models 20, 44 and 67) was replaced with the compatible System/370 range in 1970 and Model 20 users were targeted to move to the IBM System/3. (The idea of a major breakthrough with FS technology was dropped in the mid-1970s for cost-effectiveness and continuity reasons.) Later compatible IBM systems include the 4300 family, the 308x family, the 3090, the ES/9000 and 9672 families (System/390 family), and the IBM Z series.

Computers that were mostly identical or compatible in terms of the machine code or architecture of the System/360 included Amdahl&#x27;s 470 family (and its successors), Hitachi mainframes, the UNIVAC 9000 series, Fujitsu as the Facom, the RCA Spectra 70 series, and the English Electric System 4. The System 4 machines were built under license to RCA. RCA sold the Spectra series to what was then UNIVAC, where they became the UNIVAC Series 70. UNIVAC also developed the UNIVAC Series 90 as successors to the 9000 series and Series 70. The Soviet Union produced a System/360 clone named the ES EVM.

The IBM 5100 portable computer, introduced in 1975, offered an option to execute the System/360&#x27;s APL.SV programming language through a hardware emulator. IBM used this approach to avoid the costs and delay of creating a 5100-specific version of APL.

Special radiation-hardened and otherwise somewhat modified System/360s, in the form of the System/4 Pi avionics computer, are used in several fighter and bomber jet aircraft. In the complete 32-bit AP-101 version, 4 Pi machines were used as the replicated computing nodes of the fault-tolerant Space Shuttle computer system (in five nodes). The U.S. Federal Aviation Administration operated the IBM 9020, a special cluster of modified System/360s for air traffic control, from 1970 until the 1990s. (Some 9020 software is apparently still used via emulation on newer hardware.)

==Table of System/360 models==


: Model summary
:* Six of the twenty IBM System/360 models announced either were never shipped or were never released.
:* Fourteen of the twenty IBM System/360 models announced shipped.

==Technical description==
===Influential features===
The System/360 introduced a number of industry standards to the marketplace, such as:
* The 8-bit byte (against financial pressure during development to reduce the byte to 4 or 6 bits), rather than adopting the 7030 concept of accessing bytes of variable size at arbitrary bit addresses.
* Byte-addressable memory (as opposed to bit-addressable or word-addressable memory)
* 32-bit words
* The Bus and Tag I/O channel standardized in FIPS-60
* Commercial use of microcoded CPUs
* The IBM hexadecimal floating-point architecture
* The EBCDIC character set
* Nine-track magnetic tape

===Architectural overview===
The System/360 series computer architecture specification makes no assumptions on the implementation itself, but rather describes the interfaces and expected behavior of an implementation. The architecture describes mandatory interfaces that must be available on all implementations, and optional interfaces. Some aspects of this architecture are:
* Big endian byte ordering
* A processor with:
** 16 32-bit general-purpose registers (R0–R15)
** A 64-bit program status word (PSW), which describes (among other things)
*** Interrupt masks
*** Privilege states
*** A condition code
*** A 24-bit instruction address
** An interruption mechanism, maskable and unmaskable interruption classes and subclasses
** An instruction set. Each instruction is wholly described and also defines the conditions under which an exception is recognized in the form of program interruption.
* A memory (called storage) subsystem with:
** 8 bits per byte
** A special processor communication area starting at address 0
** 24-bit addressing
* Manual control operations that allow
** A bootstrap process (a process called Initial Program Load or IPL)
** Operator-initiated interrupts
** Resetting the system
** Basic debugging facilities
** Manual display and modifications of the system&#x27;s state (memory and processor)
* An Input/Output mechanism which does not describe the devices themselves

Some of the optional features are:
* Binary-coded decimal instructions
* Floating-point instructions
* Timing facilities (interval timer)
* Key-controlled memory protection

All models of System/360, except for the Model 20 and Model 44, implemented that specification.

Binary arithmetic and logical operations are performed as register-to-register and as memory-to-register/register-to-memory as a standard feature. If the Commercial Instruction Set option was installed, packed decimal arithmetic could be performed as memory-to-memory with some memory-to-register operations. The Scientific Instruction Set feature, if installed, provided access to four floating-point registers that could be programmed for either 32-bit or 64-bit floating-point operations. The Models 85 and 195 could also operate on 128-bit extended-precision floating-point numbers stored in pairs of floating-point registers, and software provided emulation in other models. The System/360 used an 8-bit byte, 32-bit word, 64-bit double-word, and 4-bit nibble. Machine instructions had operators with operands, which could contain register numbers or memory addresses. This complex combination of instruction options resulted in a variety of instruction lengths and formats.

Memory addressing was accomplished using a base-plus-displacement scheme, with registers 1 through F (15). A displacement was encoded in 12 bits, thus allowing a 4096-byte displacement (0–4095), as the offset from the address put in a base register.

Register 0 could not be used as a base register nor as an index register (nor as a branch address register), as &quot;0&quot; was reserved to indicate an address in the first 4 KB of memory, that is, if register 0 was specified as described, the value 0x00000000 was implicitly input to the effective address calculation in place of whatever value might be contained within register 0 (or if specified as a branch address register, then no branch was taken, and the content of register 0 was ignored, but any side effect of the instruction was performed).

This specific behavior permitted initial execution of an interrupt routines, since base registers would not necessarily be set to 0 during the first few instruction cycles of an interrupt routine. It isn&#x27;t needed for IPL (&quot;Initial Program Load&quot; or boot), as one can always clear a register without the need to save it.

With the exception of the Model 67, all addresses were real memory addresses. Virtual memory was not available in most IBM mainframes until the System/370 series. The Model 67 introduced a virtual memory architecture, which MTS, CP-67, and TSS/360 used—but not IBM&#x27;s mainline System/360 operating systems.

The System/360 machine-code instructions are 2 bytes long (no memory operands), 4 bytes long (one operand), or 6 bytes long (two operands). Instructions are always situated on 2-byte boundaries.

Operations like MVC (Move-Characters) (Hex: D2) can only move at most 256 bytes of information. Moving more than 256 bytes of data required multiple MVC operations. (The System/370 series introduced a family of more powerful instructions such as the MVCL &quot;Move-Characters-Long&quot; instruction, which supports moving up to 16 MB as a single block.)

An operand is two bytes long, typically representing an address as a 4-bit nibble denoting a base register and a 12-bit displacement relative to the contents of that register, in the range (shown here as hexadecimal numbers). The address corresponding to that operand is the contents of the specified general-purpose register plus the displacement. For example, an MVC instruction that moves 256 bytes (with length code 255 in hexadecimal as ) from base register 7, plus displacement , to base register 8, plus displacement , would be coded as the 6-byte instruction &quot;&quot; (operator/length/address1/address2).

The System/360 was designed to separate the &quot;system state&quot; from the &quot;problem state&quot;. This provided a basic level of security and recoverability from programming errors. Problem (user) programs could not modify data or program storage associated with the system state. Addressing, data, or operation exception errors made the machine enter the system state through a controlled routine so the operating system could try to correct or terminate the program in error. Similarly, it could recover certain processor hardware errors through the &quot;machine check&quot; routines.

===Channels===
Peripherals interfaced to the system via &quot;channels&quot;. A channel is a specialized processor with the instruction set optimized for transferring data between a peripheral and main memory. In modern terms, this could be compared to direct memory access (DMA). The S/360 connects channels to control units with bus and tag cables; IBM eventually replaced these with Enterprise Systems Connection (ESCON) and Fibre Connection (FICON) channels, but well after the S/360 era.

====Byte-multiplexor and selector channels====
There were initially two types of channels; byte-multiplexer channels (known at the time simply as &quot;multiplexor channels&quot;), for connecting &quot;slow speed&quot; devices such as card readers and punches, line printers, and communications controllers, and selector channels for connecting high speed devices, such as disk drives, tape drives, data cells and drums. Every System/360 (except for the Model 20, which was not a standard 360) has a byte-multiplexer channel and 1 or more selector channels, though the model 25 has just one channel, which can be either a byte-multiplexor or selector channel. The smaller models (up to the model 50) have integrated channels, while for the larger models (model 65 and above) the channels are large separate units in separate cabinets: the IBM 2870 is the byte-multiplexor channel with up to four selector sub-channels, and the IBM 2860 is up to three selector channels.

The byte-multiplexer channel is able to handle I/O to/from several devices simultaneously at the device&#x27;s highest rated speeds, hence the name, as it multiplexed I/O from those devices onto a single data path to main memory. Devices connected to a byte-multiplexer channel are configured to operate in 1-byte, 2-byte, 4-byte, or &quot;burst&quot; mode. The larger &quot;blocks&quot; of data are used to handle progressively faster devices. For example, a 2501 card reader operating at 600 cards per minute would be in 1-byte mode, while a 1403-N1 printer would be in burst mode. Also, the byte-multiplexer channels on larger models have an optional selector subchannel section that would accommodate tape drives. The byte-multiplexor&#x27;s channel address was typically &quot;0&quot; and the selector subchannel addresses were from &quot;C0&quot; to &quot;FF.&quot; Thus, tape drives on System/360 were commonly addressed at 0C0–0C7. Other common byte-multiplexer addresses are: 00A: 2501 Card Reader, 00C/00D: 2540 Reader/Punch, 00E/00F: 1403-N1 Printers, 010–013: 3211 Printers, 020–0BF: 2701/2703 Telecommunications Units. These addresses are still commonly used in z/VM virtual machines.

System/360 models 40 and 50 have an integrated 1052-7 console that is usually addressed as 01F, however, this was not connected to the byte-multiplexer channel, but rather, had a direct internal connection to the mainframe. The model 30 attached a different model of 1052 through a 1051 control unit. The models 60 through 75 also use the 1052–7.


Selector channels enabled I/O to high speed devices. These storage devices were attached to a control unit and then to the channel. The control unit let clusters of devices be attached to the channels. On higher speed models, multiple selector channels, which could operate simultaneously or in parallel, improved overall performance.

Control units are connected to the channels with &quot;bus and tag&quot; cable pairs. The bus cables carried the address and data information and the tag cables identified what data was on the bus. The general configuration of a channel is to connect the devices in a chain, like this: Mainframe—Control Unit X—Control Unit Y—Control Unit Z. Each control unit is assigned a &quot;capture range&quot; of addresses that it services. For example, control unit X might capture addresses 40–4F, control unit Y: C0–DF, and control unit Z: 80–9F. Capture ranges had to be a multiple of 8, 16, 32, 64, or 128 devices and be aligned on appropriate boundaries. Each control unit in turn has one or more devices attached to it. For example, you could have control unit Y with 6 disks, that would be addressed as C0-C5.

There are three general types of bus-and-tag cables produced by IBM. The first is the standard gray bus-and-tag cable, followed by the blue bus-and-tag cable, and finally the tan bus-and-tag cable. Generally, newer cable revisions are capable of higher speeds or longer distances, and some peripherals specified minimum cable revisions both upstream and downstream.

The cable ordering of the control units on the channel is also significant. Each control unit is &quot;strapped&quot; as High or Low priority. When a device selection was sent out on a mainframe&#x27;s channel, the selection was sent from X-&gt;Y-&gt;Z-&gt;Y-&gt;X. If the control unit was &quot;high&quot; then the selection was checked in the outbound direction, if &quot;low&quot; then the inbound direction. Thus, control unit X was either 1st or 5th, Y was either 2nd or 4th, and Z was 3rd in line. It is also possible to have multiple channels attached to a control unit from the same or multiple mainframes, thus providing a rich high-performance, multiple-access, and backup capability.

Typically the total cable length of a channel is limited to 200 feet, less being preferred. Each control unit accounts for about 10 &quot;feet&quot; of the 200-foot limit.

====Block multiplexer channel====
IBM first introduced a new type of I/O channel on the Model 85 and Model 195, the 2880 block multiplexer channel, and then made them standard on the System/370. This channel allowed a device to suspend a channel program, pending the completion of an I/O operation and thus to free the channel for use by another device. A block multiplexer channel can support either standard 1.5 MB/s connections or, with the 2-byte interface feature, 3 MB/s; the latter use one tag cable and two bus cables. On the S/370 there is an option for a 3.0 MB/s data streaming channel with one bus cable and one tag cable.

The initial use for this was the 2305 fixed-head disk, which has 8 &quot;exposures&quot; (alias addresses) and rotational position sensing (RPS).

Block multiplexer channels can operate as a selector channel to allow compatible attachment of legacy subsystems.

===Basic hardware components===


Being uncertain of the reliability and availability of the then new monolithic integrated circuits, IBM chose instead to design and manufacture its own custom hybrid integrated circuits. These were built on 11 mm square ceramic substrates. Resistors were silk screened on and discrete glass encapsulated transistors and diodes were added. The substrate was then covered with a metal lid or encapsulated in plastic to create a &quot;Solid Logic Technology&quot; (SLT) module.

A number of these SLT modules were then flip chip mounted onto a small multi-layer printed circuit &quot;SLT card&quot;. Each card had one or two sockets on one edge that plugged onto pins on one of the computer&#x27;s &quot;SLT boards&quot; (also referred to as a backplane). This was the reverse of how most other company&#x27;s cards were mounted, where the cards had pins or printed contact areas and plugged into sockets on the computer&#x27;s boards.

Up to twenty SLT boards could be assembled side-by-side (vertically and horizontally, max 4 high by 5 wide) to form a &quot;logic gate&quot;. Several gates mounted together constituted a box-shaped &quot;logic frame&quot;. The outer gates were generally hinged along one vertical edge so they could be swung open to provide access to the fixed inner gates. The larger machines could have more than one frame bolted together to produce the final unit, such as a multi-frame Central Processing Unit (CPU).

===Operating system software===
The smaller System/360 models used the Basic Operating System/360 (BOS/360), Tape Operating System (TOS/360), or Disk Operating System/360 (DOS/360, which evolved into DOS/VS, DOS/VSE, VSE/AF, VSE/SP, VSE/ESA, and then z/VSE).

The larger models used Operating System/360 (OS/360). IBM developed several levels of OS/360, with increasingly powerful features: Primary Control Program (PCP), Multiprogramming with a Fixed number of Tasks (MFT), and Multiprogramming with a Variable number of Tasks (MVT). MVT took a long time to develop into a usable system, and the less ambitious MFT was widely used. PCP was used on intermediate machines too small to run MFT well, and on larger machines before MFT was available; the final releases of OS/360 included only MFT and MVT. For the System/370 and later machines, MFT evolved into OS/VS1, while MVT evolved into OS/VS2 (SVS) (Single Virtual Storage), then various versions of MVS (Multiple Virtual Storage) culminating in the current z/OS.

When it announced the Model 67 in August 1965, IBM also announced TSS/360 (Time-Sharing System) for delivery at the same time as the 67. TSS/360, a response to Multics, was an ambitious project that included many advanced features. It had performance problems, was delayed, canceled, reinstated, and finally canceled again in 1971. Customers migrated to CP-67, MTS (Michigan Terminal System), TSO (Time Sharing Option for OS/360), or one of several other time-sharing systems.

CP-67, the original virtual machine system, was also known as CP/CMS. CP/67 was developed outside the IBM mainstream at IBM&#x27;s Cambridge Scientific Center, in cooperation with MIT researchers. CP/CMS eventually won wide acceptance, and led to the development of VM/370 (Virtual Machine) which had a primary interactive &quot;sub&quot; operating system known as VM/CMS (Conversational Monitoring System). This evolved into today&#x27;s z/VM.

The Model 20 offered a simplified and rarely used tape-based system called TPS (Tape Processing System), and DPS (Disk Processing System) that provided support for the 2311 disk drive. TPS could run on a machine with 8 KB of memory; DPS required 12 KB, which was pretty hefty for a Model 20. Many customers ran quite happily with 4 KB and CPS (Card Processing System). With TPS and DPS, the card reader was used to read the Job Control Language cards that defined the stack of jobs to run and to read in transaction data such as customer payments. The operating system was held on tape or disk, and results could also be stored on the tapes or hard drives. Stacked job processing became an exciting possibility for the small but adventurous computer user.

A little-known and little-used suite of 80-column punched-card utility programs known as Basic Programming Support (BPS) (jocularly: Barely Programming Support), a precursor of TOS, was available for smaller systems.

==Component names==
IBM created a new naming system for the new components created for System/360, although well-known old names, like IBM 1403 and IBM 1052, were retained. In this new naming system, components were given four-digit numbers starting with 2. The second digit described the type of component, as follows:
==Peripherals==
IBM developed a new family of peripheral equipment for System/360, carrying over a few from its older 1400 series. Interfaces were standardized, allowing greater flexibility to mix and match processors, controllers and peripherals than in the earlier product lines.

In addition, System/360 computers could use certain peripherals that were originally developed for earlier computers. These earlier peripherals used a different numbering system, such as the IBM 1403 chain printer. The 1403, an extremely reliable device that had already earned a reputation as a workhorse, was sold as the 1403-N1 when adapted for the System/360.

Also available were optical character recognition (OCR) readers IBM 1287 and IBM 1288 which could read Alpha Numeric (A/N) and Numeric Hand Printed (NHP/NHW) Characters from Cashier&#x27;s rolls of tape to full legal size pages. At the time this was done with very large optical/logic readers. Software was too slow and expensive at that time.

Models 65 and below sold with an IBM 1052–7 as the console typewriter. The 360/85 with feature 5450 uses a display console that was not compatible with anything else in the line; the later 3066 console for the 370/165 and 370/168 use the same basic display design as the 360/85.
The IBM System/360 models 91 and 195 use a graphical display similar to the IBM 2250 as their primary console.

Additional operator consoles were also available. Certain high-end machines could optionally be purchased with a 2250 graphical display, costing upwards of US$100,000; smaller machines could use the less expensive 2260 display or later the 3270.

===Direct access storage devices (DASD)===

The first disk drives for System/360 were IBM 2302s and IBM 2311s. The first drum for System/360 was the IBM 7320.
The 156 kbit/s 2302 was based on the earlier 1302 and was available as a model 3 with two 112.79 MB modules or as a model 4 with four such modules.

The 2311, with a removable 1316 disk pack, was based on the IBM 1311 and had a theoretical capacity of 7.2 MB, although actual capacity varied with record design. (When used with a 360/20, the 1316 pack was formatted into fixed-length 270 byte sectors, giving a maximum capacity of 5.4MB.)
In 1966, the first 2314s shipped. This device had up to eight usable disk drives with an integral control unit; there were nine drives, but one was reserved as a spare. Each drive used a removable 2316 disk pack with a capacity of nearly 28 MB. The disk packs for the 2311 and 2314 were &quot;physically&quot; large by today&#x27;s standards — e.g., the 1316 disk pack was about in diameter and had six platters stacked on a central spindle. The top and bottom outside platters did not store data. Data were recorded on the inner sides of the top and bottom platters and both sides of the inner platters, providing 10 recording surfaces. The 10 read/write heads moved together across the surfaces of the platters, which were formatted with 203 concentric tracks. To reduce the amount of head movement (seeking), data was written in a virtual cylinder from inside top platter down to inside bottom platter. These disks were not usually formatted with fixed-sized sectors as are today&#x27;s hard drives (though this &quot;was&quot; done with CP/CMS). Rather, most System/360 I/O software could customize the length of the data record (variable-length records), as was the case with magnetic tapes.

Some of the most powerful early System/360s used high-speed head-per-track drum storage devices. The 3,500 RPM 2301, which replaced the 7320, was part of the original System/360 announcement, with a capacity of 4 MB. The 303.8 kbit/s IBM 2303 was announced on January 31, 1966, with a capacity of 3.913 MB. These were the only drums announced for System/360 and System/370, and their niche was later filled by fixed-head disks.

The 6,000 RPM 2305 appeared in 1970, with capacities of 5 MB (2305–1) or 11 MB (2305–2) per module. Although these devices did not have large capacity, their speed and transfer rates made them attractive for high-performance needs. A typical use was overlay linkage (e.g. for OS and application subroutines) for program sections written to alternate in the same memory regions. Fixed-head disks and drums were particularly effective as paging devices on the early virtual memory systems. The 2305, although often called a &quot;drum&quot; was actually a head-per-track disk device, with 12 recording surfaces and a data transfer rate up to 3 MB/s.

Rarely seen was the IBM 2321 Data Cell, a mechanically complex device that contained multiple magnetic strips to hold data; strips could be randomly accessed, placed upon a cylinder-shaped drum for read/write operations; then returned to an internal storage cartridge. The IBM Data Cell [noodle picker] was among several IBM trademarked &quot;speedy&quot; mass online direct-access storage peripherals (reincarnated in recent years as &quot;virtual tape&quot; and automated tape librarian peripherals). The 2321 file had a capacity of 400 MB, at the time when the 2311 disk drive only had 7.2 MB. The IBM Data Cell was proposed to fill cost/capacity/speed gap between magnetic tapes—which had high capacity with relatively low cost per stored byte—and disks, which had higher expense per byte. Some installations also found the electromechanical operation less dependable and opted for less mechanical forms of direct-access storage.

The Model 44 was unique in offering an integrated single-disk drive as a standard feature. This drive used the 2315 &quot;ramkit&quot; cartridge and provided 1,171,200 bytes of storage.

===Tape drives===
The 2400-series of 1/2&quot; magnetic tape units consisted of the 2401 and 2402 Models 1-6 Magnetic Tape Units, the 2403 Models 1-6 Magnetic Tape Unit and Control, the 2404 Models 1-3 Magnetic Tape Unit and Control, and the 2803/2804 Models 1 and 2 Tape Control Units. The later 2415 Magnetic Tape Unit and Control, introduced in 1967 contained two, four, or six tape drives and a control in a single unit, and was slower and cheaper. The 2415 drives and control were not marketed separately. With System/360, IBM switched from IBM 7-track to 9-track tape format. Some 2400-series drives could be purchased that read and wrote 7-track tapes for compatibility with the older IBM 729 tape drives. In 1968, the IBM 2420 tape system was released, offering much higher data rates, self-threading tape operation and 1600bpi packing density. It remained in the product line until 1979.

===Unit record devices===
* Punched card devices included the 2501 card reader and the 2540 card reader punch. Virtually every System/360 had a 2540. The 2560 MFCM (&quot;Multi-Function Card Machine&quot;) reader/sorter/punch, listed above, was for the Model 20 only. It was notorious for reliability problems (earning humorous acronyms often involving &quot;...Card Muncher&quot; or &quot;Mal-Function Card Machine&quot;).
* Line printers were the IBM 1403 and the slower IBM 1443.
* A paper tape reader, the IBM 2671, was introduced in 1964. It had a rated speed of 1,000 cps. There were also a paper tape reader and paper tape punch from an earlier era, available only as RPQs (Request Price Quotation). The 1054 (reader) and 1055 (punch), which were carried forward (like the 1052 console typewriter) from the IBM 1050 Teleprocessing System. All these devices operated at a maximum of 15.5 characters per second. The paper tape punch from the IBM 1080 System was also available by RPQ, but at a prohibitively expensive price.
* Optical character recognition (OCR) devices 1287 and later the 1288 were available on the 360&#x27;s. The 1287 could read handwritten numerals, some OCR fonts, and cash register OCR paper tape reels. The 1288 &#x27;page reader&#x27; could handle up to legal size OCR font typewritten pages, as well as handwritten numerals. Both of these OCR devices employed a &#x27;flying spot&#x27; scanning principle, with the raster scan provided by a large CRT, and the reflected light density changes were picked up by a high gain photomultiplier tube.
* Magnetic ink character recognition (MICR) was provided by the IBM 1412 and 1419 cheque sorters, with magnetic ink printing (for cheque books) on 1445 printers (a modified 1443 that used an MICR ribbon). 1412/1419 and 1445 were mainly used by banking institutions.

==Remaining machines==
Despite having been sold or leased in very large numbers for a mainframe system of its era, only a few of System/360 computers remain—mainly as non-operating property of museums or collectors. Examples of existing systems include:
* The Computer History Museum in Mountain View, California, has a non-working Model 30 on display, as do the Museum of Transport and Technology in Auckland, New Zealand, and the Vienna University of Technology in Austria.
* The University of Western Australia Computer Club has a complete Model 40 in storage.
* The KCG Computer Museum of Kyoto Computer Gakuin, Japan&#x27;s first computer school in town, has an IBM System/360 Model 40 on display.
* Two Model 20 processors along with numerous peripherals (forming at least one complete system) located in Nürnberg, Germany were purchased on eBay in April/May 2019 for €3710 by two UK enthusiasts who, over the course of some months, moved the machine to Creslow Park in Buckinghamshire, United Kingdom. The system was in a small, abandoned building left untouched for decades, and apparently had been used in that building since all peripherals were still fully wired and interconnected. As of September 2024 the systems have been moved on a long-term loan basis to the System Source Computer Museum in Hunt Valley, Maryland, USA for display and restoration.
* The Living Computers: Museum + Labs has a 360 model 30.
A running list of remaining System/360s that are more than just &#x27;front panels&#x27; can be found at World Inventory of remaining System/360 CPUs.

==Gallery==
This gallery shows the operator&#x27;s console, with register value lamps, toggle switches (middle of pictures), and &quot;emergency pull&quot; switch (upper right of pictures) of the various models.

==See also==
* IBM System/360 architecture 
* IBM 9020
* History of IBM
* List of IBM products
* IBM System/4 Pi
* Gerrit Blaauw
* Bob O. Evans

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==
* 
* IBM System/360 System Summary 11th edition August 1969
* 
* Generations of the IBM 360/370/3090/390 by Lars Poulsen with multiple links and references
* Description of a large IBM System/360 model 75 installation at JPL
* Illustrations from “Introduction to IBM Data Processing Systems”, 1968: contains photographs of IBM System/360 computers and peripherals
* IBM System 360 RPG Debugging Template and Keypunch Card
* Video of a two-hour lecture and panel discussion entitled &quot;The IBM System/360 Revolution&quot;, from the Computer History Museum on 2004-04-07
* Original vintage film from 1964 IBM System/360 Computer History Archives Project
* Several photos of a dual processor IBM 360/67 at the University of Michigan&#x27;s academic Computing Center in the late 1960s or early 1970s are included in Dave Mills&#x27; article describing the Michigan Terminal System (MTS)
* Pictures of an IBM System/360 Model 67 at Newcastle (UK) University
* 

===From the &quot;IBM Journal of Research and Development&quot;===
* 

===From &quot;IBM Systems Journal&quot;===
* 
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q609843" start="4" end="18" title="IBM System/360" label="IBM System/360"/>
<link wikidata="Q609843" start="20" end="25" title="IBM System/360" label="S/360"/>
<link wikidata="Q177234" start="42" end="60" title="mainframe computer" label="mainframe computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q37156" start="82" end="85" title="IBM" label="IBM"/>
<link wikidata="Q173212" start="339" end="351" title="computer architecture" label="architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q16927911" start="485" end="493" title="IBM System/360 Model 44" label="Model 44"/>
<link wikidata="Q175869" start="529" end="538" title="microcode" label="microcode"/>
<link wikidata="Q270159" start="583" end="588" title="8-bit computing" label="8-bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5968834" start="653" end="664" title="IBM hexadecimal floating-point" label="hexadecimal"/>
<link wikidata="Q117879" start="665" end="679" title="floating-point arithmetic" label="floating-point"/>
<link wikidata="Q4040980" start="738" end="760" title="Solid Logic Technology" label="Solid Logic Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q62890" start="904" end="915" title="Gene Amdahl" label="Gene Amdahl"/>
<link wikidata="Q92609" start="948" end="959" title="Fred Brooks" label="Fred Brooks"/>
<link wikidata="Q46000" start="985" end="1005" title="Thomas J. Watson Jr." label="Thomas J. Watson Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q1701260" start="1082" end="1094" title="John R. Opel" label="John R. Opel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3386642" start="1222" end="1230" title="IBM System/360 Model 30" label="Model 30"/>
<link wikidata="Q8799" start="1309" end="1311" title="Kibibyte" label="KB"/>
<link wikidata="Q25245679" start="1358" end="1381" title="IBM System/360 Model 91" label="IBM System/360 Model 91"/>
<link wikidata="Q71486" start="1407" end="1438" title="million instructions per second" label="million instructions per second"/>
<link wikidata="Q8799" start="1481" end="1483" title="Mebibyte" label="MB"/>
<link wikidata="Q66221" start="1487" end="1498" title="main memory" label="main memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q5968604" start="1697" end="1725" title="IBM 2361 Large Capacity Storage" label="Large Capacity Storage (LCS)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2141460" start="2214" end="2222" title="IBM System z" label="System z"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066933" start="2559" end="2567" title="IBM 1401" label="IBM 1401"/>
<link wikidata="Q5147243" start="2646" end="2654" title="IBM 7040" label="IBM 7040"/>
<link wikidata="Q49202" start="3159" end="3181" title="Greenwich, Connecticut" label="Greenwich, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q5339" start="3369" end="3379" title="transistor" label="transistor"/>
<link wikidata="Q80831" start="3386" end="3417" title="Integrated circuit" label="small-scale integrated circuits"/>
<link wikidata="Q8799" start="3443" end="3447" title="byte" label="byte"/>
<link wikidata="Q272683" start="3843" end="3871" title="instruction set architecture" label="instruction set architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q3913" start="3904" end="3910" title="binary number" label="binary"/>
<link wikidata="Q117879" start="3912" end="3926" title="floating-point arithmetic" label="floating-point"/>
<link wikidata="Q276582" start="3932" end="3939" title="binary-coded decimal" label="decimal"/>
<link wikidata="Q8815" start="4049" end="4054" title="ASCII" label="ASCII"/>
<link wikidata="Q3297167" start="4694" end="4703" title="Bob O. Evans" label="Bob Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q46000" start="4734" end="4754" title="Thomas J. Watson Jr." label="Thomas J. Watson Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q62890" start="4782" end="4793" title="Gene Amdahl" label="Gene Amdahl"/>
<link wikidata="Q92609" start="4853" end="4864" title="Fred Brooks" label="Fred Brooks"/>
<link wikidata="Q5388007" start="4907" end="4918" title="Erich Bloch" label="Erich Bloch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210109" start="4953" end="4978" title="hybrid integrated circuit" label="hybrid integrated circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q4040980" start="4988" end="5010" title="Solid Logic Technology" label="Solid Logic Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q160710" start="5541" end="5557" title="read only memory" label="read only memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q175869" start="5585" end="5594" title="microcode" label="microcode"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320033" start="7488" end="7500" title="line printer" label="line printer"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="8090" end="8094" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q3734967" start="8130" end="8138" title="IBM System/360 Model 20" label="Model 20"/>
<link wikidata="Q839647" start="8171" end="8182" title="magnetic-core memory" label="core memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q272683" start="8282" end="8297" title="instruction set" label="instruction set"/>
<link wikidata="Q3386642" start="8405" end="8407" title="IBM System/360 Model 30" label="30"/>
<link wikidata="Q3088121" start="8409" end="8411" title="IBM System/360 Model 40" label="40"/>
<link wikidata="Q9295720" start="8413" end="8415" title="IBM System/360 Model 50" label="50"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915577" start="8496" end="8511" title="IBM 1400 series" label="IBM 1400 series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265495" start="8597" end="8608" title="IBM 700/7000 series" label="7000 series"/>
<link wikidata="Q28213148" start="8660" end="8662" title="IBM System/360 Model 65" label="65"/>
<link wikidata="Q27892736" start="8667" end="8669" title="IBM System/360 Model 75" label="75"/>
<link wikidata="Q3734967" start="8796" end="8798" title="IBM System/360 Model 20" label="20"/>
<link wikidata="Q5969046" start="8824" end="8826" title="IBM System/360 Model 22" label="22"/>
<link wikidata="Q16927911" start="9150" end="9158" title="IBM System/360 Model 44" label="Model 44"/>
<link wikidata="Q5969049" start="9455" end="9463" title="IBM System/360-67" label="Model 67"/>
<link wikidata="Q25245679" start="9538" end="9540" title="IBM System/360 Model 91" label="91"/>
<link wikidata="Q1586139" start="9676" end="9686" title="IBM System/370" label="System/370"/>
<link wikidata="Q25245679" start="10054" end="10056" title="IBM System/360 Model 91" label="91"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153762" start="10122" end="10156" title="Out-of-order execution" label="out-of-order instruction execution"/>
<link wikidata="Q5969049" start="10661" end="10669" title="IBM System/360 Model 67" label="Model 67"/>
<link wikidata="Q189401" start="10742" end="10769" title="Virtual memory" label="dynamic address translation"/>
<link wikidata="Q913876" start="10807" end="10819" title="time-sharing" label="time-sharing"/>
<link wikidata="Q518020" start="10876" end="10879" title="memory management unit" label="MMU"/>
<link wikidata="Q1586139" start="11175" end="11180" title="S/370" label="S/370"/>
<link wikidata="Q7834322" start="11481" end="11507" title="Transistor computer" label="second-generation machines"/>
<link wikidata="Q202871" start="11553" end="11562" title="Emulator" label="emulating"/>
<link wikidata="Q175869" start="11628" end="11637" title="microcode" label="microcode"/>
<link wikidata="Q1586139" start="12230" end="12240" title="System/370" label="System/370"/>
<link wikidata="Q750180" start="12303" end="12315" title="IBM System/3" label="IBM System/3"/>
<link wikidata="Q3407192" start="12356" end="12369" title="FS technology" label="FS technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q11223801" start="12488" end="12499" title="IBM 4300" label="4300 family"/>
<link wikidata="Q28379865" start="12505" end="12516" title="IBM 308X" label="308x family"/>
<link wikidata="Q10850980" start="12522" end="12526" title="IBM 3090" label="3090"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361373" start="12532" end="12539" title="IBM ES/9000 family" label="ES/9000"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361373" start="12544" end="12548" title="IBM 9672" label="9672"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361373" start="12559" end="12569" title="System/390" label="System/390"/>
<link wikidata="Q2141460" start="12587" end="12592" title="IBM Z" label="IBM Z"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842504" start="12725" end="12731" title="Amdahl Corporation" label="Amdahl"/>
<link wikidata="Q53238" start="12772" end="12779" title="Hitachi, Ltd." label="Hitachi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7865331" start="12796" end="12814" title="UNIVAC 9000 series" label="UNIVAC 9000 series"/>
<link wikidata="Q218038" start="12842" end="12845" title="RCA" label="RCA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7276059" start="12846" end="12856" title="Spectra 70" label="Spectra 70"/>
<link wikidata="Q5378249" start="12873" end="12898" title="English Electric System 4" label="English Electric System 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q1443793" start="13000" end="13006" title="UNIVAC" label="UNIVAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7865330" start="13074" end="13090" title="UNIVAC Series 90" label="UNIVAC Series 90"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="13143" end="13155" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q4172729" start="13194" end="13200" title="ES EVM" label="ES EVM"/>
<link wikidata="Q429802" start="13207" end="13215" title="IBM 5100" label="IBM 5100"/>
<link wikidata="Q296187" start="13306" end="13333" title="APL programming language" label="APL.SV programming language"/>
<link wikidata="Q3026015" start="13468" end="13486" title="radiation hardened" label="radiation-hardened"/>
<link wikidata="Q3146519" start="13551" end="13562" title="System/4 Pi" label="System/4 Pi"/>
<link wikidata="Q221329" start="13563" end="13571" title="avionics" label="avionics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3140932" start="13739" end="13753" title="fault-tolerance" label="fault-tolerant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1775296" start="13754" end="13767" title="Space Shuttle program" label="Space Shuttle"/>
<link wikidata="Q335357" start="13810" end="13841" title="Federal Aviation Administration" label="Federal Aviation Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q5968746" start="13855" end="13863" title="IBM 9020" label="IBM 9020"/>
<link wikidata="Q202871" start="14008" end="14017" title="emulator" label="emulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q270159" start="14404" end="14409" title="8-bit computing" label="8-bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q8799" start="14410" end="14414" title="byte" label="byte"/>
<link wikidata="Q984038" start="14523" end="14527" title="IBM 7030" label="7030"/>
<link wikidata="Q835713" start="14607" end="14618" title="memory address" label="addressable"/>
<link wikidata="Q225147" start="14687" end="14693" title="32-bit computing" label="32-bit"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14694" end="14699" title="integer (computer science)#Words" label="words"/>
<link wikidata="Q60743050" start="14706" end="14717" title="Bus and Tag" label="Bus and Tag"/>
<link wikidata="Q175869" start="14774" end="14783" title="microcode" label="microcode"/>
<link wikidata="Q5968834" start="14796" end="14839" title="IBM hexadecimal floating-point" label="IBM hexadecimal floating-point architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q627945" start="14846" end="14852" title="EBCDIC" label="EBCDIC"/>
<link wikidata="Q4032660" start="14869" end="14893" title="9-track tape" label="Nine-track magnetic tape"/>
<link wikidata="Q173212" start="14946" end="14967" title="computer architecture" label="computer architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q339338" start="15274" end="15284" title="Big endian" label="Big endian"/>
<link wikidata="Q225147" start="15325" end="15331" title="32-bit computing" label="32-bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q187466" start="15332" end="15356" title="general-purpose register" label="general-purpose register"/>
<link wikidata="Q9063099" start="15379" end="15398" title="program status word" label="program status word"/>
<link wikidata="Q220764" start="15447" end="15456" title="Interrupt" label="Interrupt"/>
<link wikidata="Q814194" start="15518" end="15537" title="program counter" label="instruction address"/>
<link wikidata="Q220764" start="15568" end="15576" title="interrupt" label="maskable"/>
<link wikidata="Q272683" start="15634" end="15649" title="instruction set" label="instruction set"/>
<link wikidata="Q66221" start="15800" end="15833" title="primary storage" label="memory (called storage) subsystem"/>
<link wikidata="Q180256" start="15988" end="15997" title="booting" label="bootstrap"/>
<link wikidata="Q276582" start="16339" end="16359" title="Binary-coded decimal" label="Binary-coded decimal"/>
<link wikidata="Q117879" start="16375" end="16389" title="Floating-point arithmetic" label="Floating-point"/>
<link wikidata="Q163585" start="16442" end="16474" title="Memory protection key" label="Key-controlled memory protection"/>
<link wikidata="Q276582" start="16776" end="16790" title="Binary-coded decimal" label="packed decimal"/>
<link wikidata="Q117879" start="16960" end="16974" title="floating-point arithmetic" label="floating-point"/>
<link wikidata="Q225147" start="17021" end="17027" title="32-bit computing" label="32-bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q252132" start="17031" end="17037" title="64-bit computing" label="64-bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q740943" start="17331" end="17337" title="nybble" label="nibble"/>
<link wikidata="Q180256" start="18584" end="18587" title="Initial Program Load" label="IPL"/>
<link wikidata="Q1586139" start="18841" end="18851" title="System/370" label="System/370"/>
<link wikidata="Q6837755" start="18921" end="18924" title="Michigan Terminal System" label="MTS"/>
<link wikidata="Q5013581" start="18926" end="18931" title="CP-67" label="CP-67"/>
<link wikidata="Q15956143" start="18937" end="18944" title="TSS/360" label="TSS/360"/>
<link wikidata="Q1586139" start="19375" end="19385" title="System/370" label="System/370"/>
<link wikidata="Q740943" start="19636" end="19642" title="nybble" label="nibble"/>
<link wikidata="Q82828" start="19765" end="19776" title="hexadecimal" label="hexadecimal"/>
<link wikidata="Q210813" start="21028" end="21048" title="direct memory access" label="direct memory access"/>
<link wikidata="Q60743050" start="21106" end="21117" title="Bus and Tag" label="bus and tag"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344714" start="21161" end="21190" title="ESCON" label="Enterprise Systems Connection"/>
<link wikidata="Q117691" start="21203" end="21219" title="FICON" label="Fibre Connection"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320033" start="21530" end="21542" title="line printer" label="line printer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046817" start="21642" end="21652" title="disk drive" label="disk drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q751913" start="21655" end="21665" title="tape drive" label="tape drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q908463" start="21683" end="21688" title="drum memory" label="drums"/>
<link wikidata="Q222903" start="22395" end="22406" title="multiplexing" label="multiplexed"/>
<link wikidata="Q16927929" start="23336" end="23345" title="270x" label="2701/2703"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26285" end="26289" title="IBM 2880" label="2880"/>
<link wikidata="Q1586139" start="26352" end="26362" title="System/370" label="System/370"/>
<link wikidata="Q1586139" start="26703" end="26708" title="IBM System/370" label="S/370"/>
<link wikidata="Q80831" start="27180" end="27198" title="integrated circuit" label="integrated circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210109" start="27260" end="27285" title="hybrid integrated circuit" label="hybrid integrated circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q45621" start="27321" end="27328" title="ceramic" label="ceramic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5321" start="27341" end="27349" title="Resistor" label="Resistor"/>
<link wikidata="Q187791" start="27356" end="27369" title="screen-printing" label="silk screened"/>
<link wikidata="Q11469" start="27386" end="27391" title="glass" label="glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q5339" start="27405" end="27415" title="transistor" label="transistor"/>
<link wikidata="Q11656" start="27421" end="27426" title="diode" label="diode"/>
<link wikidata="Q4040980" start="27533" end="27555" title="Solid Logic Technology" label="Solid Logic Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q432439" start="27617" end="27626" title="flip chip" label="flip chip"/>
<link wikidata="Q173350" start="27660" end="27675" title="printed circuit board" label="printed circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972118" start="27956" end="27977" title="Edge connector" label="printed contact areas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4836225" start="28639" end="28646" title="BOS/360" label="BOS/360"/>
<link wikidata="Q3487917" start="28712" end="28719" title="DOS/360" label="DOS/360"/>
<link wikidata="Q289345" start="28791" end="28796" title="VSE (operating system)" label="z/VSE"/>
<link wikidata="Q1690495" start="28823" end="28843" title="OS/360 and successors" label="Operating System/360"/>
<link wikidata="Q1690495" start="28962" end="29007" title="MFT (operating system)" label="Multiprogramming with a Fixed number of Tasks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1690495" start="29019" end="29067" title="Multiprogramming with a Variable number of Tasks" label="Multiprogramming with a Variable number of Tasks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1586139" start="29351" end="29361" title="System/370" label="System/370"/>
<link wikidata="Q7072966" start="29399" end="29405" title="OS/VS1" label="OS/VS1"/>
<link wikidata="Q7072968" start="29430" end="29442" title="OS/VS2 (SVS)" label="OS/VS2 (SVS)"/>
<link wikidata="Q781443" start="29494" end="29497" title="MVS" label="MVS"/>
<link wikidata="Q283705" start="29552" end="29556" title="z/OS" label="z/OS"/>
<link wikidata="Q5969049" start="29581" end="29589" title="IBM System/360 Model 67" label="Model 67"/>
<link wikidata="Q15956143" start="29625" end="29632" title="TSS/360" label="TSS/360"/>
<link wikidata="Q739186" start="29719" end="29726" title="Multics" label="Multics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5013581" start="29913" end="29918" title="CP-67" label="CP-67"/>
<link wikidata="Q6837755" start="29925" end="29949" title="Michigan Terminal System" label="Michigan Terminal System"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140920" start="29957" end="29976" title="Time Sharing Option" label="Time Sharing Option"/>
<link wikidata="Q913876" start="30014" end="30026" title="time-sharing" label="time-sharing"/>
<link wikidata="Q192726" start="30057" end="30072" title="virtual machine" label="virtual machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5013590" start="30099" end="30105" title="CP/CMS" label="CP/CMS"/>
<link wikidata="Q5025526" start="30168" end="30195" title="Cambridge Scientific Center" label="Cambridge Scientific Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q49108" start="30217" end="30220" title="MIT" label="MIT"/>
<link wikidata="Q5013572" start="30303" end="30309" title="VM/370" label="VM/370"/>
<link wikidata="Q5013572" start="30402" end="30408" title="VM/CMS" label="VM/CMS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399696" start="30476" end="30480" title="z/VM" label="z/VM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1505372" start="30907" end="30927" title="Job Control Language" label="Job Control Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q5968765" start="31329" end="31354" title="IBM Basic Programming Support" label="Basic Programming Support"/>
<link wikidata="Q5968578" start="31593" end="31601" title="IBM 1403" label="IBM 1403"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118800" start="31606" end="31614" title="IBM 1050" label="IBM 1052"/>
<link wikidata="Q5968578" start="32252" end="32260" title="IBM 1403" label="IBM 1403"/>
<link wikidata="Q167555" start="32446" end="32475" title="optical character recognition" label="optical character recognition"/>
<link wikidata="Q5968598" start="33275" end="33279" title="IBM 2250" label="2250"/>
<link wikidata="Q5968599" start="33376" end="33380" title="IBM 2260" label="2260"/>
<link wikidata="Q386610" start="33402" end="33406" title="IBM 3270" label="3270"/>
<link wikidata="Q2712755" start="33495" end="33503" title="IBM 2302" label="IBM 2302"/>
<link wikidata="Q2712755" start="33509" end="33517" title="IBM 2311" label="IBM 2311"/>
<link wikidata="Q85768015" start="33558" end="33566" title="IBM 7320" label="IBM 7320"/>
<link wikidata="Q2712755" start="33613" end="33617" title="IBM 1302" label="1302"/>
<link wikidata="Q2712755" start="33744" end="33748" title="IBM 1316" label="1316"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282316" start="33749" end="33758" title="disk pack" label="disk pack"/>
<link wikidata="Q2712755" start="33777" end="33785" title="IBM 1311" label="IBM 1311"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043737" start="33961" end="33968" title="disk sector" label="sectors"/>
<link wikidata="Q2712755" start="34026" end="34031" title="IBM 2314" label="2314s"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="34204" end="34208" title="IBM 2316" label="2316"/>
<link wikidata="Q2712755" start="34361" end="34365" title="IBM 1316" label="1316"/>
<link wikidata="Q5013590" start="35048" end="35054" title="CP/CMS" label="CP/CMS"/>
<link wikidata="Q85768015" start="35439" end="35447" title="IBM 2303" label="IBM 2303"/>
<link wikidata="Q5968602" start="36303" end="36321" title="IBM 2321 Data Cell" label="IBM 2321 Data Cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3146514" start="37951" end="37962" title="IBM 7-track" label="IBM 7-track"/>
<link wikidata="Q4032660" start="37966" end="37978" title="9-track tape" label="9-track tape"/>
<link wikidata="Q5968730" start="38097" end="38104" title="IBM 729" label="IBM 729"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320033" start="38729" end="38741" title="Line printer" label="Line printer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5968578" start="38752" end="38760" title="IBM 1403" label="IBM 1403"/>
<link wikidata="Q48977198" start="38776" end="38784" title="IBM 1443" label="IBM 1443"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314805" start="38984" end="39007" title="Request price quotation" label="Request Price Quotation"/>
<link wikidata="Q167555" start="39335" end="39364" title="Optical character recognition" label="Optical character recognition"/>
<link wikidata="Q61897384" start="39856" end="39871" title="photomultiplier" label="photomultiplier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192011" start="39880" end="39914" title="Magnetic ink character recognition" label="Magnetic ink character recognition"/>
<link wikidata="Q177234" start="40231" end="40240" title="mainframe computer" label="mainframe"/>
<link wikidata="Q964035" start="40405" end="40428" title="Computer History Museum" label="Computer History Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q486860" start="40432" end="40457" title="Mountain View, California" label="Mountain View, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q3386642" start="40477" end="40485" title="IBM System/360 Model 30" label="Model 30"/>
<link wikidata="Q1954764" start="40508" end="40542" title="Museum of Transport and Technology" label="Museum of Transport and Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q37100" start="40546" end="40554" title="Auckland" label="Auckland"/>
<link wikidata="Q689400" start="40577" end="40608" title="Vienna University of Technology" label="Vienna University of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517021" start="40627" end="40658" title="University of Western Australia" label="University of Western Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3088121" start="40688" end="40696" title="IBM System/360 Model 40" label="Model 40"/>
<link wikidata="Q58024" start="40992" end="40996" title="eBay" label="eBay"/>
<link wikidata="Q85754532" start="41105" end="41117" title="Creslow Park" label="Creslow Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q23229" start="41121" end="41136" title="Buckinghamshire" label="Buckinghamshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q109849655" start="41421" end="41450" title="System Source Computer Museum" label="System Source Computer Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5944006" start="41454" end="41475" title="Hunt Valley, Maryland" label="Hunt Valley, Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="" start="41516" end="41547" title="Living Computers: Museum + Labs" label="Living Computers: Museum + Labs"/>
<link wikidata="Q216640" start="41771" end="41778" title="System console" label="console"/>
<link wikidata="Q187466" start="41785" end="41799" title="processor register" label="register value"/>
<link wikidata="Q5320" start="41807" end="41820" title="toggle switch" label="toggle switch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001958" start="41855" end="41869" title="kill switch" label="emergency pull"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="41948" end="41976" title="IBM System/360 architecture " label="IBM System/360 architecture "/>
<link wikidata="Q5968746" start="41979" end="41987" title="IBM 9020" label="IBM 9020"/>
<link wikidata="Q16927972" start="41990" end="42004" title="History of IBM" label="History of IBM"/>
<link wikidata="Q2749276" start="42007" end="42027" title="List of IBM products" label="List of IBM products"/>
<link wikidata="Q3146519" start="42030" end="42045" title="IBM System/4 Pi" label="IBM System/4 Pi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632606" start="42048" end="42061" title="Gerrit Blaauw" label="Gerrit Blaauw"/>
<link wikidata="Q3297167" start="42064" end="42076" title="Bob O. Evans" label="Bob O. Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q964035" start="42656" end="42679" title="Computer History Museum" label="Computer History Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5969049" start="42814" end="42824" title="IBM System/360 Model 67" label="IBM 360/67"/>
<link wikidata="Q230492" start="42832" end="42854" title="University of Michigan" label="University of Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3018243" start="42937" end="42953" title="David L. Mills" label="Dave Mills&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q6837755" start="42977" end="43001" title="Michigan Terminal System" label="Michigan Terminal System"/>
<link wikidata="Q5969049" start="43025" end="43048" title="IBM System/360 Model 67" label="IBM System/360 Model 67"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="29298" wikidata="Q1196129" url="?curid=29298" title="Spouse">
<text>A spouse is a significant other in a marriage. A male spouse is called a husband while a female spouse is called a wife.

==Married==

The legal status of a spouse, and the specific rights and obligations associated with that status, vary significantly among the jurisdictions of the world. These regulations are usually described in family law statutes. However, in many parts of the world, where civil marriage is not that prevalent, there is instead customary marriage, which is usually regulated informally by the community. In many parts of the world, spousal rights and obligations are related to the payment of bride price, dowry or dower. Historically, many societies have given sets of rights and obligations to male marital partners that have been very different from the sets of rights and obligations given to female marital partners. In particular, the control of marital property, inheritance rights, and the right to dictate the activities of children of the marriage, have typically been given to male marital partners. However, this practice was curtailed to a great deal in many countries in the twentieth century, and more modern statutes tend to define the rights and duties of a spouse without reference to gender. Among the last European countries to establish full gender equality in marriage were Switzerland. In 1985, a referendum guaranteed women legal equality with men within marriage. The new reforms came into force in January 1988. Although married women in France obtained the right to work without their husbands&#x27; permission in 1965, and the paternal authority of a man over his family was ended in 1970 (before that parental responsibilities belonged solely to the father who made all legal decisions concerning the children), it was only in 1985 that a legal reform abolished the stipulation that the husband had the sole power to administer the children&#x27;s property. in the 1980s. In various marriage laws around the world, however, the husband continues to have authority; for instance the Civil Code of Iran states at Article 1105: &quot;In relations between husband and wife; the position of the head of the family is the exclusive right of the husband&quot;.

Depending on jurisdiction, the refusal or inability of a spouse to perform the marital obligations may constitute a ground for divorce, legal separation or annulment. The latter two options are more prevalent in countries where the dominant religion is Roman Catholicism, some of which introduced divorce only recently (i.e. Italy in 1970, Portugal in 1975, Brazil in 1977, Spain in 1981, Argentina in 1987, Paraguay in 1991, Colombia in 1991, Ireland in 1996, Chile in 2004 and Malta in 2011). In recent years, many Western countries have adopted no-fault divorce. In some parts of the world, the formal dissolution of a marriage is complicated by the payments and goods which have been exchanged between families (this is common where marriages are arranged). This often makes it difficult to leave a marriage, especially for the woman: in some parts of Africa, once the bride price has been paid, the wife is seen as belonging to the husband and his family; and if she wants to leave, the husband may demand back the bride price that he had paid to the girl&#x27;s family. The girl&#x27;s family often cannot or does not want to pay it back.

Regardless of legislation, personal relations between spouses may also be influenced by local culture and religion.

==Minimum age==
There is often a minimum legal marriageable age. The United Nations Population Fund stated the following:

:&quot;In 2010, 158 countries reported that 18 years was the minimum legal age for marriage for women without parental consent or approval by a pertinent authority. However, in 146 countries, state or customary law allows girls younger than 18 to marry with the consent of parents or other authorities; in 52 countries, girls under age 15 can marry with parental consent. In contrast, 18 is the legal age for marriage without consent among males in 180 countries. Additionally, in 105 countries, boys can marry with the consent of a parent or a pertinent authority, and in 23 countries, boys under age 15 can marry with parental consent.&quot;

==Procreation==
In Western countries, spouses sometimes choose not to have children. In some parts of the world, there is greater expectations that heterosexual couples will procreate, such is the case in northern Ghana. For example, the payment of the bride signifies a woman&#x27;s requirement to bear children, and women using birth control are at risks of threats and coercion.

==Selection==
There are many ways in which a spouse is chosen, which vary across the world, and include love marriage, arranged marriage, and forced marriage. The latter is in some jurisdictions a void marriage or a voidable marriage. Forcing someone to marry is also a criminal offense in some countries.

== See also ==
* Bride
* Spousal privilege
* Work spouses, a pair of co-workers sharing emotional bonds similar to those in a marriage

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1196129" start="2" end="8" title="Spouse" label="spouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q11493441" start="14" end="31" title="significant other" label="significant other"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="37" end="45" title="marriage" label="marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q212878" start="73" end="80" title="husband" label="husband"/>
<link wikidata="Q188830" start="115" end="119" title="wife" label="wife"/>
<link wikidata="Q384014" start="334" end="344" title="family law" label="family law"/>
<link wikidata="Q205572" start="398" end="412" title="civil marriage" label="civil marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q765157" start="618" end="629" title="bride price" label="bride price"/>
<link wikidata="Q45803" start="631" end="636" title="dowry" label="dowry"/>
<link wikidata="Q351406" start="640" end="645" title="dower" label="dower"/>
<link wikidata="Q6125066" start="877" end="893" title="Matrimonial regime" label="marital property"/>
<link wikidata="Q200303" start="895" end="906" title="inheritance" label="inheritance"/>
<link wikidata="Q113453" start="1288" end="1303" title="gender equality" label="gender equality"/>
<link wikidata="Q17542970" start="1937" end="1950" title="marriage laws" label="marriage laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="2050" end="2054" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q5611015" start="2325" end="2343" title="ground for divorce" label="ground for divorce"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142948" start="2345" end="2361" title="legal separation" label="legal separation"/>
<link wikidata="Q701040" start="2365" end="2374" title="annulment" label="annulment"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="2462" end="2479" title="Roman Catholicism" label="Roman Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="2534" end="2539" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q45" start="2549" end="2557" title="Portugal" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="2567" end="2573" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="2583" end="2588" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q414" start="2598" end="2607" title="Argentina" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q733" start="2617" end="2625" title="Paraguay" label="Paraguay"/>
<link wikidata="Q739" start="2635" end="2643" title="Colombia" label="Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q27" start="2653" end="2660" title="Republic of Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q298" start="2670" end="2675" title="Chile" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q233" start="2688" end="2693" title="Malta" label="Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q7042775" start="2757" end="2773" title="no fault divorce" label="no-fault divorce"/>
<link wikidata="Q1923231" start="2946" end="2968" title="arranged marriage" label="marriages are arranged"/>
<link wikidata="Q11042" start="3449" end="3456" title="culture" label="culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q9174" start="3461" end="3469" title="religion" label="religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196585" start="3519" end="3535" title="marriageable age" label="marriageable age"/>
<link wikidata="Q623036" start="3541" end="3571" title="United Nations Population Fund" label="United Nations Population Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q2355340" start="4296" end="4323" title="Childfree" label="choose not to have children"/>
<link wikidata="Q502215" start="4445" end="4459" title="northern Ghana" label="northern Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q122224" start="4570" end="4583" title="birth control" label="birth control"/>
<link wikidata="Q1468362" start="4727" end="4740" title="love marriage" label="love marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1923231" start="4742" end="4759" title="arranged marriage" label="arranged marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q231632" start="4765" end="4780" title="forced marriage" label="forced marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q7939753" start="4820" end="4833" title="void marriage" label="void marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q7939758" start="4839" end="4856" title="voidable marriage" label="voidable marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q353673" start="4947" end="4952" title="Bride" label="Bride"/>
<link wikidata="Q7580153" start="4955" end="4972" title="Spousal privilege" label="Spousal privilege"/>
<link wikidata="Q8034644" start="4975" end="4986" title="Work spouse" label="Work spouse"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="29299" wikidata="Q652692" url="?curid=29299" title="Sexuality (disambiguation)">
<text>Human [[human sexuality|sexuality]] is the capacity to have erotic experiences and responses.

Sexuality may also refer to:

*Sexuality (biology)
**Animal sexuality
**Plant sexuality
**Sexuality of fungi
*Sexuality (orientation)
*&quot;Sexualities&quot; (journal), an academic journal
*&quot;Sexualities&quot; (book) a 2007 book edited by Nivedita Menon
*&quot;Sexuality&quot; (album), a 2008 album by Sébastien Tellier
*&quot;Sexuality&quot; (Billy Bragg song) (1991)
*&quot;Sexuality&quot; (Prince song) (1981)
*&quot;Sexuality&quot;, a 1995 song by k.d. lang from &quot;All You Can Eat&quot;

==See also==
*Index of human sexuality articles
*Plant reproduction
*Sex (disambiguation)
*Sexual attractiveness
*Sexual identity
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q652692" start="6" end="35" title="Sexuality (disambiguation)" label="[[human sexuality|sexuality]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q652692" start="95" end="104" title="Sexuality (disambiguation)" label="Sexuality"/>
<link wikidata="Q290" start="126" end="145" title="Sexuality (biology)" label="Sexuality (biology)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2431958" start="148" end="164" title="Animal sexuality" label="Animal sexuality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1608538" start="167" end="182" title="Plant sexuality" label="Plant sexuality"/>
<link wikidata="Q764" start="185" end="203" title="Sexuality of fungi" label="Sexuality of fungi"/>
<link wikidata="Q17888" start="205" end="228" title="Sexuality (orientation)" label="Sexuality (orientation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7458832" start="230" end="263" title="Sexualities (journal)" label="&amp;quot;Sexualities&amp;quot; (journal)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16733425" start="286" end="316" title="Sexualities (book)" label="&amp;quot;Sexualities&amp;quot; (book)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3079098" start="355" end="384" title="Sexuality (album)" label="&amp;quot;Sexuality&amp;quot; (album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7458835" start="421" end="461" title="Sexuality (Billy Bragg song)" label="&amp;quot;Sexuality&amp;quot; (Billy Bragg song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129248" start="470" end="505" title="Sexuality (Prince song)" label="&amp;quot;Sexuality&amp;quot; (Prince song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3612208" start="573" end="588" title="All You Can Eat (k.d. lang album)" label="All You Can Eat"/>
<link wikidata="Q3276421" start="610" end="643" title="Index of human sexuality articles" label="Index of human sexuality articles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2725616" start="645" end="663" title="Plant reproduction" label="Plant reproduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q225833" start="665" end="685" title="Sex (disambiguation)" label="Sex (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q464859" start="687" end="708" title="Sexual attractiveness" label="Sexual attractiveness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165905" start="710" end="725" title="Sexual identity" label="Sexual identity"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="29301" wikidata="Q60195" url="?curid=29301" title="Semiotics">
<text>Semiotics ( ) is the systematic study of sign processes and the communication of meaning. In semiotics, a sign is defined as anything that communicates intentional and unintentional meaning or feelings to the sign&#x27;s interpreter.

Semiosis is any activity, conduct, or process that involves signs. Signs often are communicated by verbal language, but also by gestures, or by other forms of language, e.g. artistic ones (music, painting, sculpture, etc.). Contemporary semiotics is a branch of science that generally studies meaning-making (whether communicated or not) and various types of knowledge.

Unlike linguistics, semiotics also studies non-linguistic sign systems. Semiotics includes the study of indication, designation, likeness, analogy, allegory, metonymy, metaphor, symbolism, signification, and communication.

Semiotics is frequently seen as having important anthropological and sociological dimensions. Some semioticians regard every cultural phenomenon as being able to be studied as communication. Semioticians also focus on the logical dimensions of semiotics, examining biological questions such as how organisms make predictions about, and adapt to, their semiotic niche in the world.

Fundamental semiotic theories take signs or sign systems as their object of study. Applied semiotics analyzes cultures and cultural artifacts according to the ways they construct meaning through their being signs. The communication of information in living organisms is covered in biosemiotics including zoosemiotics and phytosemiotics.

== History and terminology ==
The importance of signs and signification has been recognized throughout much of the history of philosophy and psychology. The term derives (). For the Greeks, &#x27;signs&#x27; ( ) occurred in the world of nature and &#x27;symbols&#x27; ( ) in the world of culture. As such, Plato and Aristotle explored the relationship between signs and the world.

It would not be until Augustine of Hippo that the nature of the sign would be considered within a conventional system. Augustine introduced a thematic proposal for uniting the two under the notion of &#x27;sign&#x27; () as transcending the nature–culture divide and identifying symbols as no more than a species (or sub-species) of &quot;&quot;. A monograph study on this question was done by Manetti (1987). These theories have had a lasting effect in Western philosophy, especially through scholastic philosophy.

The general study of signs that began in Latin with Augustine culminated with the 1632 of John Poinsot and then began anew in late modernity with the attempt in 1867 by Charles Sanders Peirce to draw up a &quot;new list of categories&quot;. More recently Umberto Eco, in his &quot;Semiotics and the Philosophy of Language&quot;, has argued that semiotic theories are implicit in the work of most, perhaps all, major thinkers.

=== John Locke ===
John Locke (1690), himself a man of medicine, was familiar with this &quot;semeiotics&quot; as naming a specialized branch within medical science. In his personal library were two editions of Scapula&#x27;s 1579 abridgement of Henricus Stephanus&#x27; , which listed as the name for , the branch of medicine concerned with interpreting symptoms of disease (&quot;symptomatology&quot;). Physician and scholar Henry Stubbe (1670) had transliterated this term of specialized science into English precisely as &quot;semeiotics&quot;, marking the first use of the term in English:Locke would use the term &quot;sem(e)iotike&quot; in &quot;An Essay Concerning Human Understanding&quot; (book IV, chap. 21), in which he explains how science may be divided into three parts:

Locke then elaborates on the nature of this third category, naming it (), and explaining it as &quot;the doctrine of signs&quot; in the following terms:

Juri Lotman introduced Eastern Europe to semiotics and adopted Locke&#x27;s coinage () as the name to subtitle his founding at the University of Tartu in Estonia in 1964 of the first semiotics journal, &quot;Sign Systems Studies&quot;.

=== Ferdinand de Saussure ===
Ferdinand de Saussure founded his semiotics, which he called semiology, in the social sciences:

Thomas Sebeok would assimilate &quot;semiology&quot; to &quot;semiotics&quot; as a part to a whole, and was involved in choosing the name &quot;Semiotica&quot; for the first international journal devoted to the study of signs. Saussurean semiotics have exercised a great deal of influence on the schools of structuralism and post-structuralism. Jacques Derrida, for example, takes as his object the Saussurean relationship of signifier and signified, asserting that signifier and signified are not fixed, coining the expression , relating to the endless deferral of meaning, and to the absence of a &quot;transcendent signified&quot;.

=== Charles Sanders Peirce ===
In the nineteenth century, Charles Sanders Peirce defined what he termed &quot;semiotic&quot; (which he would sometimes spell as &quot;semeiotic&quot;) as the &quot;quasi-necessary, or formal doctrine of signs,&quot; which abstracts &quot;what must be the characters of all signs used by...an intelligence capable of learning by experience,&quot; and which is philosophical logic pursued in terms of signs and sign processes.

Peirce&#x27;s perspective is considered as philosophical logic studied in terms of signs that are not always linguistic or artificial, and sign processes, modes of inference, and the inquiry process in general. The Peircean semiotic addresses not only the external communication mechanism, as per Saussure, but the internal representation machine, investigating sign processes, and modes of inference, as well as the whole inquiry process in general.

Peircean semiotic is triadic, including sign, object, interpretant, as opposed to the dyadic Saussurian tradition (signifier, signified). Peircean semiotics further subdivides each of the three triadic elements into three sub-types, positing the existence of signs that are symbols; semblances (&quot;icons&quot;); and &quot;indices,&quot; i.e., signs that are such through a factual connection to their objects.

Peircean scholar and editor Max H. Fisch (1978) would claim that &quot;semeiotic&quot; was Peirce&#x27;s own preferred rendering of Locke&#x27;s σημιωτική. Charles W. Morris followed Peirce in using the term &quot;semiotic&quot; and in extending the discipline beyond human communication to animal learning and use of signals.

While the Saussurean semiotic is dyadic (sign/syntax, signal/semantics), the Peircean semiotic is triadic (sign, object, interpretant), being conceived as philosophical logic studied in terms of signs that are not always linguistic or artificial.

==== Peirce&#x27;s list of categories ====
Peirce would aim to base his new list directly upon experience precisely as constituted by action of signs, in contrast with the list of Aristotle&#x27;s categories which aimed to articulate within experience the dimension of being that is independent of experience and knowable as such, through human understanding.

The estimative powers of animals interpret the environment as sensed to form a &quot;meaningful world&quot; of objects, but the objects of this world (or &quot;Umwelt&quot;, in Jakob von Uexküll&#x27;s term) consist exclusively of objects related to the animal as desirable (+), undesirable (–), or &quot;safe to ignore&quot; (0).

In contrast to this, human understanding adds to the animal &quot;Umwelt&quot; a relation of self-identity within objects which transforms objects experienced into &#x27;things&#x27; as well as +, –, 0 objects. Thus, the generically animal objective world as &quot;Umwelt&quot;, becomes a species-specifically human objective world or (), wherein linguistic communication, rooted in the biologically underdetermined () of humans, makes possible the further dimension of cultural organization within the otherwise merely social organization of non-human animals whose powers of observation may deal only with directly sensible instances of objectivity.

This further point, that human culture depends upon language understood first of all not as communication, but as the biologically underdetermined aspect or feature of the human animal&#x27;s &quot;&quot;, was originally clearly identified by Thomas A. Sebeok. Sebeok also played the central role in bringing Peirce&#x27;s work to the center of the semiotic stage in the twentieth century, first with his expansion of the human use of signs (&quot;anthroposemiosis&quot;) to include also the generically animal sign-usage (&quot;zoösemiosis&quot;), then with his further expansion of semiosis to include the vegetative world (&quot;phytosemiosis&quot;). Such would initially be based on the work of Martin Krampen, but takes advantage of Peirce&#x27;s point that an interpretant, as the third item within a sign relation, &quot;need not be mental&quot;.

Peirce distinguished between the interpretant and the interpreter. The interpretant is the internal, mental representation that mediates between the object and its sign. The interpreter is the human who is creating the interpretant. Peirce&#x27;s &quot;interpretant&quot; notion opened the way to understanding an action of signs beyond the realm of animal life (study of phytosemiosis + zoösemiosis + anthroposemiosis = &quot;biosemiotics&quot;), which was his first advance beyond Latin Age semiotics.

Other early theorists in the field of semiotics include Charles W. Morris. Writing in 1951, Jozef Maria Bochenski surveyed the field in this way: &quot;Closely related to mathematical logic is the so-called semiotics (Charles Morris) which is now commonly employed by mathematical logicians. Semiotics is the theory of symbols and falls in three parts;
# logical syntax, the theory of the mutual relations of symbols,
# logical semantics, the theory of the relations between the symbol and what the symbol stands for, and
# logical pragmatics, the relations between symbols, their meanings and the users of the symbols.&quot;
Max Black argued that the work of Bertrand Russell was seminal in the field.

== Formulations and subfields ==

Semioticians classify signs or sign systems in relation to the way they are transmitted. This process of carrying meaning depends on the use of codes that may be the individual sounds or letters that humans use to form words, the body movements they make to show attitude or emotion, or even something as general as the clothes they wear. To coin a word to refer to a &quot;thing&quot;, the community must agree on a simple meaning (a denotative meaning) within their language, but that word can transmit that meaning only within the language&#x27;s grammatical structures and codes. Codes also represent the values of the culture, and are able to add new shades of connotation to every aspect of life.

To explain the relationship between semiotics and communication studies, communication is defined as the process of transferring data and-or meaning from a source to a receiver. Hence, communication theorists construct models based on codes, media, and contexts to explain the biology, psychology, and mechanics involved. Both disciplines recognize that the technical process cannot be separated from the fact that the receiver must decode the data, i.e., be able to distinguish the data as salient, and make meaning out of it. This implies that there is a necessary overlap between semiotics and communication. Indeed, many of the concepts are shared, although in each field the emphasis is different. In &quot;Messages and Meanings: An Introduction to Semiotics&quot;, Marcel Danesi (1994) suggested that semioticians&#x27; priorities were to study signification first, and communication second. A more extreme view is offered by Jean-Jacques Nattiez who, as a musicologist, considered the theoretical study of communication irrelevant to his application of semiotics.

=== Syntactics ===

Semiotics differs from linguistics in that it generalizes the definition of a sign to encompass signs in any medium or sensory modality. Thus it broadens the range of sign systems and sign relations, and extends the definition of language in what amounts to its widest analogical or metaphorical sense. The branch of semiotics that deals with such formal relations between signs or expressions in abstraction from their signification and their interpreters, or—more generally—with formal properties of symbol systems (specifically, with reference to linguistic signs, syntax) is referred to as syntactics.

Peirce&#x27;s definition of the term &quot;semiotic&quot; as the study of necessary features of signs also has the effect of distinguishing the discipline from linguistics as the study of contingent features that the world&#x27;s languages happen to have acquired in the course of their evolutions. From a subjective standpoint, perhaps more difficult is the distinction between semiotics and the philosophy of language. In a sense, the difference lies between separate traditions rather than subjects. Different authors have called themselves &quot;philosopher of language&quot; or &quot;semiotician.&quot; This difference does &quot;not&quot; match the separation between analytic and continental philosophy. On a closer look, there may be found some differences regarding subjects. Philosophy of language pays more attention to natural languages or to languages in general, while semiotics is deeply concerned with non-linguistic signification. Philosophy of language also bears connections to linguistics, while semiotics might appear closer to some of the humanities (including literary theory) and to cultural anthropology.

=== Cognitive semiotics ===
Semiosis or &quot;semeiosis&quot; is the process that forms meaning from any organism&#x27;s apprehension of the world through signs. Scholars who have talked about semiosis in their subtheories of semiotics include C. S. Peirce, John Deely, and Umberto Eco. Cognitive semiotics is combining methods and theories developed in the disciplines of semiotics and the humanities, with providing new information into human signification and its manifestation in cultural practices. The research on cognitive semiotics brings together semiotics from linguistics, cognitive science, and related disciplines on a common meta-theoretical platform of concepts, methods, and shared data.

Cognitive semiotics may also be seen as the study of meaning-making by employing and integrating methods and theories developed in the cognitive sciences. This involves conceptual and textual analysis as well as experimental investigations. Cognitive semiotics initially was developed at the Center for Semiotics at Aarhus University (Denmark), with an important connection with the Center of Functionally Integrated Neuroscience (CFIN) at Aarhus Hospital. Amongst the prominent cognitive semioticians are Per Aage Brandt, Svend Østergaard, Peer Bundgård, Frederik Stjernfelt, Mikkel Wallentin, Kristian Tylén, Riccardo Fusaroli, and Jordan Zlatev. Zlatev later in co-operation with Göran Sonesson established CCS (Center for Cognitive Semiotics) at Lund University, Sweden.

=== Finite semiotics ===
Finite semiotics, developed by Cameron Shackell (2018, 2019), aims to unify existing theories of semiotics for application to the post-Baudrillardian world of ubiquitous technology. Its central move is to place the finiteness of thought at the root of semiotics and the sign as a secondary but fundamental analytical construct. The theory contends that the levels of reproduction that technology is bringing to human environments demands this reprioritisation if semiotics is to remain relevant in the face of effectively infinite signs. The shift in emphasis allows practical definitions of many core constructs in semiotics which Shackell has applied to areas such as human computer interaction, creativity theory, and a computational semiotics method for generating semiotic squares from digital texts.

=== Pictorial semiotics ===
Pictorial semiotics is intimately connected to art history and theory. It goes beyond them both in at least one fundamental way, however. While art history has limited its visual analysis to a small number of pictures that qualify as &quot;works of art&quot;, pictorial semiotics focuses on the properties of pictures in a general sense, and on how the artistic conventions of images can be interpreted through pictorial codes. Pictorial codes are the way in which viewers of pictorial representations seem automatically to decipher the artistic conventions of images by being unconsciously familiar with them.

According to Göran Sonesson, a Swedish semiotician, pictures can be analyzed by three models: the narrative model, which concentrates on the relationship between pictures and time in a chronological manner as in a comic strip; the rhetoric model, which compares pictures with different devices as in a metaphor; and the Laokoon model, which considers the limits and constraints of pictorial expressions by comparing textual mediums that utilize time with visual mediums that utilize space.

The break from traditional art history and theory—as well as from other major streams of semiotic analysis—leaves open a wide variety of possibilities for pictorial semiotics. Some influences have been drawn from phenomenological analysis, cognitive psychology, structuralist, and cognitivist linguistics, and visual anthropology and sociology.

=== Globalization ===
Studies have shown that semiotics may be used to make or break a brand. Culture codes strongly influence whether a population likes or dislikes a brand&#x27;s marketing, especially internationally. If the company is unaware of a culture&#x27;s codes, it runs the risk of failing in its marketing. Globalization has caused the development of a global consumer culture where products have similar associations, whether positive or negative, across numerous markets.

Mistranslations may lead to instances of &quot;Engrish&quot; or &quot;Chinglish&quot; terms for unintentionally humorous cross-cultural slogans intended to be understood in English. When translating surveys, the same symbol may mean different things in the source and target language thus leading to potential errors. For example, the symbol of &quot;x&quot; is used to mark a response in English language surveys but &quot;x&quot; usually means in the Chinese convention. This may be caused by a sign that, in Peirce&#x27;s terms, mistakenly indexes or symbolizes something in one culture, that it does not in another. In other words, it creates a connotation that is culturally-bound, and that violates some culture code. Theorists who have studied humor (such as Schopenhauer) suggest that contradiction or incongruity creates absurdity and therefore, humor. Violating a culture code creates this construct of ridiculousness for the culture that owns the code. Intentional humor also may fail cross-culturally because jokes are not on code for the receiving culture.

A good example of branding according to cultural code is Disney&#x27;s international theme park business. Disney fits well with Japan&#x27;s cultural code because the Japanese value &quot;cuteness&quot;, politeness, and gift-giving as part of their culture code; Tokyo Disneyland sells the most souvenirs of any Disney theme park. In contrast, Disneyland Paris failed when it launched as Euro Disney because the company did not research the codes underlying European culture. Its storybook retelling of European folktales was taken as elitist and insulting, and the strict appearance standards that it had for employees resulted in discrimination lawsuits in France. Disney souvenirs were perceived as cheap trinkets. The park was a financial failure because its code violated the expectations of European culture in ways that were offensive.

However, some researchers have suggested that it is possible to successfully pass a sign perceived as a cultural icon, such as the logos for Coca-Cola or McDonald&#x27;s, from one culture to another. This may be accomplished if the sign is migrated from a more economically developed to a less developed culture. The intentional association of a product with another culture has been called &quot;foreign consumer culture positioning&quot; (FCCP). Products also may be marketed using global trends or culture codes, for example, saving time in a busy world; but even these may be fine-tuned for specific cultures.

Research also found that, as airline industry brandings grow and become more international their logos become more symbolic and less iconic. The iconicity and symbolism of a sign depends on the cultural convention and are, on that ground, in relation with each other. If the cultural convention has greater influence on the sign, the signs get more symbolic value.

=== Semiotics of dreaming ===

The flexibility of human semiotics is well demonstrated in dreams. Sigmund Freud spelled out how meaning in dreams rests on a blend of images, affects, sounds, words, and kinesthetic sensations. In his chapter on &quot;The Means of Representation,&quot; he showed how the most abstract sorts of meaning and logical relations can be represented by spatial relations. Two images in sequence may indicate &quot;if this, then that&quot; or &quot;despite this, that.&quot; Freud thought the dream started with &quot;dream thoughts&quot; which were like logical, verbal sentences. He believed that the dream thought was in the nature of a taboo wish that would awaken the dreamer. In order to safeguard sleep, the midbrain converts and disguises the verbal dream thought into an imagistic form, through processes he called the &quot;dream-work.&quot;

===Introversive and extroversive semiosis in music===
Kofi Agawu quotes the distinction made by Roman Jakobson between &quot;introversive semiosis, a language with signifies itself,&quot; and extoversive semiosis, the referential component of the semiosis. Jakobson writes that introversive semiosis &quot;is indissolubly linked with the esthetic function of sign systems and dominates not only music but also glossolalic poetry and nonrepresentational painting and sculpture&quot;, but Agawu uses the distinction mainly in music, proposing Schenkerian analysis as a path to introversive semiosis and topic theory as an example of extroversive semiosis. Jean-Jacques Nattiez makes the same distinction: &quot;Roman Jakobson sees in music a semiotic system in which the &#x27;introversive semiosis&#x27; – that is, the reference of each sonic element to the other elements to come — predominates over the &#x27;extroversive semiosis&#x27; – or the referential link with the exterior world.&quot;

=== Musical topic theory ===
Semiotics can be directly linked to the ideals of musical topic theory, which traces patterns in musical figures throughout their prevalent context in order to assign some aspect of narrative, affect, or aesthetics to the gesture. Danuta Mirka&#x27;s &quot;The Oxford Handbook of Topic Theory&quot; presents a holistic recognition and overview regarding the subject, offering insight into the development of the theory. In recognizing the indicative and symbolic elements of a musical line, gesture, or occurrence, one can gain a greater understanding of aspects regarding compositional intent and identity.

Philosopher Charles Pierce discusses the relationship of icons and indexes in relation to signification and semiotics. In doing so, he draws on the elements of various ideas, acts, or styles that can be translated into a different field. Whereas indexes consist of a contextual representation of a symbol, icons directly correlate with the object or gesture that is being referenced.

In his 1980 book &quot;Classic Music: Expression, Form, and Style,&quot; Leonard Ratner amends the conversation surrounding musical tropes—or &quot;topics&quot;—in order to create a collection of musical figures that have historically been indicative of a given style. Robert Hatten continues this conversation in &quot;Beethoven, Markedness, Correlation, and Interpretation&quot; (1994), in which he states that &quot;richly coded style types which carry certain features linked to affect, class, and social occasion such as church styles, learned styles, and dance styles. In complex forms these topics mingle, providing a basis for musical allusion.&quot;

=== List of subfields ===
Subfields that have sprouted out of semiotics include, but are not limited to, the following:
* Biosemiotics: the study of semiotic processes at all levels of biology, or a semiotic study of living systems (e.g., Copenhagen–Tartu School). Annual meetings (&quot;Gatherings in Biosemiotics&quot;) have been held since 2001.
* Semiotic anthropology and anthropological semantics.
* Cognitive semiotics: the study of meaning-making by employing and integrating methods and theories developed in the cognitive sciences. This involves conceptual and textual analysis as well as experimental investigations. Cognitive semiotics initially was developed at the Center for Semiotics at Aarhus University (Denmark), with an important connection with the Center of Functionally Integrated Neuroscience (CFIN) at Aarhus Hospital. Amongst the prominent cognitive semioticians are Per Aage Brandt, Svend Østergaard, Peer Bundgård, Frederik Stjernfelt, Mikkel Wallentin, Kristian Tylén, Riccardo Fusaroli, and Jordan Zlatev. Zlatev later in co-operation with Göran Sonesson established the Center for Cognitive Semiotics (CCS) at Lund University, Sweden.
* Comics semiotics: the study of the various codes and signs of comics and how they are understood.
* Computational semiotics: attempts to engineer the process of semiosis, in the study of and design for human–computer interaction or to mimic aspects of human cognition through artificial intelligence and knowledge representation.
* Cultural and literary semiotics: examines the literary world, the visual media, the mass media, and advertising in the work of writers such as Roland Barthes, Marcel Danesi, and Juri Lotman (e.g., Tartu–Moscow Semiotic School).
* Cybersemiotics: built on two already-generated interdisciplinary approaches: cybernetics and systems theory, including information theory and science; and Peircean semiotics, including phenomenology and pragmatic aspects of linguistics, attempts to make the two interdisciplinary paradigms—both going beyond mechanistic and pure constructivist ideas—complement each other in a common framework.
* Design semiotics or product semiotics: the study of the use of signs in the design of physical products; introduced by Martin Krampen and in a practitioner-oriented version by Rune Monö while teaching industrial design at the Institute of Design, Umeå University, Sweden.
* Ethnosemiotics: a disciplinary perspective which links semiotics concepts to ethnographic methods.
* Fashion semiotics
* Film semiotics: the study of the various codes and signs of film and how they are understood. Key figures include Christian Metz.
* Finite semiotics: an approach to the semiotics of technology developed by Cameron Shackell. It is used to both trace the effects of technology on human thought and to develop computational methods for performing semiotic analysis.
* Gregorian chant semiology: a current avenue of palaeographical research in Gregorian chant, which is revising the Solesmes school of interpretation.
* Hylosemiotics: an approach to semiotics that understands meaning as inference, which is developed through exploratory interaction with the physical world. It expands the concept of communication beyond a human-centered paradigm to include other sentient beings, such as animals, plants, bacteria, fungi, etc.
* Law and semiotics: one of the more accomplished publications in this field is the &quot;International Journal for the Semiotics of Law&quot;, published by International Association for the Semiotics of Law.
* Marketing semiotics (or commercial semiotics): an application of semiotic methods and semiotic thinking to the analysis and development of advertising and brand communications in cultural context. Key figures include Virginia Valentine, Malcolm Evans, Greg Rowland, Georgios Rossolatos. International annual conferences (Semiofest) have been held since 2012.
* Music semiology: the study of signs as they pertain to music on a variety of levels.
* Organisational semiotics: the study of semiotic processes in organizations (with strong ties to computational semiotics and human–computer interaction).
* Pictorial semiotics: an application of semiotic methods and semiotic thinking to art history.
* Semiotics of music videos: semiotics in popular music.
* Social semiotics: expands the interpretable semiotic landscape to include all cultural codes, such as in slang, fashion, tattoos, and advertising. Key figures include Roland Barthes, Michael Halliday, Bob Hodge, Chris William Martin and Christian Metz.
* Structuralism and post-structuralism in the work of Jacques Derrida, Michel Foucault, Louis Hjelmslev, Roman Jakobson, Jacques Lacan, Claude Lévi-Strauss, Roland Barthes, etc. Post-structuralism and semiotics are closely related in their approaches to language, meaning, and interpretation; their relationships, and focuses are on how signs—whether linguistic, visual, or cultural—function to convey meaning, and how those meanings can shift depending on context and interpretation.
* Theatre semiotics: an application of semiotic methods and semiotic thinking to theatre studies. Key figures include Keir Elam.
* Urban semiotics: the study of meaning in urban form as generated by signs, symbols, and their social connotations.
* Visual semiotics: analyses visual signs; prominent modern founders to this branch are Groupe μ and Göran Sonesson.
* Semiotics of photography: is the observation of symbolism used within photography.
* Artificial intelligence semiotics: the observation of visual symbols and the symbols&#x27; recognition by machine learning systems. The phrase was coined by Daniel Hoeg, founder of Semiotics Mobility, due to Semiotics Mobility&#x27;s design and learning process for autonomous recognition and perception of symbols by neural networks. The phrase refers to machine learning and neural nets application of semiotic methods and semiotic machine learning to the analysis and development of robotics commands and instructions with subsystem communications in autonomous systems context.
* Semiotics of mathematics: the study of signs, symbols, sign systems and their structure, meaning and use in mathematics and mathematics education.

== Notable semioticians ==

Thomas Carlyle (1795–1881) ascribed great importance to symbols in a religious context, noting that all worship &quot;must proceed by Symbols&quot;; he propounded this theory in such works as &quot;Characteristics&quot; (1831), &quot;Sartor Resartus&quot; (1833–4), and &quot;On Heroes&quot; (1841), which have been retroactively recognized as containing semiotic theories.

Charles Sanders Peirce (1839–1914), a noted logician who founded philosophical pragmatism, defined &quot;semiosis&quot; as an irreducibly triadic process wherein something, as an object, logically determines or influences something as a sign to determine or influence something as an interpretation or &quot;interpretant&quot;, itself a sign, thus leading to further interpretants. Semiosis is logically structured to perpetuate itself. The object may be quality, fact, rule, or even fictional (Hamlet), and may be &quot;immediate&quot; to the sign, the object as represented in the sign, or &quot;dynamic&quot;, the object as it really is, on which the immediate object is founded. The interpretant may be &quot;immediate&quot; to the sign, all that the sign immediately expresses, such as a word&#x27;s usual meaning; or &quot;dynamic&quot;, such as a state of agitation; or &quot;final&quot; or &quot;normal&quot;, the ultimate ramifications of the sign about its object, to which inquiry taken far enough would be destined and with which any interpretant, at most, may coincide. His &quot;semiotic&quot; covered not only artificial, linguistic, and symbolic signs, but also semblances such as kindred sensible qualities, and indices such as reactions. He came c. 1903 to classify any sign by three interdependent trichotomies, intersecting to form ten (rather than 27) classes of sign. Signs also enter into various kinds of meaningful combinations; Peirce covered both semantic and syntactical issues in his speculative grammar. He regarded formal semiotic as logic &quot;per se&quot; and part of philosophy; as also encompassing study of arguments (hypothetical, deductive, and inductive) and inquiry&#x27;s methods including pragmatism; and as allied to, but distinct from logic&#x27;s pure mathematics. In addition to pragmatism, Peirce provided a definition of &quot;sign&quot; as a &quot;representamen&quot;, in order to bring out the fact that a sign is something that &quot;represents&quot; something else in order to suggest it (that is, &quot;re-present&quot; it) in some way: 

Ferdinand de Saussure (1857–1913), the &quot;father&quot; of modern linguistics, proposed a dualistic notion of signs, relating the &quot;signifier&quot; as the form of the word or phrase uttered, to the &quot;signified&quot; as the mental concept. According to Saussure, the sign is completely arbitrary—i.e., there is no necessary connection between the sign and its meaning. This sets him apart from previous philosophers, such as Plato or the scholastics, who thought that there must be some connection between a signifier and the object it signifies. In his &quot;Course in General Linguistics&quot;, Saussure credits the American linguist William Dwight Whitney (1827–1894) with insisting on the arbitrary nature of the sign. Saussure&#x27;s insistence on the arbitrariness of the sign also has influenced later philosophers and theorists such as Jacques Derrida, Roland Barthes, and Jean Baudrillard. Ferdinand de Saussure coined the term while teaching his landmark &quot;Course on General Linguistics&quot; at the University of Geneva from 1906 to 1911. Saussure posited that no word is inherently meaningful. Rather a word is only a &quot;signifier.&quot; i.e., the representation of something, and it must be combined in the brain with the &quot;signified&quot;, or the thing itself, in order to form a meaning-imbued &quot;sign.&quot; Saussure believed that dismantling signs was a real science, for in doing so we come to an empirical understanding of how humans synthesize physical stimuli into words and other abstract concepts.

Jakob von Uexküll (1864–1944) studied the sign processes in animals. He used the German word &quot;Umwelt&quot;, , to describe the individual&#x27;s subjective world, and he invented the concept of functional circle () as a general model of sign processes. In his &quot;Theory of Meaning&quot; (, 1940), he described the semiotic approach to biology, thus establishing the field that now is called biosemiotics.

Valentin Voloshinov (1895–1936) was a Soviet-Russian linguist, whose work has been influential in the field of literary theory and Marxist theory of ideology. Written in the late 1920s in the USSR, Voloshinov&#x27;s &quot;Marxism and the Philosophy of Language&quot; () developed a counter-Saussurean linguistics, which situated language use in social process rather than in an entirely decontextualized Saussurean &quot;langue&quot;.

Louis Hjelmslev (1899–1965) developed a formalist approach to Saussure&#x27;s structuralist theories. His best known work is &quot;Prolegomena to a Theory of Language&quot;, which was expanded in &quot;Résumé of the Theory of Language&quot;, a formal development of &quot;glossematics&quot;, his scientific calculus of language.

Charles W. Morris (1901–1979): Unlike his mentor George Herbert Mead, Morris was a behaviorist and sympathetic to the Vienna Circle positivism of his colleague, Rudolf Carnap. Morris was accused by John Dewey of misreading Peirce.

In his 1938 &quot;Foundations of the Theory of Signs&quot;, he defined semiotics as grouped into three branches:

# &quot;Syntactics&quot;/&quot;syntax&quot;: deals with the formal properties and interrelation of signs and symbols, without regard to meaning.
# &quot;Semantics&quot;: deals with the formal structures of signs, particularly the relation between signs and the objects to which they apply (i.e. signs to their designata, and the objects that they may or do denote).
# &quot;Pragmatics&quot;: deals with the biotic aspects of semiosis, including all the psychological, biological, and sociological phenomena that occur in the functioning of signs. Pragmatics is concerned with the relation between the sign system and sign-using agents or interpreters (i.e., the human or animal users).

Thure von Uexküll (1908–2004), the &quot;father&quot; of modern psychosomatic medicine, developed a diagnostic method based on semiotic and biosemiotic analyses.

Roland Barthes (1915–1980) was a French literary theorist and semiotician. He often would critique pieces of cultural material to expose how bourgeois society used them to impose its values upon others. For instance, the portrayal of wine drinking in French society as a robust and healthy habit would be a bourgeois ideal perception contradicted by certain realities (i.e. that wine can be unhealthy and inebriating). He found semiotics useful in conducting these critiques. Barthes explained that these bourgeois cultural myths were second-order signs, or connotations. A picture of a full, dark bottle is a sign, a signifier relating to a signified: a fermented, alcoholic beverage—wine. However, the bourgeois take this signified and apply their own emphasis to it, making &quot;wine&quot; a new signifier, this time relating to a new signified: the idea of healthy, robust, relaxing wine. Motivations for such manipulations vary from a desire to sell products to a simple desire to maintain the status quo. These insights brought Barthes very much in line with similar Marxist theory.

Algirdas Julien Greimas (1917–1992) developed a structural version of semiotics named, &quot;generative semiotics&quot;, trying to shift the focus of discipline from signs to systems of signification. His theories develop the ideas of Saussure, Hjelmslev, Claude Lévi-Strauss, and Maurice Merleau-Ponty.

Thomas A. Sebeok (1920–2001), a student of Charles W. Morris, was a prolific and wide-ranging American semiotician. Although he insisted that animals are not capable of language, he expanded the purview of semiotics to include non-human signaling and communication systems, thus raising some of the issues addressed by philosophy of mind and coining the term zoosemiotics. Sebeok insisted that all communication was made possible by the relationship between an organism and the environment in which it lives. He also posed the equation between &quot;semiosis&quot; (the activity of interpreting signs) and &quot;life&quot;—a view that the Copenhagen-Tartu biosemiotic school has further developed.

Juri Lotman (1922–1993) was the founding member of the Tartu (or Tartu-Moscow) Semiotic School. He developed a semiotic approach to the study of culture—semiotics of culture—and established a communication model for the study of text semiotics. He also introduced the concept of the semiosphere. Among his Moscow colleagues were Vladimir Toporov, Vyacheslav Ivanov and Boris Uspensky.

Christian Metz (1931–1993) pioneered the application of Saussurean semiotics to film theory, applying syntagmatic analysis to scenes of films and grounding film semiotics in greater context.

Eliseo Verón (1935–2014) developed his &quot;Social Discourse Theory&quot; inspired in the Peircian conception of &quot;Semiosis.&quot;

Groupe μ (founded 1967) developed a structural version of rhetorics, and the visual semiotics.

Umberto Eco (1932–2016) was an Italian novelist, semiotician and academic. He made a wider audience aware of semiotics by various publications, most notably &quot;A Theory of Semiotics&quot; and his novel, &quot;The Name of the Rose&quot;, which includes (second to its plot) applied semiotic operations. His most important contributions to the field bear on interpretation, encyclopedia, and model reader. He also criticized in several works (&quot;A theory of semiotics&quot;, &quot;La struttura assente&quot;, &quot;Le signe&quot;, &quot;La production de signes&quot;) the &quot;iconism&quot; or &quot;iconic signs&quot; (taken from Peirce&#x27;s most famous triadic relation, based on indexes, icons, and symbols), to which he proposed four modes of sign production: recognition, ostension, replica, and invention.

Julia Kristeva (born 1941), a student of Lucien Goldmann and Roland Barthes, Bulgarian-French semiotician, literary critic, psychoanalyst, feminist, and novelist. She uses psychoanalytical concepts together with the semiotics, distinguishing the two components in the signification, the symbolic and the semiotic&quot;.&quot; Kristeva also studies the representation of women and women&#x27;s bodies in popular culture, such as horror films and has had a remarkable influence on feminism and feminist literary studies.

Michael Silverstein (1945–2020), a theoretician of semiotics and linguistic anthropology. Over the course of his career he created an original synthesis of research on the semiotics of communication, the sociology of interaction, Russian formalist literary theory, linguistic pragmatics, sociolinguistics, early anthropological linguistics and structuralist grammatical theory, together with his own theoretical contributions, yielding a comprehensive account of the semiotics of human communication and its relation to culture. His main influence was Charles Sanders Peirce, Ferdinand de Saussure, and Roman Jakobson.

== Current applications ==
Some applications of semiotics include:
* Representation of a methodology for the analysis of &quot;texts&quot; regardless of the medium in which it is presented. For these purposes, &quot;text&quot; is any message preserved in a form whose existence is independent of both sender and receiver;
* By scholars and professional researchers as a method to interpret meanings behind symbols and how the meanings are created;
* Potential improvement of ergonomic design in situations where it is important to ensure that human beings are able to interact more effectively with their environments, whether it be on a large scale, as in architecture, or on a small scale, such as the configuration of instrumentation for human use; and
* Marketing: Epure, Eisenstat, and Dinu (2014) express that &quot;semiotics allows for the practical distinction of persuasion from manipulation in marketing communication.&quot; Semiotics are used in marketing as a persuasive device to influence buyers to change their attitudes and behaviors in the market place. There are two ways that Epure, Eisenstat, and Dinu (2014), building on the works of Roland Barthes, state in which semiotics are used in marketing: &quot;Surface&quot;: signs are used to create personality for the product, creativity plays its foremost role at this level; &quot;Underlying&quot;: the concealed meaning of the text, imagery, sounds, etc.

In some countries, the role of semiotics is limited to literary criticism and an appreciation of audio and visual media. This narrow focus may inhibit a more general study of the social and political forces shaping how different media are used and their dynamic status within modern culture. Issues of technological determinism in the choice of media and the design of communication strategies assume new importance in this age of mass media.

=== Main institutions ===

A world organisation of semioticians, the International Association for Semiotic Studies, and its journal &quot;Semiotica&quot;, was established in 1969. The larger research centers together with teaching program include the semiotics departments at the University of Tartu, University of Limoges, Aarhus University, and Bologna University.

=== Publications ===
Publication of research is both in dedicated journals such as &quot;Sign Systems Studies&quot;, established by Juri Lotman and published by Tartu University Press; &quot;Semiotica&quot;, founded by Thomas A. Sebeok and published by Mouton de Gruyter; &quot;Zeitschrift für Semiotik&quot;; &quot;European Journal of Semiotics&quot;; &quot;Versus&quot; (founded and directed by Umberto Eco), &quot;The American Journal of Semiotics&quot;, et al.; and as articles accepted in periodicals of other disciplines, especially journals oriented toward philosophy and cultural criticism, communication theory, etc.

The major semiotic book series &quot;Semiotics, Communication, Cognition&quot;, published by De Gruyter Mouton (series editors Paul Cobley and Kalevi Kull) replaces the former &quot;Approaches to Semiotics&quot; (series editor Thomas A. Sebeok, 127 volumes) and &quot;Approaches to Applied Semiotics&quot; (7 volumes). Since 1980 the Semiotic Society of America has produced an annual conference series: &quot;&quot;.

== See also ==

* Ecosemiotics
* Ethnosemiotics
* Gender symbol
* Index of semiotics articles
* Language game (philosophy)
* Neurosemiotics
* Outline of semiotics
* Private language argument
* Semiofest
* Semiotic theory of Charles Sanders Peirce
* Social semiotics
* Universal language
== References ==

=== Footnotes ===
=== Citations ===
=== Bibliography ===

* Atkin, Albert. (2006). &quot;Peirce&#x27;s Theory of Signs&quot;, &quot;Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy&quot;.
* Barthes, Roland. ([1957] 1987). &quot;Mythologies&quot;. New York: Hill &amp; Wang.
* Barthes, Roland ([1964] 1967). &quot;Elements of Semiology&quot;. (Translated by Annette Lavers &amp; Colin Smith). London: Jonathan Cape.
* Chandler, Daniel. (2001/2007). &quot;Semiotics: The Basics&quot;. London: Routledge.
* Clarke, D. S. (1987). &quot;Principles of Semiotic&quot;. London: Routledge &amp; Kegan Paul.
* Clarke, D. S. (2003). &quot;Sign Levels&quot;. Dordrecht: Kluwer.
* Culler, Jonathan (1975). &quot;Structuralist Poetics: Structuralism, Linguistics and the Study of Literature&quot;. London: Routledge &amp; Kegan Paul.
* Danesi, Marcel &amp; Perron, Paul. (1999). &quot;Analyzing Cultures: An Introduction and Handbook&quot;. Bloomington: Indiana UP.
* Danesi, Marcel. (1994). &quot;Messages and Meanings: An Introduction to Semiotics&quot;. Toronto: Canadian Scholars&#x27; Press.
* Danesi, Marcel. (2002). &quot;Understanding Media Semiotics&quot;. London: Arnold; New York: Oxford UP.
* Danesi, Marcel. (2007). &quot;The Quest for Meaning: A Guide to Semiotic Theory and Practice&quot;. Toronto: University of Toronto Press.
* Decadt, Yves. 2000. &quot;On the Origin and Impact of Information in the Average Evolution: From Bit to Attractor, Atom and Ecosystem&quot; [Dutch]. Summary in English available at The Information Philosopher.
* Deely, John. (2005 [1990]). &quot;Basics of Semiotics&quot;. 4th ed. Tartu: Tartu University Press.
* Deely, John. (2000), &quot;The Red Book: The Beginning of Postmodern Times or: Charles Sanders Peirce and the Recovery of&quot; Signum. Sonesson, Göran, 1989, Pictorial concepts. Inquiries into the semiotic heritage and its relevance for the analysis of the visual world, Lund: Lund University Press.Pictorial concepts. Inquiries into the semiotic heritage and its relevance for the analysis of the visual world .
* Deely, John. (2001). &quot;Four Ages of Understanding&quot;. Toronto: University of Toronto Press.
* Deely, John. (2003), &quot;On the Word Semiotics, Formation and Origins&quot;, &quot;Semiotica&quot; 146.1/4, 1–50.
* Deely, John. (2003). &quot;The Impact on Philosophy of Semiotics&quot;. South Bend: St. Augustine Press.
* Deely, John. (2004), Σημειον&#x27; to &#x27;Sign&#x27; by Way of &#x27;Signum&#x27;: On the Interplay of Translation and Interpretation in the Establishment of Semiotics&quot;, &quot;Semiotica&quot; 148–1/4, 187–227.
* Deely, John. (2006), &quot;On &#x27;Semiotics&#x27; as Naming the Doctrine of Signs&quot;, &quot;Semiotica&quot; 158.1/4 (2006), 1–33.
* Derrida, Jacques (1981). &quot;Positions&quot;. (Translated by Alan Bass). London: Athlone Press.
* Eagleton, Terry. (1983). &quot;Literary Theory: An Introduction&quot;. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
* Eco, Umberto. (1976). &quot;A Theory of Semiotics&quot;. London: Macmillan.
* Eco, Umberto. (1986) &quot;Semiotics and the Philosophy of Language&quot;. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
* Eco, Umberto. (2000) &quot;Kant and the Platypus&quot;. New York, Harcourt Brace &amp; Company.
* Eco, Umberto. (1976) &quot;A Theory of Semiotics&quot;. Indiana, Indiana University Press.
* Emmeche, Claus; Kull, Kalevi (eds.) (2011) &quot;Towards a Semiotic Biology: Life is the Action of Signs&quot;. London: Imperial College Press. pdf
* Foucault, Michel. (1970). &quot;The Order of Things: An Archaeology of the Human Sciences&quot;. London: Tavistock.
* Greimas, Algirdas. (1987). &quot;On Meaning: Selected Writings in Semiotic Theory&quot;. (Translated by Paul J Perron &amp; Frank H Collins). London: Frances Pinter.
* Herlihy, David. 1988–present. &quot;2nd year class of semiotics&quot;. CIT.
* Hjelmslev, Louis (1961). &quot;Prolegomena to a Theory of Language&quot;. (Translated by Francis J. Whitfield). Madison: University of Wisconsin Press
* Hodge, Robert &amp; Kress, Gunther. (1988). &quot;Social Semiotics&quot;. Ithaca: Cornell UP.
* Lacan, Jacques. (1977) &quot;Écrits: A Selection&quot;. (Translated by Alan Sheridan). New York: Norton.
* Lidov, David (1999) &quot;Elements of Semiotics&quot;. New York: St. Martin&#x27;s Press.
* Liszka, J. J. (1996) &quot;A General Introduction to the Semeiotic of C.S. Peirce.&quot; Indiana University Press.
* Locke, John, &quot;The Works of John Locke, A New Edition, Corrected, In Ten Volumes, Vol.III&quot;, T. Tegg, (London), 1823. (facsimile reprint by Scientia, (Aalen), 1963.)
* Lotman, Yuri M. (1990). &quot;Universe of the Mind: A Semiotic Theory of Culture&quot;. (Translated by Ann Shukman). London: I.B. Tauris.
* Matthiessen, F. O. 1949. &quot;American Renaissance: Art and Expression in the Age of Emerson and Whitman&quot;. Harvard, Boston
* Meyers, Marvin 1957 &quot;The Jacksonian Persuasion: Politics and Belief Stanford Press&quot;, California
* Morris, Charles W. (1971). &quot;Writings on the general theory of signs&quot;. The Hague: Mouton.
* Nattiez, Jean-Jacques. (1990). &quot;Music and Discourse: Toward a Semiology of Music&quot;. Translated by Carolyn Abbate. Princeton: Princeton University Press. (Translation of: &quot;Musicologie générale et sémiologue&quot;. Collection Musique/Passé/Présent 13. Paris: C. Bourgois, 1987).
* Peirce, Charles S. (1934). &quot;Collected papers: Volume V. Pragmatism and pragmaticism&quot;. Cambridge, MA, US: Harvard University Press.
* Ponzio, Augusto &amp; S. Petrilli (2007) &quot;Semiotics Today. From Global Semiotics to Semioethics, a Dialogic Response.&quot; New York, Ottawa, Toronto: Legas. 84 pp. 
* Romeo, Luigi (1977), &quot;The Derivation of &#x27;Semiotics&#x27; through the History of the Discipline&quot;, &quot;Semiosis&quot;, v. 6 pp. 37–50.
* Sebeok, T.A. (1976), &quot;Contributions to the Doctrine of Signs&quot;, Indiana University Press, Bloomington, IN.
* Sebeok, Thomas A. (Editor) (1977). &quot;A Perfusion of Signs&quot;. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press.
* &quot;Signs and Meaning: 5 Questions&quot;, edited by Peer Bundgaard and Frederik Stjernfelt, 2009 (Automatic Press / VIP). (Includes interviews with 29 leading semioticians of the world.)
* Short, T.L. (2007), &quot;Peirce&#x27;s Theory of Signs&quot;, Cambridge University Press.
* Stubbe, Henry (Henry Stubbe), &quot;The Plus Ultra reduced to a Non Plus: Or, A Specimen of some Animadversions upon the Plus Ultra of Mr. Glanvill, wherein sundry Errors of some Virtuosi are discovered, the Credit of the Aristotelians in part Re-advanced; and Enquiries made...&quot;, (London), 1670.
* Ward, John William 1955. &quot;Andrew Jackson, Symbol for an Age&quot;. New York: Oxford University Press.
* Ward, John William 1969 &quot;Red, White, and Blue: Men, Books, and Ideas in American Culture&quot;. New York: Oxford University Press
* Williamson, Judith. (1978). &quot;Decoding Advertisements: Ideology and Meaning in Advertising&quot;. London: Boyars.
* Zlatev, Jordan. (2009). &quot;The Semiotic Hierarchy: Life, Consciousness, Signs and Language, Cognitive Semiotics&quot;. Sweden: Scania.
== External links ==

* Signo — presents semiotic theories and theories closely related to semiotics.
* The Semiotics of the Web
* Center for Semiotics — Denmark: Aarhus University
* Semiotic Society of America
* Open Semiotics Resource Center — includes journals, lecture courses, etc.

=== Peircean focus ===
* Arisbe: The Peirce Gateway
* Semiotics according to Robert Marty, with 76 definitions of the sign by C. S. Peirce
* The Commens Dictionary of Peirce&#x27;s Terms

=== Journals and book series ===
* &quot;American Journal of Semiotics,&quot; edited by J. Deely and C. Morrissey. US: Semiotic Society of America.
* &quot;Applied Semiotics / Sémiotique appliquée (AS/SA) &quot;, edited by P. G. Marteinson &amp; P. G. Michelucci. CA: University of Toronto.
* &quot;Approaches to Applied Semiotics&quot; (2000–09 series), edited by T. Sebeok, et al. Berlin: De Gruyter.
* &quot;Approaches to Semiotics&quot; (1969–97 series), edited by T. A. Sebeok, A. Rey, R. Posner, et al. Berlin: De Gruyter.
* &quot;Biosemiotics&quot;, journal of the International Society for Biosemiotic Studies.
* &quot;Cybernetics and Human Knowing&quot;, edited by S. Brier, (chief).
* &quot;International Journal of Marketing Semiotics&quot;, edited by G. Rossolatos, (chief).
* &quot;International Journal of Signs and Semiotic Systems (IJSSS)&quot;, edited by A, Loula &amp; J. Queiroz.
* &quot;The Public Journal of Semiotics&quot;, edited by P. Bouissac (eic), A. Cienki (assoc.), R. Jorna, and W. Nöth.
* &quot;S.E.E.D. Journal (Semiotics, Evolution, Energy, and Development) &quot; (2001–7), edited by E. Taborsky. Toronto: SEE .
* &quot;The Semiotic Review of Books &quot;, edited by G. Genosko (gen.) and P. Bouissac (founding ed.).
* &quot;Semiotica&quot;, edited by M. Danesi (chief). International Association for Semiotic Studies.
* &quot;Semiotiche&quot;, edited by A. Valle and M. Visalli.
* &quot;Semiotics, Communication and Cognition&quot; (series), edited by P. Cobley and K. Kull.
* &quot;Semiotics: Yearbook of the Semiotic Society of America&quot;, edited by J. Pelkey. US: Semiotic Society of America.
* &quot;SemiotiX New Series: A Global Information Bulletin&quot;, edited by P. Bouissac, et al.
* &quot;Sign Systems Studies&quot;, edited by O. Puumeister, K. Kull, et al., Estonia: Dept. of Semiotics, University of Tartu.
* &quot;Signs and Society&quot;, edited by R. J. Parmentier.
* &quot;Signs: International Journal of Semiotics,&quot; edited by M. Thellefsen, T. Thellefsen, and B. Sørensen, (chief eds.).
* &quot;Tartu Semiotics Library&quot; (series), edited by P. Torop, K. Kull, S. Salupere.
* &quot;Transactions of the Charles S. Peirce Society&quot;, edited by C. de Waal (chief). The Charles S. Peirce Society.
* &quot;Versus: Quaderni di studi semiotici&quot;, founded by U. Eco.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q60195" start="0" end="9" title="Semiotics" label="Semiotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q681696" start="41" end="55" title="semiosis" label="sign processes"/>
<link wikidata="Q123509484" start="81" end="88" title="Meaning (semiotics)" label="meaning"/>
<link wikidata="Q11801374" start="106" end="110" title="Sign (semiotics)" label="sign"/>
<link wikidata="Q8162" start="613" end="624" title="linguistics" label="linguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7512598" start="664" end="675" title="sign system" label="sign system"/>
<link wikidata="Q185816" start="745" end="752" title="analogy" label="analogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q18535" start="754" end="762" title="allegory" label="allegory"/>
<link wikidata="Q41966" start="764" end="772" title="metonymy" label="metonymy"/>
<link wikidata="Q18534" start="774" end="782" title="metaphor" label="metaphor"/>
<link wikidata="Q80071" start="784" end="790" title="symbol" label="symbol"/>
<link wikidata="Q23404" start="879" end="894" title="anthropology" label="anthropological"/>
<link wikidata="Q21201" start="899" end="911" title="sociology" label="sociological"/>
<link wikidata="Q8078" start="1052" end="1057" title="logic" label="logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q420" start="1095" end="1105" title="Biology" label="biological"/>
<link wikidata="Q172861" start="1191" end="1196" title="ecological niche" label="niche"/>
<link wikidata="Q864714" start="1493" end="1505" title="biosemiotics" label="biosemiotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q13381886" start="1516" end="1528" title="zoosemiotics" label="zoosemiotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7189841" start="1533" end="1547" title="phytosemiotics" label="phytosemiotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891" start="1676" end="1686" title="philosophy" label="philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9418" start="1691" end="1701" title="psychology" label="psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q859" start="1856" end="1861" title="Plato" label="Plato"/>
<link wikidata="Q868" start="1866" end="1875" title="Aristotle" label="Aristotle"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018" start="1954" end="1972" title="Augustine of Hippo" label="Augustine of Hippo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6980998" start="2172" end="2193" title="nature–culture divide" label="nature–culture divide"/>
<link wikidata="Q842333" start="2385" end="2403" title="Western philosophy" label="Western philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q41679" start="2424" end="2434" title="Scholasticism" label="scholastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3735496" start="2538" end="2550" title="John Poinsot" label="John Poinsot"/>
<link wikidata="Q187520" start="2617" end="2639" title="Charles Sanders Peirce" label="Charles Sanders Peirce"/>
<link wikidata="Q5051818" start="2671" end="2681" title="Categories (Peirce)" label="categories"/>
<link wikidata="Q12807" start="2703" end="2714" title="Umberto Eco" label="Umberto Eco"/>
<link wikidata="Q9353" start="2894" end="2904" title="John Locke" label="John Locke"/>
<link wikidata="Q11190" start="2930" end="2938" title="medicine" label="medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q664748" start="3121" end="3139" title="Henri Estienne" label="Henricus Stephanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q112965645" start="3257" end="3271" title="symptomatology" label="symptomatology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1607289" start="3302" end="3314" title="Henry Stubbe" label="Henry Stubbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q482438" start="3528" end="3567" title="An Essay Concerning Human Understanding" label="An Essay Concerning Human Understanding"/>
<link wikidata="Q360084" start="3816" end="3827" title="Juri Lotman" label="Juri Lotman"/>
<link wikidata="Q204181" start="3947" end="3966" title="University of Tartu" label="University of Tartu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3742733" start="4024" end="4044" title="Sign Systems Studies" label="Sign Systems Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q13230" start="4083" end="4104" title="Ferdinand de Saussure" label="Ferdinand de Saussure"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4144" end="4153" title="Ferdinand de Saussure#Language as semiology" label="semiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2143720" start="4180" end="4193" title="Thomas Sebeok" label="Thomas Sebeok"/>
<link wikidata="Q10971339" start="4324" end="4333" title="Semiotica" label="Semiotica"/>
<link wikidata="Q130631" start="4525" end="4540" title="Jacques Derrida" label="Jacques Derrida"/>
<link wikidata="Q187520" start="4874" end="4896" title="Charles Sanders Peirce" label="Charles Sanders Peirce"/>
<link wikidata="Q13230" start="5819" end="5829" title="Ferdinand de Saussure" label="Saussurian"/>
<link wikidata="Q357041" start="6296" end="6313" title="Charles W. Morris" label="Charles W. Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q2572474" start="7237" end="7243" title="Umwelt" label="Umwelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q511513" start="7254" end="7271" title="Jakob von Uexküll" label="Jakob von Uexküll"/>
<link wikidata="Q2143720" start="8305" end="8321" title="Thomas Sebeok" label="Thomas A. Sebeok"/>
<link wikidata="Q98842" start="8761" end="8775" title="Martin Krampen" label="Martin Krampen"/>
<link wikidata="Q357041" start="9478" end="9495" title="Charles W. Morris" label="Charles W. Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q673672" start="9514" end="9535" title="Jozef Maria Bochenski" label="Jozef Maria Bochenski"/>
<link wikidata="Q687424" start="10048" end="10057" title="Max Black" label="Max Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q33760" start="10082" end="10098" title="Bertrand Russell" label="Bertrand Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q11258845" start="10236" end="10247" title="modality (semiotics)" label="transmitted"/>
<link wikidata="Q1105566" start="10304" end="10309" title="code (semiotics)" label="codes"/>
<link wikidata="Q130989" start="10502" end="10506" title="neologism" label="coin"/>
<link wikidata="Q789016" start="10534" end="10539" title="lexical (semiotics)" label="thing"/>
<link wikidata="Q177634" start="10551" end="10560" title="community" label="community"/>
<link wikidata="Q1982453" start="10595" end="10605" title="denotation (semiotics)" label="denotative"/>
<link wikidata="Q37437" start="10710" end="10732" title="syntax" label="grammatical structures"/>
<link wikidata="Q796212" start="10737" end="10742" title="semantics" label="codes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4192939" start="10769" end="10775" title="value (semiotics)" label="values"/>
<link wikidata="Q11042" start="10783" end="10790" title="culture" label="culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q5162064" start="10826" end="10837" title="connotation (semiotics)" label="connotation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11680831" start="10914" end="10935" title="communication studies" label="communication studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q11024" start="10937" end="10950" title="communication" label="communication"/>
<link wikidata="Q196626" start="11117" end="11125" title="context (language use)" label="contexts"/>
<link wikidata="Q420" start="11141" end="11148" title="biology" label="biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q9418" start="11150" end="11160" title="psychology" label="psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q41217" start="11166" end="11175" title="mechanics" label="mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5249529" start="11297" end="11303" title="decode (semiotics)" label="decode"/>
<link wikidata="Q7404470" start="11355" end="11362" title="Salience (semiotics)" label="salient"/>
<link wikidata="Q12369646" start="11635" end="11648" title="Marcel Danesi" label="Marcel Danesi"/>
<link wikidata="Q11801374" start="11715" end="11728" title="Sign (semiotics)" label="signification"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161507" start="11796" end="11816" title="Jean-Jacques Nattiez" label="Jean-Jacques Nattiez"/>
<link wikidata="Q164204" start="11827" end="11839" title="musicology" label="musicologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q8162" start="11979" end="11990" title="linguistics" label="linguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q37437" start="12524" end="12530" title="syntax" label="syntax"/>
<link wikidata="Q484761" start="12960" end="12982" title="philosophy of language" label="philosophy of language"/>
<link wikidata="Q183216" start="13237" end="13245" title="analytic philosophy" label="analytic"/>
<link wikidata="Q59104" start="13250" end="13272" title="continental philosophy" label="continental philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q33742" start="13394" end="13410" title="natural language" label="natural language"/>
<link wikidata="Q80083" start="13624" end="13634" title="humanities" label="humanities"/>
<link wikidata="Q459381" start="13646" end="13661" title="literary theory" label="literary theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q28598" start="13670" end="13691" title="cultural anthropology" label="cultural anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q187520" start="13938" end="13950" title="Charles Sanders Peirce" label="C. S. Peirce"/>
<link wikidata="Q12365424" start="13952" end="13962" title="John Deely" label="John Deely"/>
<link wikidata="Q12807" start="13968" end="13979" title="Umberto Eco" label="Umberto Eco"/>
<link wikidata="Q5141240" start="14399" end="14418" title="Cognitive semiotics" label="Cognitive semiotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q22906812" start="14452" end="14466" title="meaning-making" label="meaning-making"/>
<link wikidata="Q924265" start="14715" end="14732" title="Aarhus University" label="Aarhus University"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="14734" end="14741" title="Denmark" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044996" start="14905" end="14920" title="Per Aage Brandt" label="Per Aage Brandt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3740058" start="14955" end="14974" title="Frederik Stjernfelt" label="Frederik Stjernfelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q218506" start="15149" end="15164" title="Lund University" label="Lund University"/>
<link wikidata="Q182847" start="15335" end="15349" title="Jean Baudrillard" label="Baudrillardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q207434" start="15870" end="15896" title="Human–computer interaction" label="human computer interaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q170658" start="15898" end="15908" title="creativity" label="creativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q5157339" start="15923" end="15946" title="computational semiotics" label="computational semiotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189781" start="15969" end="15984" title="semiotic square" label="semiotic square"/>
<link wikidata="Q50637" start="16179" end="16190" title="art history" label="art history"/>
<link wikidata="Q431289" start="17571" end="17576" title="brand" label="brand"/>
<link wikidata="Q4246741" start="17578" end="17590" title="Culture code" label="Culture code"/>
<link wikidata="Q7181" start="17803" end="17816" title="Globalization" label="Globalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q368901" start="18018" end="18025" title="Engrish" label="Engrish"/>
<link wikidata="Q839248" start="18041" end="18050" title="Chinglish" label="Chinglish"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18158" end="18177" title="Translation#Survey translation" label="translating surveys"/>
<link wikidata="Q38193" start="18737" end="18749" title="Schopenhauer" label="Schopenhauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7414" start="19099" end="19105" title="Disney" label="Disney"/>
<link wikidata="Q194195" start="19127" end="19137" title="theme park" label="theme park"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="19170" end="19175" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q281639" start="19230" end="19238" title="Cuteness in Japan" label="cuteness"/>
<link wikidata="Q843997" start="19305" end="19321" title="Tokyo Disneyland" label="Tokyo Disneyland"/>
<link wikidata="Q206521" start="19386" end="19402" title="Disneyland Paris" label="Disneyland Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q2340292" start="19430" end="19441" title="Euro Disney S.C.A." label="Euro Disney"/>
<link wikidata="Q422933" start="19577" end="19584" title="Elitism" label="elitist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1886349" start="20017" end="20021" title="logo" label="logo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2813" start="20027" end="20036" title="Coca-Cola" label="Coca-Cola"/>
<link wikidata="Q38076" start="20040" end="20055" title="McDonald&amp;#x27;s" label="McDonald&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q130711699" start="20660" end="20669" title="Symbolism (arts)" label="symbolism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9215" start="20965" end="20978" title="Sigmund Freud" label="Sigmund Freud"/>
<link wikidata="Q159904" start="21041" end="21048" title="Affect (psychology)" label="affects"/>
<link wikidata="Q864714" start="24545" end="24557" title="Biosemiotics" label="Biosemiotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5168508" start="24662" end="24685" title="Copenhagen–Tartu School" label="Copenhagen–Tartu School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7449584" start="24774" end="24795" title="Semiotic anthropology" label="Semiotic anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783193" start="24800" end="24825" title="anthropological semantics" label="anthropological semantics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5141240" start="24829" end="24848" title="Cognitive semiotics" label="Cognitive semiotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q924265" start="25126" end="25143" title="Aarhus University" label="Aarhus University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044996" start="25316" end="25331" title="Per Aage Brandt" label="Per Aage Brandt"/>
<link wikidata="Q218506" start="25564" end="25579" title="Lund University" label="Lund University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1114490" start="25591" end="25607" title="Comics semiotics" label="Comics semiotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5157339" start="25691" end="25714" title="Computational semiotics" label="Computational semiotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q207434" start="25793" end="25819" title="human–computer interaction" label="human–computer interaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q2200417" start="25849" end="25858" title="cognition" label="cognition"/>
<link wikidata="Q11660" start="25867" end="25890" title="artificial intelligence" label="artificial intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q3478658" start="25895" end="25919" title="knowledge representation" label="knowledge representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7449596" start="25923" end="25931" title="Cultural semiotics" label="Cultural"/>
<link wikidata="Q7449593" start="25936" end="25954" title="Semiotic literary criticism" label="literary semiotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q179109" start="26066" end="26080" title="Roland Barthes" label="Roland Barthes"/>
<link wikidata="Q12369646" start="26082" end="26095" title="Marcel Danesi" label="Marcel Danesi"/>
<link wikidata="Q360084" start="26101" end="26112" title="Juri Lotman" label="Juri Lotman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2659079" start="26120" end="26148" title="Tartu–Moscow Semiotic School" label="Tartu–Moscow Semiotic School"/>
<link wikidata="Q60195" start="26153" end="26167" title="Cybersemiotics" label="Cybersemiotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q131222" start="26272" end="26290" title="information theory" label="information theory"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26550" end="26566" title="Design semiotics" label="Design semiotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q98842" start="26669" end="26683" title="Martin Krampen" label="Martin Krampen"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26726" end="26735" title="Rune Monö" label="Rune Monö"/>
<link wikidata="Q243606" start="26751" end="26768" title="industrial design" label="industrial design"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144565" start="26797" end="26812" title="Umeå University" label="Umeå University"/>
<link wikidata="Q20054617" start="26824" end="26838" title="Ethnosemiotics" label="Ethnosemiotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q132151" start="26901" end="26921" title="Ethnography" label="ethnographic methods"/>
<link wikidata="Q25303654" start="26925" end="26942" title="Semiotics of fashion" label="Fashion semiotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q17089787" start="26945" end="26959" title="Film semiotics" label="Film semiotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q932276" start="27059" end="27073" title="Christian Metz (critic)" label="Christian Metz"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27077" end="27093" title="#Finite semiotics" label="Finite semiotics"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27151" end="27167" title="Cameron Shackell" label="Cameron Shackell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545237" start="27310" end="27335" title="Semiology (Gregorian Chant)" label="Gregorian chant semiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q179957" start="27357" end="27372" title="palaeography" label="palaeographical"/>
<link wikidata="Q26473" start="27385" end="27400" title="Gregorian chant" label="Gregorian chant"/>
<link wikidata="Q306131" start="27424" end="27432" title="Solesmes Abbey" label="Solesmes"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27461" end="27474" title="Hylosemiotics" label="Hylosemiotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q408386" start="27529" end="27538" title="inference" label="inference"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27772" end="27789" title="Law and semiotics" label="Law and semiotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q6048364" start="27927" end="27977" title="International Association for the Semiotics of Law" label="International Association for the Semiotics of Law"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27981" end="28000" title="Marketing semiotics" label="Marketing semiotics"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28198" end="28216" title="Virginia Valentine" label="Virginia Valentine"/>
<link wikidata="Q25510428" start="28302" end="28311" title="Semiofest" label="Semiofest"/>
<link wikidata="Q3510808" start="28342" end="28357" title="Music semiology" label="Music semiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7101904" start="28429" end="28453" title="Organisational semiotics" label="Organisational semiotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5157339" start="28525" end="28548" title="computational semiotics" label="computational semiotics"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28584" end="28603" title="#Pictorial semiotics" label="Pictorial semiotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7449597" start="28680" end="28705" title="Semiotics of music videos" label="Semiotics of music videos"/>
<link wikidata="Q6124806" start="28737" end="28753" title="Social semiotics" label="Social semiotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q8102" start="28842" end="28847" title="slang" label="slang"/>
<link wikidata="Q179109" start="28904" end="28918" title="Roland Barthes" label="Roland Barthes"/>
<link wikidata="Q562952" start="28920" end="28936" title="Michael Halliday" label="Michael Halliday"/>
<link wikidata="Q4932804" start="28938" end="28947" title="Bob Hodge (linguist)" label="Bob Hodge"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28949" end="28969" title="Chris William Martin (sociologist)" label="Chris William Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q932276" start="28974" end="28988" title="Christian Metz (critic)" label="Christian Metz"/>
<link wikidata="Q179168" start="28992" end="29005" title="Structuralism" label="Structuralism"/>
<link wikidata="Q267932" start="29010" end="29028" title="post-structuralism" label="post-structuralism"/>
<link wikidata="Q130631" start="29044" end="29059" title="Jacques Derrida" label="Jacques Derrida"/>
<link wikidata="Q44272" start="29061" end="29076" title="Michel Foucault" label="Michel Foucault"/>
<link wikidata="Q313769" start="29078" end="29093" title="Louis Hjelmslev" label="Louis Hjelmslev"/>
<link wikidata="Q156201" start="29095" end="29109" title="Roman Jakobson" label="Roman Jakobson"/>
<link wikidata="Q169906" start="29111" end="29124" title="Jacques Lacan" label="Jacques Lacan"/>
<link wikidata="Q128126" start="29126" end="29145" title="Claude Lévi-Strauss" label="Claude Lévi-Strauss"/>
<link wikidata="Q179109" start="29147" end="29161" title="Roland Barthes" label="Roland Barthes"/>
<link wikidata="Q60195" start="29477" end="29494" title="Theatre semiotics" label="Theatre semiotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q960543" start="29556" end="29571" title="theatre studies" label="theatre studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7900165" start="29606" end="29621" title="Urban semiotics" label="Urban semiotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2398370" start="29723" end="29739" title="Visual semiotics" label="Visual semiotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3277307" start="29798" end="29804" title="visual rhetoric" label="branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1994464" start="29809" end="29817" title="Groupe μ" label="Groupe μ"/>
<link wikidata="Q7449600" start="29840" end="29864" title="Semiotics of photography" label="Semiotics of photography"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29925" end="29958" title="Artificial intelligence semiotics" label="Artificial intelligence semiotics"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30082" end="30093" title="Daniel Hoeg" label="Daniel Hoeg"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30106" end="30124" title="Semiotics Mobility" label="Semiotics Mobility"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30509" end="30533" title="Semiotics of mathematics" label="Semiotics of mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q151403" start="30685" end="30699" title="Thomas Carlyle" label="Thomas Carlyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q16828444" start="30883" end="30898" title="Critical and Miscellaneous Essays" label="Characteristics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134140" start="30919" end="30934" title="Sartor Resartus" label="Sartor Resartus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7091008" start="30961" end="30970" title="On Heroes" label="On Heroes"/>
<link wikidata="Q187520" start="31060" end="31082" title="Charles Sanders Peirce" label="Charles Sanders Peirce"/>
<link wikidata="Q468620" start="31098" end="31112" title="History of logic" label="noted logician"/>
<link wikidata="Q126692" start="31139" end="31149" title="pragmatism" label="pragmatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2447542" start="31555" end="31561" title="Prince Hamlet" label="Hamlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7449592" start="32335" end="32352" title="Semiotic elements and classes of signs (Peirce)" label="classify any sign"/>
<link wikidata="Q308495" start="32715" end="32727" title="Abductive reasoning" label="hypothetical"/>
<link wikidata="Q484284" start="32729" end="32738" title="Deductive reasoning" label="deductive"/>
<link wikidata="Q484511" start="32744" end="32753" title="Inductive reasoning" label="inductive"/>
<link wikidata="Q13230" start="33153" end="33174" title="Ferdinand de Saussure" label="Ferdinand de Saussure"/>
<link wikidata="Q8162" start="33221" end="33232" title="linguistics" label="linguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q859" start="33587" end="33592" title="Plato" label="Plato"/>
<link wikidata="Q41679" start="33600" end="33611" title="Scholasticism" label="scholastics"/>
<link wikidata="Q13231" start="33722" end="33751" title="Course in General Linguistics" label="Course in General Linguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q573847" start="33798" end="33820" title="William Dwight Whitney" label="William Dwight Whitney"/>
<link wikidata="Q130631" start="34006" end="34021" title="Jacques Derrida" label="Jacques Derrida"/>
<link wikidata="Q179109" start="34023" end="34037" title="Roland Barthes" label="Roland Barthes"/>
<link wikidata="Q182847" start="34043" end="34059" title="Jean Baudrillard" label="Jean Baudrillard"/>
<link wikidata="Q503473" start="34176" end="34196" title="University of Geneva" label="University of Geneva"/>
<link wikidata="Q511513" start="34698" end="34715" title="Jakob von Uexküll" label="Jakob von Uexküll"/>
<link wikidata="Q681696" start="34740" end="34752" title="sign process" label="sign process"/>
<link wikidata="Q2572474" start="34797" end="34803" title="Umwelt" label="Umwelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q420" start="35040" end="35047" title="biology" label="biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q864714" start="35096" end="35108" title="biosemiotics" label="biosemiotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1388808" start="35111" end="35130" title="Valentin Voloshinov" label="Valentin Voloshinov"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="35149" end="35155" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q459381" start="35222" end="35237" title="literary theory" label="literary theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7264" start="35242" end="35249" title="Marxism" label="Marxist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7257" start="35250" end="35268" title="Ideology" label="theory of ideology"/>
<link wikidata="Q313769" start="35547" end="35562" title="Louis Hjelmslev" label="Louis Hjelmslev"/>
<link wikidata="Q357041" start="35877" end="35894" title="Charles W. Morris" label="Charles W. Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q295978" start="35926" end="35945" title="George Herbert Mead" label="George Herbert Mead"/>
<link wikidata="Q208238" start="35995" end="36008" title="Vienna Circle" label="Vienna Circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q131015" start="36009" end="36019" title="positivism" label="positivism"/>
<link wikidata="Q76519" start="36038" end="36051" title="Rudolf Carnap" label="Rudolf Carnap"/>
<link wikidata="Q131805" start="36075" end="36085" title="John Dewey" label="John Dewey"/>
<link wikidata="Q96373" start="36910" end="36927" title="Thure von Uexküll" label="Thure von Uexküll"/>
<link wikidata="Q473867" start="36974" end="36996" title="psychosomatic medicine" label="psychosomatic medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q179109" start="37073" end="37087" title="Roland Barthes" label="Roland Barthes"/>
<link wikidata="Q313379" start="38164" end="38187" title="Algirdas Julien Greimas" label="Algirdas Julien Greimas"/>
<link wikidata="Q128126" start="38420" end="38439" title="Claude Lévi-Strauss" label="Claude Lévi-Strauss"/>
<link wikidata="Q212639" start="38445" end="38466" title="Maurice Merleau-Ponty" label="Maurice Merleau-Ponty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2143720" start="38469" end="38485" title="Thomas A. Sebeok" label="Thomas A. Sebeok"/>
<link wikidata="Q23407" start="38788" end="38806" title="philosophy of mind" label="philosophy of mind"/>
<link wikidata="Q13381886" start="38828" end="38840" title="zoosemiotics" label="zoosemiotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5168508" start="39108" end="39143" title="Copenhagen-Tartu biosemiotic school" label="Copenhagen-Tartu biosemiotic school"/>
<link wikidata="Q360084" start="39168" end="39179" title="Juri Lotman" label="Juri Lotman"/>
<link wikidata="Q13972" start="39223" end="39228" title="Tartu" label="Tartu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2659079" start="39247" end="39262" title="Tartu-Moscow Semiotic School" label="Semiotic School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7449596" start="39321" end="39341" title="semiotics of culture" label="semiotics of culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427873" start="39451" end="39462" title="semiosphere" label="semiosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q722068" start="39497" end="39513" title="Vladimir Toporov" label="Vladimir Toporov"/>
<link wikidata="Q794031" start="39515" end="39532" title="Vyacheslav Ivanov (philologist)" label="Vyacheslav Ivanov"/>
<link wikidata="Q4478004" start="39537" end="39551" title="Boris Uspensky" label="Boris Uspensky"/>
<link wikidata="Q932276" start="39554" end="39568" title="Christian Metz (critic)" label="Christian Metz"/>
<link wikidata="Q28793" start="39634" end="39645" title="film theory" label="film theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q3625450" start="39656" end="39676" title="syntagmatic analysis" label="syntagmatic analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q17089787" start="39710" end="39724" title="film semiotics" label="film semiotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330696" start="39746" end="39758" title="Eliseo Verón" label="Eliseo Verón"/>
<link wikidata="Q1994464" start="39883" end="39891" title="Groupe μ" label="Groupe μ"/>
<link wikidata="Q81009" start="39941" end="39950" title="rhetorics" label="rhetorics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2398370" start="39960" end="39976" title="visual semiotics" label="visual semiotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q12807" start="39979" end="39990" title="Umberto Eco" label="Umberto Eco"/>
<link wikidata="Q172850" start="40191" end="40211" title="The Name of the Rose" label="The Name of the Rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q159876" start="40799" end="40813" title="Julia Kristeva" label="Julia Kristeva"/>
<link wikidata="Q513448" start="40840" end="40855" title="Lucien Goldmann" label="Lucien Goldmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q179109" start="40860" end="40874" title="Roland Barthes" label="Roland Barthes"/>
<link wikidata="Q58854" start="40906" end="40921" title="literary critic" label="literary critic"/>
<link wikidata="Q41630" start="40923" end="40936" title="Psychoanalysis" label="psychoanalyst"/>
<link wikidata="Q3092684" start="40938" end="40946" title="French feminist" label="feminist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6625963" start="40952" end="40960" title="novelist" label="novelist"/>
<link wikidata="Q17154970" start="41151" end="41239" title="Gender in horror films" label="representation of women and women&amp;#x27;s bodies in popular culture, such as horror films"/>
<link wikidata="Q4391924" start="41319" end="41338" title="Michael Silverstein" label="Michael Silverstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q187520" start="41871" end="41893" title="Charles Sanders Peirce" label="Charles Sanders Peirce"/>
<link wikidata="Q13230" start="41895" end="41916" title="Ferdinand de Saussure" label="Ferdinand de Saussure"/>
<link wikidata="Q156201" start="41922" end="41936" title="Roman Jakobson" label="Roman Jakobson"/>
<link wikidata="Q185698" start="42028" end="42039" title="methodology" label="methodology"/>
<link wikidata="Q11258845" start="42092" end="42127" title="modality (Semiotics)" label="the medium in which it is presented"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750812" start="42414" end="42423" title="ergonomic" label="ergonomic"/>
<link wikidata="Q12271" start="42596" end="42608" title="architecture" label="architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2350449" start="42697" end="42706" title="Marketing communications" label="Marketing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363963" start="42911" end="42928" title="Marketing strategy" label="persuasive device"/>
<link wikidata="Q179109" start="43094" end="43108" title="Roland Barthes" label="Roland Barthes"/>
<link wikidata="Q58854" start="43420" end="43438" title="literary criticism" label="literary criticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q131133" start="43681" end="43692" title="determinism" label="determinism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060013" start="43878" end="43924" title="International Association for Semiotic Studies" label="International Association for Semiotic Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q10971339" start="43948" end="43957" title="Semiotica" label="Semiotica"/>
<link wikidata="Q204181" start="44090" end="44109" title="University of Tartu" label="University of Tartu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2661290" start="44111" end="44132" title="University of Limoges" label="University of Limoges"/>
<link wikidata="Q924265" start="44134" end="44151" title="Aarhus University" label="Aarhus University"/>
<link wikidata="Q131262" start="44157" end="44175" title="Bologna University" label="Bologna University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3742733" start="44267" end="44287" title="Sign Systems Studies" label="Sign Systems Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q360084" start="44310" end="44321" title="Juri Lotman" label="Juri Lotman"/>
<link wikidata="Q93986" start="44339" end="44361" title="Tartu University Press" label="Tartu University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q10971339" start="44369" end="44378" title="Semiotica" label="Semiotica"/>
<link wikidata="Q2143720" start="44397" end="44413" title="Thomas A. Sebeok" label="Thomas A. Sebeok"/>
<link wikidata="Q98818" start="44431" end="44448" title="Mouton de Gruyter" label="Mouton de Gruyter"/>
<link wikidata="Q540828" start="44537" end="44543" title="Versus (journal)" label="Versus"/>
<link wikidata="Q12807" start="44575" end="44586" title="Umberto Eco" label="Umberto Eco"/>
<link wikidata="Q7713506" start="44595" end="44628" title="The American Journal of Semiotics" label="The American Journal of Semiotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q98818" start="44898" end="44915" title="De Gruyter Mouton" label="De Gruyter Mouton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2618902" start="44948" end="44959" title="Kalevi Kull" label="Kalevi Kull"/>
<link wikidata="Q2143720" start="45032" end="45048" title="Thomas A. Sebeok" label="Thomas A. Sebeok"/>
<link wikidata="Q7449587" start="45139" end="45166" title="Semiotic Society of America" label="Semiotic Society of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q5333871" start="45242" end="45254" title="Ecosemiotics" label="Ecosemiotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q20054617" start="45257" end="45271" title="Ethnosemiotics" label="Ethnosemiotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479193" start="45274" end="45287" title="Gender symbol" label="Gender symbol"/>
<link wikidata="Q6019050" start="45290" end="45317" title="Index of semiotics articles" label="Index of semiotics articles"/>
<link wikidata="Q247592" start="45320" end="45346" title="Language game (philosophy)" label="Language game (philosophy)"/>
<link wikidata="Q130973651" start="45349" end="45363" title="Neurosemiotics" label="Neurosemiotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q17004652" start="45366" end="45386" title="Outline of semiotics" label="Outline of semiotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916424" start="45389" end="45414" title="Private language argument" label="Private language argument"/>
<link wikidata="Q25510428" start="45417" end="45426" title="Semiofest" label="Semiofest"/>
<link wikidata="Q7449592" start="45429" end="45470" title="Semiotic theory of Charles Sanders Peirce" label="Semiotic theory of Charles Sanders Peirce"/>
<link wikidata="Q6124806" start="45473" end="45489" title="Social semiotics" label="Social semiotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q41511" start="45492" end="45510" title="Universal language" label="Universal language"/>
<link wikidata="Q179109" start="45706" end="45721" title="Roland Barthes" label="Barthes, Roland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5216790" start="45933" end="45949" title="Daniel Chandler" label="Chandler, Daniel"/>
<link wikidata="Q933332" start="46184" end="46200" title="Jonathan Culler" label="Culler, Jonathan"/>
<link wikidata="Q12369646" start="46338" end="46352" title="Marcel Danesi" label="Danesi, Marcel"/>
<link wikidata="Q12365424" start="47059" end="47070" title="John Deely" label="Deely, John"/>
<link wikidata="Q130631" start="48259" end="48275" title="Jacques Derrida" label="Derrida, Jacques"/>
<link wikidata="Q315349" start="48359" end="48374" title="Terry Eagleton" label="Eagleton, Terry"/>
<link wikidata="" start="48390" end="48422" title="Literary Theory: An Introduction" label="Literary Theory: An Introduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q12807" start="48457" end="48469" title="Umberto Eco" label="Eco, Umberto"/>
<link wikidata="Q3740334" start="48842" end="48856" title="Claus Emmeche" label="Emmeche, Claus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2618902" start="48858" end="48870" title="Kalevi Kull" label="Kull, Kalevi"/>
<link wikidata="Q44272" start="48992" end="49008" title="Michel Foucault" label="Foucault, Michel"/>
<link wikidata="Q313379" start="49110" end="49127" title="Algirdas Julien Greimas" label="Greimas, Algirdas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3703207" start="49278" end="49292" title="David Herlihy" label="Herlihy, David"/>
<link wikidata="Q313769" start="49356" end="49372" title="Louis Hjelmslev" label="Hjelmslev, Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q169906" start="49605" end="49619" title="Jacques Lacan" label="Lacan, Jacques"/>
<link wikidata="Q2830584" start="49676" end="49689" title="Alan Sheridan" label="Alan Sheridan"/>
<link wikidata="Q9353" start="49921" end="49932" title="John Locke" label="Locke, John"/>
<link wikidata="Q360084" start="50097" end="50112" title="Juri Lotman" label="Lotman, Yuri M."/>
<link wikidata="Q3146461" start="50222" end="50233" title="I.B. Tauris" label="I.B. Tauris"/>
<link wikidata="Q357041" start="50476" end="50494" title="Charles W. Morris" label="Morris, Charles W."/>
<link wikidata="Q1161507" start="50577" end="50598" title="Jean-Jacques Nattiez" label="Nattiez, Jean-Jacques"/>
<link wikidata="Q5045302" start="50684" end="50698" title="Carolyn Abbate" label="Carolyn Abbate"/>
<link wikidata="Q187520" start="50870" end="50888" title="Charles Sanders Peirce" label="Peirce, Charles S."/>
<link wikidata="Q3629686" start="51013" end="51028" title="Augusto Ponzio" label="Ponzio, Augusto"/>
<link wikidata="Q2143720" start="51338" end="51350" title="Thomas Sebeok" label="Sebeok, T.A."/>
<link wikidata="None" start="51761" end="51772" title="Thomas L. Short" label="Short, T.L."/>
<link wikidata="Q1607289" start="51869" end="51881" title="Henry Stubbe" label="Henry Stubbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6264281" start="52158" end="52176" title="John William Ward (professor)" label="Ward, John William"/>
<link wikidata="Q924265" start="52825" end="52842" title="Aarhus University" label="Aarhus University"/>
<link wikidata="Q12365424" start="53226" end="53234" title="John Deely" label="J. Deely"/>
<link wikidata="Q7449587" start="53257" end="53284" title="Semiotic Society of America" label="Semiotic Society of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q98818" start="53529" end="53539" title="Walter de Gruyter" label="De Gruyter"/>
<link wikidata="Q921774" start="53621" end="53627" title="Alain Rey" label="A. Rey"/>
<link wikidata="Q98818" start="53655" end="53665" title="Walter de Gruyter" label="De Gruyter"/>
<link wikidata="Q12369646" start="54424" end="54433" title="Marcel Danesi" label="M. Danesi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2618902" start="54639" end="54646" title="Kalevi Kull" label="K. Kull"/>
<link wikidata="Q2005662" start="55243" end="55251" title="Peeter Torop" label="P. Torop"/>
<link wikidata="Q12807" start="55459" end="55465" title="Umberto Eco" label="U. Eco"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="29305" wikidata="Q105180" url="?curid=29305" title="Sojourner Truth">
<text>Sojourner Truth (; born Isabella Baumfree; November 26, 1883) was an American abolitionist and activist for African-American civil rights, women&#x27;s rights, and alcohol temperance. Truth was born into slavery in Swartekill, New York, but escaped with her infant daughter to freedom in 1826. After going to court to recover her son in 1828, she became the first black woman to win such a case against a white man.

She gave herself the name Sojourner Truth in 1843 after she became convinced that God had called her to leave the city and go into the countryside &quot;testifying to the hope that was in her.&quot; Her best-known speech was delivered extemporaneously, in 1851, at the Ohio Women&#x27;s Rights Convention in Akron, Ohio. The speech became widely known during the Civil War by the title &quot;Ain&#x27;t I a Woman?&quot;, a variation of the original speech that was published in 1863 as being spoken in a stereotypical Black dialect, then more commonly spoken in the South. Sojourner Truth, however, grew up speaking Dutch as her first language.

During the Civil War, Truth helped recruit black troops for the Union Army; after the war, she tried unsuccessfully to secure land grants from the federal government for formerly enslaved people (summarized as the promise of &quot;forty acres and a mule&quot;). She continued to fight on behalf of women and African Americans until her death. As her biographer Nell Irvin Painter wrote, &quot;At a time when most Americans thought of slaves as male and women as white, Truth embodied a fact that still bears repeating: Among the blacks are women; among the women, there are blacks.&quot;

A memorial bust of Truth was unveiled in 2009 in Emancipation Hall in the U.S. Capitol Visitor Center. She is the first African American woman to have a statue in the Capitol building. In 2014, Truth was included in &quot;Smithsonian&quot; magazine&#x27;s list of the &quot;100 Most Significant Americans of All Time&quot;.

==Early years==
Sojourner Truth once estimated that she was born between 1797 and 1800. Truth was one of the 10 or 12 children born to James and Elizabeth Baumfree (or Bomefree). Her father was a slave captured from present-day Ghana, while her mother – nicknamed &quot;Mau-Mau Bet&quot; – was the daughter of slaves captured from Guinea. Colonel Hardenbergh bought James and Elizabeth Baumfree from slave traders and kept their family at his estate in a big hilly area called by the Dutch name Swartekill (just north of present-day Rifton), in the town of Esopus, New York, north of New York City. Her first language was Dutch, and she continued to speak with a Dutch accent for the rest of her life. Charles Hardenbergh inherited his father&#x27;s estate and continued to own slaves as a part of that estate&#x27;s property.

When Charles Hardenbergh died in 1806, nine-year-old Truth (known as Belle), was sold at an auction with a flock of sheep for $100 (~$ in ) to John Neely, near Kingston, New York. Until that time, Truth spoke only Dutch, and after learning English, she spoke with a Dutch accent and not a stereotypical dialect. She later described Neely as cruel and harsh, relating how he beat her daily and once even with a bundle of rods. In 1808 Neely sold her for $105 (~$ in ) to tavern keeper Martinus Schryver of Port Ewen, New York, who owned her for 18 months. Schryver then sold Truth in 1810 to John Dumont of West Park, New York. 

Dumont raped her repeatedly, and considerable tension existed between Truth and Dumont&#x27;s wife, Elizabeth Waring Dumont, who harassed her and made her life more difficult. Around 1815, Truth met and fell in love with a slave named Robert from a neighboring farm. Robert&#x27;s owner (Charles Catton, Jr., a landscape painter) forbade their relationship; he did not want the slaves he owned to have children with people he did not own because he would not own the children. One day Robert sneaked over to see Truth. When Catton and his son found him, they savagely beat Robert until Dumont finally intervened. Truth never saw Robert again after that day and he died a few years later. The experience haunted Truth throughout her life. Truth eventually married an older enslaved man named Thomas. She bore five children: James, her firstborn, who died in childhood; Diana (1815), the result of a rape by John Dumont; and Peter (1821), Elizabeth (1825), and Sophia (), all born after she and Thomas united.

==Freedom==
In 1799, the State of New York began to legislate the abolition of slavery, although the process of emancipating slaves in New York was not complete until July 4, 1827. Dumont had promised to grant Truth her freedom a year before the state emancipation, &quot;if she would do well and be faithful&quot;. However, he changed his mind, claiming a hand injury had made her less productive. She was infuriated but continued working, spinning of wool, to satisfy her sense of obligation to him.

Late in 1826, Truth escaped to freedom with her infant daughter, Sophia. She had to leave her other children behind because they were not legally freed in the emancipation order until they had served as bound servants into their twenties. She later said, &quot;I did not run off, for I thought that wicked, but I walked off, believing that to be all right.&quot;

She found her way to the home of Isaac and Maria Van Wagenen in New Paltz, who took her and her baby in. Isaac offered to buy her services for the remainder of the year (until the state&#x27;s emancipation took effect), which Dumont accepted for $20. She lived there until the New York State Emancipation Act was approved a year later.

Truth learned that her son Peter, then five years old, had been sold by Dumont and then illegally resold to an owner in Alabama. With the help of the Van Wagenens, she took the issue to the New York Supreme Court. Using the name Isabella van Wagenen, she filed a suit against Peter&#x27;s new owner Solomon Gedney. In 1828, after months of legal proceedings, she got back her son, who had been abused by his owners. Truth became one of the first black women to go to court against a white man and win the case. The court documents related to this lawsuit were rediscovered by the staff at the New York State Archives .

In 1827, she became a Christian and participated in the founding of the Methodist church of Kingston, New York.
In 1829, she moved to New York City and joined the John Street Methodist Church (Zion African Methodist Episcopal Church).

In 1833, she was hired by Robert Matthews, also known as the Prophet Matthias, leader of a sect who identified with Judaism, went to work for him as a housekeeper in the communal settlement, and became a member of the group. In 1834, Matthews and Truth were charged with the murder of Elijah Pierson, but were acquitted due to lack of evidence and Truth&#x27;s presentation of several letters confirming her reliability as a servant. The trial then focused on the reported beating of his daughter of which he was found guilty and sentenced to three months and an additional thirty days for contempt of court. This event prompted Truth to leave the sect in 1835. Afterwards, she retired to New York City until 1843.

In 1839, Truth&#x27;s son Peter took a job on a whaling ship called the &quot;Zone of Nantucket&quot;. From 1840 to 1841, she received three letters from him, though in his third letter he told her he had sent five. Peter said he also never received any of her letters. When the ship returned to port in 1842, Peter was not on board and Truth never heard from him again.

==The result of freedom==
The year 1843 was a turning point for her. On June 1, Pentecost Sunday, she changed her name to Sojourner Truth. She chose the name because she heard the Spirit of God calling on her to preach the truth. She told her friends: &quot;The Spirit calls me, and I must go&quot;, and left to make her way traveling and preaching about the abolition of slavery. Taking along only a few possessions in a pillowcase, she traveled north, working her way up through the Connecticut River Valley, towards Massachusetts.

At that time, Truth began attending Millerite Adventist camp meetings. Millerites followed the teachings of William Miller of New York, who preached that Jesus would appear in 1843–1844, bringing about the end of the world. Many in the Millerite community greatly appreciated Truth&#x27;s preaching and singing, and she drew large crowds when she spoke. Like many others disappointed when the anticipated second coming did not arrive, Truth distanced herself from her Millerite friends for a time.

In 1844, she joined the Northampton Association of Education and Industry in Florence, Massachusetts. Founded by abolitionists, the organization supported women&#x27;s rights and religious tolerance as well as pacifism. There were, in its four-and-a-half-year history, a total of 240 members, though no more than 120 at any one time. They lived on , raising livestock, running a sawmill, a gristmill, and a silk factory. Truth lived and worked in the community and oversaw the laundry, supervising both men and women. While there, Truth met William Lloyd Garrison, Frederick Douglass, and David Ruggles. Encouraged by the community, Truth delivered her first anti-slavery speech that year.

In 1845, she joined the household of George Benson, the brother-in-law of William Lloyd Garrison. In 1846, the Northampton Association of Education and Industry disbanded, unable to support itself. In 1849, she visited John Dumont before he moved west.

Truth started dictating her memoirs to her friend Olive Gilbert and in 1850 William Lloyd Garrison privately published her book, &quot;The Narrative of Sojourner Truth: a Northern Slave&quot;. That same year, she purchased a home in Florence for $300 and spoke at the first National Women&#x27;s Rights Convention in Worcester, Massachusetts. In 1854, with proceeds from sales of the narrative and &quot;cartes-de-visite&quot; captioned, &quot;I sell the shadow to support the substance&quot;, she paid off the mortgage held by her friend from the community, Samuel L. Hill.

==&quot;Ain&#x27;t I a Woman?&quot;==
In 1851, Truth joined George Thompson, an abolitionist and speaker, on a lecture tour through central and western New York State. In May, she attended the Ohio Women&#x27;s Rights Convention in Akron, Ohio, where she delivered her famous extemporaneous speech on women&#x27;s rights, later known as &quot;Ain&#x27;t I a Woman?&quot;. Her speech demanded equal human rights for all women. She also spoke as a former enslaved woman, combining calls for abolitionism with women&#x27;s rights, and drawing from her strength as a laborer to make her equal rights claims.

The convention was organized by Hannah Tracy and Frances Dana Barker Gage, who both were present when Truth spoke. Different versions of Truth&#x27;s words have been recorded, with the first one published a month later in the &quot;Anti-Slavery Bugle&quot; by Rev. Marius Robinson, the newspaper owner and editor who was in the audience. Robinson&#x27;s recounting of the speech included no instance of the question &quot;Ain&#x27;t I a Woman?&quot;, nor did any of the other newspapers reporting of her speech at the time. Twelve years later, in May 1863, Gage published another, very different, version. In it, Truth&#x27;s speech pattern appeared to have characteristics of Black slaves located in the southern United States, and the speech was vastly different from the one Robinson had reported. Gage&#x27;s version of the speech became the most widely circulated version, and is known as &quot;Ain&#x27;t I a Woman?&quot; because that question was repeated four times. It is highly unlikely that Truth&#x27;s own speech pattern was like this, as she was born and raised in New York, and she spoke only upper New York State low-Dutch until she was nine years old.

In the version recorded by Rev. Marius Robinson, Truth said:

In contrast to Robinson&#x27;s report, Gage&#x27;s 1863 version included Truth saying her 13 children were sold away from her into slavery. Truth is widely believed to have had five children, with one sold away, and was never known to boast more children. Gage&#x27;s 1863 recollection of the convention conflicts with her own report directly after the convention: Gage wrote in 1851 that Akron in general and the press, in particular, were largely friendly to the woman&#x27;s rights convention, but in 1863 she wrote that the convention leaders were fearful of the &quot;mobbish&quot; opponents. Other eyewitness reports of Truth&#x27;s speech told a calm story, one where all faces were &quot;beaming with joyous gladness&quot; at the session where Truth spoke; that not &quot;one discordant note&quot; interrupted the harmony of the proceedings. In contemporary reports, Truth was warmly received by the convention-goers, the majority of whom were long-standing abolitionists, friendly to progressive ideas of race and civil rights. In Gage&#x27;s 1863 version, Truth was met with hisses, with voices calling to prevent her from speaking. Other interracial gatherings of black and white abolitionist women had in fact been met with violence, including the burning of Pennsylvania Hall.

According to Frances Gage&#x27;s recount in 1863, Truth argued, &quot;That man over there says that women need to be helped into carriages, and lifted over ditches, and to have the best place everywhere. Nobody helps &quot;me&quot; any best place. &quot;And ain&#x27;t I a woman?&quot;&quot; Truth&#x27;s &quot;Ain&#x27;t I a Woman&quot; showed the lack of recognition that black women received during this time and whose lack of recognition will continue to be seen long after her time. &quot;Black women, of course, were virtually invisible within the protracted campaign for woman suffrage&quot;, wrote Angela Davis, supporting Truth&#x27;s argument that nobody gives her &quot;any best place&quot;; and not just her, but black women in general.

Over the next 10 years, Truth spoke before dozens, perhaps hundreds, of audiences. From 1851 to 1853, Truth worked with Marius Robinson, the editor of the Ohio &quot;Anti-Slavery Bugle&quot;, and traveled around that state speaking. In 1853, she spoke at a suffragist &quot;mob convention&quot; at the Broadway Tabernacle in New York City; that year she also met Harriet Beecher Stowe. In 1856, she traveled to Battle Creek, Michigan, to speak to a group called the Friends of Human Progress.

==Other speeches==
Northampton Camp Meeting – 1844, Northampton, Massachusetts: At a camp meeting where she was participating as an itinerant preacher, a band of &quot;wild young men&quot; disrupted the camp meeting, refused to leave, and threatened to burn down the tents. Truth caught the sense of fear pervading the worshipers and hid behind a trunk in her tent, thinking that since she was the only black person present, the mob would attack her first. However, she reasoned with herself and resolved to do something: as the noise of the mob increased and a female preacher was &quot;trembling on the preachers&#x27; stand&quot;, Truth went to a small hill and began to sing &quot;in her most fervid manner, with all the strength of her most powerful voice, the hymn on the resurrection of Christ&quot;. Her song, &quot;It was Early in the Morning&quot;, gathered the rioters to her and quieted them. They urged her to sing, preach, and pray for their entertainment. After singing songs and preaching for about an hour, Truth bargained with them to leave after one final song. The mob agreed and left the camp meeting.

Abolitionist Convention – 1840s, Boston, Massachusetts: William Lloyd Garrison invited Sojourner Truth to give a speech at an annual antislavery convention. Wendell Phillips was supposed to speak after her, which made her nervous since he was known as such a good orator. So Truth sang a song, &quot;I Am Pleading for My people&quot;, which was her own original composition sung to the tune of &quot;Auld Lang Syne&quot;.

Mob Convention – September 7, 1853: At the convention, young men greeted her with &quot;a perfect storm&quot;, hissing and groaning. In response, Truth said, &quot;You may hiss as much as you please, but women will get their rights anyway. You can&#x27;t stop us, neither&quot;. Sojourner, like other public speakers, often adapted her speeches to how the audience was responding to her. In her speech, Sojourner speaks out for women&#x27;s rights. She incorporates religious references in her speech, particularly the story of Esther. She then goes on to say that, just as women in scripture, women today are fighting for their rights. Moreover, Sojourner scolds the crowd for all their hissing and rude behavior, reminding them that God says to &quot;Honor thy father and thy mother&quot;.

American Equal Rights Association – May 9–10, 1867: Her speech was addressed to the American Equal Rights Association, and divided into three sessions. Sojourner was received with loud cheers instead of hisses, now that she had a better-formed reputation established. &quot;The Call&quot; had advertised her name as one of the main convention speakers. For the first part of her speech, she spoke mainly about the rights of black women. Sojourner argued that because the push for equal rights had led to black men winning new rights, now was the best time to give black women the rights they deserve too. Throughout her speech she kept stressing that &quot;we should keep things going while things are stirring&quot; and fears that once the fight for colored rights settles down, it would take a long time to warm people back up to the idea of colored women&#x27;s having equal rights.

In the second sessions of Sojourner&#x27;s speech, she used a story from the Bible to help strengthen her argument for equal rights for women. She ended her argument by accusing men of being self-centered, saying: &quot;Man is so selfish that he has got women&#x27;s rights and his own too, and yet he won&#x27;t give women their rights. He keeps them all to himself.&quot; For the final session of Sojourner&#x27;s speech, the center of her attention was mainly on women&#x27;s right to vote. Sojourner told her audience that she owned her own house, as did other women, and must, therefore, pay taxes. Nevertheless, they were still unable to vote because they were women. Black women who were enslaved were made to do hard manual work, such as building roads. Sojourner argues that if these women were able to perform such tasks, then they should be allowed to vote because surely voting is easier than building roads.

Eighth Anniversary of Negro Freedom – New Year&#x27;s Day, 1871: On this occasion the Boston papers related that &quot;...seldom is there an occasion of more attraction or greater general interest. Every available space of sitting and standing room was crowded&quot;. She starts off her speech by giving a little background about her own life. Sojourner recounts how her mother told her to pray to God that she may have good masters and mistresses. She goes on to retell how her masters were not good to her, about how she was whipped for not understanding English, and how she would question God why he had not made her masters be good to her. Sojourner admits to the audience that she had once hated white people, but she says once she met her final master, Jesus, she was filled with love for everyone. Once enslaved folks were emancipated, she tells the crowd she knew her prayers had been answered.
That last part of Sojourner&#x27;s speech brings in her main focus. Some freed enslaved people were living on government aid at that time, paid for by taxpayers. Sojourner announces that this is not any better for those colored people than it is for the members of her audience. She then proposes that black people are given their own land. Because a portion of the South&#x27;s population contained rebels that were unhappy with the abolishment of slavery, that region of the United States was not well suited for colored people. She goes on to suggest that colored people be given land out west to build homes and prosper on.

Second Annual Convention of the American Woman Suffrage Association – Boston, 1871: In a brief speech, Truth argued that women&#x27;s rights were essential, not only to their own well-being, but &quot;for the benefit of the whole creation, not only the women, but all the men on the face of the earth, for they were the mother of them&quot;.

==On a mission==
Truth dedicated her life to fighting for a more equal society for African Americans and for women, including abolition, voting rights, and property rights. She was at the vanguard of efforts to address intersecting social justice issues. As historian Martha Jones wrote, &quot;[w]hen Black women like Truth spoke of rights, they mixed their ideas with challenges to slavery and to racism. Truth told her own stories, ones that suggested that a women&#x27;s movement might take another direction, one that championed the broad interests of all humanity.&quot;

Truthalong with Stephen Symonds Foster and Abby Kelley Foster, Jonathan Walker, Marius Robinson, and Sallie Holleyreorganized the Michigan Anti-Slavery Society in 1853 in Adrian, Michigan. The state society was founded in 1836 in Ann Arbor, Michigan.

In 1856, Truth bought a neighboring lot in Northampton, but she did not keep the new property for long. On September 3, 1857, she sold all her possessions, new and old, to Daniel Ives and moved to Battle Creek, Michigan, where she rejoined former members of the Millerite movement who had formed the Seventh-day Adventist Church. Antislavery movements had begun early in Michigan and Ohio. Here, she also joined the nucleus of the Michigan abolitionists, the Progressive Friends, some who she had already met at national conventions. From 1857 to 1867 Truth lived in the village of Harmonia, Michigan, a Spiritualist utopia. She then moved into nearby Battle Creek, Michigan, living at her home on 38 College St. until her death in 1883. According to the 1860 census, her household in Harmonia included her daughter, Elizabeth Banks (age 35), and her grandsons James Caldwell (misspelled as &quot;Colvin&quot;; age 16) and Sammy Banks (age 8).

Truth helped recruit black troops for the Union Army during the Civil War. Her grandson, James Caldwell, enlisted in the 54th Massachusetts Regiment. In 1864, Truth was employed by the National Freedman&#x27;s Relief Association in Washington, D.C., where she worked diligently to improve conditions for African-Americans. In October of that year, she was invited to the White House by President Abraham Lincoln. In 1865, while working at the Freedman&#x27;s Hospital in Washington, Truth rode in the streetcars to help force their desegregation.

Truth is credited with writing a song, &quot;&quot;, for the 1st Michigan Colored Regiment; it was said to be composed during the war and sung by her in Detroit and Washington, D.C. It is sung to the tune of &quot;John Brown&#x27;s Body&quot; or &quot;The Battle Hymn of the Republic&quot;. Although Truth claimed to have written the words, it has been disputed (see &quot;Marching Song of the First Arkansas&quot;).

In 1867, Truth moved from Harmonia to Battle Creek. In 1868, she traveled to western New York and visited with Amy Post, and continued traveling all over the East Coast. At a speaking engagement in Florence, Massachusetts, after she had just returned from a very tiring trip, when Truth was called upon to speak she stood up and said, &quot;Children, I have come here like the rest of you, to hear what I have to say.&quot;

In 1870, Truth tried to secure land grants from the federal government to former enslaved people, a project she pursued for seven years without success. While in Washington, D.C., she had a meeting with President Ulysses S. Grant in the White House. In 1872, she returned to Battle Creek, became active in Grant&#x27;s presidential re-election campaign, and even tried to vote on Election Day, but was turned away at the polling place.

Truth spoke about abolition, women&#x27;s rights, prison reform, and preached to the Michigan Legislature against capital punishment. Not everyone welcomed her preaching and lectures, but she had many friends and staunch support among many influential people at the time, including Amy Post, Parker Pillsbury, Frances Gage, Wendell Phillips, William Lloyd Garrison, Laura Smith Haviland, Lucretia Mott, Ellen G. White, and Susan B. Anthony.

==Illness and death==
Truth was cared for by two of her daughters in the last years of her life. Several days before Sojourner Truth died, a reporter came from the &quot;Grand Rapids Eagle&quot; to interview her. &quot;Her face was drawn and emaciated and she was apparently suffering great pain. Her eyes were very bright and mind alert although it was difficult for her to talk.&quot;

Truth died early in the morning on November 26, 1883, at her Battle Creek home. On November 28, 1883, her funeral was held at the Congregational-Presbyterian Church officiated by its pastor, the Reverend Reed Stuart. Some of the prominent citizens of Battle Creek acted as pall-bearers; nearly one thousand people attended the service. Truth was buried in the city&#x27;s Oak Hill Cemetery.

Frederick Douglass offered a eulogy for her in Washington, D.C. &quot;Venerable for age, distinguished for insight into human nature, remarkable for independence and courageous self-assertion, devoted to the welfare of her race, she has been for the last forty years an object of respect and admiration to social reformers everywhere.&quot;

== Legacy ==
=== Monuments and statues ===
There have been many memorials erected in honor of Sojourner Truth, commemorating her life and work. These include memorial plaques, busts, and full-sized statues.

==== Michigan ====
The first historical marker honoring Truth was established in Battle Creek in 1935, when a stone memorial was placed in Stone History Tower, in Monument Park. The State of Michigan further recognized her legacy by naming highway M-66 in Calhoun County the Sojourner Truth Memorial Highway, running from the county line south of Athens to Morgan Road in Pennfield Township, northeast of Battle Creek.

1999 marked the estimated bicentennial of Sojourner&#x27;s birth. To honor the occasion, a larger-than-life sculpture of Sojourner Truth by Tina Allen was added to Monument Park in Battle Creek. The 12-foot tall Sojourner monument is cast in bronze.

==== Ohio ====
In 1981, an Ohio Historical Marker was unveiled on the site of the Universalist &quot;Old Stone&quot; Church in Akron where Sojourner Truth gave her &quot;Ain&#x27;t I a Woman?&quot; speech on May 29, 1851. Sojourner Truth Legacy Plaza, which includes a statue of her by sculptor and Akron native Woodrow Nash, opened in Akron in 2024.

==== New York ====
In 1862, American sculptor William Wetmore Story completed a marble statue, inspired by Sojourner Truth, named &quot;The Libyan Sibyl&quot;. The work won an award at the London World Exhibition. The original sculpture was gifted to the Metropolitan Museum of Art, in New York City, by the Erving Wolf Foundation in 1978.

In 1983, a plaque honoring Sojourner Truth was unveiled in front of the historic Ulster County Courthouse in Kingston, New York. The plaque was given by the Sojourner Truth Day Committee to commemorate the centennial of her death.

In 1990, New York Governor Mario Cuomo presented a two-foot statue of Sojourner Truth, made by New York sculptor Ruth Inge Hardison, to Nelson Mandela during his visit to New York City.

In 1998, on the 150th anniversary of the Seneca Falls Convention, a life-sized, terracotta statue of Truth by artists A. Lloyd Lillie, Jr., and Victoria Guerina was unveiled at the Women&#x27;s Rights National Historical Park visitor center. Although Truth did not attend the convention, the statue marked Truth&#x27;s famous 1851 speech in Akron, Ohio, and recognized her important role in the fight for women&#x27;s suffrage.

In 2013, a bronze statue of Truth as an 11-year-old girl was installed at Port Ewen, New York, where Truth lived for several years while still enslaved. The sculpture was created by New Paltz, New York, sculptor Trina Green.

In 2015, the Klyne Esopus Museum installed a historical marker in Ulster Park, New York commemorating Truth&#x27;s walk to freedom in 1826. She walked about 14 miles from Esopus, up what is now Floyd Ackert Road, to Rifton, New York.

In 2020, a statue was unveiled at the Walkway Over the Hudson park in Highland, New York. It was created by Yonkers sculptor Vinnie Bagwell, commissioned by the New York State Women&#x27;s Suffrage Commission. The statue includes text, braille, and symbols. The folds of her skirt act as a canvas to depict Sojourner&#x27;s life experiences, including images of a young enslaved mother comforting her child, a slavery sale sign, images of her abolitionist peers, and a poster for a women&#x27;s suffrage march.

On August 26, 2020, on the 100th anniversary of the passage of the 19th Amendment to the U.S. Constitution, a statue honoring Truth, Elizabeth Cady Stanton, and Susan B. Anthony was unveiled in Central Park in New York City. The sculpture, entitled &quot;Women&#x27;s Rights Pioneers Monument&quot;, was created by American artist Meredith Bergmann. It is the first sculpture in Central Park to depict historical women. A statue to the fictional character Alice in Wonderland is the only other female figure depicted in the park. Original plans for the memorial included only Stanton and Anthony, but after critics raised objections to the lack of inclusion of women of color, Truth was added to the design.

On February 28, 2022, New York Governor Kathy Hochul dedicated Sojourner Truth State Park near the site of her birthplace.

==== California ====
In 1999, &quot;Sojourner&quot;, a Mexican limestone statue of Sojourner Truth by sculptor Elizabeth Catlett, was unveiled in Sacramento, California on the corner of K and 13th Street. It was vandalized in 2013, where it was found smashed into pieces.

A bronze statue by San Diego sculptor Manuelita Brown was dedicated on January 22, 2015, on the campus of the Thurgood Marshall College of Law, of the University of California, San Diego, California. The artist donated the sculpture to the college.

==== Massachusetts ====
In 2002, the Sojourner Truth Memorial statue by Oregon sculptor Thomas &quot;Jay&quot; Warren was installed in Florence, Massachusetts, in a small park located on Pine Street and Park Street, on which she lived for ten years.

==== Washington, D.C. ====
In 2009, a bust of Sojourner Truth was installed in the U.S. Capitol. The bust was sculpted by noted artist Artis Lane. It is in Emancipation Hall of the U.S. Capitol Visitor Center. With this installation, Truth became the first black woman to be honored with a statue in the Capitol building.

=== Additional recognition ===
In regard to the magazine &quot;Ms.&quot;, which began in 1972, Gloria Steinem has stated, &quot;We were going to call it &quot;Sojourner&quot;, after Sojourner Truth, but that was perceived as a travel magazine.

Truth was posthumously inducted into the National Women&#x27;s Hall of Fame in Seneca Falls, New York, in 1981. She was also inducted to the Michigan Women&#x27;s Hall of Fame, in Lansing, Michigan. She was part of the inaugural class of inductees when the museum was established in 1983.

The U.S. Postal Service issued a commemorative, 22-cent postage stamp honoring Sojourner Truth in 1986. The original artwork was created by Jerry Pinkney, and features a double portrait of Truth. The stamp was part of the Black Heritage series. The first day of issue was February 4, 1986.

Truth was included in a monument of &quot;Michigan Legal Milestones&quot; erected by the State Bar of Michigan in 1987, honoring her historic court case.

The calendar of saints of the Episcopal Church remembers Sojourner Truth annually, together with Elizabeth Cady Stanton, Amelia Bloomer and Harriet Ross Tubman, on July 20. The calendar of saints of the Lutheran Church remembers Sojourner Truth together with Harriet Tubman on March 10.

In 1997, The NASA Mars Pathfinder mission&#x27;s robotic rover was named &quot;Sojourner&quot;. The following year, S.T. Writes Home appeared on the web offering &quot;Letters to Mom from Sojourner Truth&quot;, in which the Mars Pathfinder Rover at times echoes its namesake.

In 2002, Temple University scholar Molefi Kete Asante published a list of 100 Greatest African Americans, which includes Sojourner Truth.

In 2009 Truth was inducted into the National Abolition Hall of Fame, in Peterboro, New York.

In 2014, the asteroid 249521 Truth was named in her honor.

Truth was included in the Smithsonian Institution&#x27;s list of the &quot;100 Most Significant Americans&quot;, published 2014.

The U.S. Treasury Department announced in 2016 that an image of Sojourner Truth will appear on the back of a newly designed $10 bill along with Lucretia Mott, Susan B. Anthony, Elizabeth Cady Stanton, Alice Paul and the 1913 Woman Suffrage Procession. Designs for new $5, $10 and $20 bills were originally scheduled to be unveiled in 2020 in conjunction with the 100th anniversary of American women winning the right to vote via the Nineteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution. Treasury Secretary Steve Mnuchin announced that plans for the $20 redesign, which was to feature Harriet Tubman, have been postponed.

On September 19, 2016, the U.S. Secretary of the Navy Ray Mabus announced the name of the last ship of a six unit construction contract as USNS &quot;Sojourner Truth&quot; (T-AO 210). This ship will be part of the latest &quot;John Lewis&quot;-class of Fleet Replenishment Oilers named in honor of U.S. civil and human rights heroes currently under construction at General Dynamics NASSCO in San Diego, CA.

A Google Doodle was featured on February 1, 2019, in honor of Sojourner Truth. The doodle was showcased in Canada, United States, United Kingdom, Switzerland, Israel, Ireland and Germany.

For their first match of March 2019, the women of the United States women&#x27;s national soccer team each wore a jersey with the name of a woman they were honoring on the back; Christen Press chose the name of Sojourner Truth.

Metro-North Railroad named one of its Shoreliner II passenger cars – No.6188 – in honor of Sojourner Truth.

=== Works of art ===
In 1892, Albion artist Frank Courter was commissioned by Frances Titus to paint the meeting between Truth and President Abraham Lincoln that occurred on October 29, 1864.

In 1945, Elizabeth Catlett created a print entitled &quot;I&#x27;m Sojourner Truth&quot; as part of a series honoring the labor of black women. The print is in the Metropolitan Museum of Art&#x27;s collection. She would later create a full-size statue of Truth, which was displayed in Sacramento, California.

In 1958, African-American artist John Biggers created a mural called the &quot;Contribution of Negro Woman to American Life and Education&quot; as his doctoral dissertation. It was unveiled at the Blue Triangle Community Center (former YWCA) – Houston, Texas and features Sojourner Truth, Harriet Tubman, and Phillis Wheatley.

Inspired by the work of pioneer women&#x27;s historian Gerda Lerner, feminist artist Judy Chicago (Judith Sylvia Cohen) created a collaborative masterpiece – &quot;The Dinner Party&quot;, a mixed-media art installation, between the years 1974 and 1979. The Sojourner Truth placesetting is one of 39. &quot;The Dinner Party&quot; is gifted by the Elizabeth Sackler Foundation to the Elizabeth A. Sackler Center for Feminist Art, Brooklyn Museum – New York in 2000.

Feminist theorist and author bell hooks titled her first major work after Truth&#x27;s &quot;Ain&#x27;t I a Woman?&quot; speech. The book was published in 1981.

African-American composer Gary Powell Nash composed &quot;In Memoriam: Sojourner Truth,&quot; in 1992.&quot;

The Broadway musical &quot;The Civil War&quot;, which premiered in 1999, includes an abridged version of Truth&#x27;s &quot;Ain&#x27;t I a Woman?&quot; speech as a spoken-word segment. On the 1999 cast recording, the track was performed by Maya Angelou.

In 2018, a crocheted mural, &quot;Sojourner Truth: Ain&#x27;t I A Woman?&quot;, was hung on display at the Akron Civic Theatre&#x27;s outer wall at Lock 3 Park in Ohio. It was one of four projects in New York and North Carolina as part of the &quot;Love Across the U.S.A.&quot;, spearheaded by fiber artist OLEK.

=== Libraries, schools, and buildings ===
* Sojourner Truth Library at New Paltz State University of New York was named in Truth&#x27;s honor in 1971.
* In 1980, the Inter Cooperative Council at the University of Michigan and the residents of the then Lenny Bruce House rename it as Sojourner Truth House in her honor.
* Summit County, Ohio, dedicates the renovated Danner Press Building as the Sojourner Truth Building in Akron in 1991 and unveils the reinstalled Ohio Historical Marker on the building wall.
* The King&#x27;s College, located inside the Empire State Building in New York City, names one of their houses &quot;The House of Sojourner Truth&quot; in 2004.
* In recognition that Truth and her parents were enslaved by people related to their first president, Rutgers University renamed its College Avenue Apartments to the Sojourner Truth Apartments.
* Sojourner–Douglass College in Baltimore, which closed in 2019, was named after Truth and Frederick Douglass.
* As of February 2020, elementary schools and K–12 schools in several states are named after Truth.

=== Organizations ===
* In 1969, the left-wing political group Sojourner Truth Organization was established.
* In 1996, visual artist and community activist Shonna McDaniels establishes the Sojourner Truth African American (Art) Heritage Museum in South Sacramento, California (popularly known as &quot;SOJO&quot; Museum).&quot;&quot;
* In 1998, Velma Laws Clay founded the Sojourner Truth Institute in Battle Creek, to &quot;expand the historical and biographical knowledge of Sojourner Truth&#x27;s life work and carry on her mission by teaching, demonstrating and promoting projects that accentuate the ideals and principles for which she stood.&quot;
* Sojourner Truth Houses have been established in many U.S. cities to provide shelter and services to women facing homelessness or domestic abuse. These include Sojourner Truth Houses in Boston, MA, Providence, RI, and Pittsburgh.

==== Study clubs ====
Starting in 1895, numerous black civic associations adopted the name Sojourner Truth Club or similar titles to honor her.

Examples listing club names, places, years founded:

* Sojourner Truth Club, Birmingham, AL, 1895
* Sojourner Truth Club, Battle Creek, Michigan, 1897
* Sojourner Truth Club, Los Angeles, CA, 1906
* Sojourner Truth Club, Denver, CO, by 1916
* Sojourner Truth Study Club, Omaha, NE, by 1933
* Sojourner Truth Study Club, St. Louis, MO, by 1938
* Women&#x27;s Sojourner Truth Study Club, Pasadena, CA by 1945
* Sojourner Truth Political Study Club, Los Angeles, CA, by 1946
* Sojourner Truth Club, Richmond, IN, by 1974

==Writings==

* &quot;Narrative of Sojourner Truth: A Northern Slave&quot; (1850).
** Dover Publications 1997 edition: 
** Penguin Classics 1998 edition: . Introduction &amp; notes by Nell Irvin Painter.
** University of Pennsylvania online edition (HTML format, one chapter per page)
** University of Virginia online edition (HTML format, 207 kB, entire book on one page)

==See also==
* Elizabeth Freeman
* Elizabeth Key Grinstead
* List of enslaved people
* List of women&#x27;s rights activists
* List of abolitionists
* List of African-American abolitionists

==References==
==Further reading==
* Andrews, William L., ed. &quot;Sisters of the Spirit: Three Black Women&#x27;s Autobiographies of the Nineteenth Century&quot; (Indiana University Press, 1986).
* Bernard, Jacqueline. &quot;Journey toward freedom: The story of Sojourner Truth&quot; (Feminist Press at CUNY, 1990).
* Field, Corinne T. &quot;Old-Age Justice and Black Feminist History: Sojourner Truth&#x27;s and Harriet Tubman&#x27;s Intersectional Legacies.&quot; &quot;Radical History Review&quot; 2021.139 (2021): 37–51.
* 
* Mabee, Carleton. &quot;Sojourner Truth, Bold Prophet: Why Did She Never Learn to Read?.&quot; &quot;New York History&quot; 69.1 (1988): 55–77. 
* Mandziuk, Roseann M., and Suzanne Pullon Fitch. &quot;The rhetorical construction of Sojourner Truth.&quot; &quot;Southern Journal of Communication&quot; 66.2 (2001): 120–138.
* Murphy, Larry G. &quot;Sojourner Truth: A Biography&quot; (ABC-CLIO, 2011).
* Painter, Nell Irvin. &quot;Sojourner Truth in life and memory: Writing the biography of an American exotic.&quot; &quot;Gender &amp; History&quot; 2.1 (1990): 3–16. online
* Painter, Nell Irvin (2000). &quot;Truth, Sojourner&quot; in &quot;American National Biography&quot;. 
* Peterson, Carla. &quot;&quot;Doers of the Word&quot;: African American Women Speakers and Writers in the North (1830–1880)&quot; (Rutgers University Press, 1998).
* Redding, Saunders. &quot;Sojourner Truth,&quot; Edward T. James ed. &quot;Notable American Women&quot; vol 3 (1971) 481
* Smiet, Katrine. &quot;Sojourner Truth and Intersectionality: Traveling Truths in Feminist Scholarship&quot; (Routledge, 2020).
* 
* Online edition (PDF format, 9.9 MB).
* Vetter, Lisa Pace. &quot;The Political Thought of America&#x27;s Founding Feminists&quot; (New York UP, 2017)( pp. 198–212.
* Yee, Shirley J. &quot;Black women abolitionists: A study in activism, 1828–1860&quot; (Univ. of Tennessee Press, 1992). online
* Yellin, Jean Fagan. &quot;Women and Sisters: The Antislavery Feminists in American Culture&quot; (Yale University Press, 1989).

==External links==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* Part of her life is retold in the 1948 radio drama &quot;Truth Goes to Washington&quot;, a presentation from &quot;Destination Freedom&quot;, written by Richard Durham</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q105180" start="0" end="15" title="Sojourner Truth" label="Sojourner Truth"/>
<link wikidata="Q105180" start="24" end="41" title="Sojourner Truth" label="Isabella Baumfree"/>
<link wikidata="Q2853205" start="78" end="90" title="Abolitionism in the United States" label="abolitionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q223569" start="139" end="158" title="women&amp;#x27;s rights" label="women&amp;#x27;s rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q333247" start="164" end="182" title="Temperance movement" label="alcohol temperance"/>
<link wikidata="Q8463" start="204" end="211" title="slavery" label="slavery"/>
<link wikidata="Q3460136" start="215" end="235" title="Swartekill, New York" label="Swartekill, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="364" end="369" title="black Americans" label="black"/>
<link wikidata="Q163132" start="725" end="736" title="Akron, Ohio" label="Akron, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="780" end="789" title="American Civil War" label="Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3887597" start="809" end="830" title="Ain&amp;#x27;t I a Woman?" label="Ain&amp;#x27;t I a Woman?"/>
<link wikidata="Q8002" start="935" end="948" title="African-American Vernacular English" label="Black dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q7411" start="1033" end="1038" title="Dutch language" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752901" start="1127" end="1137" title="Union Army" label="Union Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q3217027" start="1189" end="1199" title="land grant" label="land grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q48525" start="1210" end="1228" title="Federal government of the United States" label="federal government"/>
<link wikidata="Q2299355" start="1294" end="1316" title="forty acres and a mule" label="forty acres and a mule"/>
<link wikidata="Q730820" start="1424" end="1442" title="Nell Irvin Painter" label="Nell Irvin Painter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7555044" start="1652" end="1676" title="Bust of Sojourner Truth (U.S. Capitol)" label="A memorial bust of Truth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495308" start="1726" end="1753" title="United States Capitol Visitor Center" label="U.S. Capitol Visitor Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q3487014" start="1874" end="1885" title="Smithsonian (magazine)" label="Smithsonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q117" start="2205" end="2210" title="Ghana" label="Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006" start="2308" end="2314" title="Guinea" label="Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q3460136" start="2472" end="2482" title="Swartekill, New York" label="Swartekill"/>
<link wikidata="Q3460136" start="2510" end="2516" title="Rifton, New York" label="Rifton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3709827" start="2534" end="2550" title="Esopus, New York" label="Esopus, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q868660" start="2965" end="2983" title="Kingston, New York" label="Kingston, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q3461421" start="3310" end="3329" title="Port Ewen, New York" label="Port Ewen, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q7986162" start="3411" end="3430" title="West Park, New York" label="West Park, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q5076143" start="3722" end="3741" title="Charles Catton the younger" label="Charles Catton, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q173" start="5767" end="5774" title="Alabama" label="Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q33203" start="6339" end="6348" title="Methodism" label="Methodist"/>
<link wikidata="Q868660" start="6359" end="6377" title="Kingston, New York" label="Kingston, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="6401" end="6414" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q3916663" start="6430" end="6458" title="John Street Methodist Church" label="John Street Methodist Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q14685818" start="6460" end="6499" title="Zion African Methodist Episcopal Church" label="Zion African Methodist Episcopal Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q7347421" start="6529" end="6544" title="Robert Matthews (religious impostor)" label="Robert Matthews"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268" start="6619" end="6626" title="Judaism" label="Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="7192" end="7205" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q973740" start="7267" end="7279" title="whaling ship" label="whaling ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q49149" start="7305" end="7314" title="Nantucket" label="Nantucket"/>
<link wikidata="Q379648" start="8076" end="8100" title="Connecticut River Valley" label="Connecticut River Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q719620" start="8162" end="8171" title="Millerites" label="Millerite"/>
<link wikidata="Q215168" start="8172" end="8181" title="Adventism" label="Adventist"/>
<link wikidata="Q353723" start="8234" end="8248" title="William Miller (preacher)" label="William Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1214667" start="8497" end="8509" title="Great Disappointment" label="disappointed"/>
<link wikidata="Q7369319" start="8649" end="8698" title="Northampton Association of Education and Industry" label="Northampton Association of Education and Industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5460527" start="8702" end="8725" title="Florence, Massachusetts" label="Florence, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q223569" start="8780" end="8799" title="women&amp;#x27;s rights" label="women&amp;#x27;s rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q2086472" start="8804" end="8823" title="religious tolerance" label="religious tolerance"/>
<link wikidata="Q58848" start="8835" end="8843" title="pacifism" label="pacifism"/>
<link wikidata="Q505213" start="9004" end="9011" title="sawmill" label="sawmill"/>
<link wikidata="Q623605" start="9015" end="9024" title="gristmill" label="gristmill"/>
<link wikidata="Q360155" start="9166" end="9188" title="William Lloyd Garrison" label="William Lloyd Garrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q215562" start="9190" end="9208" title="Frederick Douglass" label="Frederick Douglass"/>
<link wikidata="Q5239291" start="9214" end="9227" title="David Ruggles" label="David Ruggles"/>
<link wikidata="Q5536904" start="9353" end="9366" title="George Benson (Quaker)" label="George Benson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3336961" start="9844" end="9883" title="National Women&amp;#x27;s Rights Convention" label="National Women&amp;#x27;s Rights Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757923" start="9974" end="9990" title="Carte de visite" label="cartes-de-visite"/>
<link wikidata="Q5545176" start="10206" end="10221" title="George Thompson (abolitionist)" label="George Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q163132" start="10378" end="10389" title="Akron, Ohio" label="Akron, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q3887597" start="10489" end="10510" title="Ain&amp;#x27;t I a Woman?" label="Ain&amp;#x27;t I a Woman?"/>
<link wikidata="Q5648974" start="10783" end="10795" title="Hannah Tracy Cutler" label="Hannah Tracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5478590" start="10800" end="10824" title="Frances Dana Barker Gage" label="Frances Dana Barker Gage"/>
<link wikidata="Q11988391" start="11016" end="11031" title="Marius Robinson" label="Marius Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7163749" start="13254" end="13272" title="Pennsylvania Hall (Philadelphia)" label="Pennsylvania Hall."/>
<link wikidata="Q160456" start="13880" end="13892" title="Angela Davis" label="Angela Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q205204" start="14281" end="14291" title="Women&amp;#x27;s suffrage" label="suffragist"/>
<link wikidata="Q4972534" start="14326" end="14345" title="Broadway Tabernacle" label="Broadway Tabernacle"/>
<link wikidata="Q102513" start="14387" end="14408" title="Harriet Beecher Stowe" label="Harriet Beecher Stowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q810998" start="14435" end="14457" title="Battle Creek, Michigan" label="Battle Creek, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q110517368" start="14490" end="14515" title="Progressive Friends" label="Friends of Human Progress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029878" start="14603" end="14615" title="camp meeting" label="camp meeting"/>
<link wikidata="Q360155" start="15698" end="15720" title="William Lloyd Garrison" label="William Lloyd Garrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q211939" start="16042" end="16056" title="Auld Lang Syne" label="Auld Lang Syne"/>
<link wikidata="Q732413" start="16593" end="16599" title="Esther" label="Esther"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842913" start="16942" end="16975" title="American Equal Rights Association" label="American Equal Rights Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q15052225" start="21136" end="21158" title="Stephen Symonds Foster" label="Stephen Symonds Foster"/>
<link wikidata="Q2820848" start="21163" end="21181" title="Abby Kelley" label="Abby Kelley Foster"/>
<link wikidata="Q6274705" start="21183" end="21198" title="Jonathan Walker (abolitionist)" label="Jonathan Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q29051018" start="21221" end="21234" title="Sallie Holley" label="Sallie Holley"/>
<link wikidata="Q111941656" start="21250" end="21279" title="Michigan Anti-Slavery Society" label="Michigan Anti-Slavery Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q372304" start="21291" end="21307" title="Adrian, Michigan" label="Adrian, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q485172" start="21350" end="21369" title="Ann Arbor, Michigan" label="Ann Arbor, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q810998" start="21569" end="21591" title="Battle Creek, Michigan" label="Battle Creek, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q104319" start="21672" end="21700" title="Seventh-day Adventist Church" label="Seventh-day Adventist Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q110517368" start="21831" end="21850" title="Progressive Friends" label="Progressive Friends"/>
<link wikidata="Q829348" start="21976" end="21988" title="Spiritualism (movement)" label="Spiritualist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345528" start="22132" end="22138" title="United States Census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752901" start="22359" end="22369" title="Union Army" label="Union Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="22381" end="22390" title="American Civil War" label="Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140668" start="22438" end="22465" title="54th Massachusetts Regiment" label="54th Massachusetts Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q35525" start="22688" end="22699" title="White House" label="White House"/>
<link wikidata="Q91" start="22713" end="22728" title="Abraham Lincoln" label="Abraham Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q5500403" start="22760" end="22784" title="Freedman&amp;#x27;s Hospital" label="Freedman&amp;#x27;s Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q48532" start="22849" end="22862" title="Desegregation in the United States" label="desegregation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4546433" start="22926" end="22955" title="102nd Regiment United States Colored Troops" label="1st Michigan Colored Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q947444" start="23079" end="23101" title="John Brown&amp;#x27;s Body" label="John Brown&amp;#x27;s Body"/>
<link wikidata="Q583210" start="23117" end="23148" title="The Battle Hymn of the Republic" label="The Battle Hymn of the Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6757013" start="23238" end="23273" title="Marching Song of the First Arkansas" label="Marching Song of the First Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q40741510" start="23394" end="23402" title="Amy Post" label="Amy Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q4268" start="23441" end="23451" title="East Coast of the United States" label="East Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q3217027" start="23739" end="23749" title="land grant" label="land grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q48525" start="23760" end="23778" title="Federal government of the United States" label="federal government"/>
<link wikidata="Q34836" start="23921" end="23937" title="Ulysses S. Grant" label="Ulysses S. Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q35525" start="23945" end="23956" title="White House" label="White House"/>
<link wikidata="Q40741510" start="24427" end="24435" title="Amy Post" label="Amy Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q7138361" start="24437" end="24453" title="Parker Pillsbury" label="Parker Pillsbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q5478590" start="24455" end="24467" title="Frances Dana Barker Gage" label="Frances Gage"/>
<link wikidata="Q530310" start="24469" end="24485" title="Wendell Phillips" label="Wendell Phillips"/>
<link wikidata="Q360155" start="24487" end="24509" title="William Lloyd Garrison" label="William Lloyd Garrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q6499450" start="24511" end="24531" title="Laura Smith Haviland" label="Laura Smith Haviland"/>
<link wikidata="Q267107" start="24533" end="24546" title="Lucretia Mott" label="Lucretia Mott"/>
<link wikidata="Q292290" start="24548" end="24562" title="Ellen G. White" label="Ellen G. White"/>
<link wikidata="Q192245" start="24568" end="24584" title="Susan B. Anthony" label="Susan B. Anthony"/>
<link wikidata="Q5160703" start="25105" end="25139" title="Congregational-Presbyterian Church" label="Congregational-Presbyterian Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q810998" start="25998" end="26010" title="Battle Creek, Michigan" label="Battle Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q2353428" start="26165" end="26169" title="M-66 (Michigan highway)" label="M-66"/>
<link wikidata="Q137516" start="26173" end="26187" title="Calhoun County, Michigan" label="Calhoun County"/>
<link wikidata="Q2791349" start="26264" end="26270" title="Athens, Michigan" label="Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1920367" start="26289" end="26307" title="Pennfield Charter Township, Michigan" label="Pennfield Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q22341349" start="26477" end="26487" title="Tina Allen" label="Tina Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q163132" start="26715" end="26720" title="Akron, Ohio" label="Akron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335728" start="26986" end="27007" title="William Wetmore Story" label="William Wetmore Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q1372700" start="27129" end="27152" title="1862 International Exhibition" label="London World Exhibition"/>
<link wikidata="Q160236" start="27195" end="27221" title="Metropolitan Museum of Art" label="Metropolitan Museum of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q868660" start="27390" end="27408" title="Kingston, New York" label="Kingston, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q521145" start="27540" end="27551" title="Mario Cuomo" label="Mario Cuomo"/>
<link wikidata="Q16729635" start="27626" end="27644" title="Ruth Inge Hardison" label="Ruth Inge Hardison"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736155" start="27741" end="27764" title="Seneca Falls Convention" label="Seneca Falls Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q8031053" start="27881" end="27925" title="Women&amp;#x27;s Rights National Historical Park" label="Women&amp;#x27;s Rights National Historical Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q3461421" start="28203" end="28222" title="Port Ewen, New York" label="Port Ewen, New York"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28341" end="28352" title="Trina Green" label="Trina Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q29903626" start="28421" end="28442" title="Ulster Park, New York" label="Ulster Park, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q2106712" start="28628" end="28651" title="Walkway Over the Hudson" label="Walkway Over the Hudson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3460450" start="28660" end="28678" title="Highland, Ulster County, New York" label="Highland, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q205304" start="29169" end="29208" title="Nineteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="19th Amendment to the U.S. Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q160409" start="29296" end="29308" title="Central Park" label="Central Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q104646228" start="29357" end="29394" title="Women&amp;#x27;s Rights Pioneers Monument" label="Women&amp;#x27;s Rights Pioneers Monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q6818908" start="29433" end="29450" title="Meredith Bergmann" label="Meredith Bergmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q92640" start="29558" end="29577" title="Alice in Wonderland" label="Alice in Wonderland"/>
<link wikidata="Q45956" start="29851" end="29863" title="Kathy Hochul" label="Kathy Hochul"/>
<link wikidata="Q111942620" start="29874" end="29900" title="Sojourner Truth State Park" label="Sojourner Truth State Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q290331" start="30046" end="30063" title="Elizabeth Catlett" label="Elizabeth Catlett"/>
<link wikidata="Q18013" start="30081" end="30091" title="Sacramento, California" label="Sacramento"/>
<link wikidata="Q6753065" start="30246" end="30261" title="Manuelita Brown" label="Manuelita Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q312348" start="30318" end="30335" title="Thurgood Marshall" label="Thurgood Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q622664" start="30359" end="30394" title="University of California, San Diego" label="University of California, San Diego"/>
<link wikidata="Q7555044" start="30747" end="30770" title="Bust of Sojourner Truth (U.S. Capitol)" label="bust of Sojourner Truth"/>
<link wikidata="Q54109" start="30792" end="30804" title="United States Capitol" label="U.S. Capitol"/>
<link wikidata="Q4801195" start="30844" end="30854" title="Artis Lane" label="Artis Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495308" start="30865" end="30882" title="Emancipation Hall" label="Emancipation Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q3656351" start="31095" end="31098" title="Ms. (magazine)" label="Ms."/>
<link wikidata="Q231178" start="31127" end="31141" title="Gloria Steinem" label="Gloria Steinem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967852" start="31318" end="31352" title="National Women&amp;#x27;s Hall of Fame" label="National Women&amp;#x27;s Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q668687" start="31571" end="31590" title="U.S. Postal Service" label="U.S. Postal Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q6184250" start="31707" end="31720" title="Jerry Pinkney" label="Jerry Pinkney"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603081" start="31947" end="31968" title="State Bar of Michigan" label="State Bar of Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5019509" start="32017" end="32059" title="Calendar of saints (Episcopal Church in the United States of America)" label="calendar of saints of the Episcopal Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q465335" start="32110" end="32132" title="Elizabeth Cady Stanton" label="Elizabeth Cady Stanton"/>
<link wikidata="Q442759" start="32134" end="32148" title="Amelia Bloomer" label="Amelia Bloomer"/>
<link wikidata="Q102870" start="32153" end="32172" title="Harriet Tubman" label="Harriet Ross Tubman"/>
<link wikidata="Q905917" start="32190" end="32231" title="Calendar of Saints (Lutheran)" label="calendar of saints of the Lutheran Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="32314" end="32318" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q201771" start="32319" end="32334" title="Mars Pathfinder" label="Mars Pathfinder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770537" start="32374" end="32395" title="Sojourner (rover)" label="&amp;quot;Sojourner&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1512329" start="32613" end="32631" title="Molefi Kete Asante" label="Molefi Kete Asante"/>
<link wikidata="Q4546133" start="32652" end="32682" title="100 Greatest African Americans" label="100 Greatest African Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q7545510" start="32753" end="32784" title="National Abolition Hall of Fame" label="National Abolition Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q7177982" start="32789" end="32808" title="Peterboro, New York" label="Peterboro, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q729695" start="32833" end="32845" title="249521 Truth" label="249521 Truth"/>
<link wikidata="Q131626" start="32897" end="32920" title="Smithsonian Institution" label="Smithsonian Institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q648666" start="33005" end="33029" title="United States Department of the Treasury" label="U.S. Treasury Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q4159284" start="33125" end="33133" title="United States ten-dollar bill" label="$10 bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q267107" start="33145" end="33158" title="Lucretia Mott" label="Lucretia Mott"/>
<link wikidata="Q192245" start="33160" end="33176" title="Susan B. Anthony" label="Susan B. Anthony"/>
<link wikidata="Q465335" start="33178" end="33200" title="Elizabeth Cady Stanton" label="Elizabeth Cady Stanton"/>
<link wikidata="Q127328" start="33202" end="33212" title="Alice Paul" label="Alice Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q8030700" start="33221" end="33251" title="1913 Woman Suffrage Procession" label="1913 Woman Suffrage Procession"/>
<link wikidata="Q205304" start="33434" end="33488" title="Nineteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Nineteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q24248265" start="33509" end="33522" title="Steven Mnuchin" label="Steve Mnuchin"/>
<link wikidata="Q940135" start="33652" end="33678" title="United States Secretary of the Navy" label="U.S. Secretary of the Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q531247" start="33679" end="33688" title="Ray Mabus" label="Ray Mabus"/>
<link wikidata="Q22121561" start="33764" end="33807" title="USNS Sojourner Truth (T-AO-210)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Sojourner Truth&amp;quot; (T-AO 210)"/>
<link wikidata="Q22121561" start="33846" end="33874" title="John Lewis-class oiler" label="&amp;quot;John Lewis&amp;quot;-class"/>
<link wikidata="Q162986" start="33878" end="33904" title="Replenishment oiler" label="Fleet Replenishment Oilers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6978703" start="33990" end="34013" title="National Steel and Shipbuilding Company" label="General Dynamics NASSCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q18156042" start="34035" end="34048" title="Google Doodle" label="Google Doodle"/>
<link wikidata="Q334526" start="34276" end="34323" title="United States women&amp;#x27;s national soccer team" label="United States women&amp;#x27;s national soccer team"/>
<link wikidata="Q2652968" start="34400" end="34414" title="Christen Press" label="Christen Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q125908" start="34451" end="34471" title="Metro-North Railroad" label="Metro-North Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q7501462" start="34489" end="34502" title="Shoreliner" label="Shoreliner II"/>
<link wikidata="Q50805159" start="34638" end="34651" title="Frances Titus" label="Frances Titus"/>
<link wikidata="Q91" start="34701" end="34716" title="Abraham Lincoln" label="Abraham Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q160236" start="34917" end="34943" title="Metropolitan Museum of Art" label="Metropolitan Museum of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q15516987" start="35096" end="35108" title="John T. Biggers" label="John Biggers"/>
<link wikidata="Q16555" start="35307" end="35314" title="Houston" label="Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q102870" start="35352" end="35366" title="Harriet Tubman" label="Harriet Tubman"/>
<link wikidata="Q257911" start="35372" end="35388" title="Phillis Wheatley" label="Phillis Wheatley"/>
<link wikidata="Q85102" start="35446" end="35458" title="Gerda Lerner" label="Gerda Lerner"/>
<link wikidata="Q441440" start="35476" end="35488" title="Judy Chicago" label="Judy Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915473" start="35697" end="35713" title="The Dinner Party" label="The Dinner Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q16728801" start="35737" end="35754" title="Elizabeth Sackler" label="Elizabeth Sackler"/>
<link wikidata="Q5362267" start="35773" end="35817" title="Elizabeth A. Sackler Center for Feminist Art" label="Elizabeth A. Sackler Center for Feminist Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q632682" start="35819" end="35834" title="Brooklyn Museum" label="Brooklyn Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q259507" start="35885" end="35895" title="bell hooks" label="bell hooks"/>
<link wikidata="Q4697221" start="35907" end="35923" title="Ain&amp;#x27;t I a Woman? (book)" label="first major work"/>
<link wikidata="Q7723241" start="36155" end="36168" title="The Civil War (musical)" label="The Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q19526" start="36368" end="36380" title="Maya Angelou" label="Maya Angelou"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603625" start="36768" end="36806" title="New Paltz State University of New York" label="New Paltz State University of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q230492" start="36896" end="36918" title="University of Michigan" label="University of Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3521483" start="37209" end="37232" title="The King&amp;#x27;s College (New York)" label="The King&amp;#x27;s College"/>
<link wikidata="Q9188" start="37253" end="37274" title="Empire State Building" label="Empire State Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q499451" start="37471" end="37489" title="Rutgers University" label="Rutgers University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7555052" start="37565" end="37591" title="Sojourner–Douglass College" label="Sojourner–Douglass College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092" start="37595" end="37604" title="Baltimore" label="Baltimore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151386" start="37720" end="37732" title="K–12 (education)" label="K–12 schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q7555047" start="37838" end="37866" title="Sojourner Truth Organization" label="Sojourner Truth Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q18013" start="38029" end="38039" title="Sacramento, California" label="Sacramento"/>
<link wikidata="Q2137023" start="39412" end="39430" title="Dover Publications" label="Dover Publications"/>
<link wikidata="Q11281443" start="39449" end="39465" title="Penguin Classics" label="Penguin Classics"/>
<link wikidata="Q49117" start="39533" end="39559" title="University of Pennsylvania" label="University of Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q8811" start="39576" end="39580" title="HTML" label="HTML"/>
<link wikidata="Q213439" start="39614" end="39636" title="University of Virginia" label="University of Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3375368" start="39715" end="39732" title="Elizabeth Freeman" label="Elizabeth Freeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3723405" start="39735" end="39758" title="Elizabeth Key Grinstead" label="Elizabeth Key Grinstead"/>
<link wikidata="Q6639572" start="39761" end="39784" title="List of slaves" label="List of enslaved people"/>
<link wikidata="Q11722889" start="39787" end="39824" title="List of women&amp;#x27;s rights activists" label="List of women&amp;#x27;s rights activists"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243132" start="39827" end="39848" title="List of abolitionists" label="List of abolitionists"/>
<link wikidata="Q2264210" start="39851" end="39889" title="List of African-American abolitionists" label="List of African-American abolitionists"/>
<link wikidata="Q85756571" start="42093" end="42112" title="Destination Freedom" label="Destination Freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q16170770" start="42131" end="42145" title="Richard Durham" label="Richard Durham"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="29306" wikidata="Q427062" url="?curid=29306" title="STOVL">
<text>A short take-off and vertical landing aircraft (STOVL aircraft) is a fixed-wing aircraft that is able to take off from a short runway (or take off vertically if it does not have a heavy payload) and land vertically (i.e. with no runway). The formal NATO definition (since 1991) is:

On aircraft carriers, non-catapult-assisted fixed-wing short takeoffs are accomplished with the use of thrust vectoring, which may also be used in conjunction with a runway &quot;ski-jump&quot;. There are 14 aircraft carriers that operate these STOVL aircraft: United States (9), United Kingdom (2), Italy (2), and Spain (1). Use of STOVL tends to allow aircraft to carry a larger payload compared to vertical take-off and landing (VTOL), while still only requiring a short runway. The most famous examples are the Hawker Siddeley Harrier and the BAe Sea Harrier. Although technically a V/STOL aircraft, they are operationally STOVL aircraft due to the extra weight carried at take-off for fuel and armaments. The same is true of the B variant of the Lockheed Martin F-35 Lightning II, which demonstrated VTOL capability in test flights but is operationally a STOVL.

==History==

In 1951, the Lockheed XFV and the Convair XFY Pogo tailsitters were both designed around the Allison YT40 turboprop engine driving contra-rotating propellers.

The British Hawker P.1127 took off vertically in 1960, and demonstrated conventional take-off in 1961. It was developed into the Hawker Siddeley Harrier which flew in 1967.

In 1962, Lockheed built the XV-4 Hummingbird for the U.S. Army. It sought to &quot;augment&quot; available thrust by injecting the engine exhaust into an ejector pump in the fuselage. First flying vertically in 1963, it suffered a fatal crash in 1964. It was converted into the XV-4B Hummingbird for the U.S. Air Force as a testbed for separate, vertically mounted lift engines, similar to those used in the Yakovlev Yak-38 &#x27;Forger&#x27;. That plane flew and later crashed in 1969. The Ryan XV-5 Vertifan, which was also built for the U.S. Army at the same time as the Hummingbird, experimented with gas-driven lift fans. That plane used fans in the nose and each wing, covered by doors which resembled half garbage can lids when raised. However, it crashed twice, and proved to generate a disappointing amount of lift, and was difficult to transition to horizontal flight.

Of dozens of VTOL and V/STOL designs tried from the 1950s to 1980s, only the subsonic Hawker Siddeley Harrier and Yak-38 Forger reached operational status, with the Forger being withdrawn after the fall of the Soviet Union.

Rockwell International built, and then abandoned, the Rockwell XFV-12 supersonic fighter which had an unusual wing which opened up like window blinds to create an ejector pump for vertical flight. It never generated enough lift to get off the ground despite developing 20,000 lbf of thrust. The French had a nominally Mach 2 Dassault Mirage IIIV fitted with no less than 8 lift engines that flew (and crashed), but did not have enough space for fuel or payload for combat missions. The German EWR VJ 101 used swiveling engines mounted on the wingtips with fuselage mounted lift engines, and the VJ 101C X1 reached supersonic flight (Mach 1.08) on 29 July 1964. The supersonic Hawker Siddeley P.1154, which competed with the Mirage IIIV for use in NATO, was cancelled even as the aircraft were being built.

In 1983, the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) initiated the Advanced STOVL (ASTOVL) program to develop a supersonic STOVL fighter (SSF) to replace the Harrier for the U.S. Marine Corps and the U.K. Royal Navy. Several propulsion methods were explored under ASTOVL and assigned to different contractors for research and development. These include the Shaft-Driven Lift Fan (SDLF) by Lockheed which had a forward lift fan powered by a shaft connected to the main engine&#x27;s low-pressure spool and engaged by a clutch, the Lift-Plus-Lift/Cruise (LPLC) by Northrop (later Northrop Grumman) which had a separate dedicated lift engine alongside the main engine, and the Gas-Driven Lift Fan (GDLF) by McDonnell Douglas that used the main engine bleed air to power a lift fan; all methods had an aft vectoring nozzle for the main engine.

ASTOVL would continue under the Common Affordable Lightweight Fighter (CALF) program, which eventually became part of the Joint Strike Fighter program; the Lockheed Martin X-35B with the SDLF was eventually selected for full-scale development in 2001, with the production aircraft for operational service becoming the F-35B with the F135-PW-600 engine. NASA uses the abbreviation SSTOVL for Supersonic Short Take-Off / Vertical Landing, and as of 2012, the X-35B/F-35B are the only aircraft to conform with this combination within one flight.

The experimental Mach 1.7 Yakovlev Yak-141 did not find an operational customer, but similar rotating rear nozzle technology is used on the F-35B which entered service on 31 July 2015.

Larger STOVL designs were considered, the Armstrong Whitworth AW.681 cargo aircraft was under development when cancelled in 1965. The Dornier Do 31 got as far as three experimental aircraft before cancellation in 1970.

Although mostly a VTOL design, the Bell Boeing V-22 Osprey has increased payload when taking off from a short runway.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q427062" start="2" end="46" title="STOVL" label="short take-off and vertical landing aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q427062" start="48" end="62" title="STOVL" label="STOVL aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q2875704" start="69" end="88" title="fixed-wing aircraft" label="fixed-wing aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q854248" start="105" end="113" title="takeoff" label="take off"/>
<link wikidata="Q844947" start="199" end="203" title="Landing" label="land"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="249" end="253" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q17205" start="286" end="302" title="aircraft carrier" label="aircraft carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q743135" start="386" end="402" title="thrust vectoring" label="thrust vectoring"/>
<link wikidata="Q27960872" start="462" end="470" title="Ski-jump (aviation)" label="ski-jump"/>
<link wikidata="Q320599" start="684" end="713" title="VTOL" label="vertical take-off and landing"/>
<link wikidata="Q725313" start="798" end="821" title="Hawker Siddeley Harrier" label="Hawker Siddeley Harrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q210384" start="830" end="845" title="British Aerospace Sea Harrier" label="BAe Sea Harrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q29261" start="1034" end="1067" title="Lockheed Martin F-35 Lightning II" label="Lockheed Martin F-35 Lightning II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758294" start="1177" end="1189" title="Lockheed XFV" label="Lockheed XFV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129331" start="1198" end="1214" title="Convair XFY Pogo" label="Convair XFY Pogo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1593067" start="1215" end="1225" title="tailsitter" label="tailsitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q4732833" start="1257" end="1269" title="Allison YT40" label="Allison YT40"/>
<link wikidata="Q309027" start="1270" end="1279" title="turboprop" label="turboprop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777836" start="1295" end="1321" title="contra-rotating propellers" label="contra-rotating propellers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1591690" start="1336" end="1349" title="Hawker P.1127" label="Hawker P.1127"/>
<link wikidata="Q725313" start="1453" end="1476" title="Hawker Siddeley Harrier" label="Hawker Siddeley Harrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1867610" start="1526" end="1542" title="Lockheed XV-4 Hummingbird" label="XV-4 Hummingbird"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="1551" end="1560" title="U.S. Army" label="U.S. Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q11223" start="1802" end="1816" title="U.S. Air Force" label="U.S. Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q505643" start="1906" end="1921" title="Yakovlev Yak-38" label="Yakovlev Yak-38"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390439" start="1989" end="2007" title="Ryan XV-5 Vertifan" label="Ryan XV-5 Vertifan"/>
<link wikidata="Q320599" start="2391" end="2395" title="VTOL" label="VTOL"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193453" start="2400" end="2406" title="V/STOL" label="V/STOL"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="2588" end="2600" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348664" start="2603" end="2625" title="Rockwell International" label="Rockwell International"/>
<link wikidata="Q962286" start="2657" end="2672" title="Rockwell XFV-12" label="Rockwell XFV-12"/>
<link wikidata="Q321046" start="2739" end="2751" title="window blind" label="window blind"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194225" start="2879" end="2882" title="pound-force" label="lbf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172017" start="2928" end="2948" title="Dassault Mirage IIIV" label="Dassault Mirage IIIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q539831" start="3096" end="3106" title="EWR VJ 101" label="EWR VJ 101"/>
<link wikidata="Q3268199" start="3279" end="3301" title="Hawker Siddeley P.1154" label="Hawker Siddeley P.1154"/>
<link wikidata="Q207361" start="3466" end="3471" title="DARPA" label="DARPA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7233" start="3809" end="3817" title="Lockheed Corporation" label="Lockheed"/>
<link wikidata="Q29017826" start="3838" end="3846" title="lift fan" label="lift fan"/>
<link wikidata="Q912979" start="3982" end="3990" title="Northrop Corporation" label="Northrop"/>
<link wikidata="Q329953" start="3998" end="4014" title="Northrop Grumman" label="Northrop Grumman"/>
<link wikidata="Q201815" start="4124" end="4141" title="McDonnell Douglas" label="McDonnell Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q16950547" start="4293" end="4330" title="Common Affordable Lightweight Fighter" label="Common Affordable Lightweight Fighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q202568" start="4383" end="4411" title="Joint Strike Fighter program" label="Joint Strike Fighter program"/>
<link wikidata="Q1867599" start="4417" end="4438" title="Lockheed Martin X-35" label="Lockheed Martin X-35B"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368421" start="4594" end="4605" title="Pratt &amp;amp; Whitney F135" label="F135-PW-600"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="4614" end="4618" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q102786" start="4628" end="4640" title="abbreviation" label="abbreviation"/>
<link wikidata="Q430766" start="4831" end="4847" title="Yakovlev Yak-141" label="Yakovlev Yak-141"/>
<link wikidata="Q2862814" start="5033" end="5059" title="Armstrong Whitworth AW.681" label="Armstrong Whitworth AW.681"/>
<link wikidata="Q1245869" start="5125" end="5138" title="Dornier Do 31" label="Dornier Do 31"/>
<link wikidata="Q217935" start="5246" end="5269" title="Bell Boeing V-22 Osprey" label="Bell Boeing V-22 Osprey"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="29307" wikidata="Q274924" url="?curid=29307" title="Russian aircraft carrier Admiral Kuznetsov">
<text>Admiral Flota Sovetskogo Soyuza Kuznetsov (, &quot;Admiral of the Fleet of the Soviet Union Kuznetsov&quot;) is an aircraft carrier (heavy aircraft cruiser in Russian classification) that has served as the flagship of the Russian navy. She was built by the Black Sea Shipyard, the sole manufacturer of Soviet aircraft carriers, in Nikolayev within the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic (Ukrainian SSR) and launched in 1985, becoming fully operational in the Russian Navy in 1995. The initial name of the ship was Tbilisi; she was launched as Leonid Brezhnev, embarked on sea trials as Tbilisi, and was finally named after Admiral of the Fleet of the Soviet Union Nikolay Gerasimovich Kuznetsov.

She was originally commissioned in the Soviet Navy, and was intended to be the lead ship of the two-ship . However, her sister ship &quot;Varyag&quot; was still incomplete when the Soviet Union disbanded in 1991. The second hull was eventually sold by Ukraine to China, completed in Dalian and commissioned as .

The ship has been out of service and in repairs since 2018. The repair process has been hampered by accidents, embezzlement of funds, and other setbacks. After the floating drydock sank in Kola Bay (Murmansk) in an accident that killed one worker in October 2018, the ship was towed to Sevmorput Yard No 35. In another mishap in December 2019, a major fire killed at least one worker and injured ten others. In June 2022, the ship was transferred to a drydock at the 35th Ship Repair Plant in Murmansk, where she remained until February 2023. It was projected that repairs would be completed and the ship would be transferred back to the Russian Navy in 2024, but this was pushed back to at least 2025.

 the non-operational &quot;Admiral Kuznetsov&quot; is the Russian Navy&#x27;s only carrier, leaving the Russian Navy without an operational aircraft carrier.

==Design==

The design of &quot;Admiral Kuznetsov&quot; class implies a mission different from that of the United States Navy&#x27;s carriers. The term used by its builders to describe the Russian ships is (TAVKR) – &quot;heavy aircraft-carrying cruiser&quot; – intended to support and defend strategic missile-carrying submarines, surface ships, and naval missile-carrying aircraft of the Russian Navy.

&quot;Admiral Kuznetsov&quot;″s main fixed-wing aircraft is the multi-role Sukhoi Su-33. It can perform air superiority, fleet defence, and air support missions and can also be used for direct fire support of amphibious assault, reconnaissance and placement of naval mines. The carrier also carries the Kamov Ka-27 and Kamov Ka-27S helicopters for anti-submarine warfare, search and rescue, and small transport.

For take-off of fixed-wing aircraft, &quot;Admiral Kuznetsov&quot; has a ski-jump at the end of her bow. When taking off, aircraft accelerate toward and up the ski-jump using their afterburners. This results in the aircraft leaving the deck at a higher angle and elevation than on an aircraft carrier with a flat deck and catapults. The ski-jump take-off is less demanding on the pilot&#x27;s body, since the acceleration is lower, but results in a clearance speed of only requiring an aircraft design which will not stall at those speeds.

The &quot;cruiser&quot; role is facilitated by &quot;Admiral Kuznetsov&quot;″s complement of 12 long-range surface-to-surface anti-ship P-700 Granit (NATO reporting name: Shipwreck) cruise missiles, resulting in the ship&#x27;s Russian type designator of &quot;heavy aircraft-carrying missile cruiser&quot;.

Unlike most western naval ships that use gas turbines or nuclear power, &quot;Admiral Kuznetsov&quot; is a conventionally powered ship that uses mazut as a fuel, often leading to a visible trail of heavy black smoke that can be seen at a great distance. Russian naval officials have said that the failure to properly preheat the heavy mazut fuel prior to entering the combustion chamber may contribute to the heavy smoke trail associated with the ship.

===Transiting the Turkish Straits===

&quot;Admiral Kuznetsov&quot;″s designation as an aircraft-carrying cruiser is important under the Montreux Convention, as it allows the ship to transit the Turkish Straits. The Convention prohibits countries from sending an aircraft carrier heavier than 15,000 tons through the Straits. Since the ship was built in the Ukrainian SSR, &quot;Admiral Kuznetsov&quot; would have been stuck in the Black Sea if Turkey had refused permission to pass into the Mediterranean Sea. However, the Convention does not limit the displacement of capital ships operated by Black Sea powers. Turkey allowed &quot;Admiral Kuznetsov&quot; to transit the Straits, and no signatory to the Montreux Convention ever issued a formal protest of her classification as an aircraft-carrying cruiser.

==History==
===1982–1991: construction and dispute of ownership===

&quot;Admiral Flota Sovetskogo Soyuza Kuznetsov&quot;, constructed at Chernomorskiy Shipyard, also known as Nikolayev South Shipyard, in Nikolayev within the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic (SSR) was launched in 1985, and became fully operational in 1995. An official ceremony marking the start of construction took place on 1 September 1982; in fact she was laid down in 1983. The vessel was first named &quot;Riga&quot;, then the name was changed to &quot;Leonid Brezhnev&quot;, this was followed by &quot;Tbilisi&quot;. Finally, on 4 October 1990, she was renamed &quot;Admiral Flota Sovetskogo Soyuza N.G. Kuznetsov&quot;, referred to in short as &quot;Admiral Kuznetsov&quot;. The ship was 71% complete by mid-1989. In November 1989 she undertook her first aircraft operations.

After the 1991 Soviet coup d&#x27;état attempt and the independence of Ukraine, Ukrainian president Leonid Kravchuk sent a telegram to the ship&#x27;s commander Viktor Yarygin, declaring that &quot;Admiral Kuznetsov&quot; was Ukrainian property, and that the ship should remain in Sevastopol until the Ukrainian government made a decision on her fate. Deputy commander of the Northern Fleet Yuri Ustimenko urgently arrived from the Arctic to pre-empt the Ukrainian government and gave the order for &quot;Admiral Kuznetsov&quot; to sail to Vidyayevo so the ship could remain in the Soviet fleet. In December 1991, she sailed from the Black Sea to join the Northern Fleet.

===1995–1996 deployment===
From 23 December 1995 through 22 March 1996 &quot;Admiral Kuznetsov&quot; made her first 90-day Mediterranean deployment with 13 Su-33, 2 Su-25 UTG, and 11 helicopters aboard. The deployment of the Russian navy&#x27;s flagship was undertaken to mark the 300th anniversary of the establishment of the Russian navy in October 1996. The deployment was to allow the carrier, which was accompanied by a frigate, destroyer and oiler, to adapt to the Mediterranean climate and to perform continuous flight operations until 21:00 each day, as the Barents Sea only receives about one hour of sunlight during that time of year. During that period the carrier lay at anchor off the port of Tartus, Syria. Her aircraft often made flights close to the Israeli shore line and were escorted by Israeli F-16s. During the deployment, a severe water shortage occurred due to evaporators breaking down.

===1997–1998 overhaul===
The ship was immobilized in a Northern Fleet shipyard at the end of 1997 after repairs had been halted due to a lack of funding. After the overhaul was completed, the ship returned to active service in the Northern fleet on 3 November 1998.

===2000–2006===

&quot;Admiral Kuznetsov&quot; remained in port for two years before preparing for another Mediterranean deployment scheduled for the winter of 2000–2001. This deployment was canceled due to the explosion and sinking of the nuclear-powered submarine . &quot;Admiral Kuznetsov&quot; participated in the &quot;Kursk&quot; rescue and salvage operations in late 2000. Plans for further operations were postponed or cancelled. In late 2003 and early 2004, &quot;Admiral Kuznetsov&quot; went to sea for inspection and sea trials. In October 2004, the ship participated in a fleet exercise of the Russian Navy in the Atlantic Ocean. During a September 2005 exercise, a Su-33 accidentally fell from the carrier into the Atlantic Ocean. On 27 September 2006, it was announced that &quot;Admiral Kuznetsov&quot; would return to service in the Northern Fleet by the year&#x27;s end, following another modernization to correct some technical issues. Admiral Vladimir Masorin, Commander-in-Chief of the Russian Navy, also stated that Su-33 fighters assigned to her would return after undergoing their own maintenance and refits.

===2007–2008 deployment===
From 5 December 2007 through 3 February 2008 &quot;Admiral Kuznetsov&quot; made her second Mediterranean deployment. On 11 December 2007, &quot;Admiral Kuznetsov&quot; passed by Norwegian oil platforms in the North Sea, outside Bergen, Norway. Su-33 fighters and Kamov helicopters were launched from &quot;Admiral Kuznetsov&quot; while within international waters; Norwegian helicopter services to the rigs were halted due to the collision risk with the Russian aircraft. &quot;Admiral Kuznetsov&quot; later participated in an exercise on the Mediterranean Sea, together with 11 other Russian surface ships and 47 aircraft, performing three tactical training missions using live and simulated air and surface missile launches. &quot;Admiral Kuznetsov&quot; and her escorts returned to Severomorsk on 3 February 2008. Following maintenance, she returned to sea on 11 October 2008 for the Stability 2008 strategic exercises held in the Barents Sea. On 12 October 2008, Russian President Dmitry Medvedev visited the ship during the exercise.

===2008–2009 deployment===
From 5 December 2008 through 2 March 2009, &quot;Admiral Kuznetsov&quot; made her third Mediterranean deployment. On 5 December 2008, the carrier and several other vessels left Severomorsk for the Atlantic for a combat training tour, including joint drills with Russia&#x27;s Black Sea Fleet and visits to several Mediterranean ports. On 7 January 2009, a small fire broke out onboard &quot;Admiral Kuznetsov&quot; while anchored off Turkey. The fire, caused by a short circuit, led to the death of one crew member by carbon monoxide poisoning. On 16 February 2009, she was involved in a large oil spill, along with other Russian naval vessels, while refuelling off the south coast of Ireland. On 2 March 2009, &quot;Admiral Kuznetsov&quot; returned to Severomorsk, and in September 2010, she left dry dock after scheduled repairs and preparations for a training mission in the Barents Sea, later that month.

===2011–2012 deployment===

The Russian Main Navy Staff announced that &quot;Admiral Kuznetsov&quot; would begin a deployment to the Atlantic and Mediterranean in December 2011. In November 2011, it was announced that &quot;Admiral Kuznetsov&quot; would lead a squadron to Russia&#x27;s naval facility in Tartus.

A Russian naval spokesman announced via the &quot;Izvestia&quot; daily that &quot;The call of the Russian ships in Tartus should not be seen as a gesture towards what is going on in Syria... This was planned already in 2010 when there were no such events there&quot; noting that &quot;Admiral Kuznetsov&quot; would also be making port calls in Beirut, Genoa and Cyprus. On 29 November 2011, Army General Nikolay Makarov, Chief of the Russian General Staff, said that Russian ships in the Mediterranean were due to exercises rather than events in Syria, and noted that &quot;Admiral Kuznetsov&quot;″s size does not allow her to moor in Tartus.

On 6 December 2011, &quot;Admiral Kuznetsov&quot; and her escort ships departed the Northern Fleet home base in Severomorsk for a Mediterranean deployment to exercise with ships from the Russian Baltic and Black Sea Fleets. On 12 December 2011, &quot;Admiral Kuznetsov&quot; and her escorts, were spotted northeast of Orkney off the coast of northern Scotland, the first such time she had deployed near the UK. shadowed the group for a week; due to severe weather, the group took shelter in international waters in the Moray Firth, some from the UK coast. &quot;Admiral Kuznetsov&quot; then sailed around the top of Scotland and into the Atlantic past western Ireland, where she conducted flight operations with her Sukhoi Su-33 &#x27;Flanker&#x27; jets and Kamov Ka-27 helicopters in international airspace. On 8 January 2012, &quot;Admiral Kuznetsov&quot; anchored near shore outside Tartus while other ships from her escort entered the port to use the leased Russian naval support facility to replenish their supplies, after which all ships continued their deployment on 9 January. In February 2012, &quot;Admiral Kuznetsov&quot; returned to her home base of Severomorsk, having lost propulsion during the return voyage in the Bay of Biscay. The tugboat took the vessel in tow and aided &quot;Admiral Kuznetsov&quot;″s return.

===2013–2014 deployment===
On 1 June 2013, it was announced that the ship would return to the Mediterranean by the end of the year, and on 17 December, &quot;Admiral Kuznetsov&quot; departed her home base for the Mediterranean. On 1 January 2014, &quot;Admiral Kuznetsov&quot; celebrated New Year&#x27;s Day while at anchor in international waters of the Moray Firth off northeast Scotland. The anchorage allowed replenishment of ship&#x27;s supplies and respite for the crew from stormy weather off the southwest coast of Norway. She then proceeded to the Mediterranean Sea, docking in Cyprus on 28 February. In May 2014, the ship and her task group: the &quot;Kirov&quot;-class nuclear-powered cruiser &quot;Petr Velikiy&quot;; tankers &quot;Sergey Osipov&quot;, &quot;Kama&quot; and &quot;Dubna&quot;; the ocean-going tug &quot;Altay&quot; and the &quot;Minsk&quot; (part of the Black Sea Fleet), passed the UK while sailing for home. Despite financial and technical problems, resulting in limited operations for the ship, it was expected that &quot;Admiral Kuznetsov&quot; would remain in active service until at least 2030.

===2016–2017 deployment===

&quot;Admiral Kuznetsov&quot; set sail on 15 October 2016 from Severomorsk for the Mediterranean, accompanied by seven other vessels of the Russian Navy including the nuclear-powered battlecruiser and two s. The carrier was accompanied by an ocean-going tugboat as a precaution due to potential propulsion failure. The carrier air wing included six to eight Sukhoi Su-33 fighters, four MiG-29KR/KUBR multi-role aircraft, Ka-52K &quot;Katran&quot; navalised attack helicopters, Ka-31R &quot;Helix&quot; AEW&amp;C helicopters and Ka-27PS &quot;Helix-D&quot; search and rescue helicopters. All the Su-33 aircraft had been upgraded with the Gefest SVP-24 bombsights for free-fall bombs, giving them a limited ground-attack capability. Analysts suggested that a lack of trained pilots restricted the number of fixed-wing aircraft that could be deployed from the carrier.

In the largest Russian military deployment since the Cold War, the carrier battle group sailed through the English Channel on 21 October. The British Royal Navy responded to this test by sending two of its own ships to escort the Russian warships. On 26 October 2016, the ship was reported to have passed through the Strait of Gibraltar and refuelled at sea off North Africa the following day. On 3 November 2016, the carrier battle group paused off the east coast of Crete. On 14 November 2016, a MiG-29K crashed into the sea after taking off from the carrier. The pilot ejected safely from the plane and was rescued by helicopter. The plane had run out of fuel waiting to land while the crew was attempting to repair a broken arresting cable. The carrier commander could have diverted the aircraft to land at a nearby airbase, but hesitated in the hope that the arresting gear would be repaired in time.

On 15 November 2016—as part of a large-scale engagement—&quot;Admiral Kuznetsov&quot; launched Su-33 strikes against the positions of terrorist groups Islamic State and Al-Nusra in the provinces of Idlib and Homs in Syria. This was the first time the aircraft carrier had ever participated in combat operations. The Russian Defence Ministry later reported that at least 30 militants had been killed as a result of those strikes, including three field commanders, among them Abul Baha al-Asfari, leader of Al-Nusra reserve forces in the provinces of Homs and Aleppo. Al-Asfari had also planned and led several insurgent attacks on the city of Aleppo. The Su-33s reportedly used precision-guided munitions. On 3 December 2016, an Su-33 crashed into the sea after attempting to land on the carrier. The pilot was safely recovered by a search and rescue helicopter. Later it was revealed that the arresting gear mechanism had failed to hold the aircraft, and was damaged in the attempt. Following this second incident, the air wing was transferred to shore at Khmeimim Air Base near Latakia to continue military operations while the carrier&#x27;s arresting gear issues were addressed.

In early January 2017, it was announced that &quot;Admiral Kuznetsov&quot; and her battlegroup would be ceasing operations in Syria and returning to Russia as part of a scaling back of Russian involvement in the conflict. During her deployment off Syria, aircraft from &quot;Admiral Kuznetsov&quot; carried out 420 combat missions, hitting 1,252 hostile targets. On 11 January 2017, &quot;Admiral Kuznetsov&quot; was conducting live-fire training exercises in the Mediterranean off the coast of Libya. The Russian defence ministry announced that on 11 January, &quot;Admiral Kuznetsov&quot; was visited by Libya&#x27;s military leader Khalifa Haftar, who had a video conference with Russian defence minister Sergey Shoygu while on board.

On 20 January, &quot;Admiral Kuznetsov&quot; was sighted passing west through the Strait of Gibraltar and six days later, she was escorted back along the English Channel by three Eurofighter Typhoons of the Royal Air Force and the Type 23 frigate . It arrived back in Severomorsk on 9 February. On 23 February 2017, President Vladimir Putin said that the ship&#x27;s deployment to the Mediterranean had been his personal initiative.

===2017–present: overhaul===

&quot;Admiral Kuznetsov&quot; started an overhaul and modernization program in the first quarter of 2017 to extend her service life by 25 years. The ship was to undergo modernization at the 35th Ship Repair Plant in Murmansk between 2018 and 2021, upgrading the ship&#x27;s power plant and electronics systems.

On 30 October 2018, the ship was damaged when Russia&#x27;s biggest floating drydock, , sank, causing one of its 70-ton cranes to crash onto the ship&#x27;s flight deck, leaving behind a hole. One person was reported missing and four were injured as the drydock sank in Kola Bay. The ship was in the process of being removed from the dock when the incident occurred and was towed to a nearby yard after the incident. The cost of repairing the damage was estimated to be RUB 70million (about US$1million). The fallen crane was removed by the end of 2018.

In late May 2019, repair work of the aircraft carrier was underway. That same month, it was also announced that two graving docks in Murmansk would be merged and enlarged to accommodate the ship, the work taking a year and a half. In December 2019, a major fire broke out on board the ship as work continued on the ship&#x27;s refit. Two people died and more than a dozen were injured in the fire, and damage to the ship was estimated at US$8million.

In June 2021, Vladimir Korolev, Vice President of the United Shipbuilding Corporation announced that the overhaul and upgrade of &quot;Admiral Kuznetsov&quot; was expected to be completed by the first half of 2023. The avionics, flight deck with the ski jump, electric equipment, and the power plant were expected to be replaced as part of this process. The carrier would also receive a new fully domestic takeoff and landing control system, with the onboard airpower remaining the same. Due to the lack of a large enough drydock, a new drydock was being constructed in Murmansk. In November 2021 it was reported that &quot;bad weather&quot; had caused significant delays to repair work which might push back the completion of the refit by more than one year.

The ship was finally dry-docked on 20 May 2022. By 27 July 2022, the drydock had been drained, allowing repairs on the aircraft carrier to commence. On 15 August 2022, the head of the United Shipbuilding Corporation confirmed that &quot;Admiral Kuznetsov&quot; would be handed over to the Russian Navy in the first quarter of 2024, and that the ship is expected to remain in service for at least another 25 years. On 22 December 2022, as the ship was being prepared to leave drydock, another fire occurred. The fire was extinguished, and no casualties were reported. On 25 January 2023, it was reported that &quot;Admiral Kuznetsov&quot; would leave the drydock in February 2023. The aircraft carrier was removed from the drydock on 21 February 2023, although it was initially reported that the operation had been suspended due to heavy fog.

Prior to the December 2022 fire the overhaul of the carrier was projected to last into 2024.

In September 2024, an OSINT analyst revealed that the &quot;Admiral Kuznetsov&quot;&#x27;s crew of ca. 1500 had been reassigned to the Russian Army for combat duty in Ukraine. This has fueled speculation that there is no plan to make &quot;Admiral Kuznetsov&quot; seaworthy again.

==Gallery==
==See also==
* List of aircraft carriers

==References==
==External links==

* SU-25 at Faqs.org
* Video clip of Su-33 operating on the deck of &quot;Kuznetsov&quot;
* Aircraft cruiser Admiral Kuznetsov - on Russian News Agency TASS Official Infographic 
* &quot;Admiral Kuznetsov&quot; rejoining the Northern Fleet at RIA Novosti</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q17205" start="115" end="131" title="aircraft carrier" label="aircraft carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430687" start="139" end="155" title="aircraft cruiser" label="aircraft cruiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q212357" start="206" end="214" title="flagship" label="flagship"/>
<link wikidata="Q465283" start="222" end="234" title="Russian Navy" label="Russian navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634589" start="257" end="275" title="Black Sea Shipyard" label="Black Sea Shipyard"/>
<link wikidata="Q41572" start="331" end="340" title="Mykolaiv" label="Nikolayev"/>
<link wikidata="Q133356" start="352" end="387" title="Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic" label="Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q596643" start="408" end="416" title="Ship launch" label="launched"/>
<link wikidata="Q596643" start="532" end="540" title="Ceremonial ship launching" label="launched"/>
<link wikidata="Q1988181" start="573" end="582" title="sea trial" label="sea trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1986828" start="624" end="664" title="Admiral of the Fleet of the Soviet Union" label="Admiral of the Fleet of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q342462" start="665" end="695" title="Nikolai Kuznetsov (admiral)" label="Nikolay Gerasimovich Kuznetsov"/>
<link wikidata="Q14475832" start="717" end="729" title="Ship commissioning" label="commissioned"/>
<link wikidata="Q796754" start="737" end="748" title="Soviet Navy" label="Soviet Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q923085" start="818" end="829" title="sister ship" label="sister ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="879" end="891" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="950" end="957" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="961" end="966" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q74881" start="981" end="987" title="Dalian" label="Dalian"/>
<link wikidata="Q157833" start="1122" end="1134" title="embezzlement" label="embezzlement"/>
<link wikidata="Q161591" start="1200" end="1208" title="Kola Bay" label="Kola Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1763" start="1210" end="1218" title="Murmansk" label="Murmansk"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="1981" end="1999" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430687" start="2102" end="2127" title="aircraft cruiser" label="aircraft-carrying cruiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q332637" start="2354" end="2366" title="Sukhoi Su-33" label="Sukhoi Su-33"/>
<link wikidata="Q898788" start="2383" end="2398" title="Air supremacy" label="air superiority"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164772" start="2400" end="2413" title="Combat air patrol" label="fleet defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050818" start="2419" end="2430" title="Close air support" label="air support"/>
<link wikidata="Q935181" start="2472" end="2484" title="fire support" label="fire support"/>
<link wikidata="Q348120" start="2488" end="2506" title="Amphibious warfare" label="amphibious assault"/>
<link wikidata="Q3306321" start="2508" end="2522" title="Aerial reconnaissance" label="reconnaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q189929" start="2540" end="2550" title="naval mine" label="naval mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q505929" start="2582" end="2593" title="Kamov Ka-27" label="Kamov Ka-27"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073579" start="2627" end="2649" title="anti-submarine warfare" label="anti-submarine warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q741964" start="2651" end="2668" title="search and rescue" label="search and rescue"/>
<link wikidata="Q27960872" start="2765" end="2773" title="Aircraft ski-jump" label="ski-jump"/>
<link wikidata="Q301897" start="2792" end="2795" title="Bow (ship)" label="bow"/>
<link wikidata="Q29426" start="2873" end="2884" title="afterburner" label="afterburner"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3141" end="3156" title="Takeoff#Required speeds" label="clearance speed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143706" start="3340" end="3358" title="Surface-to-surface missile" label="surface-to-surface"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072126" start="3369" end="3381" title="P-700 Granit" label="P-700 Granit"/>
<link wikidata="Q221403" start="3383" end="3402" title="NATO reporting name" label="NATO reporting name"/>
<link wikidata="Q898757" start="3687" end="3692" title="mazut" label="mazut"/>
<link wikidata="Q869500" start="4133" end="4152" title="Montreux Convention Regarding the Regime of the Straits" label="Montreux Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051401" start="4191" end="4206" title="Turkish Straits" label="Turkish Straits"/>
<link wikidata="Q166" start="4428" end="4437" title="Black Sea" label="Black Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="4488" end="4505" title="Mediterranean Sea" label="Mediterranean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q5636358" start="4550" end="4562" title="Displacement (ship)" label="displacement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634589" start="4984" end="5008" title="Black Sea Shipyard" label="Nikolayev South Shipyard"/>
<link wikidata="Q41572" start="5013" end="5022" title="Mykolaiv" label="Nikolayev"/>
<link wikidata="Q133356" start="5034" end="5069" title="Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic" label="Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q596643" start="5080" end="5088" title="Ceremonial ship launching" label="launched"/>
<link wikidata="Q14592615" start="5239" end="5248" title="Keel laying" label="laid down"/>
<link wikidata="Q221382" start="5674" end="5710" title="1991 Soviet coup d&amp;#x27;état attempt" label="1991 Soviet coup d&amp;#x27;état attempt"/>
<link wikidata="Q277182" start="5719" end="5742" title="Declaration of Independence of Ukraine" label="independence of Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q189732" start="5764" end="5779" title="Leonid Kravchuk" label="Leonid Kravchuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q7525" start="5945" end="5955" title="Sevastopol" label="Sevastopol"/>
<link wikidata="Q613729" start="5966" end="5986" title="Government of Ukraine" label="Ukrainian government"/>
<link wikidata="Q936613" start="6040" end="6054" title="Northern Fleet" label="Northern Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249732" start="6204" end="6213" title="Vidyayevo" label="Vidyayevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q465283" start="6562" end="6574" title="Russian Navy" label="Russian navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q212357" start="6582" end="6590" title="flagship" label="flagship"/>
<link wikidata="Q161705" start="6762" end="6769" title="frigate" label="frigate"/>
<link wikidata="Q174736" start="6771" end="6780" title="destroyer" label="destroyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q162986" start="6785" end="6790" title="Replenishment oiler" label="oiler"/>
<link wikidata="Q45823" start="6903" end="6914" title="Barents Sea" label="Barents Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q174916" start="7043" end="7049" title="Tartus" label="Tartus"/>
<link wikidata="Q100026" start="7151" end="7155" title="F-16" label="F-16"/>
<link wikidata="Q5416062" start="7221" end="7232" title="evaporator (marine)" label="evaporators"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136114" start="7727" end="7748" title="Kursk submarine disaster" label="explosion and sinking"/>
<link wikidata="Q1988181" start="8044" end="8053" title="sea trial" label="sea trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138858" start="8478" end="8494" title="Vladimir Masorin" label="Vladimir Masorin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1693" start="8885" end="8894" title="North Sea" label="North Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q26793" start="8904" end="8910" title="Bergen" label="Bergen"/>
<link wikidata="Q193898" start="9461" end="9472" title="Severomorsk" label="Severomorsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q7595720" start="9563" end="9577" title="Stability 2008" label="Stability 2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q218295" start="9643" end="9660" title="President of Russia" label="Russian President"/>
<link wikidata="Q23530" start="9661" end="9676" title="Dmitry Medvedev" label="Dmitry Medvedev"/>
<link wikidata="Q934022" start="10019" end="10034" title="Black Sea Fleet" label="Black Sea Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q125367" start="10261" end="10286" title="carbon monoxide poisoning" label="carbon monoxide poisoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q7984870" start="10329" end="10346" title="West Cork oil spill" label="a large oil spill"/>
<link wikidata="Q574818" start="10926" end="10964" title="Russian naval facility in Tartus" label="Russia&amp;#x27;s naval facility in Tartus"/>
<link wikidata="Q753932" start="11017" end="11025" title="Izvestia" label="Izvestia"/>
<link wikidata="Q178810" start="11129" end="11154" title="Syrian Civil War" label="what is going on in Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q3820" start="11311" end="11317" title="Beirut" label="Beirut"/>
<link wikidata="Q1449" start="11319" end="11324" title="Genoa" label="Genoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q229" start="11329" end="11335" title="Cyprus" label="Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q581931" start="11371" end="11386" title="Nikolay Yegorovich Makarov" label="Nikolay Makarov"/>
<link wikidata="Q4315169" start="11388" end="11422" title="Chief of the General Staff (Russia)" label="Chief of the Russian General Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q100166" start="11929" end="11935" title="Orkney" label="Orkney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360927" start="12130" end="12141" title="Moray Firth" label="Moray Firth"/>
<link wikidata="Q41573" start="12841" end="12854" title="Bay of Biscay" label="Bay of Biscay"/>
<link wikidata="Q3052778" start="13598" end="13670" title="Russian battlecruiser Pyotr Velikiy" label="&amp;quot;Kirov&amp;quot;-class nuclear-powered cruiser &amp;quot;Petr Velikiy&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q122460753" start="13799" end="13804" title="Russian landing ship Minsk" label="Minsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q191826" start="14354" end="14361" title="tugboat" label="tugboat"/>
<link wikidata="Q477983" start="14419" end="14435" title="carrier air wing" label="carrier air wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155823" start="14486" end="14499" title="Mikoyan MiG-29K" label="MiG-29KR/KUBR"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14521" end="14546" title="Kamov_Ka-50#Ka-52K_%22Katran%22" label="Ka-52K &amp;quot;Katran&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1723248" start="14577" end="14601" title="Kamov Ka-31" label="Ka-31R &amp;quot;Helix&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q161341" start="14602" end="14611" title="Airborne early warning and control" label="AEW&amp;amp;C"/>
<link wikidata="Q30897206" start="14744" end="14750" title="SVP-24" label="SVP-24"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454201" start="14766" end="14781" title="Unguided bomb" label="free-fall bombs"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="15020" end="15028" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434110" start="15034" end="15054" title="carrier battle group" label="carrier battle group"/>
<link wikidata="Q34640" start="15074" end="15089" title="English Channel" label="English Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761288" start="15093" end="15103" title="Trafalgar Day" label="21 October"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="15117" end="15127" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q36124" start="15284" end="15303" title="Strait of Gibraltar" label="Strait of Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q34374" start="15435" end="15440" title="Crete" label="Crete"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364312" start="15695" end="15710" title="Arresting gear" label="arresting cable"/>
<link wikidata="Q27894014" start="15907" end="15929" title="Aleppo offensive (November–December 2016)" label="large-scale engagement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429253" start="16025" end="16038" title="Islamic State" label="Islamic State"/>
<link wikidata="Q32748" start="16043" end="16051" title="Al-Nusra Front" label="Al-Nusra"/>
<link wikidata="Q233218" start="16059" end="16077" title="Idlib Governorate" label="provinces of Idlib"/>
<link wikidata="Q131301" start="16082" end="16086" title="Homs" label="Homs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146492" start="16190" end="16214" title="Ministry of Defence (Russia)" label="Russian Defence Ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q41183" start="16432" end="16438" title="Aleppo" label="Aleppo"/>
<link wikidata="Q32050" start="16551" end="16576" title="precision-guided munition" label="precision-guided munition"/>
<link wikidata="Q21582584" start="16930" end="16947" title="Khmeimim Air Base" label="Khmeimim Air Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q200030" start="16953" end="16960" title="Latakia" label="Latakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016" start="17552" end="17557" title="Libya" label="Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q2298768" start="17692" end="17706" title="Khalifa Haftar" label="Khalifa Haftar"/>
<link wikidata="Q32024" start="17765" end="17778" title="Sergey Shoygu" label="Sergey Shoygu"/>
<link wikidata="Q151384" start="17975" end="17994" title="Eurofighter Typhoon" label="Eurofighter Typhoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="18003" end="18018" title="Royal Air Force" label="Royal Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1264384" start="18027" end="18042" title="Type 23 frigate" label="Type 23 frigate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7747" start="18122" end="18136" title="Vladimir Putin" label="Vladimir Putin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1763" start="18476" end="18484" title="Murmansk" label="Murmansk"/>
<link wikidata="Q161591" start="18842" end="18850" title="Kola Bay" label="Kola Bay"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19243" end="19256" title="Dry_dock#Graving" label="graving docks"/>
<link wikidata="Q4330413" start="19633" end="19664" title="United Shipbuilding Corporation" label="United Shipbuilding Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059178" start="21299" end="21304" title="OSINT" label="OSINT"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031386" start="21412" end="21424" title="Russian Army" label="Russian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q110999040" start="21429" end="21451" title="Russian invasion of Ukraine" label="combat duty in Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1646209" start="21586" end="21611" title="List of aircraft carriers" label="List of aircraft carriers"/>
<link wikidata="Q223799" start="21779" end="21803" title="TASS" label="Russian News Agency TASS"/>
<link wikidata="Q845734" start="21813" end="21824" title="Infographic" label="Infographic"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="29311" wikidata="Q1324599" url="?curid=29311" title="Subaru Forester">
<text>The is a compact crossover SUV that has been manufactured by Subaru since 1997. The first generation was built on the platform of the Impreza in the style of a taller station wagon, a style that continued to the second generation, while the third-generation model onwards moved towards a crossover SUV design. A performance model was available for the second-generation Forester in Japan as the Forester STi.

== First generation (SF; 1997)==
The Forester was first introduced as the Streega concept at the 1995 Tokyo Motor Show and became available for sale in Japan in February 1997, reaching the U.S. market later that year for the 1998 model year. As one of the first crossover SUVs, it was reportedly inspired by Volkswagen. Built in the style of a station wagon, the Forester featured a taller stance, higher H-point seating, and a standard all-wheel drive drivetrain. Subaru marketed it with the slogan &quot;SUV tough, Car Easy&quot;. It utilized the Impreza platform but was powered by the larger 2.5-liter DOHC EJ25D engine from the Subaru Outback, producing 123 kW (165 hp) at 5,600 rpm and 220 Nm (162 lb-ft) of torque at 4,000 rpm.
===Japan===
In its domestic market, the Forester replaced the Impreza Gravel Express, known in the US as the Subaru Outback Sport. However, the Outback Sport remained in production for the U.S. market. The Forester appeared after the introduction of the Nissan Rasheen in Japan with a similar appearance, and the Forester&#x27;s Japanese competitors include the Toyota RAV4, Mitsubishi RVR, and the Suzuki Grand Vitara. Because of the Forester&#x27;s low center of gravity, it meets the United States federal safety standards for passenger vehicles and does not require a &quot;risk of rollover&quot; warning label on the driver&#x27;s visor. Size- and price-wise, it fits between the shared Impreza platform and the larger Legacy.

The automatic transmissions used on AWD-equipped vehicles will normally send 60% of the engine&#x27;s torque to the front wheels and 40% to the rear wheels, using a computer-controlled, continuously variable, multi-plate transfer clutch. When the transmission detects a speed difference between the front and rear axle sets, the transmission progressively sends power to the rear wheels. Under slip conditions, it can achieve an equal split in front and rear axle speeds.

When accelerating or driving uphill, the vehicle&#x27;s weight shifts rearward, reducing front-wheel traction, causing the transmission to automatically send torque to the rear wheels to compensate. When braking or driving downhill, the vehicle&#x27;s weight shifts towards the front, reducing rear-wheel traction. The transmission again compensates by sending torque to the front wheels for better steering control and braking performance. If the automatic is placed in reverse or first gear, the transmission divides the torque 50/50 to both front and rear wheels. The manual transmission cars are set up with a near 50/50 torque split as a base setting, and it varies from there. Essentially, manual cars are set up with more bias towards the rear than automatic cars.

===Australia===
There was a change in body styling for all 2001–2002 models, and the 2001/2002 GT spec also had a change in engine management and power output was increased from 125 to .

===United States===
The U.S. market first got the car starting in the fall of 1997 as a 1998 model. The 1998 had the 2.5-liter DOHC (EJ25D) engine, and in 1999+ models changed to a 2.5-liter SOHC naturally aspirated engine (no turbocharged engines). In 2000, for MY2001, Subaru updated the exterior with a modest facelift to the front, rear, sides, and the interior&#x27;s dashboard.

The trim levels were the basic model &quot;L&quot; and the fully equipped &quot;S&quot; for the USA versions.

Forester L came with a high level of standard equipment, including ABS, air conditioning, power windows, power locks, cruise control, digital temperature gauge, multi-reflector halogen headlights, fog lights, roof rack, rear window defogger, trailer harness connector, reclining front bucket seats with adjustable lumbar support, tilt steering, tinted glass, AM/FM/cassette stereo with its antenna laminated in the left-rear quarter window. Notably new in 2001 were the three-point seatbelts for all five seating positions, including force limiters in front and height-adjustable shoulder belt anchors for front and rear outboard positions, plus rear seat headrests for all three seating positions.

Forester S adds a viscous limited-slip differential for the 2000 Model Year, rear disc brakes, 16 × 6.5-inch alloy wheels with 215/60R16 tires (the L uses 15 × 6-inch steel wheels), upgraded moquette upholstery, heated front seats with net storage pockets in back, dual vanity mirrors, heated side-view mirrors, heated windshield wipers, and keyless entry. New equipment for 2001 included Titanium pearl paint for the bumpers and cladding; six-disc in-dash CD sound system; leather-wrapped steering wheel, shift knob, and handbrake handle; variable intermittent wipers with de-icers and driver&#x27;s side fin; and the five-spoke alloy wheels. Some models were equipped with the $1,000 optional premium package on the Forester S, including monotone paint (Sedona Red Pearl), power moonroof, front side-impact airbags, and gold accent wheels. Other options were the $800 automatic transmission, $39 chrome tailpipe cover, and $183 auto-dimming rear-view mirror with compass, bringing the sticker price to $25,412 including $495 delivery (U.S. dollars quoted).
== Second generation (SG; 2002)==
The second generation was introduced as a 2003 model at the 2002 Chicago Auto Show, based on the new Impreza platform, featuring several fine-tune improvements over the past model. The 2003 Forester features weight-saving refinements such as an aluminum hood, perforated rails, and a hydro-formed front sub-frame. The most noticeable change was the offering of 2.5 L versions (normally aspirated and turbocharged) and in the U.S. the introduction of the turbocharged 2.5-liter model.

In the United States, the naturally aspirated X (previously L) and XS (previously S) were released in 2003. In 2004, the turbocharged XT trim was released in the USA. However, a turbocharged version was available since the late 1990s elsewhere in the world. The X and XS models feature a 2.5 L SOHC EJ253 engine, while the XT model features a 2.5 L turbocharged DOHC engine. Both engines have timing belt (camshaft). The XT model uses the same Mitsubishi Motors TD04 turbocharger used in the Subaru Impreza WRX. All Forester 2.5 L engines are of the interference engine type. The flat engine can be mounted lower in the car and gives the Forester a lower centre of gravity than other 4x4s or soft roaders. The two-litre petrol boxer-four engined version is reported to do of fuel in town.

Starting with the 2004 XT, the turbocharged version had Active valve control system cylinder heads. The i-AVLS (active valve lift system) became standard on the naturally aspirated version of the Forester in 2006. This increased horsepower and torque figures to 173 HP and 166 ft-lbs. The 2006 XT received a higher compression ratio to 8.4:1 from 8.2:1. This increased the XT&#x27;s power to 230 HP and 235 ft-lbs.

For the 2006 model year, Subaru gave the SG Forester a facelift, using redesigned headlights, tail lights, bonnet, grille, front bumper, and side moldings.

===Safety===
MY03-04 Models has a 4-Star ANCAP safety rating. MY05 Forester Model had a mid-life update, which increased its ANCAP safety rating to 5 Stars.

In 2006, the turbocharged engine (powering the Forester XT) was awarded International Engine of the Year. This engine is also used in the Subaru Impreza WRX, as well as the re-badged Saab 9-2X Aero.

===Maintenance===
All of the 2.5-liter 4-cylinder engines for this generation have a timing belt made of rubber and cord. A belt must be replaced at . These engines are interference engines, meaning that if the timing belt breaks or stretches, the pistons will hit the valves, requiring an engine teardown, and a likely rebuild. Also, if this belt is replaced around 105,000 miles, it is a good idea to change the water pump, thermostat, belt tensioner and all the idler pulleys for this belt. The water pump and thermostat are behind this belt. In Australia for the Series II (MY06) cars, Subaru changed the recommended service interval for the timing belt replacement from 100,000 kilometers to 125,000 kilometers. The 2.5-liter 4-cylinder engine in the first-generation Foresters featured head gaskets which were prone to premature failure. For 2003 and later, this problem was addressed with a revised, higher performing design, but is still a problem.

===United States===

For the U.S. market, the car was offered with either the 2.5 SOHC naturally aspirated engine, or the 2.5 DOHC turbocharged version added in 2004. In 2005, the L.L. Bean edition was added. In 2006, the styling was updated, Active valve lift system was added to non-turbo engines to improve power and efficiency, the XS model was deleted, and the Premium model was added. In 2007, a bottle holder was added to front door panels, the &#x27;Sports&#x27; trim level was added, which changed some interior and exterior features and added the VDT/VDC transmission to the XT Sports turbo Automatic model. In 2008, TPMS was added, the L.L. Bean model deleted rear load-leveling suspension but gained a radio upgrade, and the XT Turbo Limited models got the VDT/VDC Auto transmission.

===Australia===

The Forester had three main models available in Australia until July 2005, which are X, XS and XT. Both the X and XS are equipped with the naturally aspirated 2.5 L engine producing , while the XT received the turbo engine with a higher output of . From the Series II which was released in August 2005, the engine was upgraded to for the X and XS and for the XT grade.

Following a General Motors (GM) and Subaru tie-up in 1999, GM considered rebadging the Forester as a Holden in the Australian market as the brand lacked an SUV offering. In exchange, GM would provide Subaru the Holden VY Ute. Subaru considered naming the rebadged Ute the Subaru Brumby. According to former Subaru Australia managing director Nick Senior, the plan was called off due to objection from Subaru Australia.

===India===
The Forester was sold in India by General Motors India as the Chevrolet Forester. Introduced in 2003, it was the first Chevrolet-badged model released in India, as previous GM models are badged as Opels. Sales of the Chevrolet Forester ended in 2007 since General Motors no longer holds an ownership stake in Subaru&#x27;s parent company, Fuji Heavy Industries.

===China===
A look-alike was produced by Yema Auto and known as the Yema F99 in China. It was a similar design to the pre-facelifted model. Production ran from 2012 to 2014. The engine was a 1.5l 4 cylinder mated to a 5-speed manual gearbox. The car was not related to the Forester even though they look very similar. The Forester was imported to China from 2004 until 2007 in the following models:

2004 Version sold in China:
*2.0XT Automatic

2006 Version (Facelift) sold in China:
*2.0X Manual
*2.0X Automatic
*2.5XT Automatic

2007 Version (Facelift) sold in China:
*2.0X Manual
*2.0X Automatic
*2.5XT Automatic

=== Forester STi (SF and SG; 2004) ===
In 2004, Subaru launched the Forester STi for the Japanese market only. A &quot;sportier&quot; version of the standard second-gen (SG) Forester, the Forester STi incorporated most of the running components from the WRX STi, with several other changes. It was never sold outside of Japan.

The Forester STi exterior was modified with additions such as a redesigned front fascia with new headlights, front bumper, grille and &quot;STi&quot; badged covered fog lights, like those seen on the Impreza WRX STi. The rear fascia was also redesigned with revised taillights, a revised rear bumper, and an added rear spoiler.

Multiple changes were made to the engine and the mechanical components of the Forester to create the Forester STi. They include the engine, which received a 2.5-liter turbocharged flat-four [block designated EJ255, not from the WRX STi which used a block designated EJ257], making and 186.0 lb-ft of torque. While the block was not shared with the STI, the Forester STI shared the STI’s better breathing manifold, painted in matt crinkle red, allowing it to produce more power and torque than other 2.5l EJ255 engined SG9 Foresters sold in AU/NZ from 2003-2008. 

A much stronger six-speed manual gearbox, from the WRX STI, a larger intercooler, and a low-back-pressure exhaust system were also added. The top three ratios of the gearbox are 14 percent taller to match the engine&#x27;s torque curve, raising the vehicle’s top speed and allowing more relaxed highway cruising at lower rpm . As the result, the 2006 Forester STi accelerates from in 5.2 seconds, in 5.4 seconds, and does the quarter mile in 14.1 seconds at . It can reach a top speed of and has a power to weight ratio of 174 hp per ton.

To cope with the extra power made by the new engine, the Forester STi got many upgraded suspension components including STi sport springs, revised struts at each corner, and bigger anti-roll bars and cross-members. These changes resulted in a 1.2 inch lower ride height and improved resistance to torsional forces. Rolling resistance was also improved, but the higher center of gravity of the Forester still remained. The Forester STi is also equipped with a new steering rack with a quicker ratio that leads to a more deliberate turn-in.

The Forester STi got 18-inch, 10-spoke alloy wheels with 225/45R-18 Bridgestone Potenza tires. Four-piston Brembo brakes, painted red, are employed on the front wheels, and two-piston Brembo are used at the rear,greatly enhancing braking performance and lowering stopping distances and fade resistance under heavy use. It also has special STi bucket seats, unique to the Forester STI, trimmed in dark grey cloth, deeply moulded for much stronger hip and torso support. A smaller leather MOMO steering wheel, and a weighted, leather shift knob with red stitching and a H-pattern 6-speed shift map.

== Third generation (SH; 2008) ==
The third-generation Forester began to move away from a traditional wagon design towards becoming a crossover SUV. It was larger in nearly every dimension and featured a sloping roofline with more cargo space. Subaru unveiled the model year 2008 Forester in Japan on December 25, 2007. The North American version made its debut at the 2008 North American International Auto Show in Detroit.

Styling was by Subaru Chief Designer Mamoru Ishii. The dimensions derive from engineers using the basic body structure of the Japanese-spec Impreza wagon with the rear platform of the U.S.-spec Impreza sedan. The Forester&#x27;s wheelbase was increased , with overall increases of in length, in width and in height.

The independent double-wishbone rear suspension was redesigned for better handling and a smoother ride. A &quot;Sportshift&quot; mode was added to the four-speed computer-controlled automatic transmission. The in-dash, touch-screen satellite navigation system became Bluetooth compatible, and integrated with a premium stereo. A six-speaker surround sound enhancement was optional.

The new model added to the Forester&#x27;s wheelbase, improving interior space and cargo room ( expandable to ). Ground clearance was .

===Europe=== 
The Forester was available in Europe from 2008 with either the 2.0-liter EJ20 () 196 Nm gasoline engine with Active Valve Control System (AVCS) matched to either five-speed manual or four-speed automatic gearbox, or an all-new diesel-powered horizontally opposed Subaru EE boxer engine, and six-speed manual gearbox. The new model was introduced at the 2008 Paris Motor Show in October. The diesel engine produces a power output of and 350 Nm. The EE20 diesel engine in the Euro 4 guise was plagued by crankshaft failure caused by cracks forming when operated in cold climate. Although Subaru never acknowledged this defect, the engine was reworked for the Euro 5 model in 2011 to fix this problem.

In the UK, the gasoline-powered Forester was offered in the popular X and XS models, while the trim levels for the diesel models were X, XC, and XS NavPlus.

In Russia, Belarus, and Ukraine 2.5 and 2.5 Turbo engines were also available.

In the Netherlands, the Forester is offered with gasoline or diesel engines. The gasoline engine can also be fitted with an additional liquefied petroleum gas installation (LPG), an aftermarket installation provided directly through dealerships. The available equipment levels are Intro (gasoline engine only), Comfort, Luxury, Premium, and XT (gasoline engine turbo). Maximum towing abilities for the gasoline or gasoline with LPG are 2000 kg (manual) or 1500 kg (auto), while the manual-only diesel can tow 2000 kg.

===Australia===

There were seven specifications with various trim and performance levels:
*X: Base model - naturally aspirated 2.5 L flat-4, 229 Nm (169 ft-lbf)
*XS: Lower luxury non-turbo model - naturally aspirated 2.5 L flat-4, 229 Nm (169 ft-lbf)
*XS Premium: luxury non-turbo model - naturally aspirated 2.5 L flat-4, 229 Nm (169 ft-lbf)
*2.0 Diesel: turbo-diesel 2.0 L flat-4, 350 Nm (258 ft-lbf)
*2.0 Premium Diesel: Premium - turbo-diesel 2.0 L flat-4, 350 Nm (258 ft-lbf)
*XT: Lower luxury turbo model - turbocharged 2.5 L flat-4, 320 Nm (236 ft-lbf)
*XT Premium: luxury turbo model - turbocharged 2.5 L flat-4, 320 Nm (236 ft-lbf)
*S-Edition: - turbocharged 2.5 L flat-4 347 Nm (256 ft-lbf)
Of note is a serious head gasket problem that Subaru has not resolved. Mostly oil and coolant leaks, with cross-cylinder failure being the worst. It can be fixed with aftermarket gaskets, though this is an expensive, engine-out job.
Summary of standard trim and equipment over different Australian models.
* Wheels and tires – The X model came with 16-inch steel wheels, the 2.0 diesel model with 16-inch alloys, all other models came with 17-inch alloy wheels. The S-Edition comes with STi-style wheels.
* Suspension – The X model came with double-wishbone type, independent rear suspension. All other models came with self-leveling double-wishbone type, independent suspension on the rear.
* Miscellaneous – The Premium versions of the 2.0 diesel, XS, and XT models came with leather seating and an electric sunroof. These items were not available as options on other models.
* Transmission. The X came with either a dual-range, five-speed manual transmission or a four-speed automatic transmission. Both diesel models come with a six-speed manual transmission only. All other models came with either a single-range, five-speed manual or four-speed automatic transmission. The S-Edition has a 5-speed Automatic Transmission.
* Entertainment – The XT Premium came with a multi-information in-dash satellite navigation system and a single CD/DVD player (7-inch touch screen). The X and 2.0 diesel came with an AM/FM radio, CD player (MP3 and WMA compatible), four-speaker stereo (tweeters and subwoofer optional extra). All other models came with an AM/FM radio, a six-stack in-dash CD player (MP3 and WMA compatible), and a six-speaker SRS stereo system with a subwoofer. The system from the XT Premium was optional on all other models, but cost A$4851.50 (fitted).

===United States===
The Forester trim levels were the 2.5X Limited, the 2.5X Premium, the 2.5X, and the 2.5XT Limited and 2.5XT Premium both with turbo. The interior color was either black or light gray, with three upholstery selections, including leather. Nine exterior colors were offered, with four colors in a pearlescent appearance.

Starting July 2009, Subaru no longer offered a special-edition L.L. Bean trim level on the Forester. The Subaru Elaion is a modified Subaru Forester which was built by Subaru and Elaion (Repsol-YPF).

The USA 2.5X model was certified PZEV emissions (rated instead of ), with a badge attached to the rear of the vehicle on the bottom right-hand side of the tailgate. All other USA models were certified LEV2. The PZEV Forester was available for sale in all fifty states, unlike other manufacturers who only sold PZEV-certified vehicles in states that had adopted California emission standards. The naturally-aspirated engine runs on unleaded gasoline rated at 87 octane; the turbo engine (EJ255) requires premium fuel rated minimum 91 octane.

Safety equipment included front airbags with side curtain airbags and front passenger-side airbags (for a total of six airbags) and brake assist that detects panic-braking situations and applies maximum braking force more quickly. The five-speed manual transmission was equipped with Incline Start Assist.

Some of the standard equipment found on the 2.5X included Subaru&#x27;s VDC (Vehicle Dynamics Control), 16 inch steel wheels, and an auxiliary audio jack for MP3 players. Optional equipment included 17 inch alloy wheels, panoramic moonroof, heated front seats, and heated side-view mirrors. The L.L. Bean edition added automatic climate control, leather upholstery, an upgraded stereo with six speakers and a six-disc in-dash CD changer over the four-speaker stereo with single-disc CD player, and an in-dash navigation system, as well as L.L. Bean signature floor mats and rear cargo tray.

The 2.5 XT came with the premium stereo standard, as well as 17-inch alloy wheels, and the panoramic moonroof. The 2.5 XT Limited added leather upholstery with heated front seats, in-dash navigation, a rear spoiler, and automatic climate control. For 2009, XT models came only with a four-speed automatic with Sport Shift.

===Forester XTI concept===
The Forester XTI concept vehicle used the 2.5-liter inter-cooled turbo engine from the Subaru WRX STI, six-speed manual transmission, 18 × 8-inch S204 forged alloy wheels with Yokohama Advan Neova 255/40R18 performance tires, adjustable coil-over suspension, Brembo brakes with four-piston front calipers, 2-piston rear calipers, SuperSport ABS and Electronic Brake-force Distribution (EBD), leather and Alcantara sport seats, a special instrument cluster, front dash, and center console and leather-wrapped steering wheel. Engine is rated and torque.

The vehicle was unveiled in the 2008 SEMA Show.

===Mountain Rescue Vehicle===
Subaru produced a specialized vehicle for the National Ski Patrol based on the 2.5XT turbo. It includes diamond plate floor, rear steel walls, a 9,500-pound winch and a roof-mounted toboggan. The vehicle was unveiled in the 2008 SEMA Show.

=== Facelift ===
In 2010 (U.S. model year 2011), the Subaru Forester received a minor facelift featuring a new grille insert and several small changes in various trim levels. A new 2.5X Touring trim level was also introduced above the 2.5X Limited. The 2.5X Touring trim added HID lighting, a rearview camera, dual-zone climate control, and silver roof rails. 2.5XT models got a slightly larger rear roof spoiler.

Subaru also quietly switched to the all-new 2.5L DOHC FB25 third-generation boxer engine in naturally aspirated Forester models. The new engine made the same as the outgoing EJ253, but torque increased by . Fuel economy improved by 1 mpg EPA city/highway to 21/27. 2.5XT models retained the 2.5L DOHC EJ255 turbo engine.
== Fourth generation (SJ; 2012)==
The fourth-generation Forester was unveiled at the November 2012 Guangzhou Motor Show, followed by the 2013 New York International Auto Show.

The fourth-generation model had a major revamp of interior comfort. The passenger seat is higher, the sound system has been upgraded, the rear bench seats are higher and the console is re-positioned for the person riding in the center. The manual transmission models were also upgraded to a six-speed transmission instead of the previous generation&#x27;s five-speed transmission.

Changes to the line-up include:
* Continuously Variable Transmission and decreased towing capacity. Maximum towing capacity was reduced to across all trim lines (in the United States; overseas the towing capacity is double that). Turbocharged variants use a high-torque CVT with optional steering wheel paddle shifter controls.
* Revised, sport-oriented suspension, wheels (18-inch), and chassis bracing for XT (turbo) variant, providing flatter cornering in turns and better handling overall with little impact on the ride.
* Increased fuel economy, up to 32 mpg (7.35 L/100 km) highway (EPA rated)
* 1.4 inches longer, 0.6 inches wider, 1 inch longer wheelbase
*Increased interior volume: rear seat legroom is and rear cargo volume (with seats folded down) is .
*New option on higher end CVT models is &quot;X-MODE&quot; AWD control system, which was developed for driving on uneven or slippery road conditions. Engine, Transmission and VDC are controlled cooperatively.
*New option on top-of-the-line 2.5i and 2.0XT Touring models only: EyeSight Driver Assist System

Japan models went on sale in November 2012. Early model includes 2.0i, 2.0i-L, 2.0i-L EyeSight, 2.0i-S EyeSight, 2.0XT (280 PS), 2.0XT EyeSight (280 PS). 2.0i engine models include six-speed manual (2.0i, 2.0i-L) or Lineartronic CVT transmission; 2.0XT (280 PS) engine models include Lineartronic CVT transmission.

Asian models went on sale in March 2013 as 2014 model year. Early model includes 2.0i-L, 2.0i Premium and 2.0XT. Association of Southeast Asian Nations production of the Subaru Forester began in February 2016. Malaysia-based Tan Chong Motor Assemblies assembled approximately 10,000 Forester units annually for Malaysia, Thailand and Indonesia respectively.

US models went on sale in March 2013 as 2014 model year vehicles. Early models include 2.5i in base, Premium, Limited and top-line Touring versions, and performance-oriented turbocharged 2.0XT (253 PS) in Premium and Touring versions. Base and Premium model 2014 Foresters can be equipped with the manual six-speed transmission or the Lineartronic CVT. All other models are equipped with the Lineartronic CVT. An option on Limited/Touring 2.5i and Premium/Touring 2.0XT is new X-Mode control and Hill Descent Control (HDC) features. These are not available on other models.

The 2014 Forester has a new feature called X Mode that allows owners to go through more extreme conditions both on the road and off. The concept is that any driver, regardless of skill level, can drive safely on wet roads or muddy areas. It works by monitoring wheel-slip on all four wheels; should one or more wheels begin to slip, X Mode kicks in and applies the brakes to the affected wheel which results in a transfer of power to the opposite wheel. After it is engaged by a simple push button, X Mode stays engaged up until the vehicle&#x27;s speed is about then disengages itself.

It has been awarded &quot;Motor Trend&#x27;s&quot; 2009 and 2014 SUV of the Year and The Car Connection&#x27;s Best Car To Buy 2014.

===Safety===

According to IIHS (Insurance Institute for Highway Safety), the 2014 Forester achieved Good crash test ratings in Small Overlap Front, Moderate Overlap Front, Side, Roof Strength, and Head Restraining &amp; Seats categories. The Forester had not been rated Good in the Small Overlap Front test until modifications were made for the 2014 model year. The small overlap test, introduced in 2012 by the IIHS, simulates a frontal collision on 25 percent of the driver&#x27;s side front corner. Since its adoption, the IIHS has noticed several automakers making non-symmetrical modifications to their vehicles. Another small overlap test was conducted on a number of vehicles, including a 2014 Forester, but was conducted on the passenger side instead. The crash test showed substantially more intrusion into the passenger side than into the driver&#x27;s side of the Forester, it would have been rated Marginal

===EyeSight Driver Assist System===

The 2014 top-of-the-line Touring model Forester in the U.S. offers Subaru&#x27;s EyeSight driver assist technology that uses stereoscopic CCD cameras mounted on either side of the rearview mirror. Eyesight offers several driver assist technologies/features which include:
* Pre-Collision Braking System
* Pre-Collision Throttle Management
* Adaptive Cruise Control
* Lane Departure and Sway Warning

The system can be manually turned on or off. Being an optical, instead of radar, based system, it has limitations in limited visibility situations; driving into the sun, fog, or where the windshield is not cleared (snow, mud, etc.) may cause the system to disengage.

=== Facelift ===
The facelifted fourth-generation Forester was revealed in October 2015 ahead of the 2015 Tokyo Motor Show. Changes include new LED projector headlights with C-shaped positioning lights, new taillights, a redesigned grille and a reprofiled front bumper.

Subaru also introduced improvements to the Forester&#x27;s AWD chassis and NVH. It also feature greater front cross member rigidity and optimization of the rear trailing link bushings which result in better steering response and straight-line stability. The turbo model gets Active Torque Vectoring. Ride comfort has been improved with optimized dampers and spring rates, while thicker door glass, stronger sealing, additional under-floor insulation and improvements to the Lineartronic CVT gearbox result in quieter ride. The FB 2.0-liter naturally-aspirated flat-four petrol engine with has been given more efficient combustion and reduced friction for better fuel efficiency with no loss of performance.

The Forester uses color cameras for the EyeSight system with a wider and longer field of view. Alongside EyeSight which was upgraded to Version 3, Subaru offered a Rear Vehicle Detection package that includes Blind Spot Detection, Lane Change Assist and Rear Cross Traffic Alert. The stereo cameras of Eyesight also double up as the eyes for Adaptive Driving Beam.

In the U.S., the facelift was introduced in April 2016 for the 2017 model year.

===Engines===

== Fifth generation (SK; 2018)==

The fifth-generation Forester was presented on March 28, 2018, at the New York International Auto Show. Like contemporary Subaru models, the fifth-generation model moved the Forester to the Subaru Global Platform. The new platform is said to provide greater handling capability, agility, ride comfort and crash protection. It is also claimed to be inherently resistant to noise, vibration and harshness (NVH).

The fifth-generation Forester incorporates Subaru&#x27;s recent design language, marketed as &quot;Dynamic x Solid&quot;. Interior space has been increased with the redesign, by lengthening the wheelbase by . Rear legroom has grown by , while head, hip and shoulder room have also increased, improving the overall cabin space. Wider rear door openings and a steeper C-pillar allow for easier entry and egress and also makes installing a child seat easier.

The reworked front seats are claimed to be more comfortable on long trips. Subaru also included an electric parking brake which frees up center console space. Cargo space in the trunk is larger with with the 60:40-split rear seats folded – an increase of – and the maximum width of the tailgate opening is wider at .

=== North America ===
Initial trim levels available in the U.S. and Canada are Base, Premium, Sport, Limited and Touring. All Foresters sold in the U.S. come standard with Subaru&#x27;s Eyesight Driver Assist Technology. Subaru DriverFocus Distraction Mitigation System comes standard on the Touring trim in the U.S., which provides an alert when it detects the driver is distracted or is drowsy. In addition, the DriverFocus system is able to recognize five different drivers and will set seat and mirror positions and climate control settings accordingly.

As standard, the Forester comes with the Starlink Multimedia system with a 6.5-inch touchscreen.

In North America, the model is only available with one engine type: Subaru&#x27;s new &quot;FB25 DI&quot;. The engine is a naturally aspirated, direct injection flat (boxer) 4 cylinder producing at 5800 rpm and at 4400 rpm, with the Lineartronic CVT as the sole transmission option.

All fifth-generation Foresters have one of three versions of Subaru&#x27;s Symmetrical All Wheel Drive system. The trim levels in North America determines which system is installed. The Base trim received a Variable Torque Distribution (VTD) using electronically controlled clutches to control torque split. Premium, Sport, Limited and Touring trims receive the driver-selectable X-Mode system with Hill Descent Control, which optimizes engine, transmission, AWD system and Vehicle Dynamics Control for maximum traction on slippery conditions. A new dual-mode version with Snow/Dirt and Deep Snow/Mud modes is fitted on Sport, Limited and Touring variants. All models provide a nominal torque split biased 60 front to 40 rear.

===Forester e-Boxer===

Subaru introduced the e-Boxer hybrid powertrain for the European-market Forester and XV at the Geneva Motor Show in March 2019; the e-Boxer integrates an electric motor into the Lineartronic CVT to improve fuel economy and increase power.

The e-Boxer powertrain features a modified FB20 rated at at 5,600–6,000 rpm and of torque at 4,000 rpm. Like the first-generation XV Crosstrek Hybrid, the Forester e-Boxer adds a single electric motor rated at maximum output. The battery for the traction motor is placed above the rear axle, improving the front/rear weight balance.

===Forester Sport===
A Forester Sport with a &quot;CB18&quot; 1.8-liter direct injection turbocharged flat-4 engine was introduced in October 2020 for the Japanese domestic market. The engine produces at 5,200-5,600 rpm and at 1,600-3,600 rpm. This engine is also present in the JDM-only Subaru Levorg. With the introduction of the Sport, the &quot;FB20D e-BOXER&quot; became the standard engine across the rest of the Forester line in Japan. , there are no reports whether other markets will receive the &quot;CB18&quot;.

The Forester Sport is identified by its black grille as well as grey-painted fog lamps covers, side mirrors and rocker panels. The Sport also is equipped with a set of dark 18-inch wheels, while the rear fascia adds additional trim around the tailgate window. It is also equipped with dual exhaust outlets, which are part of a redesigned and sportier lower apron.

=== Facelift ===
The facelifted model was released for North America in September 2021 for the 2022 model year. It had a new front end as well as a slightly tweaked rear bumper while the powertrain was unchanged. All Forester models have Subaru&#x27;s updated fourth-generation eyesight driver-assist system. An off-road-focused Wilderness model was also introduced.
====Forester Wilderness====
Alongside the facelift model, Subaru released a new model called the Forester Wilderness for the North American market. It is intended to be a more off-road-oriented version of the Forester, and is positioned between the Limited and Touring trim levels in the Forester lineup. Visually, the Forester has more body cladding, and on the inside, copper-colored accents. It features a lift for a total of of ground clearance, the Wilderness also has all-terrain tires, a higher final drive ratio (4.11 vs. 3.70), and a stronger roof rack than previous models. Subaru&#x27;s StarTex water-repellent seats are also standard.

The Wilderness is powered by the same 2.5-liter &quot;FB25D&quot; naturally-aspirated four cylinder engine powering other North American market Foresters. The Wilderness uses an Enhanced Dual-Function X-Mode version. The X-Mode is upgraded and re-tuned, with settings for snow, dirt, deep snow and mud. Additional wheel-slip is allowed to occur, which provides an advantage in harsh driving conditions.

====Forester STI Sport====
Subaru released a special model known as the Forester STI Sport in July 2023 for the Chinese market. The 2.0-litre &quot;FB20&quot; H4 and 2.5-litre &quot;FB25 DI&quot; H4 engines are available paired to the Lineartronic CVT as standard. Three trim levels are available known as STI Sport, STI Sport Plus, and STI Sport Plus Special Edition and pricing ranges from 275,800 yuan to 299,200 yuan.

=== Safety ===
== Sixth generation (SL; 2024)==

The sixth-generation Forester was revealed at the Los Angeles Auto Show on November 16, 2023. The Forester is still based on the Subaru Global Platform with 10% greater rigidity, exterior has design elements borrowed from other Subaru vehicles, the interior features a portrait 11.6&quot; touchscreen standard on all trims except for the base model and a higher-mounted dashboard for increased space, and the 2.5-liter FB25 was carried over from the previous generation. The Forester was released in North America in the second quarter of 2024, in Base, Premium (only for U.S), Sport, Limited and Touring (Premier in Canada) trim levels.

Subaru CEO Atsushi Osaki confirmed at the launch event a full hybrid model is to follow a year after the model&#x27;s launch for the 2026 model year.

=== Safety ===
==Awards==
* &quot;Car and Driver&quot;″s 5Best Trucks 2004, 2005, 2006
* Winner of &quot;Wheels&quot; Gold star cars award for best compact SUV 2008
* Winner of &quot;Motor Trend&quot; magazine&#x27;s Sport/Utility of the Year Award in 2009
* Best Small Utility in MotorWeek&#x27;s 2009 Driver&#x27;s Choice Awards
* Winner of &quot;Motor Trend&quot; Magazine&#x27;s SUV of the Year Award in 2014
* Insurance Institute for Highway Safety Top Safety &quot;Pick+&quot;
* Subaru Forester Claims Top Honours as AJAC&#x27;s 2017 Canadian Utility Vehicle of the Year
*Winner of New Zealand Motoring Writers Guild Car of the Year Award in 2018

==Sales==


==References==
==External links==

*Official website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q115579744" start="9" end="30" title="compact crossover SUV" label="compact crossover SUV"/>
<link wikidata="Q172741" start="61" end="67" title="Subaru" label="Subaru"/>
<link wikidata="Q391342" start="134" end="141" title="Subaru Impreza" label="Impreza"/>
<link wikidata="Q875600" start="288" end="301" title="crossover SUV" label="crossover SUV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536958" start="1254" end="1274" title="Subaru Outback Sport" label="Subaru Outback Sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1312050" start="1399" end="1413" title="Nissan Rasheen" label="Nissan Rasheen"/>
<link wikidata="Q819982" start="1507" end="1518" title="Toyota RAV4" label="Toyota RAV4"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284007" start="1520" end="1534" title="Mitsubishi RVR" label="Mitsubishi RVR"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130587" start="1544" end="1563" title="Suzuki Grand Vitara" label="Suzuki Grand Vitara"/>
<link wikidata="Q603323" start="1869" end="1875" title="Subaru Legacy" label="Legacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q194302" start="2108" end="2114" title="clutch" label="clutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1850364" start="3575" end="3577" title="Model year" label="MY"/>
<link wikidata="Q630247" start="5666" end="5683" title="Chicago Auto Show" label="Chicago Auto Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q920531" start="5885" end="5897" title="hydroforming" label="hydro-formed"/>
<link wikidata="Q7631141" start="5904" end="5913" title="sub-frame" label="sub-frame"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6380" end="6384" title="Overhead camshaft#Single overhead camshaft" label="SOHC"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6385" end="6390" title="Subaru EJ engine#EJ253" label="EJ253"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6448" end="6452" title="Overhead camshaft#Dual overhead camshaft" label="DOHC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132815" start="6479" end="6501" title="timing belt (camshaft)" label="timing belt (camshaft)"/>
<link wikidata="Q36033" start="6530" end="6547" title="Mitsubishi Motors" label="Mitsubishi Motors"/>
<link wikidata="Q391342" start="6578" end="6596" title="Subaru Impreza WRX" label="Subaru Impreza WRX"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454550" start="6636" end="6655" title="interference engine" label="interference engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3602308" start="6932" end="6959" title="Active valve control system" label="Active valve control system"/>
<link wikidata="Q4823439" start="7490" end="7495" title="Australasian New Car Assessment Program" label="ANCAP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1666521" start="7679" end="7711" title="International Engine of the Year" label="International Engine of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q20653715" start="7790" end="7799" title="Saab 9-2X" label="Saab 9-2X"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454550" start="7976" end="7996" title="interference engines" label="interference engines"/>
<link wikidata="Q6131944" start="8945" end="8954" title="L.L. Bean" label="L.L. Bean"/>
<link wikidata="Q3602282" start="9008" end="9032" title="Active valve lift system" label="Active valve lift system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1946072" start="9392" end="9396" title="Tire-pressure monitoring system" label="TPMS"/>
<link wikidata="Q81965" start="9961" end="9980" title="General Motors" label="General Motors (GM)"/>
<link wikidata="Q172741" start="9985" end="9991" title="Subaru" label="Subaru"/>
<link wikidata="Q798992" start="10022" end="10031" title="rebadging" label="rebadging"/>
<link wikidata="Q917477" start="10160" end="10173" title="Holden VY Ute" label="Holden VY Ute"/>
<link wikidata="Q2598667" start="10221" end="10234" title="Subaru Brumby" label="Subaru Brumby"/>
<link wikidata="Q5532048" start="10415" end="10435" title="General Motors India" label="General Motors India"/>
<link wikidata="Q40966" start="10578" end="10582" title="Opel" label="Opel"/>
<link wikidata="Q81965" start="10637" end="10651" title="General Motors" label="General Motors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051297" start="10720" end="10741" title="Subaru Corporation" label="Fuji Heavy Industries"/>
<link wikidata="Q8052055" start="10785" end="10794" title="Yema Auto" label="Yema Auto"/>
<link wikidata="Q63922341" start="10812" end="10820" title="Yema F-series" label="Yema F99"/>
<link wikidata="Q7605966" start="13615" end="13620" title="Steering ratio" label="ratio"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14630" end="14673" title="North American International Auto Show#2008" label="2008 North American International Auto Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q632300" start="14855" end="14863" title="automobile platform" label="platform"/>
<link wikidata="Q843592" start="15186" end="15208" title="automatic transmission" label="automatic transmission"/>
<link wikidata="Q39531" start="15271" end="15280" title="Bluetooth" label="Bluetooth"/>
<link wikidata="Q569874" start="15345" end="15359" title="surround sound" label="surround sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q6598539" start="15801" end="15810" title="Subaru EE engine" label="Subaru EE"/>
<link wikidata="Q3320556" start="15891" end="15912" title="2008 Paris Motor Show" label="2008 Paris Motor Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q351609" start="16611" end="16634" title="liquefied petroleum gas" label="liquefied petroleum gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q185525" start="19611" end="19616" title="turbocharger" label="turbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q957208" start="19779" end="19790" title="Iridescence" label="pearlescent"/>
<link wikidata="Q7630797" start="19909" end="19922" title="Subaru Elaion" label="Subaru Elaion"/>
<link wikidata="Q174747" start="19991" end="19997" title="Repsol" label="Repsol"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006989" start="19998" end="20001" title="YPF" label="YPF"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340026" start="20038" end="20042" title="Partial zero-emissions vehicle" label="PZEV"/>
<link wikidata="Q16911470" start="20206" end="20210" title="Low Emission Vehicle" label="LEV2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208529" start="20793" end="20812" title="manual transmission" label="manual transmission"/>
<link wikidata="Q819351" start="20831" end="20851" title="Hill-holder" label="Incline Start Assist"/>
<link wikidata="Q595839" start="20926" end="20956" title="Electronic Stability Control" label="VDC (Vehicle Dynamics Control)"/>
<link wikidata="Q42591" start="21012" end="21015" title="MP3" label="MP3"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165438" start="21085" end="21093" title="moonroof" label="moonroof"/>
<link wikidata="Q6131944" start="21149" end="21158" title="L.L. Bean" label="L.L. Bean"/>
<link wikidata="Q907265" start="22056" end="22062" title="Brembo" label="Brembo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22382" end="22396" title="SEMA (association)#2008" label="2008 SEMA Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q6978450" start="22475" end="22494" title="National Ski Patrol" label="National Ski Patrol"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22653" end="22667" title="SEMA (association)#2008" label="2008 SEMA Show"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23139" end="23143" title="List of Subaru engines#Subaru FB engine" label="FB25"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23259" end="23264" title="Subaru EJ engine#EJ253" label="EJ253"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23386" end="23391" title="Subaru EJ engine#EJ255" label="EJ255"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23543" end="23580" title="New York International Auto Show#2013" label="2013 New York International Auto Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q7768" start="25465" end="25503" title="Association of Southeast Asian Nations" label="Association of Southeast Asian Nations"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25577" end="25603" title="Tan Chong Motor#Production facilities" label="Tan Chong Motor Assemblies"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26046" end="26062" title="List of Subaru transmissions#Subaru Lineartronic CVT TR690 and TR580" label="Lineartronic CVT"/>
<link wikidata="Q35158" start="28091" end="28103" title="Stereoscopy" label="stereoscopic"/>
<link wikidata="Q189880" start="28104" end="28114" title="CCD camera" label="CCD camera"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28735" end="28756" title="Tokyo Motor Show#2015" label="2015 Tokyo Motor Show"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30179" end="30211" title="New York International Auto Show#2018" label="New York International Auto Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q106552242" start="30299" end="30321" title="Subaru Global Platform" label="Subaru Global Platform"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478080" start="30481" end="30511" title="noise, vibration and harshness" label="noise, vibration and harshness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1437680" start="30584" end="30599" title="design language" label="design language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326438" start="31076" end="31098" title="electric parking brake" label="electric parking brake"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32038" end="32057" title="Subaru FB engine#FB25 DI" label="&amp;quot;FB25 DI&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32185" end="32201" title="List of Subaru transmissions#Subaru Lineartronic CVT TR690 and TR580" label="Lineartronic CVT"/>
<link wikidata="Q2119417" start="33073" end="33075" title="Subaru XV" label="XV"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="33083" end="33100" title="Geneva Motor Show#2019" label="Geneva Motor Show"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="33607" end="33623" title="Subaru CB engine#CB18" label="&amp;quot;CB18&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q16867829" start="33850" end="33863" title="Subaru Levorg" label="Subaru Levorg"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35514" end="35531" title="Subaru FB engine#FB25D" label="&amp;quot;FB25D&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36012" end="36028" title="Subaru FB engine#FB20" label="&amp;quot;FB20&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36046" end="36065" title="Subaru FB engine#FB25D" label="&amp;quot;FB25 DI&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187258" start="36392" end="36413" title="Los Angeles Auto Show" label="Los Angeles Auto Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q858319" start="37166" end="37180" title="Car and Driver" label="Car and Driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q7992353" start="37237" end="37243" title="Wheels (magazine)" label="Wheels"/>
<link wikidata="Q3109600" start="37315" end="37326" title="Motor Trend" label="Motor Trend"/>
<link wikidata="Q6918095" start="37435" end="37462" title="MotorWeek Drivers&amp;#x27; Choice Awards" label="Driver&amp;#x27;s Choice Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q6042346" start="37547" end="37585" title="Insurance Institute for Highway Safety" label="Insurance Institute for Highway Safety"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="29313" wikidata="Q7442989" url="?curid=29313" title="Second-system effect">
<text>The second-system effect or second-system syndrome is the tendency of small, elegant, and successful systems to be succeeded by over-engineered, bloated systems, due to inflated expectations and overconfidence.

The phrase was first used by Fred Brooks in his book &quot;The Mythical Man-Month&quot;, first published in 1975. It described the jump from a set of simple operating systems on the IBM 700/7000 series to OS/360 on the 360 series, which happened in 1964.

== See also ==

* Anti-pattern
* Feature creep
* Inner-platform effect
* Osborne effect
* Sophomore slump
* Unix philosophy
* Examples in information technology: IPv6 deployment, Taligent, Workplace OS, Copland, Rhapsody

== References ==
== External links ==
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7442989" start="4" end="24" title="Second-system effect" label="second-system effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q7442989" start="28" end="50" title="Second-system effect" label="second-system syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207152" start="77" end="84" title="elegant" label="elegant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2042313" start="128" end="143" title="overengineering" label="over-engineered"/>
<link wikidata="Q119981" start="145" end="152" title="Software bloat" label="bloated"/>
<link wikidata="Q92609" start="241" end="252" title="Fred Brooks" label="Fred Brooks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192316" start="271" end="293" title="The Mythical Man-Month" label="The Mythical Man-Month"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265495" start="394" end="413" title="IBM 700/7000 series" label="IBM 700/7000 series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1690495" start="417" end="423" title="OS/360" label="OS/360"/>
<link wikidata="Q76438" start="486" end="498" title="Anti-pattern" label="Anti-pattern"/>
<link wikidata="Q4116154" start="501" end="514" title="Feature creep" label="Feature creep"/>
<link wikidata="Q6035312" start="517" end="538" title="Inner-platform effect" label="Inner-platform effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634790" start="541" end="555" title="Osborne effect" label="Osborne effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500528" start="558" end="573" title="Sophomore slump" label="Sophomore slump"/>
<link wikidata="Q14652" start="576" end="591" title="Unix philosophy" label="Unix philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11089" start="630" end="645" title="IPv6 deployment" label="IPv6 deployment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2390313" start="647" end="655" title="Taligent" label="Taligent"/>
<link wikidata="Q5969165" start="657" end="669" title="Workplace OS" label="Workplace OS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131259" start="671" end="678" title="Copland (operating system)" label="Copland"/>
<link wikidata="Q264020" start="680" end="688" title="Rhapsody (operating system)" label="Rhapsody"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="29316" wikidata="Q27389" url="?curid=29316" title="Sandinista National Liberation Front">
<text>The Sandinista National Liberation Front (, FSLN) is a socialist political party in Nicaragua. Its members are called Sandinistas () in both English and Spanish. The party is named after Augusto César Sandino, who led the Nicaraguan resistance against the United States occupation of Nicaragua in the 1930s.

The FSLN overthrew Anastasio Somoza Debayle in the 1979 Nicaraguan Revolution, ending the Somoza dynasty, and established a revolutionary government in its place. Having seized power, the Sandinistas ruled Nicaragua from 1979 to 1990, first as part of a Junta of National Reconstruction. Following the resignation of centrist members from this Junta, the FSLN took exclusive power in March 1981. They instituted literacy programs, nationalization, land reform, and devoted significant resources to healthcare, but came under international criticism for human rights abuses, including mass execution and oppression of indigenous peoples. They were also criticized for mismanaging the economy and overseeing runaway inflation.

A US-backed group, known as the Contras, was formed in 1981 to overthrow the Sandinista government and was funded and trained by the Central Intelligence Agency. The United States sought to place economic pressure on the Sandinista government by imposing a full trade embargo and by planting underwater mines in Nicaragua&#x27;s ports. In 1984, free and fair elections were held, but were boycotted by opposition parties. The FSLN won the majority of the votes, and those who opposed the Sandinistas won approximately a third of the seats. The civil war between the Contras and the government continued until 1989. After revising the constitution in 1987, and after years of fighting the Contras, the FSLN lost the 1990 election to Violeta Barrios de Chamorro in an election marked by US interference, but retained a plurality of seats in the legislature.

The FSLN is now Nicaragua&#x27;s dominant party. Since the 2006 Nicaraguan general election when Daniel Ortega was reelected President of Nicaragua, Ortega and the FSLN have centralized power and overseen democratic backsliding in Nicaragua. In October 2009, the Supreme Court, which has a majority of Sandinista judges, overturned presidential term limits that were set by the constitution. Ortega and the FSLN were reelected in the presidential elections of 2011, 2016, and 2021, although these elections have been criticized by international observers. The party is firmly controlled by Ortega. Despite the left-wing revolutionary rhetoric of the party, Ortega has allied with the business class and enacted what scholars characterize as crony capitalism.

== History ==

=== Origin of the term Sandinista ===
The Sandinistas took their name from Augusto César Sandino (1895–1934), the leader of Nicaragua&#x27;s nationalist rebellion against the US occupation of the country during the early 20th century (ca. 1922–1934). The suffix &quot;-ista&quot; is the Spanish equivalent of &quot;-ist&quot;.

Sandino was assassinated in 1934 by the Nicaraguan National Guard (), the US-equipped police force of Anastasio Somoza, whose family ruled the country from 1936 until they were overthrown by the Sandinistas in 1979.

=== Precursor to Revolution (1933–1961) ===
The second U.S. intervention in Nicaragua ended when Juan Bautista Sacasa of the Liberal Party won the elections. By 1 January 1933 there wasn&#x27;t a single US soldier left on Nicaraguan soil, however in 1930 the US had formed a group for national security known as the National Guard. The National Guard remained after the exit of the U.S. under the leadership of Anastasio Somoza Garcia who was supported by the U.S. On 21 February 1934, Somoza, using the National Guard, assassinated Sandino who opposed and fought against US intervention. This was the first act of a series that Somoza, with help from the U.S., would take that would culminate in his election as president in 1936. The result of his election was the start of the U.S. sponsored dictatorship of the Somoza family.

During the 1960s, leftist ideas began spreading worldwide, sparking independence movements in different colonial territories. On 1 January 1959 in Havana, Cuban revolutionaries fought against dictator Fulgencio Batista. In Algeria the Algerian National Liberation Front was founded to fight against French colonial control. In Nicaragua, different movements that opposed the Somoza dynasty began to unite, forming the Nicaraguan National Liberation Front which would later be renamed the Sandinista National Liberation Front.

The economic situation of Nicaragua in the mid-20th century had deteriorated as the prices of agricultural exports such as cotton and coffee dropped. Politically, the conservative party of Nicaragua split and one of the factions, the Zancudos, began collaborating with the Somoza regime.

Anastasio Somoza Garcia was assassinated by poet Rigoberto Lopez Perez in 1956.

In 1957 Carlos Fonseca Amador, Silvio Mayorga, Tomás Borge, Oswaldo Madriz y Heriberto Carrillo formed the first cell of the Nicaraguan Revolutionary Committee who identified with the issues of the proletariat. Later that October, the Mexican cell was formed with members such as Edén Pastora Gómez, Juan José Ordóñez, Roger Hernández, Porfirio Molina y Pedro José Martínez Alvarado.

In October 1958 Ramon Raudales began his guerilla war against the Somoza dynasty beginning the armed conflict.

June 1959 the event known as &quot;El Chaparral&quot; occurred in Honduran territory bordering Nicaragua. The guerrilla fighters &quot;Rigoberto López Pérez&quot; under the command of Rafael Somarriba (in which Carlos Fonseca was integrated) was found and annihilated by the Honduran Army in coordination with the intelligence services of the Nicaraguan National Guard.

After &quot;El Chaparral&quot;, several more armed rebellions took place. In August the journalist Manuel Díaz y Sotelo died; in September Carlos &quot;Chale&quot; Haslam died; in December Heriberto Reyes (Colonel of the Defensive Army of National Sovereignty) died. The following year the events of &quot;El Dorado&quot; (February 28, 1960) took place where several events occurred leading to several deaths including Luis Morales, Julio Alonso Leclair (head of the September 15 column), Manuel Baldizón and Erasmo Montoya.

The conventional opposition, up to that point led by the Nicaraguan Communist Party, had not been able to form a common front against the dictatorship. The opposition to the dictatorship was established around various student organizations. Among its leaders, Carlos Fonseca Amador in the early 1960s.

At the start of 1961 the New Nicaragua Movement (NNM) was founded by prominent leaders in education like Carlos Fonseca, Silvio Mayorga, Tomás Borge, Gordillo, Navarro y Francisco Buitrago; prominent leaders on workers issues such as Jose Benito Escobar; countryside leaders like Germán Pomares and small business leaders such as Julio Jerez Suárez. Legendary guerilla veteran Santos Lopez, who fought with Augusto Cesar Sandino, also participated in the NNM.

The New Nicaragua Movement was established in three cities Managua, Leon and Estelí, however they were generally stationed in Honduras. Their first public activity was held in March 1961, in support of the Cuban revolution and in protest of the position that the Nicaraguan government held with Cuba. The NNM later dissolved to make way for the National Liberation Front.

The New Nicaragua Movement soon dissolved with its members forming the National Liberation Front, FLN.

=== Founding (1961–1970) ===
The FSLN originated in the milieu of various oppositional organizations, youth and student groups in the late 1950s and early 1960s. The university of Léon, and the National Autonomous University of Nicaragua (UNAN) in Managua were two of the principal centers of activity. Inspired by the Revolution and the FLN in Algeria, the FSLN was founded in 1961 by Carlos Fonseca, , Tomás Borge, Casimiro Sotelo and others as &quot;The National Liberation Front&quot; (FLN). Only Borge lived long enough to see the Sandinista victory in 1979.

A congress or assembly is not formed between all the prominent leaders of the various groups as the preparation would have required a prior theoretical process in order to create them. As a result, the FSLN was not prepared for its own formation. Different discussions took place within the group as they came to a consensus on political ideas. Even in 1963, while still under the name of FLN, there was a lack of internal coherence in political ideas (this can be seen in the publication of the newspaper Trinchera). The first few years were carried by some basic shared values of all the forces that were being integrated. Some of these basic shared ideas was to imitate the success of the Cuban Revolution, the ineffectiveness of the conventional opposition to the Somoza regime and the need to remain independent of them (referring to the from the conservative, liberal and communist parties), the need for a revolutionary movement that would use the armed struggle as opposition to the Somoza dictatorship, and after some discussion, identification with Sandino&#x27;s struggle. It was not until 1969 that any programmatic document was published.

The Sandinista National Liberation Front was supposedly founded in a meeting in Tegucigalpa (Honduras) between Carlos Fonseca, Tomás Borge, and Silvio Mayorga. It&#x27;s even been said that the meeting was held on July 19, 1961. In reality, there is no documentary reference that supports this affirmation, with the first news of this meeting and date surfacing after the revolutionary triumph of 1979.

The term &quot;Sandinista&quot; was adopted two years later, establishing continuity with Sandino&#x27;s movement, and using his legacy to develop the newer movement&#x27;s ideology and strategy. By the early 1970s, the FSLN was launching limited military initiatives.

=== Rise (1970–1976) ===
On December 23, 1972, a magnitude 6.2 earthquake leveled the capital city, Managua. The earthquake killed 10,000 of the city&#x27;s 400,000 residents and left another 50,000 homeless. About 80% of Managua&#x27;s commercial buildings were destroyed. President Anastasio Somoza Debayle&#x27;s National Guard embezzled much of the international aid that flowed into the country to assist in reconstruction, and several parts of downtown Managua were never rebuilt. The president gave reconstruction contracts preferentially to family and friends, thereby profiting from the quake and increasing his control of the city&#x27;s economy. By some estimates, his personal wealth rose to US$400 million in 1974.

In December 1974, a guerrilla group affiliated with FSLN directed by Eduardo Contreras and Germán Pomares seized government hostages at a party in the house of the Minister of Agriculture in the Managua suburb Los Robles, among them several leading Nicaraguan officials and Somoza relatives. The siege was carefully timed to take place after the departure of the US ambassador from the gathering. At 10:50 pm, a group of 15 young guerrillas and their commanders, Pomares and Contreras, entered the house. They killed the minister, who tried to shoot them, during the takeover. The guerrillas received US$2 million ransom, and had their official communiqué read on the radio and printed in the newspaper &quot;La Prensa&quot;.

Over the next year, the guerrillas got 14 Sandinista prisoners released from jail, and with them were flown to Cuba. One of the released prisoners was Daniel Ortega, who later became president of Nicaragua. The group also lobbied for an increase in wages for National Guard soldiers to 500 córdobas ($71 at the time). The Somoza government responded with further censorship, intimidation, torture, and murder.

In 1975, Somoza imposed a state of siege, censoring the press, and threatening all opponents with internment and torture. Somoza&#x27;s National Guard also increased its violence against people and communities suspected of collaborating with the Sandinistas. Many of the FSLN guerrillas were killed, including its leader and founder Carlos Fonseca in 1976. Fonseca had returned to Nicaragua in 1975 from his exile in Cuba to try to reunite factions that existed in the FSLN. He and his group were betrayed by someone who informed the National Guard that they were in the area. The guerrilla group was ambushed, and Fonseca was wounded in the process. The next morning the National Guard executed Fonseca.

=== Split (1977–1978) ===

After the FSLN&#x27;s defeat at the battle of Pancasán in 1967, it adopted the &quot;Prolonged Popular War&quot; (&quot;Guerra Popular Prolongada&quot;, GPP) theory as its strategic doctrine. The GPP was based on the &quot;accumulation of forces in silence&quot;: while the urban organization recruited on the university campuses and robbed money from banks, the main cadres were to permanently settle in the north central mountain zone. There they would build a grassroots peasant support base in preparation for renewed rural guerrilla warfare.

As a consequence of the repressive campaign of the National Guard, in 1975 a group within the FSLN&#x27;s urban mobilization arm began to question the GPP&#x27;s viability. In the view of the young orthodox Marxist intellectuals, such as Jaime Wheelock, economic development had turned Nicaragua into a nation of factory workers and wage-earning farm laborers. Wheelock&#x27;s faction was known as the &quot;Proletarian Tendency&quot;.

Shortly after, a third faction arose within the FSLN. The &quot;Insurrectional Tendency&quot;, also known as the &quot;Third Way&quot; or &quot;Terceristas&quot;, led by Daniel Ortega, his brother Humberto Ortega, and Mexican-born Victor Tirado Lopez, was more pragmatic and called for tactical, temporary alliances with non-communists, including the right-wing opposition, in a popular front against the Somoza regime. By attacking the Guard directly, the Terceristas would demonstrate the regime&#x27;s weakness and encourage others to take up arms.

In October 1977, a group of prominent Nicaraguan professionals, business leaders, and clergymen allied with the Terceristas to form &quot;El Grupo de los Doce&quot; (The Group of Twelve) in Costa Rica. The group&#x27;s main idea was to organize a provisional government in Costa Rica. The Terceristas&#x27; new strategy also included unarmed strikes and rioting by labor and student groups coordinated by the FSLN&#x27;s &quot;United People&#x27;s Movement&quot; (Movimiento Pueblo Unido – MPU).

=== Insurrection (1978) ===
On January 10, 1978, Pedro Joaquín Chamorro, the editor of the opposition newspaper &quot;La Prensa&quot; and leader of the &quot;Democratic Union of Liberation&quot; (Unión Democrática de Liberación – UDEL), was assassinated. His assassins were not identified at the time, but evidence implicated Somoza&#x27;s son and other members of the National Guard. Spontaneous riots followed in several cities, while the business community organized a general strike demanding Somoza&#x27;s resignation.

The Terceristas carried out attacks in early February in several Nicaraguan cities. The National Guard responded by further increasing repression and using force to contain and intimidate all government opposition. The nationwide strike that paralyzed the country for ten days weakened private enterprises and most of them decided to suspend their participation in less than two weeks. Meanwhile, Somoza asserted his intention to stay in power until the end of his presidential term in 1981. The United States government showed its displeasure with Somoza by suspending all military assistance to the regime, but continued to approve economic assistance to the country for humanitarian reasons.

In August, the Terceristas took hostages. Twenty-three Tercerista commandos led by Edén Pastora seized the entire Nicaraguan congress and took nearly 1,000 hostages, including Somoza&#x27;s nephew José Somoza Abrego and cousin Luis Pallais Debayle. Somoza gave in to their demands and paid a $500,000 ransom, released 59 political prisoners (including GPP chief Tomás Borge), broadcast a communiqué with FSLN&#x27;s call for general insurrection and gave the guerrillas safe passage to Panama.

A few days later six Nicaraguan cities rose in revolt. Armed youths took over the highland city of Matagalpa. Tercerista cadres attacked Guard posts in Managua, Masaya, León, Chinandega and Estelí. Large numbers of semi-armed civilians joined the revolt and put the Guard garrisons of the latter four cities under siege. The September Insurrection of 1978 was subdued at the cost of several thousand, mostly civilian, casualties. Members of all three factions fought in these uprisings, which began to blur the divisions and prepare the way for unified action.

=== Reunification (1979) ===
In early 1979, President Jimmy Carter and the United States ended support for the Somoza government, but did not want a left-wing government to take power in Nicaragua. The moderate &quot;Broad Opposition Front&quot; (&quot;Frente Amplio Opositor&quot; – FAO), which opposed Somoza, was made up of a conglomeration of dissidents within the government as well as the &quot;Democratic Union of Liberation&quot; (UDEL) and the &quot;Twelve&quot;, representatives of the Terceristas (whose founding members included Casimiro A. Sotelo, later to become Ambassador to the U.S. and Canada representing the FSLN). The FAO and Carter came up with a plan to remove Somoza from office but give the FSLN no government power. The FAO&#x27;s efforts lost political legitimacy, as the grassroots support of the FSLN wanted more structural changes and was opposed to &quot;Somocism without Somoza&quot;.

The &quot;Twelve&quot; abandoned the coalition in protest and formed the &quot;National Patriotic Front&quot; (&quot;Frente Patriotico Nacional&quot; – FPN) together with the &quot;United People&#x27;s Movement&quot; (MPU). This strengthened the revolutionary organizations as tens of thousands of youths joined the FSLN and the fight against Somoza. A direct consequence of the spread of the armed struggle in Nicaragua was the official reunification of the FSLN that took place March 7, 1979. Nine men, three from each tendency, formed the National Directorate that led the reunited FSLN: Daniel Ortega, Humberto Ortega and Víctor Tirado (Terceristas); Tomás Borge, , and Henry Ruiz (GPP faction); and Jaime Wheelock, Luis Carrión and Carlos Núñez.

=== Nicaraguan Revolution ===

The FSLN evolved from one of many opposition groups to a leadership role in the overthrow of the Somoza regime. By mid-April 1979, five guerrilla fronts opened under the FSLN&#x27;s joint command, including an internal front in Managua. Young guerrilla cadres and the National Guardsmen were clashing almost daily in cities throughout the country. The Final Offensive&#x27;s strategic goal was the division of the enemy&#x27;s forces. Urban insurrection was the crucial element because the FSLN could never hope to outnumber or outgun the National Guard.

On June 4, the FSLN called a general strike, to last until Somoza fell and an uprising was launched in Managua. On June 16, the formation of a provisional Nicaraguan government in exile, consisting of a five-member Junta of National Reconstruction, was announced and organized in Costa Rica. The members of the new junta were Daniel Ortega (FSLN), Moisés Hassán (FPN), Sergio Ramírez (the &quot;Twelve&quot;), Alfonso Robelo (MDN) and Violeta Barrios de Chamorro, the widow of &quot;La Prensa&quot;″s director Pedro Joaquín Chamorro. By the end of that month, with the exception of the capital, most of Nicaragua was under FSLN control, including León and Matagalpa, Nicaragua&#x27;s two largest cities after Managua.

On July 9, the provisional government in exile released a government program in which it pledged to organize an effective democratic regime, promote political pluralism and universal suffrage, and ban ideological discrimination, except for those promoting the &quot;return of Somoza&#x27;s rule&quot;. On July 17, Somoza resigned, handed over power to Francisco Urcuyo, and fled to Miami. While initially seeking to remain in power to serve out Somoza&#x27;s presidential term, Urcuyo ceded his position to the junta and fled to Guatemala two days later.

On July 19, the 18th anniversary of the foundation of the FSLN, the FSLN army entered Managua, culminating the first goal of the revolution. The war left 30,000–50,000 dead and 150,000 Nicaraguans in exile. The five-member junta entered Managua the next day and assumed power, reiterating its pledge to work for political pluralism, a mixed economic system, and a nonaligned foreign policy.

=== Sandinista rule (1979–1990) ===
The Sandinistas inherited a country with a debt of US$1.6 billion, an estimated 30,000 to 50,000 war dead, 600,000 homeless, and a devastated economic infrastructure. To begin establishing a new government, they created a Council (or ) of National Reconstruction, made up of five appointed members. Three of the appointed members—Sandinista militants Daniel Ortega, Moisés Hassán, and novelist Sergio Ramírez (a member of Los Doce &quot;the Twelve&quot;)—belonged to the FSLN. Two opposition members, businessman Alfonso Robelo, and Violeta Barrios de Chamorro (the widow of Pedro Joaquín Chamorro), were also appointed. Only three votes were needed to pass law.

The FSLN also established a Council of State, subordinate to the junta, which was composed of representative bodies. But the Council of State gave political parties only 12 of 47 seats; the rest were given to Sandinista organizations. Of the 12 seats reserved for political parties, only three were not allied with the FSLN. Due to the rules governing the Council of State, in 1980 both non-FSLN junta members resigned. Nevertheless, as of the 1982 State of Emergency, opposition parties were no longer given representation in the council. The preponderance of power also remained with the Sandinistas through their mass organizations, including the Sandinista Workers&#x27; Federation (), the Luisa Amanda Espinoza Nicaraguan Women&#x27;s Association (), the National Union of Farmers and Ranchers (), and most importantly the Sandinista Defense Committees (CDS). The Sandinista-controlled mass organizations were extremely influential over civil society and saw their power and popularity peak in the mid-1980s.

Upon assuming power, the FSLN&#x27;s official political platform included nationalization of property owned by the Somozas and their supporters; land reform; improved rural and urban working conditions; free unionization for all workers, both urban and rural; price fixing for commodities of basic necessity; improved public services, housing conditions, education; abolition of torture, political assassination and the death penalty; protection of democratic liberties; equality for women; non-aligned foreign policy; and formation of a &quot;popular army&quot; under the leadership of the FSLN and Humberto Ortega.

The FSLN&#x27;s literacy campaign sent teachers into the countryside; within six months, half a million people had been taught rudimentary reading, bringing the national illiteracy rate down from over 50% to just under 12%. Over 100,000 Nicaraguans participated as literacy teachers. One of the literacy campaign&#x27;s aims was to create a literate electorate that could make informed choices in the promised elections. The success of the literacy campaign was recognized by UNESCO with a Nadezhda Krupskaya International Prize, although the actual success of this literary campaign, and its long-term impact, have been called into question.

The FSLN also created neighborhood groups similar to the Cuban Committees for the Defense of the Revolution, called Sandinista Defense Committees ( or CDS). Especially in the early days following Somoza&#x27;s overthrow, the CDSes served as &quot;de facto&quot; units of local governance. Their obligations included political education, organizing Sandinista rallies, distributing food rations, organizing neighborhood/regional cleanup and recreational activities, policing to control looting, and apprehending counter-revolutionaries. The CDSes organized civilian defense efforts against Contra activities and a network of intelligence systems in order to apprehend their supporters. These activities led critics of the Sandinistas to argue that the CDS was a system of local spy networks for the government used to stifle political dissent, and the CDS did hold limited powers—such as the ability to suspend privileges such as driver licenses and passports—if locals refused to cooperate with the government. After the initiation of heavier U.S. military involvement in the Nicaraguan conflict the CDS was empowered to enforce wartime bans on political assembly and association with other political parties (i.e., parties associated with the Contras).

By 1980, conflicts began to emerge between the Sandinista and non-Sandinista members of the governing junta. Violeta Chamorro and Alfonso Robelo resigned from the junta in 1980, and rumors began that members of the Ortega junta would consolidate power among themselves. These allegations spread, and rumors intensified that it was Ortega&#x27;s goal to turn Nicaragua into a state modeled after Cuban socialism. In 1979 and 1980, former Somoza supporters and ex-members of Somoza&#x27;s National Guard formed irregular military forces, while the original core of the FSLN began to splinter. Armed opposition to the Sandinista government eventually divided into two main groups: The Fuerza Democrática Nicaragüense (FDN), a U.S.-supported army formed in 1981 by the CIA, U.S. State Department, and former members of the Somoza-era Nicaraguan National Guard; and the Alianza Revolucionaria Democratica (ARDE) Democratic Revolutionary Alliance, a group that had existed since before the FSLN and was led by Sandinista founder and former FSLN supreme commander Edén Pastora, a.k.a. &quot;Commander Zero&quot;. Milpistas, former anti-Somoza rural militias, eventually formed the largest pool of recruits for the Contras. Although independent and often in conflict with each other, these guerrilla bands—along with several others—all became known as Contras (short for —counter-revolutionaries).

The opposition militias were initially organized and largely remained segregated according to regional affiliation and political backgrounds. They conducted attacks on economic, military, and civilian targets. During the Contra war, the Sandinistas arrested suspected members of the Contra militias and censored publications they accused of collaborating with the enemy, such as the U.S., the FDN, and ARDE.

==== State of Emergency (1982–1988) ====
In March 1982 the Sandinistas declared an official State of Emergency. They argued that this was a response to attacks by counter-revolutionary forces. The State of Emergency lasted six years, until January 1988, when it was lifted.

Under the new &quot;Law for the Maintenance of Order and Public Security&quot; the &quot;Tribunales Populares Anti-Somocistas&quot; allowed for the indefinite holding of suspected counter-revolutionaries without trial. The State of Emergency, however, most notably affected rights and guarantees contained in the &quot;Statute on Rights and Guarantees of Nicaraguans&quot;. Many civil liberties were curtailed or canceled such as the freedom to organize demonstrations, the inviolability of the home, freedom of the press, freedom of speech, and the freedom to strike.

All independent news program broadcasts were suspended. In total, twenty-four programs were cancelled. In addition, Sandinista censor Nelba Cecilia Blandón issued a decree ordering all radio stations to take broadcasts from government radio station La Voz de La Defensa de La Patria every six hours.

The rights affected also included certain procedural guarantees in the case of detention including habeas corpus. The State of Emergency was not lifted during the 1984 elections. There were many instances where rallies of opposition parties were physically broken up by Sandinista Youth or pro-Sandinista mobs. Opponents to the State of Emergency argued its intent was to crush resistance to the FSLN. James Wheelock justified the actions of the Directorate by saying &quot;... We are annulling the license of the false prophets and the oligarchs to attack the revolution.&quot;

Some emergency measures were taken before 1982. In December 1979 special courts called &quot;Tribunales Especiales&quot; were established to speed up the processing of 7,000-8,000 National Guard prisoners. These courts operated through relaxed rules of evidence and due process and were often staffed by law students and inexperienced lawyers. However, the decisions of the &quot;Tribunales Especiales&quot; were subject to appeal in regular courts. Many of the National Guard prisoners were released immediately due to lack of evidence. Others were pardoned or released by decree. By 1986 only 2,157 remained in custody and only 39 were still being held in 1989 when they were released under the Esquipulas II agreement.

On October 5, 1985, the Sandinistas broadened the 1982 State of Emergency and suspended many more civil rights. A new regulation also forced any organization outside of the government to first submit any statement it wanted to make public to the censorship bureau for prior approval.

The FSLN lost power in the presidential election of 1990 when Daniel Ortega was defeated in an election for the Presidency of Nicaragua by Violeta Chamorro.

=== Sandinistas vs. Contras ===
Upon assuming office in 1981, U.S. President Ronald Reagan condemned the FSLN for joining with Cuba in supporting &quot;Marxist&quot; revolutionary movements in other Latin American countries such as El Salvador. His administration authorized the CIA to begin financing, arming and training rebels, most of whom were the remnants of Somoza&#x27;s National Guard, as anti-Sandinista guerrillas that were branded &quot;counter-revolutionary&quot; by leftists ( in Spanish). This was shortened to &quot;Contras&quot;, a label the force chose to embrace. Edén Pastora and many of the indigenous guerrilla forces, who were not associated with the &quot;Somocistas&quot;, also resisted the Sandinistas.

The Contras operated out of camps in the neighboring countries of Honduras to the north and Costa Rica (see Edén Pastora cited below) to the south. As was typical in guerrilla warfare, they were engaged in a campaign of economic sabotage in an attempt to combat the Sandinista government and disrupted shipping by planting underwater mines in Nicaragua&#x27;s Corinto harbour, an action condemned by the International Court of Justice as illegal. The U.S. also sought to place economic pressure on the Sandinistas, and, as with Cuba, the Reagan administration imposed a full trade embargo.

The Contras also carried out a systematic campaign to disrupt the social reform programs of the government. This campaign included attacks on schools, health centers and the majority of the rural population that was sympathetic to the Sandinistas. Widespread murder, rape, and torture were also used as tools to destabilize the government and to &quot;terrorize&quot; the population into collaborating with the Contras. Throughout this campaign, the Contras received military and financial support from the CIA and the Reagan Administration. This campaign has been condemned internationally for its many human rights violations. Contra supporters have often tried to downplay these violations, or countered that the Sandinista government carried out much more. In particular, the Reagan administration engaged in a campaign to alter public opinion on the Contras that has been termed &quot;white propaganda&quot;. In 1984, the International Court of Justice judged that the United States Government had been in violation of International law when it supported the Contras.

After the U.S. Congress prohibited federal funding of the Contras through the Boland Amendment in 1983, the Reagan administration continued to back the Contras by raising money from foreign allies and covertly selling arms to Iran (then engaged in a war with Iraq), and channelling the proceeds to the Contras (see the Iran–Contra affair). When this scheme was revealed, Reagan admitted that he knew about Iranian &quot;arms for hostages&quot; dealings but professed ignorance about the proceeds funding the Contras; for this, National Security Council aide Lt. Col. Oliver North took much of the blame.

Senator John Kerry&#x27;s 1988 U.S. Senate Committee on Foreign Relations report on links between the Contras and drug imports to the US concluded that &quot;senior U.S. policy makers were not immune to the idea that drug money was a perfect solution to the Contras&#x27; funding problems&quot;. According to the National Security Archive, Oliver North had been in contact with Manuel Noriega, the US-backed president of Panama. The Reagan administration&#x27;s support for the Contras continued to stir controversy well into the 1990s. In August 1996, &quot;San Jose Mercury News&quot; reporter Gary Webb published a series titled &quot;Dark Alliance&quot;, linking the origins of crack cocaine in California to the CIA-Contra alliance. Webb&#x27;s allegations were repudiated by reports from the &quot;Los Angeles Times&quot;, &quot;The New York Times&quot;, and &quot;The Washington Post&quot;, and the &quot;San Jose Mercury News&quot; eventually disavowed his work. An investigation by the United States Department of Justice also stated that their &quot;review did not substantiate the main allegations stated and implied in the Mercury News articles&quot;. Regarding the specific charges towards the CIA, the DOJ wrote &quot;the implication that the drug trafficking by the individuals discussed in the &quot;Mercury News&quot; articles was connected to the CIA was also not supported by the facts&quot;. The CIA also investigated and rejected the allegations.

The Contra war unfolded differently in the northern and southern zones of Nicaragua. Contras based in Costa Rica operated on Nicaragua&#x27;s Caribbean coast, which is sparsely populated by indigenous groups including the Miskito, Sumo, Rama, Garifuna, and Mestizo. Unlike Spanish-speaking western Nicaragua, the Caribbean Coast also has lots of speakers of indigenous languages and English-based creoles, and was largely ignored by the Somoza regime. The &quot;costeños&quot; did not participate in the uprising against Somoza and viewed Sandinismo with suspicion from the outset.

=== Elections ===

==== 1984 election ====
While the Sandinistas encouraged grassroots pluralism, they were perhaps less enthusiastic about national elections. They argued that popular support was expressed in the insurrection and that further appeals to popular support would be a waste of scarce resources. International pressure and domestic opposition eventually pressed the government toward a national election. Tomás Borge warned that the elections were a concession, an act of generosity and of political necessity. On the other hand, the Sandinistas had little to fear from the election given the advantages of incumbency and the restrictions on the opposition, and they hoped to discredit the armed efforts to overthrow them.

A broad range of political parties, ranging in political orientation from far-left to far-right, competed for power. Following promulgation of a new populist constitution, Nicaragua held national elections in 1984. Independent electoral observers from around the world—including groups from the UN as well as observers from Western Europe—claimed that the elections had been fair. Several groups, however, disputed this, including UNO, a broad coalition of anti-Sandinista activists, COSEP, an organization of business leaders, the Contra group &quot;FDN&quot;, organized by former Somozan-era National Guardsmen, landowners, businessmen, peasant highlanders, and what some claimed as their patron, the U.S. government.

Although initially willing to stand in the 1984 elections, the UNO, headed by Arturo Cruz (a former Sandinista), declined participation in the elections based on their own objections to the restrictions placed on the electoral process by the State of Emergency and the official advisement of President Ronald Reagan&#x27;s State Department, who wanted to de-legitimize the election process. Among other parties that abstained was COSEP, who had warned the FSLN that they would decline participation unless freedom of the press was reinstituted. Coordinadora Democrática (CD) also refused to file candidates and urged Nicaraguans not to take part in the election. The Independent Liberal Party (PLI), headed by Virgilio Godoy Reyes, announced its refusal to participate in October. Consequently, when the elections went ahead the U.S. raised objections based upon political restrictions instituted by the State of Emergency (e.g., censorship of the press, cancellation of habeas corpus, and the curtailing of free assembly).

Daniel Ortega and Sergio Ramírez were elected president and vice-president, and the FSLN won an overwhelming 61 out of 96 seats in the new National Assembly, having taken 67% of the vote on a turnout of 75%. Despite international validation of the elections by multiple political and independent observers (virtually all from among U.S. allies), the United States refused to recognize the elections, with President Ronald Reagan denouncing the elections as a sham. Daniel Ortega began his six-year presidential term on January 10, 1985. After the United States Congress turned down continued funding of the Contras in April 1985, the Reagan administration ordered a total embargo on United States trade with Nicaragua the following month, accusing the Sandinista government of threatening United States security in the region.

==== 1990 election ====
The elections of 1990, which had been mandated by the constitution passed in 1987, saw the Bush administration funnel $49.75 million of &#x27;non-lethal&#x27; aid to the Contras, as well as $9 million to the opposition UNO—equivalent to $2 billion worth of intervention by a foreign power in a US election at the time, and proportionately five times the amount George Bush had spent on his own election campaign. When Violeta Chamorro visited the White House in November 1989, the US pledged to maintain the embargo against Nicaragua unless Violeta Chamorro won.

There were reports of intimidation and violence during the election campaign by the contras, with a Canadian observer mission claiming that 42 people were killed by the contras in &quot;election violence&quot; in October 1989. Sandinistas were also accused of intimidation and violence during the election campaign. According to the Puebla Institute, by mid-December 1989, seven opposition leaders had been murdered, 12 had disappeared, 20 had been arrested, and 30 others assaulted. In late January 1990, the OAS observer team reported that &quot;a convoy of troops attacked four truckloads of UNO sympathizers with bayonets and rifle butts, threatening to kill them.&quot;

Years of conflict had left 50,000 casualties and $12 billion of damages in a society of 3.5 million people and an annual GNP of $2 billion. After the election, a survey was taken of voters: 75.6% agreed that if the Sandinistas had won, the war would never have ended. 91.8% of those who voted for the UNO agreed with this (William I Robinson, op cit). The Library of Congress Country Studies on Nicaragua states:

Despite limited resources and poor organization, the UNO coalition under Violeta Chamorro directed a campaign centered around the failing economy and promises of peace. Many Nicaraguans expected the country&#x27;s economic crisis to deepen and the Contra conflict to continue if the Sandinistas remained in power. Chamorro promised to end the unpopular military draft, bring about democratic reconciliation, and promote economic growth. In the February 25, 1990, elections, Violeta Barrios de Chamorro carried 55 percent of the popular vote against Daniel Ortega&#x27;s 41 percent.

=== Opposition (1990–2006) ===
In 1987, due to a stalemate with the Contras, the Esquipulas II treaty was brokered by Costa Rican President Óscar Arias Sánchez. The treaty&#x27;s provisions included a call for a cease-fire, freedom of expression, and national elections. After the February 26, 1990 elections, the Sandinistas lost and peacefully passed power to the National Opposition Union (UNO), an alliance of 14 opposition parties ranging from the conservative business organization COSEP to Nicaraguan communists. UNO&#x27;s candidate, Violeta Barrios de Chamorro, replaced Daniel Ortega as president of Nicaragua.

Reasons for the Sandinista loss in 1990 are disputed. Defenders of the defeated government assert that Nicaraguans voted for the opposition due to the continuing U.S. economic embargo and potential Contra threat. Others have alleged that the United States threatened to continue to support the Contras and continue the civil war if the regime was not voted out of power.

After their loss, the Sandinista leaders held most of the private property and businesses that had been confiscated and nationalized by the FSLN government. This process became known as the &quot;piñata&quot; and was tolerated by the new Chamorro government. Ortega also claimed to &quot;rule from below&quot; through groups he controls such as labor unions and student groups.

Ortega remained the head of the FSLN, but his brother Humberto resigned from the party and remained at the head of the Sandinista Army, becoming a close confidante and supporter of Chamorro. The party also experienced internal divisions, with prominent Sandinistas such as Ernesto Cardenal and Sergio Ramírez resigning to protest what they described as heavy-handed domination of the party by Daniel Ortega. Ramírez also founded a separate political party, the Sandinista Renovation Movement (MRS); his faction came to be known as the , who favor a more social democratic approach than the &quot;ortodoxos&quot;, or hardliners. In the 1996 Nicaraguan election, Ortega and Ramírez both campaigned unsuccessfully as presidential candidates on behalf of their respective parties, with Ortega receiving 43% of the vote while Arnoldo Alemán of the Constitutional Liberal Party received 51%. The Sandinistas won second place in the congressional elections, with 36 of 93 seats.

Ortega was re-elected as leader of the FSLN in 1998. Municipal elections in November 2000 saw a strong Sandinista vote, especially in urban areas, and former Tourism Minister Herty Lewites was elected mayor of Managua. This result led to expectations of a close race in the presidential elections scheduled for November 2001. Daniel Ortega and Enrique Bolaños of the Constitutional Liberal Party (PLC) ran neck-and-neck in the polls for much of the campaign, but in the end the PLC won a clear victory. The results of these elections were that the FSLN won 42.6% of the vote for parliament (versus 52.6% for the PLC), giving them 41 out of the 92 seats in the National Assembly (versus 48 for the PLC). In the presidential race, Ortega lost to Bolaños 46.3% to 53.6%.

Daniel Ortega was once again re-elected as leader of the FSLN in March 2002 and re-elected as president of Nicaragua in November 2006.

=== Return to government ===
In 2006, Daniel Ortega was elected president with 38% of the vote (see 2006 Nicaraguan general election). This occurred despite the fact that the breakaway Sandinista Renovation Movement continued to oppose the FSLN, running former Mayor of Managua Herty Lewites as its candidate for president. However, Lewites died several months before the elections.

The FSLN also won 38 seats in the congressional elections, becoming the party with the largest representation in parliament. The split in the Constitutionalist Liberal Party helped to allow the FSLN to become the largest party in Congress. The Sandinista vote was also split between the FSLN and MRS, but the split was more uneven, with limited support for the MRS. The vote for the two liberal parties combined was larger than the vote for the two Sandinista parties. In 2010, several liberal congressmen raised accusations about the FSLN presumably attempting to buy votes in order to pass constitutional reforms that would allow Ortega to run for office for the 6th time since 1984. In 2011, Ortega was re-elected as president.

Ortega was allowed by Nicaraguan Supreme Court to run again as president, despite having already served two mandates, in a move which was strongly criticized by the opposition. The Supreme Court also banned the leader of the Independent Liberal Party Eduardo Montealegre from running in the election. Ortega was re-elected as president, amid claims of electoral fraud; data about turnout were unclear: while the Supreme Electoral Council claimed a turnout of 66% of voters, the opposition claimed only 30% of voters actually went to the polls.

==== 2018–20 protests ====

The year 2018 was marked by particular unrest in Nicaragua that had not been seen in the country in three decades. It came in two different phases, with initial unrest in the context of a fire at the Indio Maíz Biological Reserve in the Río San Juan department (which came to an end when rain abruptly put the fire out), leading on to an outbreak of violence a few weeks later after social security reforms were announced by the government.

During this unrest there were many deaths linked to the violence, as well as many instances of torture, sexual assaults, death threats, ransacking and burning of buildings and violence against journalists. Opposition figures argued that the government was responsible for the violence, a view supported by some press outlets and NGOs such as Amnesty International. Many opposition figures and independent journalists have been arrested and police raids of opposition forces and independent media have occurred frequently.

On September 29, 2018, President Ortega declared that the protests were illegal, stating that demonstrators would &quot;respond to justice.&quot; The United Nations condemned the actions as being a violation of human rights regarding freedom of assembly.

Carlos Fernando Chamorro, son of former president Violeta Chamorro and editor of &quot;Confidencial&quot;, left the country after his office was subject to police search in December 2018.

In December 2018, the government revoked the licenses of five human rights organizations, closed the offices of the cable news and online show &quot;Confidencial&quot;, and beat journalists when they protested.

The Confidential newspaper and other media were seized and taken by the government of Daniel Ortega Several service stations of the Puma brand were closed on the afternoon, December 20, by representatives of the Nicaraguan Energy Institute (INE), a state entity that has the mandate to regulate, among others, the hydrocarbons sector. Puma Energy entered the Nicaraguan oil and fuel derivatives market at the end of March 2011, when it bought the entire network of Esso stations in Nicaragua, as part of a regional operation that involved the purchase of 290 service stations and eight storage terminals of fuel in four countries of Central America.

On December 21, 2018, the Nicaraguan police raided the offices of the 100% News Channel. They arrested Miguel Mora, owner of the Canal; Lucía Pineda, Head of Press of 100% Noticias and Verónica Chávez, wife of Miguel Mora and host of the Ellas Lo Dicen Program. Subsequently, Verónica Chávez was released. Miguel Mora and Lucia Pineda were accused of terrorist crimes and provoking hatred and discrimination between the police and Sandinistas.

On January 30, 2019, the FSLN was expelled from the Socialist International, which cited &quot;gross violations of human rights and democratic values committed by the government of Nicaragua&quot;. The ruling Democratic Revolutionary Party of Panama, also a member of the Socialist International, rejected the expulsion of the FSLN and threatened to leave the International, saying that it has abandoned its principles and made a decision regarding Latin America without consulting the Latin American parties, and referred to a &quot;history of brotherhood in the struggle for social justice in Central America&quot; between the two parties.

== Ideology ==

Through the media and the works of FSLN leaders such as Carlos Fonseca, the life and times of Augusto César Sandino became its unique symbol in Nicaragua. The ideology of Sandinismo gained momentum in 1974, when a Sandinista-initiated hostage situation resulted in the Somoza government adhering to FSLN demands and publicly printing and airing work on Sandino in well known newspapers and media outlets.

During the struggle against Somoza, the FSLN leaders&#x27; internal disagreements over strategy and tactics were reflected in three main factions:
* The (GPP, &quot;protracted people&#x27;s war&quot;) faction was rural-based and sought long-term &quot;silent accumulation of forces&quot; within the country&#x27;s large peasant population, which it saw as the main social base for the revolution.
* The (TP, &quot;proletarian tendency&quot;), led by Jaime Wheelock, reflected an orthodox Marxist approach that sought to organize urban workers.
* The &quot;/&quot; (TI, &quot;third way/insurrectionist&quot;) faction, led by Humberto, Casimiro A. Sotelo, and Daniel Ortega, was ideologically eclectic, favoring a more rapid insurrectional strategy in alliance with diverse sectors of the country, including business owners, churches, students, the middle class, unemployed youth and the inhabitants of shantytowns. The also helped attract popular and international support by organizing a group of prominent Nicaraguan professionals, business leaders, and clergymen (known as &quot;the Twelve&quot;), who called for Somoza&#x27;s removal and sought to organize a provisional government from Costa Rica.

Nevertheless, while ideologies varied between FSLN leaders, all leaders essentially agreed that Sandino provided a path for the Nicaragua masses to take charge, and the FSLN would act as the legitimate vanguard. The extreme end of the ideology links Sandino to Roman Catholicism and portrays him as descending from the mountains in Nicaragua knowing he would be betrayed and killed. Generally however, most Sandinistas associated Sandino on a more practical level, as a heroic and honest person who tried to combat the evil forces of imperialist national and international governments that existed in Nicaragua&#x27;s history.

An important part of the Sandinista ideology is Christian socialism and liberation theology. This connection was so strong that Catholic priest Ernesto Cardenal who served as the Minister of Culture in the Sandinista government, remarked: &quot;I think Nicaraguans who separate Christianity from Revolution are mistaken. Here they are the same thing.&quot; In response to the growing radicalization and opposition to Somoza amongst the Church, the FSLN incorporated a Catholic message into its program; this was augmented by left-wing Catholic organizations such as the Movimiento Cristiano Revolucionario joining the FSLN, whose members would assume high responsibilities within the Sandinista government. Sandinista activists infiltrated folk and religious imagery - on one such instance, they distributed paintings of the resurrection of Christ, where Christ appeared in a black and red cape (Sandinista colours), which bore the letters FSLN. As the FSLN lacked party structures which could be used for organizing, they relied on friendly clergymen instead; according to Peter Marchetti, this relationship became so intimate that &quot;the parish replaced Lenin&#x27;s idea of a cell&quot;. Sandinista Minister of Education Carlos Tünnerman argued that Sandinismo &quot;is deeply rooted in Christianity&quot; and &quot;came about through a process of Christian self-reflection&quot;.

As Sandinistas relied on churches to build their structures, their ideological relationship to Catholicism was not just based on mutual support, but on active incorporation of Political Catholicism. Sandinista musician Carlos Mejía Godoy composed &quot;Misa Campesina Nicaraguense&quot; (Nicaraguan peasant mass) which replaced the traditional mass in Nicaraguan churches, with Catholic hymns praising &quot;worker Christ&quot;. The FSLN provided churches with decals of Virgin Mary and Catholic saints next to portraits of Augusto Sandino, Che Guevara and Camilo Torres Restrepo. Sandinistas openly promoted the Catholic concept of &quot;preferential option for the poor&quot;, and the Secretary-General of FSLN Carlos Fonseca remarked: &quot;Since I began working with the Sandinista Front I have never—never! at any moment met anything which contradicts my Christian faith, nor which clashes with my Christian morality. Never. Just the opposite. For me the Sandinista Front has been the channel that has enabled me to live my Christian faith more authentically, that is, with actions.&quot; Sandinismo offered a blend of the Marxist notion of class struggle and liberation theology, presenting their ideology as an &#x27;extension&#x27; of Catholicism. Tomás Borge argued that the Sandinista revolution &quot;was on behalf of all human beings, but as with Christ above all for the poor.&quot;

== Principles of government ==
For purposes of making sense of how to govern, the FSLN drew four fundamental principles from the work of Carlos Fonseca and his understanding of the lessons of Sandino. According to Bruce E. Wright, &quot;the Governing Junta of National Reconstruction agreed, under Sandinista leadership, that these principles had guided it in putting into practice a form of government that was characterized by those principles.&quot; It is generally accepted that these following principles have evolved the &quot;ideology of Sandinismo&quot;. Three of these (excluding popular participation, which was presumably contained in Article 2 of the Constitution of Nicaragua) were to ultimately be guaranteed by Article 5 of the Constitution of Nicaragua. They are as follows:
# Political Pluralism – The ultimate success of the Sandinista Front in guiding the insurrection and in obtaining the leading fore within it was based on the fact that the FSLN, through the tercerista guidance, had worked with many sectors of the population in defeating the Somoza dictatorship. The FSLN and all those who would constitute the new provisional government were called diverse; &quot;they were plural in virtually all senses&quot;.
# Mixed Economy – Fonseca&#x27;s understanding that Nicaragua was not, in spite of Browderist interpretations, simply a feudal country and that it had also never really developed its own capitalism made it clear that a simple feudalism-capitalism-socialism path was not a rational way to think about the future development of Nicaragua. The FSLN was not necessarily seen simply as the vanguard of the proletariat revolution. The proletariat was but a minor fraction of the population. A complex class structure in a revolution based on unity among people from various class positions suggested more that it made sense to see the FSLN as the &quot;vanguard of the people&quot;.
# Popular Participation and Mobilization – This calls for more than simple representative democracy. The inclusion of the mass organizations in the Council of State clearly manifested this conception. In Article 2 of the Constitution this is spelled out as follows: &quot;The people exercise democracy, freely participating and deciding in the construction of the economic, political and social system what is most appropriate to their interest. The people exercise power directly and by their means of their representatives, freely elected in accord with universal, equal, direct, free, and secret suffrage.&quot;
# International Non-alignment – This is a result of the fundamentally Bolivarist conceptions of Sandino as distilled through the modern understanding of Fonseca. The U.S. government and large U.S. economic entities were a significant part of the problem for Nicaragua. But experiences with the traditional parties allied with the Soviet Union had also been unsatisfactory. Thus it was clear that Nicaragua must seek its own road.

Bruce E. Wright claims that &quot;this was a crucial contribution from Fonseca&#x27;s work that set the template for FSLN governance during the revolutionary years and beyond&quot;.

== Policies and programs ==

=== Foreign policy ===

==== Cuban assistance ====

Beginning in 1967, the Cuban General Intelligence Directorate, or DGI, had begun to establish ties with Nicaraguan revolutionary organizations. By 1970 the DGI had managed to train hundreds of Sandinista guerrilla leaders and had vast influence over the organization. After the successful ousting of Somoza, DGI involvement in the new Sandinista government expanded rapidly. An early indication of the central role that the DGI would play in the Cuban-Nicaraguan relationship is a meeting in Havana on July 27, 1979, at which diplomatic ties between the two countries were re-established after more than 25 years. Julián López Díaz, a prominent DGI agent, was named Ambassador to Nicaragua. Cuban military and DGI advisors, initially brought in during the Sandinista insurgency, would swell to over 2,500 and operated at all levels of the new Nicaraguan government.

The Cubans would like to have helped more in the development of Nicaragua towards socialism. Following the US invasion of Grenada, countries previously looking for support from Cuba saw that the United States was likely to take violent action to discourage this.

===== Cuban assistance after the revolution =====
The early years of the Nicaraguan revolution had strong ties to Cuba. The Sandinista leaders acknowledged that the FSLN owed a great debt to the socialist island. Once the Sandinistas assumed power, Cuba gave Nicaragua military advice, as well as aid in education, health care, vocational training and industry building for the impoverished Nicaraguan economy. In return, Nicaragua provided Cuba with grains and other foodstuffs to help Cuba overcome the effects of the US embargo.

==== Relationship with eastern bloc intelligence agencies ====

===== Pre-Revolution =====
According to Cambridge University historian Christopher Andrew, who undertook the task of processing the Mitrokhin Archive, Carlos Fonseca Amador, one of the original three founding members of the FSLN had been recruited by the KGB in 1959 while on a trip to Moscow. This was one part of Aleksandr Shelepin&#x27;s &#x27;grand strategy&#x27; of using national liberation movements as a spearhead of the Soviet Union&#x27;s foreign policy in the Third World, and in 1960 the KGB organized funding and training for twelve individuals that Fonseca handpicked. These individuals were to be the core of the new Sandinista organization. In the following several years, the FSLN tried with little success to organize guerrilla warfare against the government of Luis Somoza Debayle. After several failed attempts to attack government strongholds and little initial support from the local population, the National Guard nearly annihilated the Sandinistas in a series of attacks in 1963. Disappointed with the performance of Shelepin&#x27;s new Latin American &quot;revolutionary vanguard&quot;, the KGB reconstituted its core of the Sandinista leadership into the ISKRA group and used them for other activities in Latin America.

According to Andrew, Mitrokhin says during the following three years the KGB handpicked several dozen Sandinistas for intelligence and sabotage operations in the United States. Andrew and Mitrokhin say that in 1966, this KGB-controlled Sandinista sabotage and intelligence group was sent to northern Mexico near the US border to conduct surveillance for possible sabotage.

In July 1961 during the Berlin Crisis of 1961 KGB chief Alexander Shelepin sent a memorandum to Soviet premier Nikita Khrushchev containing proposals to create a situation in various areas of the world which would favor dispersion of attention and forces by the US and their satellites, and would tie them down during the settlement of the question of a German peace treaty and West Berlin. It was planned, inter alia, to organize an armed mutiny in Nicaragua in coordination with Cuba and with the &quot;Revolutionary Front Sandino&quot;. Shelepin proposed to make appropriations from KGB funds in addition to the previous assistance $10,000 for purchase of arms.

Khrushchev sent the memo with his approval to his deputy Frol Kozlov and on August 1 it was, with minor revisions, passed as a CPSU Central Committee directive. The KGB and the Soviet Ministry of Defense were instructed to work out more specific measures and present them for consideration by the Central Committee.

===== Cooperation with foreign intelligence agencies during the 1980s =====
Other researchers have documented the contribution made from other Warsaw Pact intelligence agencies to the fledgling Sandinista government including the East German Stasi, by using recently declassified documents from Berlin as well as from former Stasi spymaster Markus Wolf who described the Stasi&#x27;s assistance in the creation of a secret police force modeled on East Germany&#x27;s.

=== Educational assistance ===
Cuba was instrumental in the Nicaraguan Literacy Campaign. Nicaragua was a country with a very high rate of illiteracy, but the campaign succeeded in lowering the rate from 50% to 12%. The revolution in Cuban education since the ousting of the US-backed Batista regime not only served as a model for Nicaragua but also provided technical assistance and advice. Cuba played an important part in the Campaign, providing teachers on a yearly basis after the revolution. Prevost states that &quot;Teachers were not the only ones studying in Cuba, about 2,000 primary and secondary students were studying on the Isle of Youth and the cost was covered by the host country (Cuba)&quot;.

==== 1980 literacy campaign ====
The goals of the 1980 Literacy Campaign were socio-political, strategic as well as educational. It was the most prominent campaign with regards to the new education system. Illiteracy in Nicaragua was reduced, and it has been claimed that overall illiteracy went down from 50% to 13%, although this figure has been called into question. One of the government&#x27;s major concerns was the previous education system under the Somoza regime which did not see education as a major factor on the development of the country. As mentioned in the Historical Program of the FSLN of 1969, education was seen as a right and the pressure to stay committed to the promises made in the program was even stronger. 1980 was declared the &quot;Year of Literacy&quot; and the major goals of the campaign that started only 8 months after the FSLN took over. This included the eradication of illiteracy and the integration of different classes, races, gender and age. Political awareness and the strengthening of political and economic participation of the Nicaraguan people was also a central goal of the Literacy Campaign. The campaign was a key component of the FSLN&#x27;s cultural transformation agenda.

The basic reader which was disseminated and used by teacher was called &quot;Dawn of the People&quot; based on the themes of Sandino, Carlos Fonseca, and the Sandinista struggle against imperialism and defending the revolution. Political education was aimed at creating a new social values based on the principles of Sandinista socialism, such as social solidarity, worker&#x27;s democracy, egalitarianism, and anti-imperialism.

=== Health care ===
Health conditions in Somoza era Nicaragua were abysmal according to a report published in the New England Journal of Medicine. Vaccine coverage of babies under a year old was 88% immunised against polio and 78% against measles in 1983. Despite the turmoil caused by the Contra War under-fire mortality was reduced by approximately half during this period.

In this area Cuba played a role by again offering expertise to Nicaragua. Over 1,500 Cuban doctors worked in Nicaragua and provided more than five million consultations. Cuban personnel were essential in the elimination of polio, the decrease in whooping cough, rubella, measles and the lowering of the infant mortality rate. Gary Prevost states that Cuban personnel made it possible for Nicaragua to have a national health care system that reached the majority of its citizens.

=== Vocational assistance ===
Cuba has participated in the training of Nicaraguan workers in the use of new machinery imported to Nicaragua. The Nicaraguan revolution caused the United States to oppose the country&#x27;s government; therefore the Sandinistas would not receive any aid from the United States. The United States embargo against Nicaragua, imposed by the Reagan administration in May 1985, made it impossible for Nicaragua to receive spare parts for US-made machines, so this led Nicaragua to look to other countries for help. Cuba was the best choice because of the shared language and proximity and also because it had imported similar machinery over the years. Nicaraguans went to Cuba for short periods of three to six months and this training involved close to 3,000 workers. Countries such as the UK, sent farm equipment to Nicaragua.

=== Industry and infrastructure ===
Cuba helped Nicaragua in large projects such as building roads, power plants and sugar mills. Cuba also attempted to help Nicaragua build the first overland route linking Nicaragua″s Atlantic and Pacific coasts. The road was meant to traverse 420 kilometres (260 mi) of jungle, but completion of the road and usage was hindered by the Contra war, and it was never completed.

Another significant feat was the building of the Tipitapa-Malacatoya sugar mill. It was completed and inaugurated during a visit by Fidel Castro in January 1985. The plant used the newest technology available and was built by workers trained in Cuba. Also during this visit Castro announced that all debts incurred on this project were absolved. Cuba also provided technicians to aid in the sugar harvest and assist in the rejuvenation of several old sugar mills. Cubans also assisted in building schools and similar projects.

=== Ministry of Culture ===
After the Nicaraguan revolution, the Sandinista government established a Ministry of Culture in 1980. The ministry was spearheaded by Ernesto Cardenal, a poet and priest. The ministry was established in order to socialize the modes of cultural production. This extended to art forms including dance, music, art, theatre and poetry. The project was created to democratize culture on a national level. The aim of the ministry was to &quot;democratize art&quot; by making it accessible to all social classes as well as protecting the right of the oppressed to produce, distribute and receive art. In particular, the ministry was devoted to the development of working class and &quot;campesino&quot;, or peasant culture. Therefore, the ministry sponsored cultural workshops throughout the country until October 1988 when the Ministry of Culture was integrated into the Ministry of Education because of financial troubles.

The objective of the workshops was to recognize and celebrate neglected forms of artistic expression. The ministry created a program of cultural workshops known as, &quot;Casas de Cultura and Centros Populares de Cultura&quot;. The workshops were set up in poor neighbourhoods and rural areas and advocated universal access and consumption of art in Nicaragua. The ministry assisted in the creation of theatre groups, folklore and artisanal production, song groups, new journals of creation and cultural criticism, and training programs for cultural workers. The ministry created a Sandinista daily newspaper named &quot;Barricada&quot; and its weekly cultural addition named &quot;Ventana&quot; along with the &quot;Television Sandino, Radio Sandino&quot; and the Nicaraguan film production unit called the INCINE. There were existing papers which splintered after the revolution and produced other independent, pro-Sandinista newspapers, such as &quot;El Nuevo Diario&quot; and its literary addition &quot;Nuevo Amanecer Cultural&quot;. Editorial Nueva Nicaragua, a state publishing house for literature, was also created. The ministry collected and published political poetry of the revolutionary period, known as testimonial narrative, a form of literary genre that recorded the experiences of individuals in the course of the revolution.

The ministry developed a new anthology of Rubén Darío, a Nicaraguan poet and writer, established a Rubén Darío prize for Latin American writers, the Leonel Rugama prize for young Nicaraguan writers, as well as public poetry readings and contests, cultural festivals and concerts. The Sandinista regime tried to keep the revolutionary spirit alive by empowering its citizens artistically. At the time of its inception, the Ministry of Culture needed, according to Cardenal, &quot;to bring a culture to the people who were marginalized from it. We want a culture that is not the culture of an elite, of a group that is considered &#x27;cultivated&#x27;, but rather of an entire people.&quot; Nevertheless, the success of the Ministry of Culture had mixed results and by 1985 criticism arose over artistic freedom in the poetry workshops. The poetry workshops became a matter for criticism and debate. Critics argued that the ministry imposed too many principles and guidelines for young writers in the workshop, such as, asking them to avoid metaphors in their poetry and advising them to write about events in their everyday life. Critical voices came from established poets and writers represented by the &quot;Asociacion Sandinista de Trabajadores de la Cultura&quot; (ASTC) and from the &quot;Ventana&quot; both of which were headed by Rosario Murillo. They argued that young writers should be exposed to different poetic styles of writing and resources developed in Nicaragua and elsewhere. Furthermore, they argued that the ministry exhibited a tendency that favored and fostered political and testimonial literature in post-revolutionary Nicaragua.

=== Economy ===

The new government, formed in 1979 and dominated by the Sandinistas, resulted in a socialist model of economic development. The new leadership was conscious of the social inequities produced during the previous thirty years of unrestricted economic growth and was determined to make the country&#x27;s workers and peasants, the &quot;economically underprivileged&quot;, the prime beneficiaries of the new society. Consequently, in 1980 and 1981, unbridled incentives to private investment gave way to institutions designed to redistribute wealth and income. Private property would continue to be allowed, but all land belonging to the Somozas was confiscated. By 1990 the agrarian reform had affected half of the country&#x27;s arable land benefiting some 60% of rural families.

However, the ideology of the Sandinistas put the future of the private sector and of private ownership of the means of production in doubt. Although under the new government both public and private ownership were accepted, government spokespersons occasionally referred to a reconstruction phase in the country&#x27;s development, in which property owners and the professional class would be tapped for their managerial and technical expertise. After reconstruction and recovery, the private sector would give way to expanded public ownership in most areas of the economy. Despite such ideas, which represented the point of view of a faction of the government, the Sandinista government remained officially committed to a mixed economy.

The Sandinista government also significantly expanded workers rights in particular the right to form a union and collective bargaining. Some trade union rights however, like the right to strike were suspended during the Contra War, but strikes still occurred throughout the 1980s, most labour strikes were settled through dialogue with the FSLN.

Economic growth was uneven in the 1980s. Restructuring of the economy and the rebuilding immediately following the end of the civil war caused the GDP to rise about 5 percent in 1980 and 1981. Each year from 1984 to 1990, however, showed a drop in the GDP. Reasons for the contraction included the reluctance of foreign banks to offer new loans, the diversion of funds to fight the new insurrection against the government, and, after 1985, the total embargo on trade with the United States, formerly Nicaragua&#x27;s largest trading partner. After 1985 the government chose to fill the gap between decreasing revenues and mushrooming military expenditures by printing large amounts of paper money. Inflation rose rapidly, peaking in 1988 at more than 14,000 percent annually.

Measures taken by the government to lower inflation were hampered by natural disaster. In early 1988, the administration of Daniel José Ortega Saavedra (Sandinista junta coordinator 1979–85, president 1985–90) established an austerity program to lower inflation. Price controls were tightened, and a new currency was introduced. As a result, by August 1988, inflation had dropped to an annual rate of 240 percent. The following month, however, Hurricane Joan cut a path directly across the center of the country. Damage was extensive, and the government&#x27;s program of large spending to repair the infrastructure destroyed its anti-inflation measures.

In its eleven years in power, the Sandinista government never overcame most of the economic inequalities that it inherited from the Somoza era. Years of war, policy missteps, natural disasters, and the effects of the United States trade embargo all hindered economic development. Despite these problems however, the Nicaragua economy saw a transformation in a direction to satisfy the needs of Nicaragua&#x27;s poor majority.

== Women in revolutionary Nicaragua ==

The women of Nicaragua prior to, during and after the revolution played a prominent role within the nation&#x27;s society as they have commonly been recognized, throughout history and across all Latin American states, as its backbone. Nicaraguan women were therefore directly affected by all of the positive and negative events that took place during this revolutionary period. The victory of the Sandinista National Liberation Front (FSLN) in 1979 brought about major changes and gains for women, mainly in legislation, broad educational opportunities, training programs for working women, childcare programs to help women enter the work force and greatly increased participation and leadership positions in a range of political activities. This, in turn, reduced the burdens that the women of Nicaragua were faced with prior to the revolution. During the Sandinista government, women were more active politically. The large majority of members of the neighborhood committees (Comités de Defensa Sandinista) were women. By 1987, 31% of the executive positions in the Sandinista government, 27% of the leadership positions of the FSLN, and 25% of the FSLN&#x27;s active membership were women.

Supporters of the Sandinistas see their era as characterized by the creation and implementation of successful social programs which were free and made widely available to the entire nation. Some of the more successful programs for women that were implemented by the Sandinistas were in the areas of education (see: Nicaraguan Literacy Campaign), health, and housing. Providing subsidies for basic foodstuffs and the introduction of mass employment were also contributions of the FSLN. The Sandinistas were particularly advantageous for the women of Nicaraguan as they promoted progressive views on gender as early as 1969 claiming that the revolution would &quot;abolish the detestable discrimination that women have suffered with regard to men and establish economic, political and cultural equality between men and women&quot;. This was evident as the FSLN began integrating women into their ranks by 1967, unlike other left-wing guerilla groups in the region. This goal was not fully reached because the roots of gender inequality were not explicitly challenged. Women&#x27;s participation within the public sphere was also substantial, as many took part in the armed struggle as part of the FSLN or as part of counter-revolutionary forces.

Nicaraguan women organized independently in support of the revolution and their cause. Some of those organizations were the Socialist Party (1963), Federación Democrática (which support the FSLN in rural areas), and Luisa Amanda Espinoza Association of Nicaraguan Women (, AMNLAE). However, since Daniel Ortega, was defeated in the 1990 election by the United Nicaraguan Opposition (UNO) coalition headed by Violeta Chamorro, the situation for women in Nicaragua was seriously altered. In terms of women and the labor market, by the end of 1991 AMNLAE reported that almost 16,000 working women—9,000 agricultural laborers, 3,000 industrial workers, and 3,800 civil servants, including 2,000 in health, 800 in education, and 1,000 in administration—had lost their jobs. The change in government also resulted in the drastic reduction or suspension of all Nicaraguan social programs, which brought back the burdens characteristic of pre-revolutionary Nicaragua. The women were forced to maintain and supplement community social services on their own without economic aid or technical and human resource.

Between 2007 and 2018 under Sandinista administrations, Nicaragua has advanced from 62nd to 6th in the world in terms of gender equality, according to the Global Gender Gap Report from the World Economic Forum.

== Relationship with the Catholic Church ==

The Catholic Church&#x27;s relationship with the Sandinistas was extremely complex. Initially, the Church was supportive of the Somoza regime as it broke with the liberal tradition of anti-clericalism. Anti-clerical laws of the &quot;Estado Liberal&quot; established by the Liberal Party of Nicaragua were repealed, and Somoza granted the Church tax exemptions and assigned it a central role in state education, allowing Catholic, state-funded schools to flourish. However, relations with the Catholic clergy gradually deteriorated as the regime grew more oppressive and Somoza committed atrocities against his political opponents with help of Guardia Nacional. Open conflict between the Church and the regime emerged in the wake of Vatican II.

Vatican II had a profound effect on the Catholic Church, leading to the beginning of liberation theology, Catholic-Marxist dialogue, and empowering already existing left-wing currents within the Catholic clergy such as the worker-priests. Many Nicagaruan priests would join this trend and radicalize their parishioners into either supporting or even joining the Sandinistas. Priest Ernesto Cardenal encouraged his parishioners to reflect on their living conditions in relation to the religious message; in his teachings, Cardenal concluded that the realization of the Gospel would be taking up arms against the Somoza regime to oppose “un-Christian” conditions. Cardenal&#x27;s brand of revolutionary Catholicism attracted the local working class, allowing the FSLN to successfully recruit them. Eventually the Sandinistas managed to recruit Cardenal himself, turning his local church into a potent source of new recruits. Cardenal was even reported to have said that &quot;Jesus Christ is the Sandinistas&quot; during Mass. Other priests such as José de la Jara promoted a sense of Catholic community in poor squatter neighbourhoods, promoting the portrayal of Jesus Christ as a poor worker in image of local inhabitants, and instituted a number of Catholic programs to help the community, such as road repairs, literacy programs and founded the Christian Youth Movement. Such actions united hitherto dispersed communities and fostered mutual support and trust. When encouraged by local priests to consider struggling for better living conditions as the realization of Catholic social teachings, parishioners spoke out forcefully against poor living conditions and unaffordable prices, eventually turning their discontent into open support for the FSLN. Even the priests who did not join the revolution would turn their churches into safe houses for the insurrectionists, gathering food and medicine for Sandinista combatants.

At its core, liberation theology recognized class struggle as a part of the Latin American society that was inherited from colonialism, and that is continued under capitalism which was considered neo-colonialism. For revolutionary Catholics, imperialism and capitalism became sin in themselves, and Jesus Christ was interpreted in context of being a revolutionary. Left-wing Nicaraguan priests replaced the traditional imaginery of &#x27;New Jerusalem&#x27; with &#x27;New Havana&#x27;, and argued for the necessity of embracing the option for the poor and committing onself to Marxist revolution in order to be a &#x27;true Catholic&#x27;. Supporters of liberation theology also agreed in principle with Marxist economics, with liberation theology priests such as Gustavo Gutiérrez stating that a classless society where private ownership of production is prohibited is the only acceptable Catholic response. The FSLN openly courted the growing following of revolutionary Catholics, portraying their revolutionary struggle against the Somoza regime as a realization of the Catholic social teaching. While the Catholic upper hierarchy was first reluctant to join the Sandinista revolution, it gradually moved to legitimatize its revolutionary goals and openly embraced it following the Second Episcopal Conference of Latin America, which openly called for challenging oppressive regimes in the region. The Church&#x27;s hostility towards Somoza became even more apparent in 1970 with the appointment of Archbishop Miguel Obando y Bravo. When given a Mercedes Benz as a goodwill gift by Somoza, Bravo sold it and distributed the money among the poor. During the revolution, the Catholic Church&#x27;s relationship with the Sandinistas grew so close that even sacraments acquired a revolutionary meaning - one priest reportedly baptized a newborn girl by saying: “Let all selfishness, capitalism, Somozism, go out of this little girl.” Numerous Christian base communities (CEBs) were created in which lower level clergy and laity took part in consciousness raising initiatives to educate the peasants about the institutionalized violence they were suffering from. Some priests took a more active role in supporting the revolutionary struggle. For example, Father Gaspar García Laviana took up arms and became a member of FSLN.

After the establishment of Sandinista regime, the Catholic Church was jubilant, which could be observed in the November 1979 pastoral letter “Christian Commitment for a New Nicaragua” which was described as “warm, encouraging, confident, and supportive of the FSLN-led revolution.” Nicaraguan bishops stated that they are “confident that the revolutionary process will be something creative, profoundly original, and in no way imitative.” Full of praise for the new revolutionary government, the clergy promised to assist the new regime, “even in the construction of a socialist society.” However, the new government alienated the Church by what was perceived as a gradual removal of the Church&#x27;s in the education; the government was accused of introducing a purely secular model of education on the example of the Cuban government, even inviting Cuban teachers to assist the process. Conservative media attacked the government by promoting “materialist ideology” in schools and warning of looming Marxist and atheist infiltration of the state education. By 1982, the controversy over education became so polarizing that some members of the governing junta such as Violeta Chamorro and Alfonso Robelo resigned, arguing that new laws are unconstitutional. Analyzing the conflict, John M. Kirk concluded: “For their part, the Sandinistas can be criticized for their lack of sensitivity to the hierarchy’s concerns — for it should have been obvious that education had long been regarded as the bailiwick of Church leaders. This political insensitivity of the FSLN — particularly among the middle-level cadres—exacerbated the increasingly problematic relationship between the FSLN and the Church hierarchy.”

Conservative Catholic priests and journalists attacked the new regime, with Humberto Belli claiming that the FSLN was trying to appropriate Catholic symbols. Examples of their attempts to &quot;infiltrate&quot; the Church was the presence of Sandinista leaders at religious ceremonies, supporting socialist-aligned Catholic institutions such as the Instituto Histérico Centro-Americano which published pamphlets that depicted Jesus Christ superimposed on the image of a guerrilla fighter, encouraging Catholics to participate in the &quot;revolutionary process&quot;, and discussing “martyrs” of the revolutionary struggle. The Episcopal Conference of Latin America (CELAM) warned in 1981 that “Nicaragua is heading for atheism, and that the Sandinista Front was already suppressing Christmas and the feast of the Immaculate Conception.” However, when Spanish priest Teófilo Cabestrero travelled to Revolutionary Nicaragua to investigate the situation, he found that Catholic celebrations were not suppressed at all, but rather encouraged and openly celebrated by the Sandinistas themselves - festivities were held in government ministries, commercialization of the religious feast was prohibited, and a national holiday for all major Catholic feasts were proclaimed. Cabastrero concluded: “This revolution is not prohibiting or curbing religious activities, but rather is offering the churches a unique opportunity to re-evangelize themselves, and to evangelize the entire population with new evangelical vigor.” He also added: “For the present, the danger for religion and the Church is not with the Sandinista people’s revolution, but rather is in the utilization of religion and the Church against the people’s revolution”.

Phillip Berryman concludes that the growing tension between the Sandinistas and the Catholic Church was a result of constant misinterpretations and misunderstanding between both sides, combined with interference of foreign conservative clergymen. He concludes that CELAM did not intend to attack the revolutionary government but rather as an attempt to “spiritualize religion and support the moral authority of the bishops.” John M. Kirk shares Berryman&#x27;s conclusion, arguing that the emerging rift between the Church and state was a result of “powerful international organizations stepping in to shore up an increasingly conservative hierarchy and at the same time cast aspersions on the progressive wing of the Church, which favored the government reforms.” Mounting tensions were followed by the attempts of the Sandinista government to silence bishops perceived as problematic - in July 1981 the government cancelled the weekly televised broadcast of mass by archbishop Obando y Bravo after he denied the government&#x27;s request to share the spot with progressive, government-aligned priests. The government also shut down the Church-run media such as the Radio Católica radio station, and in 1982 the government banned the publication of a letter from Pope John Paul II which called for ordinary priests to support and obey their bishops. FSLN also fostered a &quot;popular church&quot; by using its connections to progressive clergy established during the revolution, effectively developing a &#x27;popular church&#x27; that became a parallel structure to the institutional church. Sandinistas advertised this move as a part of their liberation theology, which postulated moving the Church out of the hands of the vilified higher hierarchy and into the hands of lower-ranking priests who were part of the working class and knew their struggle. Geraldine O&#x27;Leary de Macias commented on this situation:

The Sandinistas&#x27; relationship with the Church deteriorated as the Contra War continued. The hierarchy refused to speak out against the counterrevolutionary activities of the contras and failed to denounce American military aid. State media accused the Church of being reactionary and supporting the Contras. According to former President Ortega, &quot;The conflict with the church was strong, and it costs us, but I don&#x27;t think it was our fault. ... There were so many people being wounded every day, so many people dying, and it was hard for us to understand the position of the church hierarchy in refusing to condemn the contras.&quot; The hierarchy-state tensions were brought to the fore with Pope John Paul II 1983 visit to Nicaragua. Hostility to the Church became so great that at one point, FSLN militants shouted down Pope John Paul II as he tried to say Mass during a visit. Therefore, while the activities of the Church contributed to the success of the Sandinista revolution, the hierarchy&#x27;s opposition was a major factor in the downfall of the revolutionary government.

The relations between the Sandinistas and the Catholic Church started improving in 1986, starting with the appointment of Paolo Giglio as the new papal nuncio in Nicaragua in July. Giglio quickly earned the respect of the revolutionary government in November after attacking the United States for its hostility to the government, arguing that the Sandinistas were always open to negotiations with the United States but were turned down each time. That year, Vice President Sergio Ramírez was also received by the pope in a private audience. Once Congreso Eucaristico Nacional took place in Managua, Sandinistas leaders helped promote the congress and decried the lack of interest in it; President Ortega met with several Catholic clergymen during the congress, and also allowed Mother Teresa to bring four sisters into Nicaragua in order to create a new, small religious community. The Sandinista conflict with the Catholic Church was ultimately settled with the signing of the Esquipulas Peace Agreement - the government allowed Radio Catolica to broadcast again and allowed expelled clergy to return to Nicaragua.

Prior to their victory in the 2006 election, Ortega sought to rekindle his old relationship with the Catholic Church and befriended Cardinal Miguel Obando y Bravo, an erstwhile opponent of the Sandinistas in the 1980s. Bravo emerged as a close ally of Ortega, and in return Sandinistas expressed their support for a blanket ban on abortion in 2006, and in his speeches Ortega would refer to the reforged FSLN as “Christian socialist”. Despite this, FSLN still faces tensions with the Catholic clergy outside of Nicaragua. On August 23, 2020, Bishop Silvio Báez, who had been outside of Nicaragua for reasons of security since April 23, 2019, accused President Ortega of being a dictator. The &quot;Centro Nicaragüense de Derechos Humanos&quot; (Nicaraguan Human Rights Center, Cenidh) said that the Church had been the victim of 24 attacks since April 2018, including a fire that began in the Immaculate Conception Cathedral when a Molotov cocktail was thrown at a sacred image of the Blood of Christ on July 31, 2020.

== Human rights violations by the Sandinistas ==
&quot;Time&quot; magazine in 1983 published reports of human rights violations in an article which stated that &quot;According to Nicaragua&#x27;s Permanent Commission on Human Rights, the regime detains several hundred people a month; about half of them are eventually released, but the rest simply disappear.&quot; &quot;Time&quot; also interviewed a former deputy chief of Nicaraguan military counterintelligence, who stated that he had fled Nicaragua after being ordered to kill 800 Miskito prisoners and make it look like they had died in combat. Another article described Sandinista neighbourhood &quot;Defense Committees&quot;, modeled on similar Cuban Committees for the Defense of the Revolution, which according to critics were used to unleash mobs on anyone who was labeled a counterrevolutionary. Nicaragua&#x27;s only opposition newspaper, La Prensa, was subject to strict censorship. The newspaper&#x27;s editors were forbidden to print anything negative about the Sandinistas either at home or abroad.

Nicaragua&#x27;s Permanent Commission on Human Rights reported 2,000 murders in the first six months and 3,000 disappearances in the first few years. It has since documented 14,000 cases of torture, rape, kidnapping, mutilation and murder.

The Inter-American Commission on Human Rights (IACHR) in a 1981 report found evidence for mass executions in the period following the revolution. It stated: &quot;In the Commission&#x27;s view, while the government of Nicaragua clearly intended to respect the lives of all those defeated in the civil war, during the weeks immediately subsequent to the Revolutionary triumph, when the government was not in effective control, illegal executions took place which violated the right to life, and these acts have not been investigated and the persons responsible have not been punished.&quot; The IACHR also stated that: &quot;The Commission is of the view that the new regime did not have, and does not now have, a policy of violating the right to life of political enemies, including among the latter the former guardsmen of the Government of General Somoza, whom a large sector of the population of Nicaragua held responsible for serious human rights violations during the former regime; proof of the foregoing is the abolition of the death penalty and the high number of former guardsmen who were prisoners and brought to trial for crimes that constituted violations of human rights.&quot;

A 1983 IACHR report documented allegations of human rights violations against the Miskito Indians, which were alleged to have taken place after opposition forces (the Contras) infiltrated a Miskito village in order to launch attacks against government soldiers, and as part of a subsequent forced relocation program. Allegations included arbitrary imprisonment without trial, &quot;disappearances&quot; of such prisoners, forced relocation, and destruction of property. A 1984 IACHR report accused the Sandinistas of having &quot;repeatedly violated the basic rights of Miskito Indians living there, including instances of &quot;illegal killings&quot; and torture&quot;. The report accused them of executing 35 to 40 Miskitos in Leimus in December 1981. The U.S. government accused Nicaragua of genocide. The U.S. Secretary of State Alexander Haig pointed to a photo published in Le Figaro alleged to show Miskito bodies being burned by Sandinista troops as evidence; however, the photo was actually of people killed by Somoza&#x27;s National Guard in 1978.

The IACHR&#x27;s 1991 annual report states: &quot;In 1990, the Commission was informed of the discovery of common graves in Nicaragua, especially in areas where fighting had occurred. The information was provided by the Nicaraguan Pro Human Rights Association, which had received its first complaint in June 1990. By December 1991, that Association had received reports of 60 common graves and had investigated 15 of them. While most of the graves seem to be the result of summary executions by members of the Sandinista People&#x27;s Army or the State Security, some contain the bodies of individuals executed by the Nicaraguan Resistance.&quot;

The IACHR&#x27;s 1992 annual report contains details of mass graves and investigations which suggest that mass executions had been carried out. One such grave contained 75 corpses of peasants who were believed to have been executed in 1984 by government security forces pretending to be members of the Contras. Another grave was also found in the town of Quininowas which contained six corpses, believed to be an entire family killed by government forces when the town was invaded. A further 72 graves were reported as being found, containing bodies of people, the majority of whom were believed to have been executed by agents of the state and some also by the Contras.

=== Politicization of human rights ===
The issue of human rights also became highly politicized at this time as human rights is claimed to be a key component of propaganda created by the Reagan administration to help legitimize its policies in the region. The Inter-Church Committee on Human Rights in Latin America (ICCHRLA) in its &quot;Newsletter&quot; stated in 1985 that: &quot;The hostility with which the Nicaraguan government is viewed by the Reagan administration is an unfortunate development. Even more unfortunate is the expression of that hostility in the destabilization campaign developed by the US administration. ... An important aspect of this campaign is misinformation and frequent allegations of serious human rights violations by the Nicaraguan authorities.&quot; Among the accusations in The Heritage Foundation report and the Demokratizatsiya article are references to alleged policies of religious persecution, particularly antisemitism. The ICCHRLA in its newsletter stated that: &quot;From time to time the current U.S. administration, and private organizations sympathetic to it, have made serious and extensive allegations of religious persecution in Nicaragua. Colleague churches in the United States undertook onsite investigation of these charges in 1984. In their report, the delegation organized by the Division of Overseas Ministries of the National Council of Churches of Christ in the United States concluded that there is &#x27;no basis for the charge of systematic religious persecution&#x27;. The delegation &#x27;considers this issue to be a device being used to justify aggressive opposition to the present Nicaraguan government.&#x27;&quot; On the other hand, some elements of the Catholic Church in Nicaragua, among them Archbishop Miguel Obando y Bravo, strongly criticized the Sandinistas. The Archbishop stated &quot;The government wants a church that is aligned with the Marxist–Leninist regime.&quot; The Inter-American Commission on Human Rights states that: &quot;Although it is true that much of the friction between the Government and the churches arises from positions that are directly or indirectly linked to the political situation of the country, it is also true that statements by high government officials, official press statements, and the actions of groups under the control of the Government have gone beyond the limits within which political discussions should take place and have become obstacles to certain specifically religious activities.&quot;

Human Rights Watch also stated in its 1989 report on Nicaragua that: &quot;Under the Reagan administration, U.S. policy toward Nicaragua&#x27;s Sandinista government was marked by constant hostility. This hostility yielded, among other things, an inordinate amount of publicity about human rights issues. Almost invariably, U.S. pronouncements on human rights exaggerated and distorted the real human rights violations of the Sandinista regime, and exculpated those of the U.S.-supported insurgents, known as the &quot;contras&quot;.&quot;

In 1987, a report was published by the UK based NGO Catholic Institute for International Relations (CIIR, now known as &quot;Progressio&quot;), a human rights organization which identifies itself with liberation theology. The report, &quot;Right to Survive: Human Rights in Nicaragua&quot;, discussed the politicization of the human rights issue: &quot;The Reagan administration, with scant regard for the truth, has made a concerted effort to paint as evil a picture as possible of Nicaragua, describing it as a &#x27;totalitarian dungeon&#x27;. Supporters of the Sandinistas ... have argued that Nicaragua has a good record of human rights compared with other Central American countries and have compared Nicaragua with other countries at war.&quot; The CIIR report refers to estimates made by the NGO Americas Watch which count the number of non-battle related deaths and disappearances for which the government was responsible up to the year 1986 as &quot;close to 300&quot;.

According to the CIIR report, Amnesty International and Americas Watch stated that there is no evidence that the use of torture was sanctioned by the Nicaraguan authorities, although prisoners reported the use of conditions of detention and interrogation techniques that could be described as psychological torture. The Red Cross made repeated requests to be given access to prisoners held in state security detention centers, but were refused. The CIIR was critical of the Permanent Commission on Human Rights (PCHR or CPDH in Spanish), claiming that the organisation had a tendency to immediately publish accusations against the government without first establishing a factual basis for the allegations. The CIIR report also questioned the independence of the Permanent Commission on Human Rights, referring to an article in &quot;The Washington Post&quot; which claims that the National Endowment for Democracy, an organization funded by the US government, allocated a concession of US$50,000 for assistance in the translation and distribution outside Nicaragua of its monthly report, and that these funds were administered by the Committee for Democracy in Central America (Prodemca), a US-based organization which later published full-page advertisements in &quot;The Washington Post&quot; and &quot;The New York Times&quot; supporting military aid to the Contras. The Permanent Commission denies that it received any money which it claims was instead used by others for translating and distributing their monthly reports in other nations.

The Nicaraguan-based magazine &quot;Revista Envio&quot;, which describes its stance as one of &quot;critical support for the Sandinistas&quot;, refers to the report: &quot;The CPDH: Can It Be Trusted?&quot; written by Scottish lawyer Paul Laverty. In the report, Laverty observes that: &quot;The entire board of directors [of the Permanent Commission], are members of or closely identify with the &#x27;Nicaraguan Democratic Coordinating Committee&#x27; (Coordinadora), an alliance of the more right wing parties and COSEP, the business organization.&quot; He goes on to express concern about CPDH&#x27;s alleged tendency to provide relatively few names and other details in connection with alleged violations. &quot;According to the 11 monthly bulletins of 1987 (July being the only month without an issue), the CPDH claims to have received information on 1,236 abuses of all types. However, of those cases, only 144 names are provided. The majority of those 144 cases give dates and places of alleged incidents, but not all. This means that only in 11.65% of its cases is there the minimal detail provided to identify the person, place, date, incident and perpetrator of the abuse.&quot;

On the other hand, the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights states: &quot;During its on-site observation in 1978 under the Government of General Somoza, the Permanent Commission on Human Rights in Nicaragua, (CPDH) gave the Commission notable assistance, which certainly helped it to prepare its report promptly and correctly.&quot; and in 1980 &quot;It cannot be denied that the CPDH continues to play an important role in the protection of human rights, and that a good number of people who consider that their human rights have been ignored by the Government are constantly coming to it.&quot; The IACHR continued to meet with representatives of the Permanent Commission and report their assessments in later years.

The Heritage Foundation stated that: &quot;While elements of the Somoza National Guard tortured political opponents, they did not employ psychological torture.&quot; The International Commission of Jurists stated that under the Somoza regime cruel physical torture was regularly used in the interrogation of political prisoners.

Throughout the 1980s the Sandinista government was regarded as &quot;Partly Free&quot; by Freedom House.

== United States government allegations of support for foreign rebels ==
The United States State Department accused the Sandinistas of many cases of illegal foreign intervention.

The first allegation was supporting the FMLN rebels in El Salvador with safe haven, training, command-and-control headquarters, advice, weapons, ammunition, and other vital supplies. Captured documents, testimonials of former rebels and Sandinistas, aerial photographs, the tracing of captured weapons back to Nicaragua, and captured vehicles from Nicaragua smuggling weapons were cited as evidence. El Salvador was in a civil war in the period in question and the US was heavily supporting the Salvadoran government against the FMLN guerrillas.

There were also accusations of subversive activities in Honduras, Costa Rica, and Colombia, and in the case of Honduras and Costa Rica outright military operations by Nicaraguan troops.

In 2015, Kentucky senator Mitch McConnell claimed during an interview with CNN that John Kerry, then Secretary of State, had visited Nicaragua and met Daniel Ortega and denounced the Reagan Administration&#x27;s support for the Contras as supporting terrorism during Kerry&#x27;s tenure as a United States senator.

During the Nicaraguan Revolution in the 1980s, American Democratic politician and then mayor Bernie Sanders expressed support for the Sandinistas and condemned US support for the Contras, he wrote letters to the group denouncing the US media portrayal of the conflict, and also visited Nicaragua during the war where he attended a Sandinista rally where anti-American chants were reportedly being done.

== Symbols ==

The flag of the FSLN consists of an upper half in red, a lower half in black, and the letters F S L N in white. It is a modified version of the flag Sandino used in the 1930s, during the war against the U.S. occupation of Nicaragua which consisted of two vertical stripes, equally in size, one red and the other black with a skull (like the traditional Jolly Roger flag). These colors came from the Mexican anarchist movements that Sandino was involved with during his stay in Mexico in the early 1920s. (The traditional flag of anarcho-syndicalism, which joins diagonally the red color of the labour movement and the black color of anarchism, as in the flag of the CNT, is a negation of nationalism and reaffirmation of internationalism.)

In recent times, there has been a dispute between the FSLN and the dissident Sandinista Renovation Movement (MRS) about the use of the red and black flag in public activities. Although the MRS has its own flag (orange with a silhouette of Sandino&#x27;s hat in black), they also use the red-and-black flag in honor of Sandino&#x27;s legacy. They state that the red-and-black flag is a symbol of Sandinismo as a whole, not only of the FSLN party.

Sandinista Revolution Day is a national holiday, celebrated on July 19 each year.

== In popular culture ==

=== In films ===
* In the gay cult classic film &quot;To Wong Foo, Thanks for Everything! Julie Newmar&quot; (1995), Vida (Patrick Swayze) was trying to convince Noxeema Jackson (Wesley Snipes) to take a young drag queen, Chi-Chi Rodriguez, to Hollywood to compete in a drag competition. Noxeema was totally against the idea and quotes this line: &quot;Mmm, Mmm, Mmm, not on your young queer life—you and your causes. That child is Latin, you does not wanna get mixed up in all that Latin mess ... she might turn out to be a Sandinista or something.&quot;
* The film &quot;Last Plane Out&quot; (1983), about journalist Jack Cox&#x27;s experiences in Nicaragua, portrayed the Sandinistas as crazed communist psychopaths while making Anastasio Somoza Debayle look sympathetic by comparison.
* The 1983 American political thriller &quot;Under Fire&quot;, starring Nick Nolte, Gene Hackman and Joanna Cassidy, is set during the last days of the 1979 Nicaraguan Revolution that ended the Somoza regime.

=== In games ===
* The video game &quot;Metal Gear Solid: Peace Walker&quot; (2010) includes a group of FSLN Revolutionaries forced into Costa Rica as an important group of supporting characters, including Amanda. The Anti-Somoza revolution itself figures prominently into the plot of the game as well, being described within the game&#x27;s narrative as being started by KGB agent Vladimir Zadornov in order to make Nicaragua a communist state so the Soviet Union could force the United States out of Central America entirely.

=== In language ===
* Since the conflict with Nicaragua in the 1980s, variations of the term &quot;Sandinista&quot; are now sometimes used in the United States to refer to fanatical supporters of a certain cause. In the Spanish language, the suffix &quot;-ista&quot; is used to indicate a predilection towards the root and is the equivalent of &quot;-ist&quot; in English.

=== In literature ===
* Roger Ebert, in his review of &quot;Into the Wild&quot; (2007), likened the film&#x27;s subject – the American hiker and itinerant traveler Christopher McCandless – to his childhood friend, Joseph David &quot;Joe&quot; Sanderson, a nature-loving Illinois native and adventurer, who died in combat, fighting in Morazán, El Salvador as a Sandinista freedom fighter (in April 1982, one of only two Americans known to have died while in the ranks of that country&#x27;s leftist guerrilla movement in the 1980s and 1990s). Ebert wrote:

I grew up in Urbana three houses down from the Sanderson family – Milton and Virginia and their boys Steve and Joe. My close friend was Joe. His bedroom was filled with aquariums, terrariums, snakes, hamsters, spiders, and butterfly and beetle collections. I envied him like crazy. After college he hit the road. He never made a break from his parents, but they rarely knew where he was. Sometimes he came home and his mother would have to sew $100 bills into the seams of his blue jeans. He disappeared in Nicaragua. His body was later identified as a dead Sandinista freedom fighter. From a nice little house surrounded by evergreens at the other end of Washington Street, he left to look for something he needed to find. I believe in Sean Penn&#x27;s Christopher McCandless. I grew up with him.

=== In music ===
* The popular Puerto Rican Reggaeton–rap band Calle 13 mentioned the Sandinista movement in their song &quot;Llegale a mi guarida&quot; (2007). The lyrics claimed: &quot;Respeto a Nicaragua y a la lucha sandinista&quot; (&quot;I respect Nicaragua and the Sandinista struggle&quot;).
* The English anarcho-punk band Chumbawamba recorded the song &quot;An Interlude: Beginning To Take It Back&quot; on their album &quot;Pictures of Starving Children Sell Records&quot; (1986). The song chronicles the history of the Sandinistas, as well as their conflict with the Contras, and reflects an optimistic hope for the future of Nicaragua.
* The Chilean new wave group Los Prisioneros mention the Sandinistas in their song &quot;&quot;, in a passage asking, &quot;Who killed Marilyn Monroe?&quot; The song was released on the 1984 album &quot;La voz de los &#x27;80&quot; (Spanish for &quot;The Voice of the 80s&quot;).
* As a reaction to an anti-Sandinista statement by British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher and her proposal to ban the use of the word itself, punk rock group The Clash used the title &quot;Sandinista!&quot; (1980) for their fourth studio album. The triple album contains the song &quot;Washington Bullets&quot;, which references the Sandinistas and other events and groups involved in Latin American history, starting from 1959.
* In the song titled &quot;Highwomen&quot; by the US-based country music group The Highwomen, the first verse states &quot;I was a Highwoman, And a mother from my youth, For my children I did what I had to do, My family left Honduras when they killed the Sandinistas, We followed a coyote through the dust of Mexico, Every one of them except for me survived, And I am still alive.&quot;
* The Irish rebel song &quot;Croppies who will not lie down&quot; references numerous revolutionary groups around the world and includes the lines &quot;In Central America there they do strive, to rid themselves free of those Washington clowns; Freedom&#x27;s the game, Sandinista&#x27;s the name, of the Croppies who will not lie down&quot;.
* The Brazilian musician Chico Science, founder of the &#x27;Manguebeat&#x27; movement, in his song &quot;Monólogo ao pé do ouvido&quot;, makes reference to Augusto César Sandino and other personalities who resisted the status quo in their respective realities. The verse states: &quot;Viva Zapata! Viva Sandino! Viva Zumbi! Antônio Conselheiro! Todos os Panteras Negras. Lampião, sua imagem e semelhança.&quot;

=== In television ===
* In the pilot episode of &quot;Fear the Walking Dead&quot;, Salvadoran refugee Daniel Salazar (Rubén Blades) is working as a Los Angeles barber, but in season 1, episode 5 (&quot;Cobalt&quot;), &quot;we learn Salazar&#x27;s true past: No, this simple barber wasn&#x27;t so simple at all. As a younger man [in El Salvador], he was given the choice between torturer and victim, and he chose the path that kept him alive.&quot;
* In the 1990 episode &quot;Mary Has a Little Lamb&quot; of the American sitcom &quot;The Golden Girls&quot;, Blanche, Dorothy, and Rose return home to find Sophia bound, gagged, and tied to a chair. When Dorothy removes the gag and asks who has done this to her, Sophia sarcastically replies: &quot;the Sandinistas!&quot; (It was really a released prisoner named Merrill, who was searching for Blanche.)
* In &quot;Snowfall&quot;, mainly set in Los Angeles, California during the early-eighties, one of the main characters is an undercover CIA agent selling cocaine to local drug dealers with the intent of using the money to fund the Contras in their fight against the Sandinistas.
* In the second season of The Americans, the Jennings&#x27; learn of a covert effort by the US government to train the Contras&#x27; on American soil, and are aided by a fiery Sandinista operative in attempting to disrupt the training camp by killing the leadership and leaking the evidence of the camp

== Presidents of the Executive ==

Daniel Ortega has been the only Sandinista President of the Republic, from 1985 to 1990 and from 2007 to the present day.

== Prominent Sandinistas ==
* , hard-line National Directorate member in the 1980s
* Patrick Argüello, Sandinista involved with the Dawson&#x27;s Field hijackings
* Nora Astorga, Sandinista UN ambassador
* Monica Baltodano, former guerrilla commander and Minister of Regional Affairs from 1982 to 1990
* Gioconda Belli, novelist and poet, handled media relations for the FSLN government
* Tomás Borge, one of the FSLN&#x27;s founders, leader of the Prolonged People&#x27;s War tendency in the 1970s, Minister of Interior in the 1980s
* Omar Cabezas, Sandinista leader; also an author and politician
* Ernesto Cardenal, poet and priest; Minister of Culture in the 1980s
* Fernando Cardenal, a Jesuit priest and brother of Ernesto, directed the literacy campaign as Minister of Education
* Luis Carrión, 1980s National Directorate member
* Rigoberto Cruz (aka Pablo Ubeda), early FSLN member
* Joaquín Cuadra, internal front leader, later chief of staff of the army
* Miguel D&#x27;Escoto, a Maryknoll Roman Catholic priest; served as Nicaragua&#x27;s foreign minister
* Idania Fernandez, member of the Rigoberto López Pérez Regional Command; killed in action
* Carlos Fonseca, one of the FSLN&#x27;s principal founders and leading ideologist in the 1960s
* Adeline Gröns y Schindler-McCoy de Argüello-Olivas, a journalist, university professor, diplomat Ambassador to East Germany, Consul General to the United Nations, Ambassador to the OAS, Ambassador to the Soviet Union, Soviet Dean of Ambassadors, has worked in various administarions with high-profile jobs.
* Herty Lewites, former mayor of Managua, opponent of Daniel Ortega in 2005
* , FSLN co-founder
* Daniel Ortega, post-revolution junta head, then President from 1985, lost presidential elections in 1990, 1996, and 2001, won presidential elections in 2006, 2011 and 2016 and continues to lead the FSLN party
* Humberto Ortega, leader of the FSLN Insurrectional Tendency (Tercerista) in the 1970s, chief strategist of the anti-Somoza urban insurrection; Minister of Defense in the 1980s during the Contra war. Brother of Daniel Ortega.
* Edén Pastora &quot;, social democratic guerrilla leader who joined the Terceristas during the anti-Somoza insurrection, broke with FSLN to lead center-left ARDE contra group based in Costa Rica during the early 1980s
* Sergio Ramírez, novelist and civilian Sandinista, architect of alliance with moderates in the 1970s, Vice President in the 1980s, opponent of Daniel Ortega in the 1990s
* Henry Ruiz, &quot;, FSLN rural guerrilla commander in the 1970s, member of the National Directorate in the 1980s
* Casimiro A. Sotelo, architect, political activist, original member of The Group of 12, Ambassador to Panama, Consul General to the United Nations, Ambassador to the OAS, Ambassador to Canada, Canadian Dean of Latin American Ambassadors
* Arlen Siu, a Chinese Nicaraguan who became one of the first female martyrs of the Sandinista revolution
* Dora María Téllez, a Nicaraguan historian most famous as an icon of the Sandinista Revolution
* Jaime Wheelock, leader of the FSLN Proletarian Tendency, Minister of Agriculture and Rural Development
* Dorotea Wilson, later congresswoman and activist

== Electoral history ==

=== Presidential elections ===
=== National Assembly elections ===
== See also ==

* Carlos Mejía Godoy
* Iran–Contra affair
* Komite internazionalistak
* List of books and films about Nicaragua
* &quot;Nicaragua v. United States&quot;

==Notes==
== References ==
=== Bibliography ===

* Andrew, Christopher; Mitrokhin, Vasili. &quot;The World Was Going Our Way: The KGB and the Battle for the Third World&quot;. Basic Books (2005)
* Andrew, Christopher; Mitrokhin, Vasili. &quot;The Sword and the Shield: The Mitrokhin Archive and the Secret History of the KGB&quot;. Basic Books (2001)
* Arias, Pilar. . Mexico: Siglo XXI Editores, 1980.
* Asleson, Vern. &quot;Nicaragua: Those Passed By&quot;. Galde Press , 2004
* Belli, Humberto. &quot;Breaking Faith: The Sandinista Revolution and Its Impact on Freedom and Christian Faith in Nicaragua.&quot; Crossway Books/The Puebla Institute, 1985.
* Beverley, John and Marc Zimmerman. &quot;Literature and Politics in the Central American Revolutions&quot;. Austin: University of Texas Press, 1990. 
* Christian, Shirley. &quot;Nicaragua, Revolution In the Family&quot;. New York: Vintage Books, 1986.
* Cox, Jack. &quot;Requiem in the Tropics: Inside Central America&quot;. UCA Books, 1987.
* Dawes, Greg. &quot;Aesthetics and Revolution, Nicaraguan Poetry 1979–1990&quot;. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1993. 
* Gilbert, Dennis. &quot;Sandinistas: The Party And The Revolution.&quot; Blackwell Publishers, 1988.
* Hayck, Denis Lynn Daly. &quot;Life Stories of the Nicaraguan Revolution&quot;. New York: Routledge Publishing. 1990.
* Hodges, Donald C. &quot;Intellectual Foundations of the Nicaraguan Revolution.&quot; Austin: University of Texas Press, 1986.
* Kinzer, Stephen. &quot;Blood of Brothers: Life and War in Nicaragua&quot;, Putnam Pub Group, , 1991.
* Kirkpatrick, Jean. &quot;Dictatorships and Double Standards.&quot; Touchstone, 1982.
* Miranda, Roger, and William Ratliff. &quot;The Civil War in Nicaragua: Inside the Sandinistas&quot;. New Brunswick: Transaction Publishers, 1993.
* Molero, Maria. &quot;Nicaragua Sandinista: del sueno a la realidad&quot;. &quot;Institute of Political Science&quot;.(1999).
* Moore, John Norton, &quot;The Secret War in Central America: Sandinista Assault on World Order&quot;. university Publications of America, 1987.
* Nolan, David. &quot;The Ideology of the Sandinistas and the Nicaraguan Revolution&quot;. Coral Gables, Florida: University of Miami Press, 1984.
* Palmer, Steven. &quot;Carlos Fonseca and the Construction of Sandinismo in Nicaragua&quot;. &quot;Latin American Research Review&quot;. Vol. 23. No. 1 (1988). 91–109.
* Prevost, Gary. &quot;Cuba and Nicaragua: A special Relationship?&quot;. &quot;The Sandinista Legacy: The Construction of Democracy, Latin American Perspectives&quot;. 17.3 (1990)
* Sierakowski, Robert. &quot;Sandinistas: A Moral History.&quot; University of Notre Dame Press, 2019.
* Smith, Hazel. &quot;Nicaragua: Self-Determination and Survival&quot;. Pluto Press, 1991. 
* Sirias, Silvio. &quot;Bernardo and the Virgin: A Novel.&quot; Northwestern University Press, 2005.
* &quot;The Dream of Sandino&quot;. Dir. Leuten Rojas. Latin American Review Series. c. 1983.
* Wright, Bruce E. &quot;Theory in the Practice of the Nicaraguan Revolution&quot;. New York: Latin American Studies. 1995.
* Zimmermann, Matilde. &quot;Sandinista: Carlos Fonseca and the Nicaraguan Revolution&quot;. Duke University Press, 2001.
== External links == 

* Nicaragua Sandino
* La Voz del Sandinismo 
* End of the Sandinistas and US Response from the Dean Peter Krogh Foreign Affairs Digital Archives
* Sandinistas and the Catholic Church from the Dean Peter Krogh Foreign Affairs Digital Archives
* History of the Sandinista Revolution: the union of a whole nation at ViaNica
* Revista Envío – Nicaraguan magazine, &quot;critically supportive&quot; of the Sandinistas, with archive documenting events throughout the 1980s
* Art, Truth &amp; Politics – Harold Pinter delivers Nobel Prize in Literature lecture in which he explains the Sandinista conflict and condemns the U.S.
* Daniel Ortega interview highlights, March 10, 2009
* Many Nicaragua Revolutionaries feel Betrayed by the Revolution by Tracy Wilkinson, &quot;Los Angeles Times&quot;, July 19, 2009
* Exit Somoza, Enter the Sandinistas, An Account by U.S. Ambassador to Nicaragua Lawrence Pezzullo Association for Diplomatic Studies and Training
* Attacks attributed to the FSLN on the START database</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q27389" start="4" end="40" title="Sandinista National Liberation Front" label="Sandinista National Liberation Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q27389" start="44" end="48" title="Sandinista National Liberation Front" label="FSLN"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="55" end="64" title="socialist" label="socialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7278" start="65" end="80" title="political party" label="political party"/>
<link wikidata="Q811" start="84" end="93" title="Nicaragua" label="Nicaragua"/>
<link wikidata="Q27389" start="118" end="129" title="Sandinista National Liberation Front" label="Sandinistas"/>
<link wikidata="Q213746" start="187" end="208" title="Augusto César Sandino" label="Augusto César Sandino"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304042" start="256" end="293" title="United States occupation of Nicaragua" label="United States occupation of Nicaragua"/>
<link wikidata="Q218443" start="328" end="352" title="Anastasio Somoza Debayle" label="Anastasio Somoza Debayle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1463516" start="365" end="386" title="Nicaraguan Revolution" label="Nicaraguan Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q254219" start="399" end="413" title="Somoza dynasty" label="Somoza dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2522121" start="563" end="595" title="Junta of National Reconstruction" label="Junta of National Reconstruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q8236" start="721" end="729" title="literacy" label="literacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8458" start="862" end="874" title="human rights" label="human rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q36747" start="926" end="944" title="indigenous peoples of the Americas" label="indigenous peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q286810" start="1067" end="1074" title="Contras" label="Contras"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="1168" end="1195" title="Central Intelligence Agency" label="Central Intelligence Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q7024484" start="1394" end="1403" title="1984 Nicaraguan general election" label="elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7024485" start="1750" end="1763" title="1990 Nicaraguan general election" label="1990 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q114142" start="1767" end="1794" title="Violeta Barrios de Chamorro" label="Violeta Barrios de Chamorro"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586482" start="1951" end="1983" title="2006 Nicaraguan general election" label="2006 Nicaraguan general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q57402" start="1989" end="2002" title="Daniel Ortega" label="Daniel Ortega"/>
<link wikidata="Q852448" start="2017" end="2039" title="President of Nicaragua" label="President of Nicaragua"/>
<link wikidata="Q976182" start="2352" end="2356" title="2011 Nicaraguan general election" label="2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q22092112" start="2358" end="2362" title="2016 Nicaraguan general election" label="2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q104815252" start="2368" end="2372" title="2021 Nicaraguan general election" label="2021"/>
<link wikidata="Q2937479" start="2633" end="2649" title="crony capitalism" label="crony capitalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q213746" start="2742" end="2763" title="Augusto César Sandino" label="Augusto César Sandino"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2995" end="3019" title="Augusto César Sandino#Death" label="Sandino was assassinated"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541185" start="3046" end="3060" title="National Guard (Nicaragua)" label="National Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q312622" start="3097" end="3113" title="Anastasio Somoza García" label="Anastasio Somoza"/>
<link wikidata="Q312622" start="3121" end="3127" title="Anastasio Somoza García" label="family"/>
<link wikidata="Q650211" start="3309" end="3329" title="Juan Bautista Sacasa" label="Juan Bautista Sacasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541185" start="3528" end="3542" title="Nicaraguan National Guard" label="National Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q312622" start="3623" end="3646" title="Anastasio Somoza García" label="Anastasio Somoza Garcia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1563" start="4190" end="4196" title="Havana" label="Havana"/>
<link wikidata="Q11270" start="4244" end="4261" title="Fulgencio Batista" label="Fulgencio Batista"/>
<link wikidata="Q262" start="4266" end="4273" title="Algeria" label="Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q204543" start="4278" end="4312" title="National Liberation Front (Algeria)" label="Algerian National Liberation Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q11457" start="4693" end="4699" title="cotton" label="cotton"/>
<link wikidata="Q8486" start="4704" end="4710" title="coffee" label="coffee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1816516" start="4737" end="4768" title="Conservative Party (Nicaragua)" label="conservative party of Nicaragua"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4804" end="4812" title="Zancudos" label="Zancudos"/>
<link wikidata="Q312622" start="4859" end="4882" title="Anastasio Somoza García" label="Anastasio Somoza Garcia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394538" start="4908" end="4929" title="Rigoberto López Pérez" label="Rigoberto Lopez Perez"/>
<link wikidata="Q1295235" start="5220" end="5238" title="Edén Pastora" label="Edén Pastora Gómez"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5341" end="5355" title="Ramon Raudales" label="Ramon Raudales"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5621" end="5637" title="Rafael Somarriba" label="Rafael Somarriba"/>
<link wikidata="Q16492183" start="5712" end="5725" title="Honduran Army" label="Honduran Army"/>
<link wikidata="" start="6029" end="6067" title=":es:Ejército Defensor de la Soberanía Nacional" label="Defensive Army of National Sovereignty"/>
<link wikidata="Q720303" start="6391" end="6417" title="Communist Party of Nicaragua" label="Nicaraguan Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q370691" start="6594" end="6615" title="Carlos Fonseca" label="Carlos Fonseca Amador"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6758" end="6772" title="Silvio Mayorga" label="Silvio Mayorga"/>
<link wikidata="Q657577" start="6774" end="6785" title="Tomás Borge" label="Tomás Borge"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6871" end="6890" title="Jose Benito Escobar" label="Jose Benito Escobar"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6917" end="6931" title="Germán Pomares" label="Germán Pomares"/>
<link wikidata="Q1007634" start="7175" end="7181" title="Estelí" label="Estelí"/>
<link wikidata="Q208151" start="7755" end="7759" title="León, Nicaragua" label="Léon"/>
<link wikidata="Q495504" start="7769" end="7812" title="National Autonomous University of Nicaragua" label="National Autonomous University of Nicaragua"/>
<link wikidata="Q3274" start="7823" end="7830" title="Managua" label="Managua"/>
<link wikidata="Q200790" start="7894" end="7904" title="Algerian War" label="Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q204543" start="7913" end="7916" title="National Liberation Front (Algeria)" label="FLN"/>
<link wikidata="Q370691" start="7961" end="7975" title="Carlos Fonseca Amador" label="Carlos Fonseca"/>
<link wikidata="Q657577" start="7979" end="7990" title="Tomás Borge Martínez" label="Tomás Borge"/>
<link wikidata="Q924446" start="10016" end="10040" title="1972 Nicaragua earthquake" label="magnitude 6.2 earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q3274" start="10067" end="10074" title="Managua" label="Managua"/>
<link wikidata="Q218443" start="10251" end="10275" title="Anastasio Somoza Debayle" label="Anastasio Somoza Debayle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3211909" start="11405" end="11414" title="La Prensa (Managua)" label="La Prensa"/>
<link wikidata="Q241" start="11534" end="11538" title="Cuba" label="Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q57402" start="11574" end="11587" title="Daniel Ortega" label="Daniel Ortega"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541185" start="11682" end="11696" title="National Guard (Nicaragua)" label="National Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q207312" start="11713" end="11721" title="Nicaraguan córdoba" label="córdobas"/>
<link wikidata="Q543" start="11786" end="11796" title="censorship" label="censorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q3858303" start="11798" end="11810" title="intimidation" label="intimidation"/>
<link wikidata="Q132781" start="11812" end="11819" title="torture" label="torture"/>
<link wikidata="Q132821" start="11825" end="11831" title="murder" label="murder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1668049" start="11932" end="11942" title="internment" label="internment"/>
<link wikidata="Q370691" start="12167" end="12181" title="Carlos Fonseca" label="Carlos Fonseca"/>
<link wikidata="Q155059" start="12935" end="12941" title="Professional revolutionaries" label="cadres"/>
<link wikidata="Q929651" start="13030" end="13040" title="grassroots" label="grassroots"/>
<link wikidata="Q80895" start="13095" end="13112" title="guerrilla warfare" label="guerrilla warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q7264" start="13322" end="13329" title="Marxism" label="Marxist"/>
<link wikidata="Q4470031" start="13353" end="13367" title="Jaime Wheelock" label="Jaime Wheelock"/>
<link wikidata="Q57402" start="13722" end="13735" title="Daniel Ortega" label="Daniel Ortega"/>
<link wikidata="Q4337101" start="13749" end="13764" title="Humberto Ortega" label="Humberto Ortega"/>
<link wikidata="Q76074" start="13903" end="13913" title="right-wing" label="right-wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1855859" start="13931" end="13944" title="popular front" label="popular front"/>
<link wikidata="Q218443" start="13957" end="13963" title="Anastasio Somoza Debayle" label="Somoza"/>
<link wikidata="Q6682674" start="14255" end="14263" title="los Doce" label="los Doce"/>
<link wikidata="Q800" start="14295" end="14305" title="Costa Rica" label="Costa Rica"/>
<link wikidata="Q706743" start="14651" end="14673" title="Pedro Joaquín Chamorro Cardenal" label="Pedro Joaquín Chamorro"/>
<link wikidata="Q3211909" start="14720" end="14729" title="La Prensa (Managua)" label="La Prensa"/>
<link wikidata="Q48525" start="15623" end="15647" title="Government of the United States" label="United States government"/>
<link wikidata="Q775858" start="15800" end="15812" title="humanitarian" label="humanitarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1295235" start="15906" end="15918" title="Edén Pastora" label="Edén Pastora"/>
<link wikidata="Q657577" start="16185" end="16196" title="Tomás Borge" label="Tomás Borge"/>
<link wikidata="Q596688" start="16417" end="16426" title="Matagalpa" label="Matagalpa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3274" start="16470" end="16477" title="Managua" label="Managua"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001914" start="16479" end="16485" title="Masaya" label="Masaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q208151" start="16487" end="16491" title="León, Nicaragua" label="León"/>
<link wikidata="Q974354" start="16493" end="16503" title="Chinandega" label="Chinandega"/>
<link wikidata="Q1007634" start="16508" end="16514" title="Estelí" label="Estelí"/>
<link wikidata="Q23685" start="16934" end="16946" title="Jimmy Carter" label="Jimmy Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q218443" start="16991" end="16997" title="Anastasio Somoza Debayle" label="Somoza"/>
<link wikidata="Q57402" start="18389" end="18402" title="Daniel Ortega" label="Daniel Ortega"/>
<link wikidata="Q4337101" start="18404" end="18419" title="Humberto Ortega" label="Humberto Ortega"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18424" end="18437" title="Víctor Tirado" label="Víctor Tirado"/>
<link wikidata="Q657577" start="18453" end="18464" title="Tomás Borge" label="Tomás Borge"/>
<link wikidata="Q62083493" start="18472" end="18482" title="Henry Ruiz" label="Henry Ruiz"/>
<link wikidata="Q4470031" start="18502" end="18516" title="Jaime Wheelock" label="Jaime Wheelock"/>
<link wikidata="Q4216050" start="18518" end="18530" title="Luis Carrión Cruz" label="Luis Carrión"/>
<link wikidata="Q4328025" start="18535" end="18547" title="Carlos Núñez Tellez" label="Carlos Núñez"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541185" start="18849" end="18867" title="National Guard (Nicaragua)" label="National Guardsmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2522121" start="19352" end="19384" title="Junta of National Reconstruction" label="Junta of National Reconstruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q57402" start="19463" end="19476" title="Daniel Ortega" label="Daniel Ortega"/>
<link wikidata="Q104839697" start="19485" end="19498" title="Moisés Hassán" label="Moisés Hassán"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358652" start="19506" end="19520" title="Sergio Ramírez" label="Sergio Ramírez"/>
<link wikidata="Q3649515" start="19547" end="19561" title="Alfonso Robelo" label="Alfonso Robelo"/>
<link wikidata="Q114142" start="19572" end="19599" title="Violeta Barrios de Chamorro" label="Violeta Barrios de Chamorro"/>
<link wikidata="Q3211909" start="19620" end="19629" title="La Prensa (Managua)" label="La Prensa"/>
<link wikidata="Q706743" start="19647" end="19669" title="Pedro Joaquín Chamorro Cardenal" label="Pedro Joaquín Chamorro"/>
<link wikidata="Q208151" start="19784" end="19788" title="León, Nicaragua" label="León"/>
<link wikidata="Q596688" start="19793" end="19802" title="Matagalpa" label="Matagalpa"/>
<link wikidata="Q772871" start="20208" end="20224" title="Francisco Urcuyo" label="Francisco Urcuyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q8652" start="20238" end="20243" title="Miami" label="Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q774" start="20385" end="20394" title="Guatemala" label="Guatemala"/>
<link wikidata="Q57402" start="21191" end="21204" title="Daniel Ortega" label="Daniel Ortega"/>
<link wikidata="Q104839697" start="21206" end="21219" title="Moisés Hassán" label="Moisés Hassán"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358652" start="21234" end="21248" title="Sergio Ramírez" label="Sergio Ramírez"/>
<link wikidata="Q6682674" start="21262" end="21270" title="Los Doce" label="Los Doce"/>
<link wikidata="Q3649515" start="21353" end="21367" title="Alfonso Robelo" label="Alfonso Robelo"/>
<link wikidata="Q114142" start="21373" end="21400" title="Violeta Barrios de Chamorro" label="Violeta Barrios de Chamorro"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="23613" end="23619" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q7865257" start="23627" end="23665" title="UNESCO Nadezhda K. Krupskaya literacy prize" label="Nadezhda Krupskaya International Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q201595" start="23844" end="23888" title="Committees for the Defense of the Revolution" label="Committees for the Defense of the Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q114142" start="25145" end="25161" title="Violeta Chamorro" label="Violeta Chamorro"/>
<link wikidata="Q3649515" start="25166" end="25180" title="Alfonso Robelo" label="Alfonso Robelo"/>
<link wikidata="Q241" start="25431" end="25435" title="Cuba" label="Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="25437" end="25446" title="socialism" label="socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5255809" start="25943" end="25976" title="Democratic Revolutionary Alliance" label="Democratic Revolutionary Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1295235" start="26093" end="26105" title="Edén Pastora" label="Edén Pastora"/>
<link wikidata="Q286810" start="26243" end="26250" title="Contras" label="Contras"/>
<link wikidata="Q220596" start="28081" end="28094" title="habeas corpus" label="habeas corpus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7024484" start="28145" end="28159" title="1984 Nicaraguan general election" label="1984 elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q45322710" start="28252" end="28268" title="Sandinista Youth" label="Sandinista Youth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7024485" start="29597" end="29626" title="1990 Nicaraguan general election" label="presidential election of 1990"/>
<link wikidata="Q114142" start="29709" end="29725" title="Violeta Chamorro" label="Violeta Chamorro"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="29805" end="29818" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q792" start="29960" end="29971" title="El Salvador" label="El Salvador"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="30007" end="30010" title="Central Intelligence Agency" label="CIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q286810" start="30260" end="30267" title="Contras" label="Contras"/>
<link wikidata="Q1295235" start="30311" end="30323" title="Edén Pastora" label="Edén Pastora"/>
<link wikidata="Q783" start="30524" end="30532" title="Honduras" label="Honduras"/>
<link wikidata="Q800" start="30550" end="30560" title="Costa Rica" label="Costa Rica"/>
<link wikidata="Q189929" start="30781" end="30796" title="underwater mine" label="underwater mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132939" start="30818" end="30825" title="Corinto, Nicaragua" label="Corinto"/>
<link wikidata="Q7801" start="30862" end="30892" title="International Court of Justice" label="International Court of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q2824573" start="30996" end="31017" title="Reagan administration" label="Reagan administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q7801" start="31976" end="32006" title="International Court of Justice" label="International Court of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q891252" start="32201" end="32217" title="Boland Amendment" label="Boland Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="32349" end="32353" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="32382" end="32386" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q273659" start="32442" end="32460" title="Iran–Contra affair" label="Iran–Contra affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q851756" start="32650" end="32675" title="United States National Security Council" label="National Security Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q493898" start="32681" end="32689" title="Lieutenant Colonel" label="Lt. Col."/>
<link wikidata="Q431223" start="32690" end="32702" title="Oliver North" label="Oliver North"/>
<link wikidata="Q22316" start="32736" end="32746" title="John Kerry" label="John Kerry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806257" start="32759" end="32801" title="U.S. Senate Committee on Foreign Relations" label="U.S. Senate Committee on Foreign Relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q649857" start="33041" end="33066" title="National Security Archive" label="National Security Archive"/>
<link wikidata="Q192667" start="33106" end="33120" title="Manuel Noriega" label="Manuel Noriega"/>
<link wikidata="Q804" start="33149" end="33155" title="Panama" label="Panama"/>
<link wikidata="Q575741" start="33287" end="33308" title="San Jose Mercury News" label="San Jose Mercury News"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346239" start="33324" end="33333" title="Gary Webb" label="Gary Webb"/>
<link wikidata="Q330694" start="33410" end="33423" title="crack cocaine" label="crack cocaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="33427" end="33437" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553390" start="33723" end="33758" title="United States Department of Justice" label="United States Department of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165546" start="34339" end="34354" title="Mosquito Coast" label="Caribbean coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q332976" start="34419" end="34426" title="Miskito people" label="Miskito"/>
<link wikidata="Q677044" start="34428" end="34432" title="Sumo people" label="Sumo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1440932" start="34434" end="34438" title="Rama people" label="Rama"/>
<link wikidata="Q863927" start="34440" end="34448" title="Garifuna people" label="Garifuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q106713" start="34454" end="34461" title="Mestizo" label="Mestizo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="35812" end="35814" title="United Nations" label="UN"/>
<link wikidata="Q27496" start="35841" end="35855" title="Western Europe" label="Western Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q48525" start="36220" end="36235" title="Government of the United States" label="U.S. government"/>
<link wikidata="Q3649406" start="36316" end="36327" title="Arturo Cruz" label="Arturo Cruz"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="36540" end="36553" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q789915" start="36561" end="36577" title="United States State Department" label="State Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969591" start="37402" end="37419" title="National Assembly of Nicaragua" label="National Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q286810" start="37870" end="37877" title="Contras" label="Contras"/>
<link wikidata="Q1823132" start="39711" end="39746" title="Library of Congress Country Studies" label="Library of Congress Country Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q114142" start="39842" end="39858" title="Violeta Chamorro" label="Violeta Chamorro"/>
<link wikidata="Q49344" start="40492" end="40511" title="Óscar Arias Sánchez" label="Óscar Arias Sánchez"/>
<link wikidata="Q3784387" start="40718" end="40743" title="National Opposition Union (Nicaragua, 1990)" label="National Opposition Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q2330470" start="40849" end="40870" title="Nicaraguan Socialist Party" label="Nicaraguan communists"/>
<link wikidata="Q114142" start="40894" end="40921" title="Violeta Barrios de Chamorro" label="Violeta Barrios de Chamorro"/>
<link wikidata="Q276510" start="41998" end="42014" title="Ernesto Cardenal" label="Ernesto Cardenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358652" start="42019" end="42033" title="Sergio Ramírez" label="Sergio Ramírez"/>
<link wikidata="Q673988" start="42186" end="42216" title="Sandinista Renovation Movement" label="Sandinista Renovation Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q121254" start="42279" end="42296" title="social democracy" label="social democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q356647" start="42546" end="42560" title="Arnoldo Alemán" label="Arnoldo Alemán"/>
<link wikidata="Q1614777" start="42873" end="42886" title="Herty Lewites" label="Herty Lewites"/>
<link wikidata="Q311355" start="43042" end="43057" title="Enrique Bolaños" label="Enrique Bolaños"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422066" start="43065" end="43093" title="Constitutional Liberal Party" label="Constitutional Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q16919169" start="43216" end="43231" title="2001 Nicaraguan general election" label="these elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q57402" start="43641" end="43654" title="Daniel Ortega" label="Daniel Ortega"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586482" start="43703" end="43735" title="2006 Nicaraguan general election" label="2006 Nicaraguan general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q673988" start="43788" end="43818" title="Sandinista Renovation Movement" label="Sandinista Renovation Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1614777" start="43881" end="43894" title="Herty Lewites" label="Herty Lewites"/>
<link wikidata="Q2054647" start="44944" end="44969" title="Independent Liberal Party (Nicaragua)" label="Independent Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048361" start="44970" end="44989" title="Eduardo Montealegre" label="Eduardo Montealegre"/>
<link wikidata="Q11702832" start="45492" end="45521" title="Indio Maíz Biological Reserve" label="Indio Maíz Biological Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q42970" start="46076" end="46097" title="Amnesty International" label="Amnesty International"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="46407" end="46421" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q162254" start="46491" end="46510" title="freedom of assembly" label="freedom of assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q114142" start="46563" end="46579" title="Violeta Chamorro" label="Violeta Chamorro"/>
<link wikidata="Q159454" start="48062" end="48085" title="Socialist International" label="Socialist International"/>
<link wikidata="Q1630365" start="48219" end="48249" title="Democratic Revolutionary Party" label="Democratic Revolutionary Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q370691" start="48725" end="48739" title="Carlos Fonseca" label="Carlos Fonseca"/>
<link wikidata="Q213746" start="48763" end="48784" title="Augusto César Sandino" label="Augusto César Sandino"/>
<link wikidata="Q811" start="48813" end="48822" title="Nicaragua" label="Nicaragua"/>
<link wikidata="Q218443" start="49103" end="49109" title="Anastasio Somoza Debayle" label="Somoza"/>
<link wikidata="Q2289477" start="49240" end="49268" title="protracted people&amp;#x27;s war" label="protracted people&amp;#x27;s war"/>
<link wikidata="Q4470031" start="49525" end="49539" title="Jaime Wheelock" label="Jaime Wheelock"/>
<link wikidata="Q7264" start="49563" end="49570" title="Marxism" label="Marxist"/>
<link wikidata="Q4337101" start="49699" end="49707" title="Humberto Ortega" label="Humberto"/>
<link wikidata="Q57402" start="49733" end="49746" title="Daniel Ortega" label="Daniel Ortega"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="50539" end="50556" title="Roman Catholicism" label="Roman Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q739609" start="50954" end="50973" title="Christian socialism" label="Christian socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q206898" start="50978" end="50997" title="liberation theology" label="liberation theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q276510" start="51050" end="51066" title="Ernesto Cardenal" label="Ernesto Cardenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q16061120" start="52133" end="52149" title="Carlos Tünnerman" label="Carlos Tünnerman"/>
<link wikidata="Q834554" start="52470" end="52491" title="Political Catholicism" label="Political Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2501478" start="52513" end="52531" title="Carlos Mejía Godoy" label="Carlos Mejía Godoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q213746" start="52818" end="52833" title="Augusto Sandino" label="Augusto Sandino"/>
<link wikidata="Q5809" start="52835" end="52846" title="Che Guevara" label="Che Guevara"/>
<link wikidata="Q505595" start="52851" end="52873" title="Camilo Torres Restrepo" label="Camilo Torres Restrepo"/>
<link wikidata="Q370691" start="53007" end="53021" title="Carlos Fonseca" label="Carlos Fonseca"/>
<link wikidata="Q657577" start="53550" end="53561" title="Tomás Borge" label="Tomás Borge"/>
<link wikidata="Q370691" start="53828" end="53842" title="Carlos Fonseca" label="Carlos Fonseca"/>
<link wikidata="Q213746" start="53883" end="53890" title="Sandino" label="Sandino"/>
<link wikidata="Q25424534" start="53942" end="53947" title="military junta" label="Junta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2252089" start="54236" end="54246" title="Sandinismo" label="Sandinismo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164219" start="54354" end="54379" title="Constitution of Nicaragua" label="Constitution of Nicaragua"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164219" start="54434" end="54459" title="Constitution of Nicaragua" label="Constitution of Nicaragua"/>
<link wikidata="Q254219" start="54757" end="54763" title="Somoza" label="Somoza"/>
<link wikidata="Q241" start="56938" end="56942" title="Cuba" label="Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1563" start="57407" end="57413" title="Havana" label="Havana"/>
<link wikidata="Q769" start="57904" end="57911" title="Grenada" label="Grenada"/>
<link wikidata="Q811" start="58305" end="58314" title="Nicaragua" label="Nicaragua"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995529" start="58497" end="58502" title="grain" label="grain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095" start="58514" end="58523" title="foodstuff" label="foodstuff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334972" start="58566" end="58576" title="United States embargo against Cuba" label="US embargo"/>
<link wikidata="Q35794" start="58683" end="58703" title="University of Cambridge" label="Cambridge University"/>
<link wikidata="Q201788" start="58704" end="58713" title="historian" label="historian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086484" start="58714" end="58732" title="Christopher Andrew (historian)" label="Christopher Andrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q2521159" start="58775" end="58792" title="Mitrokhin Archive" label="Mitrokhin Archive"/>
<link wikidata="Q370691" start="58794" end="58815" title="Carlos Fonseca Amador" label="Carlos Fonseca Amador"/>
<link wikidata="Q80919" start="58898" end="58901" title="KGB" label="KGB"/>
<link wikidata="Q649" start="58929" end="58935" title="Moscow" label="Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q533890" start="58958" end="58976" title="Aleksandr Shelepin" label="Aleksandr Shelepin"/>
<link wikidata="Q209225" start="59029" end="59048" title="liberation movement" label="liberation movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q180194" start="59114" end="59125" title="Third World" label="Third World"/>
<link wikidata="Q80895" start="59379" end="59396" title="guerrilla warfare" label="guerrilla warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q529610" start="59423" end="59442" title="Luis Somoza Debayle" label="Luis Somoza Debayle"/>
<link wikidata="Q463328" start="59911" end="59920" title="Vasili Mitrokhin" label="Mitrokhin"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="60190" end="60196" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q193518" start="60253" end="60261" title="sabotage" label="sabotage"/>
<link wikidata="Q708321" start="60288" end="60309" title="Berlin Crisis of 1961" label="Berlin Crisis of 1961"/>
<link wikidata="Q35314" start="60375" end="60392" title="Nikita Khrushchev" label="Nikita Khrushchev"/>
<link wikidata="Q56036" start="60642" end="60653" title="West Berlin" label="West Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q241" start="60745" end="60749" title="Cuba" label="Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186441" start="60987" end="60998" title="Frol Kozlov" label="Frol Kozlov"/>
<link wikidata="Q1971373" start="61057" end="61079" title="Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union" label="CPSU Central Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q4294505" start="61107" end="61133" title="Soviet Ministry of Defense" label="Soviet Ministry of Defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q41644" start="61390" end="61401" title="Warsaw Pact" label="Warsaw Pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q16957" start="61477" end="61488" title="East German" label="East German"/>
<link wikidata="Q153846" start="61489" end="61494" title="Stasi" label="Stasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="61542" end="61548" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q57399" start="61588" end="61599" title="Markus Wolf" label="Markus Wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q214183" start="61663" end="61676" title="secret police" label="secret police"/>
<link wikidata="Q7024446" start="61776" end="61804" title="Nicaraguan Literacy Campaign" label="Nicaraguan Literacy Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q8236" start="61855" end="61865" title="illiteracy" label="illiteracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q971833" start="61950" end="61965" title="Education in Cuba" label="Cuban education"/>
<link wikidata="Q11270" start="62001" end="62008" title="Fulgencio Batista" label="Batista"/>
<link wikidata="Q12195" start="64299" end="64304" title="polio" label="polio"/>
<link wikidata="Q79793" start="64321" end="64328" title="measles" label="measles"/>
<link wikidata="Q134859" start="64705" end="64719" title="whooping cough" label="whooping cough"/>
<link wikidata="Q155857" start="64721" end="64728" title="rubella" label="rubella"/>
<link wikidata="Q835884" start="64762" end="64778" title="infant mortality" label="infant mortality"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892470" start="65252" end="65291" title="United States embargo against Nicaragua" label="United States embargo against Nicaragua"/>
<link wikidata="Q2824573" start="65308" end="65329" title="Reagan administration" label="Reagan administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="65756" end="65758" title="United Kingdom" label="UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q159719" start="65895" end="65906" title="power plant" label="power plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q11002" start="65912" end="65917" title="sugar" label="sugar"/>
<link wikidata="Q191086" start="66101" end="66107" title="jungle" label="jungle"/>
<link wikidata="Q286810" start="66166" end="66176" title="Contras" label="Contra war"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365146" start="66256" end="66264" title="Tipitapa" label="Tipitapa"/>
<link wikidata="Q11256" start="66339" end="66351" title="Fidel Castro" label="Fidel Castro"/>
<link wikidata="Q276510" start="66897" end="66913" title="Ernesto Cardenal" label="Ernesto Cardenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q173767" start="69068" end="69079" title="Rubén Darío" label="Rubén Darío"/>
<link wikidata="Q3034382" start="70364" end="70379" title="Rosario Murillo" label="Rosario Murillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q35865" start="73261" end="73270" title="Inflation" label="Inflation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7024446" start="75972" end="76000" title="Nicaraguan Literacy Campaign" label="Nicaraguan Literacy Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q17005907" start="77118" end="77171" title="Luisa Amanda Espinoza Association of Nicaraguan Women" label="Luisa Amanda Espinoza Association of Nicaraguan Women"/>
<link wikidata="Q57402" start="77199" end="77212" title="Daniel Ortega" label="Daniel Ortega"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888993" start="77255" end="77283" title="United Nicaraguan Opposition" label="United Nicaraguan Opposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q114142" start="77310" end="77326" title="Violeta Chamorro" label="Violeta Chamorro"/>
<link wikidata="Q892074" start="78160" end="78184" title="Global Gender Gap Report" label="Global Gender Gap Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q170418" start="78194" end="78214" title="World Economic Forum" label="World Economic Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="78266" end="78281" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q2054631" start="78536" end="78562" title="Democratic Party (Nicaragua)" label="Liberal Party of Nicaragua"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541185" start="78906" end="78922" title="National Guard (Nicaragua)" label="Guardia Nacional"/>
<link wikidata="Q169789" start="79008" end="79018" title="Vatican II" label="Vatican II"/>
<link wikidata="Q206898" start="79093" end="79112" title="liberation theology" label="liberation theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q276510" start="79390" end="79406" title="Ernesto Cardenal" label="Ernesto Cardenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q190586" start="81133" end="81148" title="neo-colonialism" label="neo-colonialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1554776" start="81470" end="81489" title="option for the poor" label="option for the poor"/>
<link wikidata="Q335384" start="81702" end="81719" title="Gustavo Gutiérrez" label="Gustavo Gutiérrez"/>
<link wikidata="Q5159913" start="82223" end="82267" title="Second Episcopal Conference of Latin America" label="Second Episcopal Conference of Latin America"/>
<link wikidata="Q888064" start="82451" end="82472" title="Miguel Obando y Bravo" label="Miguel Obando y Bravo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2504173" start="83198" end="83219" title="Gaspar García Laviana" label="Gaspar García Laviana"/>
<link wikidata="Q114142" start="84433" end="84449" title="Violeta Chamorro" label="Violeta Chamorro"/>
<link wikidata="Q3649515" start="84454" end="84468" title="Alfonso Robelo" label="Alfonso Robelo"/>
<link wikidata="Q62082484" start="85049" end="85063" title="Humberto Belli" label="Humberto Belli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023332" start="85601" end="85638" title="Episcopal Conference of Latin America" label="Episcopal Conference of Latin America"/>
<link wikidata="Q2088007" start="86702" end="86718" title="Phillip Berryman" label="Phillip Berryman"/>
<link wikidata="Q989" start="87966" end="87983" title="Pope John Paul II" label="Pope John Paul II"/>
<link wikidata="Q286810" start="88693" end="88699" title="Contras" label="Contra"/>
<link wikidata="Q7229185" start="89330" end="89371" title="Pope John Paul II 1983 visit to Nicaragua" label="Pope John Paul II 1983 visit to Nicaragua"/>
<link wikidata="Q989" start="89460" end="89477" title="Pope John Paul II" label="Pope John Paul II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2050383" start="89844" end="89856" title="Paolo Giglio" label="Paolo Giglio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358652" start="90195" end="90209" title="Sergio Ramírez" label="Sergio Ramírez"/>
<link wikidata="Q3274" start="90312" end="90319" title="Managua" label="Managua"/>
<link wikidata="Q30547" start="90500" end="90513" title="Mother Teresa" label="Mother Teresa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5399259" start="90700" end="90726" title="Esquipulas Peace Agreement" label="Esquipulas Peace Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q888064" start="90980" end="91001" title="Miguel Obando y Bravo" label="Miguel Obando y Bravo"/>
<link wikidata="Q97356907" start="91375" end="91379" title="2020 in Nicaragua" label="2020"/>
<link wikidata="Q2286828" start="91388" end="91399" title="Silvio José Báez" label="Silvio Báez"/>
<link wikidata="Q6825038" start="91732" end="91763" title="Immaculate Conception Cathedral, Managua" label="Immaculate Conception Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q167096" start="91771" end="91787" title="Molotov cocktail" label="Molotov cocktail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185636" start="91824" end="91839" title="Blood of Christ" label="Blood of Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="91908" end="91933" title="Time (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Time&amp;quot; magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q332976" start="92395" end="92402" title="Miskito people" label="Miskito"/>
<link wikidata="Q201595" start="92568" end="92612" title="Committees for the Defense of the Revolution" label="Committees for the Defense of the Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q3211909" start="92761" end="92770" title="La Prensa (Managua)" label="La Prensa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1589444" start="93171" end="93212" title="Inter-American Commission on Human Rights" label="Inter-American Commission on Human Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q286810" start="94526" end="94533" title="Contras" label="Contras"/>
<link wikidata="Q1288449" start="94741" end="94755" title="Forced disappearance" label="disappearances"/>
<link wikidata="Q107957" start="95192" end="95206" title="Alexander Haig" label="Alexander Haig"/>
<link wikidata="Q216047" start="95239" end="95248" title="Le Figaro" label="Le Figaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752350" start="95891" end="95908" title="summary execution" label="summary execution"/>
<link wikidata="Q876787" start="97549" end="97572" title="The Heritage Foundation" label="The Heritage Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5256150" start="97588" end="97604" title="Demokratizatsiya (journal)" label="Demokratizatsiya"/>
<link wikidata="Q22649" start="97687" end="97699" title="antisemitism" label="antisemitism"/>
<link wikidata="Q888064" start="98514" end="98535" title="Miguel Obando y Bravo" label="Miguel Obando y Bravo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1589444" start="98692" end="98733" title="Inter-American Commission on Human Rights" label="Inter-American Commission on Human Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q187052" start="99254" end="99272" title="Human Rights Watch" label="Human Rights Watch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7248599" start="99847" end="99893" title="Progressio (organization)" label="Catholic Institute for International Relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q206898" start="99996" end="100015" title="liberation theology" label="liberation theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q187052" start="100599" end="100613" title="Americas Watch" label="Americas Watch"/>
<link wikidata="Q166032" start="101609" end="101628" title="The Washington Post" label="The Washington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422577" start="101657" end="101689" title="National Endowment for Democracy" label="National Endowment for Democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q166032" start="102045" end="102064" title="The Washington Post" label="The Washington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="102081" end="102099" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q1589444" start="103536" end="103577" title="Inter-American Commission on Human Rights" label="Inter-American Commission on Human Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q876787" start="104238" end="104261" title="The Heritage Foundation" label="The Heritage Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q684800" start="104408" end="104443" title="International Commission of Jurists" label="International Commission of Jurists"/>
<link wikidata="Q242424" start="104658" end="104671" title="Freedom House" label="Freedom House"/>
<link wikidata="Q789915" start="104751" end="104781" title="United States State Department" label="United States State Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q648924" start="104894" end="104898" title="FMLN" label="FMLN"/>
<link wikidata="Q792" start="104909" end="104920" title="El Salvador" label="El Salvador"/>
<link wikidata="Q783" start="105457" end="105465" title="Honduras" label="Honduras"/>
<link wikidata="Q800" start="105467" end="105477" title="Costa Rica" label="Costa Rica"/>
<link wikidata="Q739" start="105483" end="105491" title="Colombia" label="Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1603" start="105597" end="105605" title="Kentucky" label="Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q355522" start="105614" end="105629" title="Mitch McConnell" label="Mitch McConnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q48340" start="105663" end="105666" title="CNN" label="CNN"/>
<link wikidata="Q22316" start="105672" end="105682" title="John Kerry" label="John Kerry"/>
<link wikidata="Q14213" start="105689" end="105707" title="United States Secretary of State" label="Secretary of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q57402" start="105739" end="105752" title="Daniel Ortega" label="Daniel Ortega"/>
<link wikidata="Q2824573" start="105771" end="105792" title="Reagan Administration" label="Reagan Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q7283" start="105838" end="105847" title="terrorism" label="terrorism"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="105880" end="105901" title="United States senator" label="United States senator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1463516" start="105915" end="105936" title="Nicaraguan Revolution" label="Nicaraguan Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="105960" end="105970" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q359442" start="105997" end="106011" title="Bernie Sanders" label="Bernie Sanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q286810" start="106083" end="106090" title="Contras" label="Contras"/>
<link wikidata="Q574827" start="106258" end="106271" title="anti-American" label="anti-American"/>
<link wikidata="Q213746" start="106472" end="106479" title="Sandino" label="Sandino"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304042" start="106531" end="106554" title="occupation of Nicaragua" label="occupation of Nicaragua"/>
<link wikidata="Q182773" start="106676" end="106687" title="Jolly Roger" label="Jolly Roger"/>
<link wikidata="Q6199" start="106730" end="106739" title="anarchism" label="anarchist"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="106800" end="106806" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q673988" start="107141" end="107171" title="Sandinista Renovation Movement" label="Sandinista Renovation Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2252089" start="107459" end="107469" title="Sandinismo" label="Sandinismo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="107511" end="107536" title="Sandinista Revolution Day" label="Sandinista Revolution Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q7257817" start="107542" end="107558" title="Public holidays in Nicaragua" label="national holiday"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759260" start="107674" end="107722" title="To Wong Foo, Thanks for Everything! Julie Newmar" label="To Wong Foo, Thanks for Everything! Julie Newmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q49004" start="107743" end="107757" title="Patrick Swayze" label="Patrick Swayze"/>
<link wikidata="Q189694" start="107799" end="107812" title="Wesley Snipes" label="Wesley Snipes"/>
<link wikidata="Q337084" start="107830" end="107840" title="drag queen" label="drag queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6494571" start="108193" end="108207" title="Last Plane Out" label="Last Plane Out"/>
<link wikidata="Q218443" start="108352" end="108376" title="Anastasio Somoza Debayle" label="Anastasio Somoza Debayle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140247" start="108454" end="108464" title="Under Fire (1983 film)" label="Under Fire"/>
<link wikidata="" start="108659" end="108689" title="Metal Gear Solid: Peace Walker" label="Metal Gear Solid: Peace Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q80919" start="108991" end="108994" title="KGB" label="KGB"/>
<link wikidata="Q212173" start="109546" end="109557" title="Roger Ebert" label="Roger Ebert"/>
<link wikidata="Q269912" start="109582" end="109595" title="Into the Wild (film)" label="Into the Wild"/>
<link wikidata="Q312005" start="109686" end="109708" title="Christopher McCandless" label="Christopher McCandless"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122836" start="109856" end="109876" title="Morazán Department" label="Morazán, El Salvador"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183" start="110908" end="110920" title="Puerto Rico" label="Puerto Rican"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027200" start="110940" end="110948" title="Calle 13 (band)" label="Calle 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q486365" start="111191" end="111203" title="anarcho-punk" label="anarcho-punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089523" start="111209" end="111220" title="Chumbawamba" label="Chumbawamba"/>
<link wikidata="Q7191246" start="111312" end="111354" title="Pictures of Starving Children Sell Records" label="Pictures of Starving Children Sell Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q298" start="111532" end="111537" title="Chile" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q187760" start="111540" end="111548" title="New wave music" label="new wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q783578" start="111555" end="111570" title="Los Prisioneros" label="Los Prisioneros"/>
<link wikidata="Q4616" start="111661" end="111675" title="Marilyn Monroe" label="Marilyn Monroe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6466516" start="111729" end="111751" title="La voz de los &amp;#x27;80" label="La voz de los &amp;#x27;80"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416" start="111880" end="111897" title="Margaret Thatcher" label="Margaret Thatcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q125603" start="111966" end="111975" title="The Clash" label="The Clash"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142897" start="111997" end="112008" title="Sandinista!" label="Sandinista!"/>
<link wikidata="Q7971706" start="112094" end="112112" title="Washington Bullets (song)" label="Washington Bullets"/>
<link wikidata="Q66342594" start="112316" end="112329" title="The Highwomen" label="The Highwomen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672918" start="112630" end="112646" title="Irish rebel song" label="Irish rebel song"/>
<link wikidata="Q5187981" start="112653" end="112661" title="Croppies" label="Croppies"/>
<link wikidata="Q716196" start="112992" end="113005" title="Chico Science" label="Chico Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q41718" start="113258" end="113264" title="Emiliano Zapata" label="Zapata"/>
<link wikidata="Q229682" start="113285" end="113290" title="Zumbi" label="Zumbi"/>
<link wikidata="Q611890" start="113292" end="113311" title="Antônio Conselheiro" label="Antônio Conselheiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q189150" start="113322" end="113337" title="Black Panther Party" label="Panteras Negras"/>
<link wikidata="" start="113339" end="113346" title=":pt:Lampião (cangaceiro)" label="Lampião"/>
<link wikidata="Q18844725" start="113434" end="113455" title="Fear the Walking Dead" label="Fear the Walking Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q60740246" start="113482" end="113496" title="Daniel Salazar" label="Daniel Salazar"/>
<link wikidata="Q474980" start="113498" end="113510" title="Rubén Blades" label="Rubén Blades"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="113582" end="113588" title="List of Fear the Walking Dead episodes#Season 1 (2015)" label="Cobalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q17157122" start="113856" end="113878" title="The Golden Girls (season 5)" label="Mary Has a Little Lamb"/>
<link wikidata="Q912467" start="113914" end="113930" title="The Golden Girls" label="The Golden Girls"/>
<link wikidata="Q28429799" start="114244" end="114252" title="Snowfall (TV series)" label="Snowfall"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="114274" end="114297" title="Los Angeles, California" label="Los Angeles, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="114369" end="114372" title="Central Intelligence Agency" label="CIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q41576" start="114387" end="114394" title="cocaine" label="cocaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q286810" start="114464" end="114471" title="Contras" label="Contras"/>
<link wikidata="Q16553797" start="114538" end="114551" title="The Americans (season 2)" label="The Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q57402" start="114851" end="114864" title="Daniel Ortega" label="Daniel Ortega"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044166" start="115059" end="115075" title="Patrick Argüello" label="Patrick Argüello"/>
<link wikidata="Q2449925" start="115106" end="115136" title="Dawson&amp;#x27;s Field hijackings" label="Dawson&amp;#x27;s Field hijackings"/>
<link wikidata="Q276449" start="115139" end="115151" title="Nora Astorga" label="Nora Astorga"/>
<link wikidata="Q4077107" start="115180" end="115196" title="Monica Baltodano" label="Monica Baltodano"/>
<link wikidata="Q290491" start="115278" end="115292" title="Gioconda Belli" label="Gioconda Belli"/>
<link wikidata="Q657577" start="115363" end="115374" title="Tomás Borge" label="Tomás Borge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2289477" start="115433" end="115450" title="People&amp;#x27;s War" label="People&amp;#x27;s War"/>
<link wikidata="Q320442" start="115510" end="115522" title="Omar Cabezas" label="Omar Cabezas"/>
<link wikidata="Q276510" start="115575" end="115591" title="Ernesto Cardenal" label="Ernesto Cardenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q112899" start="115645" end="115662" title="Fernando Cardenal" label="Fernando Cardenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="115666" end="115672" title="Jesuit" label="Jesuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q8236" start="115717" end="115725" title="literacy" label="literacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4216050" start="115762" end="115774" title="Luis Carrión Cruz" label="Luis Carrión"/>
<link wikidata="Q4242319" start="115812" end="115826" title="Rigoberto Cruz" label="Rigoberto Cruz"/>
<link wikidata="Q4243418" start="115866" end="115880" title="Joaquín Cuadra" label="Joaquín Cuadra"/>
<link wikidata="Q113935" start="115940" end="115960" title="Miguel D&amp;#x27;Escoto" label="Miguel D&amp;#x27;Escoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q120737418" start="115964" end="115973" title="Maryknoll" label="Maryknoll"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="115974" end="115988" title="Roman Catholic" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q12057620" start="116043" end="116059" title="Idania Fernandez" label="Idania Fernandez"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394538" start="116075" end="116096" title="Rigoberto López Pérez" label="Rigoberto López Pérez"/>
<link wikidata="Q370691" start="116134" end="116148" title="Carlos Fonseca" label="Carlos Fonseca"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="116230" end="116280" title="Adeline Gröns y Schindler-McCoy de Argüello-Olivas" label="Adeline Gröns y Schindler-McCoy de Argüello-Olivas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="116377" end="116391" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q123759" start="116411" end="116414" title="Organization of American States" label="OAS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1614777" start="116539" end="116552" title="Herty Lewites" label="Herty Lewites"/>
<link wikidata="Q57402" start="116635" end="116648" title="Daniel Ortega" label="Daniel Ortega"/>
<link wikidata="Q4337101" start="116846" end="116861" title="Humberto Ortega" label="Humberto Ortega"/>
<link wikidata="Q1295235" start="117073" end="117085" title="Edén Pastora" label="Edén Pastora"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358652" start="117292" end="117306" title="Sergio Ramírez" label="Sergio Ramírez"/>
<link wikidata="Q62083493" start="117463" end="117473" title="Henry Ruiz" label="Henry Ruiz"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="117578" end="117596" title="Casimiro Sotelo" label="Casimiro A. Sotelo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738074" start="117609" end="117627" title="political activist" label="political activist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="117709" end="117723" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q123759" start="117743" end="117746" title="Organization of American States" label="OAS"/>
<link wikidata="Q6561092" start="117748" end="117768" title="List of Ambassadors and High Commissioners to Canada" label="Ambassador to Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2043893" start="117816" end="117825" title="Arlen Siu" label="Arlen Siu"/>
<link wikidata="Q440280" start="117922" end="117939" title="Dora María Téllez" label="Dora María Téllez"/>
<link wikidata="Q4470031" start="118018" end="118032" title="Jaime Wheelock" label="Jaime Wheelock"/>
<link wikidata="Q30153737" start="118123" end="118137" title="Dorotea Wilson" label="Dorotea Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2501478" start="118283" end="118301" title="Carlos Mejía Godoy" label="Carlos Mejía Godoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q273659" start="118304" end="118322" title="Iran–Contra affair" label="Iran–Contra affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q9017889" start="118325" end="118350" title="Komite internazionalistak" label="Komite internazionalistak"/>
<link wikidata="Q6608068" start="118353" end="118392" title="List of books and films about Nicaragua" label="List of books and films about Nicaragua"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046703" start="118401" end="118427" title="Nicaragua v. United States" label="Nicaragua v. United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1306701" start="119919" end="119934" title="Stephen Kinzer" label="Kinzer, Stephen"/>
<link wikidata="" start="119942" end="119986" title="Blood of Brothers: Life and War in Nicaragua" label="Blood of Brothers: Life and War in Nicaragua"/>
<link wikidata="Q41042" start="122181" end="122194" title="Harold Pinter" label="Harold Pinter"/>
<link wikidata="Q37922" start="122204" end="122229" title="Nobel Prize in Literature" label="Nobel Prize in Literature"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="29318" wikidata="Q190161" url="?curid=29318" title="Streptococcus">
<text>Streptococcus is a genus of gram-positive or spherical bacteria that belongs to the family Streptococcaceae, within the order Lactobacillales (lactic acid bacteria), in the phylum Bacillota. Cell division in streptococci occurs along a single axis, thus when growing they tend to form pairs or chains, which may appear bent or twisted. This differs from staphylococci, which divide along multiple axes, thereby generating irregular, grape-like clusters of cells. Most streptococci are oxidase-negative and catalase-negative, and many are facultative anaerobes (capable of growth both aerobically and anaerobically).

The term was coined in 1877 by Viennese surgeon Albert Theodor Billroth (1829–1894), by combining the prefix &quot;strepto-&quot; (from ), together with the suffix &quot;-coccus&quot; (from Modern , from .) In 1984, many bacteria formerly grouped in the genus &quot;Streptococcus&quot; were separated out into the genera &quot;Enterococcus&quot; and &quot;Lactococcus&quot;. Currently, over 50 species are recognised in this genus. This genus has been found to be part of the salivary microbiome.

==Pathogenesis and classification==

In addition to streptococcal pharyngitis (strep throat), certain &quot;Streptococcus&quot; species are responsible for many cases of pink eye, meningitis, bacterial pneumonia, endocarditis, erysipelas, and necrotizing fasciitis (the &#x27;flesh-eating&#x27; bacterial infections). However, many streptococcal species are not pathogenic, and form part of the commensal human microbiota of the mouth, skin, intestine, and upper respiratory tract. Streptococci are also a necessary ingredient in producing Emmentaler (&quot;Swiss&quot;) cheese.

Species of streptococci are classified based on their hemolytic properties. Alpha-hemolytic species cause oxidization of iron in hemoglobin molecules within red blood cells, giving it a greenish color on blood agar. Beta-hemolytic species cause complete rupture of red blood cells. On blood agar, this appears as wide areas clear of blood cells surrounding bacterial colonies. Gamma-hemolytic species cause no hemolysis.

Beta-hemolytic streptococci are further classified by Lancefield grouping, a serotype classification (that is, describing specific carbohydrates present on the bacterial cell wall). The 21 described serotypes are named Lancefield groups A to W (excluding E, I and J). This system of classification was developed by Rebecca Lancefield, a scientist at Rockefeller University.

In the medical setting, the most important groups are the alpha-hemolytic streptococci &quot;S. pneumoniae&quot; and &quot;Streptococcus&quot; &quot;viridans &quot;groups, and the beta-hemolytic streptococci of Lancefield groups A and B (also known as &quot;group A strep&quot; and &quot;group B strep&quot;).

Table: Medically relevant streptococci
===Alpha-hemolytic===
When alpha-hemolysis (α-hemolysis) is present, the agar under the colony will appear dark and greenish due to the conversion of hemoglobin to green biliverdin. &quot;Streptococcus pneumoniae&quot; and a group of oral streptococci (&quot;Streptococcus viridans&quot; or viridans streptococci) display alpha-hemolysis.
Alpha-hemolysis is also termed incomplete hemolysis or partial hemolysis because the cell membranes of the red blood cells are left intact. This is also sometimes called green hemolysis because of the color change in the agar.

====Pneumococci====
* &quot;S. pneumoniae&quot; (sometimes called pneumococcus), is a leading cause of bacterial pneumonia and the occasional etiology of otitis media, sinusitis, meningitis, and peritonitis. Inflammation is thought to be the major cause of how pneumococci cause disease, hence the tendency of diagnoses associated with them to involve inflammation. They possess no Lancefield antigens.

====The viridans group: alpha-hemolytic====
* The viridans streptococci are a large group of commensal bacteria that are either alpha-hemolytic, producing a green coloration on blood agar plates (hence the name &quot;viridans&quot;, from Latin &quot;vĭrĭdis&quot;, green), or nonhemolytic. They possess no Lancefield antigens.

=== Beta-hemolytic ===
Beta-hemolysis (β-hemolysis), sometimes called complete hemolysis, is a complete lysis of red cells in the media around and under the colonies: the area appears lightened (yellow) and transparent. Streptolysin, an exotoxin, is the enzyme produced by the bacteria which causes the complete lysis of red blood cells. There are two types of streptolysin: Streptolysin O (SLO) and streptolysin S (SLS). Streptolysin O is an oxygen-sensitive cytotoxin, secreted by most group A &quot;Streptococcus&quot; (GAS), and interacts with cholesterol in the membrane of eukaryotic cells (mainly red and white blood cells, macrophages, and platelets), and usually results in beta-hemolysis under the surface of blood agar. Streptolysin S is an oxygen-stable cytotoxin also produced by most GAS strains which results in clearing on the surface of blood agar. SLS affects immune cells, including polymorphonuclear leukocytes and lymphocytes, and is thought to prevent the host immune system from clearing infection. &quot;Streptococcus pyogenes&quot;, or GAS, displays beta hemolysis.

Some weakly beta-hemolytic species cause intense hemolysis when grown together with a strain of &quot;Staphylococcus&quot;. This is called the CAMP test. &quot;Streptococcus agalactiae&quot; displays this property. &quot;Clostridium perfringens&quot; can be identified presumptively with this test. &quot;Listeria monocytogenes&quot; is also positive on sheep&#x27;s blood agar.
==== Group A ====
Group A &quot;S. pyogenes&quot; is the causative agent in a wide range of group A streptococcal infections (GAS). These infections may be noninvasive or invasive. The noninvasive infections tend to be more common and less severe. The most common of these infections include streptococcal pharyngitis (strep throat) and impetigo. Scarlet fever is another example of Group A noninvasive infection.

The invasive infections caused by group A beta-hemolytic streptococci tend to be more severe and less common. This occurs when the bacterium is able to infect areas where it is not usually found, such as the blood and organs. The diseases that may be caused include streptococcal toxic shock syndrome, necrotizing fasciitis, pneumonia, and bacteremia. Globally, GAS has been estimated to cause more than 500,000 deaths every year, making it one of the world&#x27;s leading pathogens.

Additional complications may be caused by GAS, namely acute rheumatic fever and acute glomerulonephritis. Rheumatic fever, a disease that affects the joints, kidneys, and heart valves, is a consequence of untreated strep A infection caused not by the bacterium itself, but due to the antibodies created by the immune system to fight off the infection cross-reacting with other proteins in the body. This &quot;cross-reaction&quot; causes the body to essentially attack itself and leads to the damage above. A similar autoimmune mechanism initiated by Group A beta-hemolytic streptococcal (GABHS) infection is hypothesized to cause pediatric autoimmune neuropsychiatric disorders associated with streptococcal infections (PANDAS), wherein autoimmune antibodies affect the basal ganglia, causing rapid onset of psychiatric, motor, sleep, and other symptoms in pediatric patients.

GAS infection is generally diagnosed with a rapid strep test or by culture.

==== Group B ====
&quot;S. agalactiae&quot;, or group B &quot;streptococcus&quot;, GBS, causes pneumonia and meningitis in newborns and the elderly, with occasional systemic bacteremia. Importantly, &quot;Streptococcus agalactiae&quot; is the most common cause of meningitis in infants from one month to three months old. They can also colonize the intestines and the female reproductive tract, increasing the risk for premature rupture of membranes during pregnancy, and transmission of the organism to the infant. The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, American Academy of Pediatrics, and the Centers for Disease Control recommend all pregnant women between 35 and 37 weeks gestation to be tested for GBS. Women who test positive should be given prophylactic antibiotics during labor, which will usually prevent transmission to the infant. Group III polysaccharide vaccines have been proven effective in preventing the passing of GBS from mother to infant. 

The United Kingdom has chosen to adopt a risk factor-based protocol, rather than the culture-based protocol followed in the US. Current guidelines state that if one or more of the following risk factors is present, then the woman should be treated with &quot;intrapartum&quot; antibiotics:
* GBS bacteriuria during this pregnancy
* History of GBS disease in a previous infant
* Intrapartum fever (≥38 °C)
* Preterm labour (&lt;37 weeks)
* Prolonged rupture of membranes (&gt;18 hours)
This protocol results in the administration of intrapartum antibiotics to 15–20% of pregnant women and the prevention of 65–70% of cases of early onset GBS sepsis.

==== Group C ====
This group includes &quot;S. equi&quot;, which causes strangles in horses, and &quot;S. zooepidemicus&quot; — &quot;S. equi&quot; is a clonal descendant or biovar of the ancestral &quot;S. zooepidemicus&quot; — which causes infections in several species of mammals, including cattle and horses. &quot;S. dysgalactiae subsp. dysgalactiae&quot; is also a member of group C, beta-haemolytic streptococci that can cause pharyngitis and other pyogenic infections similar to group A streptococci. Group C streptococcal bacteria are considered zoonotic pathogens, meaning infection can be passed from animal to human.

==== Group D (enterococci) ====
Many former group D streptococci have been reclassified and placed in the genus &quot;Enterococcus&quot; (including &quot;E. faecalis&quot;, &quot;E. faecium&quot;, &quot;E. durans&quot;, and &quot;E. avium&quot;). For example, &quot;Streptococcus faecalis&quot; is now &quot;Enterococcus faecalis&quot;. &quot;E. faecalis&quot; is sometimes alpha-hemolytic and &quot;E. faecium&quot; is sometimes beta hemolytic.

The remaining nonenterococcal group D strains include &quot;Streptococcus gallolyticus&quot;, &quot;Streptococcus bovis&quot;, &quot;Streptococcus equinus&quot; and &quot;Streptococcus suis&quot;.

Nonhemolytic streptococci rarely cause illness. However, weakly hemolytic group D beta-hemolytic streptococci and &quot;Listeria monocytogenes&quot; (which is actually a gram-positive bacillus) should not be confused with nonhemolytic streptococci.

====Group F streptococci====
Group F streptococci were first described in 1934 by Long and Bliss among the &quot;minute haemolytic streptococci&quot;. They are also known as &quot;Streptococcus anginosus&quot; (according to the Lancefield classification system) or as members of the &quot;S. milleri&quot; group (according to the European system).

====Group G streptococci====
These streptococci are usually, but not exclusively, beta-hemolytic. &quot;Streptococcus dysgalactiae subsp. canis&quot; is the predominant subspecies encountered. It is a particularly common GGS in humans, although it is typically found on animals. &quot;S. phocae&quot; is a GGS subspecies that has been found in marine mammals and marine fish species. In marine mammals it has been mainly associated with meningoencephalitis, sepsis, and endocarditis, but is also associated with many other pathologies. Its environmental reservoir and means of transmission in marine mammals is not well characterized. Group G streptococci are also considered zoonotic pathogens.

==== Group H streptococci ====
Group H streptococci cause infections in medium-sized canines. Group H streptococci rarely cause human illness unless a human has direct contact with the mouth of a canine. One of the most common ways this can be spread is human-to-canine, mouth-to-mouth contact. However, the canine may lick the human&#x27;s hand and infection can be spread, as well.

== Clinical identification==

In clinical practice, the most common groups of &quot;Streptococcus&quot; can be distinguished by simple bench tests, such as the PYR test for group A streptococcus. There are also latex agglutination kits which can distinguish each of the main groups seen in clinical practice.

== Treatment ==
Streptococcal infections can be treated with antibiotics from the penicillin family. Most commonly, penicillin or amoxicillin is used to treat strep infection. These antibiotics work by disrupting peptidoglycan production in the cell wall. Treatment most often occurs as a 10-day oral antibiotic cycle. For patients with penicillin allergies and those suffering from skin infections, clindamycin can be used. Clindamycin works by disrupting protein synthesis within the cell. 

==Molecular taxonomy and phylogenetics==

Streptococci have been divided into six groups on the basis of their 16S rDNA sequences: &quot;S. anginosus, S. gallolyticus, S. mitis, S. mutans, S. pyogenes&quot; and &quot;S. salivarius&quot;. The 16S groups have been confirmed by whole genome sequencing (see figure). The important pathogens &quot;S. pneumoniae&quot; and &quot;S. pyogenes&quot; belong to the &quot;S. mitis&quot; and &quot;S. pyogenes&quot; groups, respectively, while the causative agent of dental caries, &quot;Streptococcus mutans&quot;, is basal to the &quot;Streptococcus&quot; group.

Recent technological advances have resulted in an increase of available genome sequences for &quot;Streptococcus&quot; species, allowing for more robust and reliable phylogenetic and comparative genomic analyses to be conducted. In 2018, the evolutionary relationships within &quot;Streptococcus&quot; was re-examined by Patel and Gupta through the analysis of comprehensive phylogenetic trees constructed based on four different datasets of proteins and the identification of 134 highly specific molecular signatures (in the form of conserved signature indels) that are exclusively shared by the entire genus or its distinct subclades.

The results revealed the presence of two main clades at the highest level within &quot;Streptococcus&quot;, termed the &quot;Mitis-Suis&quot; and &quot;Pyogenes-Equinus-Mutans&quot; clades. The &quot;Mitis-Suis&quot; main clade comprises the Suis subclade and the Mitis clade, which encompasses the Angiosus, Pneumoniae, Gordonii and Parasanguinis subclades. The second main clade, the &quot;Pyogenes-Equinus-Mutans&quot;, includes the Pyogenes, Mutans, Salivarius, Equinus, Sobrinus, Halotolerans, Porci, Entericus and Orisratti subclades. In total, 14 distinct subclades have been identified within the genus &quot;Streptococcus&quot;, each supported by reliable branching patterns in phylogenetic trees and by the presence of multiple conserved signature indels in different proteins that are distinctive characteristics of the members of these 14 clades. A summary diagram showing the overall relationships among the &quot;Streptococcus&quot; based on these studies is depicted in a figure on this page.

==Genomics==

The genomes of hundreds of species have been sequenced. Most &quot;Streptococcus&quot; genomes are 1.8 to 2.3 Mb in size and encode 1,700 to 2,300 proteins. Some important genomes are listed in the table. The four species shown in the table (&quot;S. pyogenes, S. agalactiae, S. pneumoniae&quot;, and &quot;S. mutans&quot;) have an average pairwise protein sequence identity of about 70%.

== Bacteriophage ==
Bacteriophages have been described for many species of &quot;Streptococcus&quot;. 18 prophages have been described in &quot;S. pneumoniae&quot; that range in size from 38 to 41 kb in size, encoding from 42 to 66 genes each. Some of the first &quot;Streptococcus&quot; phages discovered were Dp-1
and ω1 (alias ω-1).
In 1981 the Cp (Complutense phage 1, officially &quot;Streptococcus virus Cp1&quot;, &quot;Picovirinae&quot;) family was discovered with Cp-1 as its first member. Dp-1 and Cp-1 infect both &quot;S. pneumoniae&quot; and &quot;S. mitis&quot;. However, the host ranges of most &quot;Streptococcus&quot; phages have not been investigated systematically.

==Natural genetic transformation==

Natural genetic transformation involves the transfer of DNA from one bacterium to another through the surrounding medium. Transformation is a complex process dependent on the expression of numerous genes. To be capable of transformation a bacterium must enter a special physiologic state referred to as competence. &quot;S. pneumoniae&quot;, &quot;S. mitis&quot; and &quot;S. oralis&quot; can become competent, and as a result actively acquire homologous DNA for transformation by a predatory fratricidal mechanism This fratricidal mechanism mainly exploits non-competent siblings present in the same niche Among highly competent isolates of &quot;S. pneumoniae&quot;, Li et al. showed that nasal colonization fitness and virulence (lung infectivity) depend on an intact competence system. Competence may allow the streptococcal pathogen to use external homologous DNA for recombinational repair of DNA damages caused by the host&#x27;s oxidative attack.

== See also ==
* Cia-dependent small RNAs
* Quellung reaction
* Streptococcal infection in poultry
* Streptococcal pharyngitis
* Streptokinase

== References ==

== External links ==
* Nature-Inspired CRISPR Enzyme Discoveries Vastly Expand Genome Editing . On: SciTechDaily. June 16, 2020. Source: Media Lab, Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
* Streptococcus genomes and related information at PATRIC, a Bioinformatics Resource Center funded by NIAID
* The Canadian Strep B Foundation 
* The UK Group B Strep Support charity
* Stuttering Streptococcal Infection Infection</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="19" end="24" title="genus" label="genus"/>
<link wikidata="Q857288" start="28" end="41" title="gram-positive bacteria" label="gram-positive"/>
<link wikidata="Q140018" start="91" end="107" title="Streptococcaceae" label="Streptococcaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q13360072" start="126" end="141" title="Lactobacillales" label="Lactobacillales"/>
<link wikidata="Q25519942" start="180" end="189" title="Bacillota" label="Bacillota"/>
<link wikidata="Q188909" start="191" end="204" title="Cell division" label="Cell division"/>
<link wikidata="Q11210" start="243" end="247" title="coordinate system" label="axis"/>
<link wikidata="Q199695" start="354" end="367" title="Staphylococcus" label="staphylococci"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868" start="456" end="461" title="cell (biology)" label="cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q576379" start="485" end="501" title="Oxidase test" label="oxidase-negative"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="506" end="523" title="Catalase#Clinical significance and application" label="catalase-negative"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091848" start="538" end="559" title="facultative anaerobic organism" label="facultative anaerobes"/>
<link wikidata="Q77242" start="665" end="688" title="Theodor Billroth" label="Albert Theodor Billroth"/>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="931" end="937" title="Genus" label="genera"/>
<link wikidata="Q517258" start="944" end="956" title="Enterococcus" label="Enterococcus"/>
<link wikidata="Q134274" start="973" end="984" title="Lactococcus" label="Lactococcus"/>
<link wikidata="Q29887926" start="1093" end="1112" title="salivary microbiome" label="salivary microbiome"/>
<link wikidata="Q840143" start="1167" end="1192" title="streptococcal pharyngitis" label="streptococcal pharyngitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q167844" start="1285" end="1293" title="conjunctivitis" label="pink eye"/>
<link wikidata="Q48143" start="1295" end="1305" title="meningitis" label="meningitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3776920" start="1307" end="1326" title="bacterial pneumonia" label="bacterial pneumonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q82504" start="1328" end="1340" title="endocarditis" label="endocarditis"/>
<link wikidata="Q207092" start="1342" end="1352" title="erysipelas" label="erysipelas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145674" start="1358" end="1379" title="necrotizing fasciitis" label="necrotizing fasciitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q191934" start="1510" end="1519" title="Commensalism" label="commensal"/>
<link wikidata="Q104117645" start="1526" end="1536" title="Microbiota (microbiology)" label="microbiota"/>
<link wikidata="Q932214" start="1655" end="1692" title="Emmental cheese" label="Emmentaler (&amp;quot;Swiss&amp;quot;) cheese"/>
<link wikidata="Q5712509" start="1749" end="1758" title="Hemolysis (microbiology)" label="hemolytic"/>
<link wikidata="Q43041" start="1824" end="1834" title="hemoglobin" label="hemoglobin"/>
<link wikidata="Q190161" start="1911" end="1925" title="Beta-hemolytic" label="Beta-hemolytic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5712509" start="2072" end="2087" title="Gamma-hemolytic" label="Gamma-hemolytic"/>
<link wikidata="Q17096297" start="2171" end="2190" title="Lancefield grouping" label="Lancefield grouping"/>
<link wikidata="Q848328" start="2194" end="2202" title="serotype" label="serotype"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545648" start="2432" end="2450" title="Rebecca Lancefield" label="Rebecca Lancefield"/>
<link wikidata="Q270272" start="2467" end="2489" title="Rockefeller University" label="Rockefeller University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5712509" start="2869" end="2884" title="alpha-hemolysis" label="alpha-hemolysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q422964" start="3012" end="3022" title="biliverdin" label="biliverdin"/>
<link wikidata="Q221179" start="3437" end="3450" title="Streptococcus pneumoniae" label="S. pneumoniae"/>
<link wikidata="Q12192" start="3522" end="3531" title="pneumonia" label="pneumonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q223254" start="3563" end="3575" title="otitis media" label="otitis media"/>
<link wikidata="Q183344" start="3577" end="3586" title="sinusitis" label="sinusitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q48143" start="3588" end="3598" title="meningitis" label="meningitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q223102" start="3604" end="3615" title="peritonitis" label="peritonitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q751405" start="3863" end="3884" title="viridans streptococci" label="viridans streptococci"/>
<link wikidata="Q191934" start="3906" end="3915" title="commensal" label="commensal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5712509" start="3941" end="3956" title="alpha-hemolytic" label="alpha-hemolytic"/>
<link wikidata="Q574816" start="3996" end="4007" title="agar plates" label="agar plates"/>
<link wikidata="Q5712509" start="4164" end="4178" title="Beta-hemolysis" label="Beta-hemolysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5712509" start="4220" end="4229" title="Hemolysis (microbiology)" label="hemolysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5008670" start="5376" end="5385" title="CAMP test" label="CAMP test"/>
<link wikidata="Q309465" start="5454" end="5477" title="Clostridium perfringens" label="Clostridium perfringens"/>
<link wikidata="Q131271" start="5644" end="5655" title="Streptococcus pyogenes" label="S. pyogenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q13587764" start="5704" end="5735" title="group A streptococcal infection" label="group A streptococcal infection"/>
<link wikidata="Q166231" start="5750" end="5759" title="infection" label="infection"/>
<link wikidata="Q840143" start="5904" end="5929" title="streptococcal pharyngitis" label="streptococcal pharyngitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q28971" start="5949" end="5957" title="impetigo" label="impetigo"/>
<link wikidata="Q180266" start="5959" end="5972" title="Scarlet fever" label="Scarlet fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873" start="6235" end="6240" title="blood" label="blood"/>
<link wikidata="Q712378" start="6245" end="6250" title="Organ (anatomy)" label="organ"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128440" start="6307" end="6327" title="toxic shock syndrome" label="toxic shock syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145674" start="6329" end="6350" title="necrotizing fasciitis" label="necrotizing fasciitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q12192" start="6352" end="6361" title="pneumonia" label="pneumonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q650912" start="6367" end="6377" title="bacteremia" label="bacteremia"/>
<link wikidata="Q170065" start="6500" end="6508" title="pathogen" label="pathogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q753904" start="6572" end="6587" title="rheumatic fever" label="rheumatic fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q605006" start="6598" end="6616" title="glomerulonephritis" label="glomerulonephritis"/>
<link wikidata="Q753904" start="6618" end="6633" title="Rheumatic fever" label="Rheumatic fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q9644" start="6662" end="6668" title="joints" label="joints"/>
<link wikidata="Q9377" start="6670" end="6677" title="kidneys" label="kidneys"/>
<link wikidata="Q215620" start="6683" end="6695" title="heart valves" label="heart valves"/>
<link wikidata="Q13587764" start="7063" end="7117" title="Group A streptococcal infection" label="Group A beta-hemolytic streptococcal (GABHS) infection"/>
<link wikidata="Q2043695" start="7143" end="7240" title="PANDAS (disorder)" label="pediatric autoimmune neuropsychiatric disorders associated with streptococcal infections (PANDAS)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7294224" start="7435" end="7451" title="rapid strep test" label="rapid strep test"/>
<link wikidata="Q132949" start="7492" end="7505" title="Streptococcus agalactiae" label="S. agalactiae"/>
<link wikidata="Q998" start="7591" end="7599" title="Infant" label="newborns"/>
<link wikidata="Q191089" start="7608" end="7615" title="elderly" label="elderly"/>
<link wikidata="Q650912" start="7642" end="7652" title="bacteremia" label="bacteremia"/>
<link wikidata="Q998" start="7746" end="7752" title="infant" label="infant"/>
<link wikidata="Q176918" start="7897" end="7917" title="rupture of membranes" label="rupture of membranes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4113827" start="7940" end="7952" title="vertically transmitted infection" label="transmission"/>
<link wikidata="Q463772" start="7988" end="8039" title="American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists" label="American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists"/>
<link wikidata="Q463305" start="8041" end="8071" title="American Academy of Pediatrics" label="American Academy of Pediatrics"/>
<link wikidata="Q583725" start="8081" end="8108" title="Centers for Disease Control" label="Centers for Disease Control"/>
<link wikidata="Q632522" start="8743" end="8754" title="bacteriuria" label="bacteriuria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430934" start="9169" end="9178" title="strangles" label="strangles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7623365" start="9200" end="9216" title="Streptococcus zooepidemicus" label="S. zooepidemicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430934" start="9231" end="9238" title="Strangles" label="S. equi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308178" start="9250" end="9256" title="Clone (cell biology)" label="clonal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972080" start="9271" end="9277" title="biovar" label="biovar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7623365" start="9301" end="9317" title="Streptococcus zooepidemicus" label="S. zooepidemicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7623351" start="9416" end="9431" title="Streptococcus dysgalactiae" label="S. dysgalactiae"/>
<link wikidata="Q190161" start="9487" end="9515" title="beta-haemolytic streptococci" label="beta-haemolytic streptococci"/>
<link wikidata="Q2085267" start="9531" end="9542" title="pharyngitis" label="pharyngitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q12829829" start="9553" end="9561" title="pyogenic" label="pyogenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q131271" start="9584" end="9604" title="Group a streptococcus" label="group A streptococci"/>
<link wikidata="Q517258" start="9845" end="9857" title="Enterococcus" label="Enterococcus"/>
<link wikidata="Q140014" start="10035" end="10056" title="Enterococcus faecalis" label="Enterococcus faecalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q190161" start="10234" end="10260" title="Streptococcus gallolyticus" label="Streptococcus gallolyticus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761388" start="10274" end="10293" title="Streptococcus bovis" label="Streptococcus bovis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7623349" start="10307" end="10328" title="Streptococcus equinus" label="Streptococcus equinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q287694" start="10345" end="10363" title="Streptococcus suis" label="Streptococcus suis"/>
<link wikidata="Q292015" start="10492" end="10514" title="Listeria monocytogenes" label="Listeria monocytogenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q857288" start="10542" end="10555" title="gram-positive" label="gram-positive"/>
<link wikidata="Q17182424" start="10713" end="10718" title="Eleanor Albert Bliss" label="Bliss"/>
<link wikidata="Q309538" start="10802" end="10825" title="Streptococcus anginosus" label="Streptococcus anginosus"/>
<link wikidata="Q737943" start="10905" end="10933" title="Streptococcus milleri group" label="&amp;quot;S. milleri&amp;quot; group"/>
<link wikidata="Q7623351" start="11075" end="11101" title="Streptococcus dysgalactiae" label="Streptococcus dysgalactiae"/>
<link wikidata="Q2346415" start="11408" end="11427" title="meningoencephalitis" label="meningoencephalitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q183134" start="11429" end="11435" title="sepsis" label="sepsis"/>
<link wikidata="Q82504" start="11441" end="11453" title="endocarditis" label="endocarditis"/>
<link wikidata="Q17096297" start="12226" end="12247" title="group A streptococcus" label="group A streptococcus"/>
<link wikidata="Q12190" start="12445" end="12455" title="penicillin" label="penicillin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209205" start="12968" end="12971" title="16S ribosomal RNA" label="16S"/>
<link wikidata="Q133772" start="13363" end="13376" title="dental caries" label="dental caries"/>
<link wikidata="Q131452" start="13384" end="13404" title="Streptococcus mutans" label="Streptococcus mutans"/>
<link wikidata="Q242125" start="13837" end="13854" title="phylogenetic tree" label="phylogenetic tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q5163163" start="13996" end="14022" title="conserved signature indels" label="conserved signature indels"/>
<link wikidata="Q5163163" start="14838" end="14864" title="conserved signature indels" label="conserved signature indels"/>
<link wikidata="Q165028" start="15533" end="15546" title="Bacteriophage" label="Bacteriophage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1712327" start="15618" end="15626" title="prophage" label="prophage"/>
<link wikidata="Q221179" start="15657" end="15670" title="Streptococcus pneumoniae" label="S. pneumoniae"/>
<link wikidata="Q7191071" start="15940" end="15951" title="Picovirinae" label="Picovirinae"/>
<link wikidata="Q684674" start="16074" end="16082" title="Streptococcus mitis" label="S. mitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q461499" start="16236" end="16266" title="Transformation (genetics)" label="Natural genetic transformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780863" start="16539" end="16549" title="Natural competence" label="competence"/>
<link wikidata="Q221179" start="16551" end="16576" title="Streptococcus pneumoniae" label="&amp;quot;S. pneumoniae&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q684674" start="16578" end="16598" title="Streptococcus mitis" label="&amp;quot;S. mitis&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1856358" start="16603" end="16624" title="Streptococcus oralis" label="&amp;quot;S. oralis&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5119051" start="17209" end="17233" title="Cia-dependent small RNAs" label="Cia-dependent small RNAs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7271206" start="17236" end="17253" title="Quellung reaction" label="Quellung reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q7623344" start="17256" end="17290" title="Streptococcal infection in poultry" label="Streptococcal infection in poultry"/>
<link wikidata="Q840143" start="17293" end="17318" title="Streptococcal pharyngitis" label="Streptococcal pharyngitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q416485" start="17321" end="17334" title="Streptokinase" label="Streptokinase"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="29322" wikidata="Q1497335" url="?curid=29322" title="SignWriting">
<text>Sutton SignWriting, or simply SignWriting, is a system of written sign languages. It is highly featural and visually iconic: the shapes of the characters are abstract pictures of the hands, face, and body; and unlike most written words, which follow a primarily linear arrangement, SignWriting is structured two-dimensionally. It was developed in 1974 by Valerie Sutton, a dancer who had, two years earlier, developed DanceWriting. Some newer standardized forms are known as the International Sign Writing Alphabet (ISWA).

== History ==

As Sutton was teaching DanceWriting to the Royal Danish Ballet, Lars von der Lieth, who was doing research on signed language at the University of Copenhagen, thought it would be useful to use a similar notation for the recording of sign languages. Sutton based SignWriting on DanceWriting, and finally expanded the system to the complete repertoire of MovementWriting. However, only SignWriting and DanceWriting have been widely used.

SignWriting was not the first writing system for sign languages, being preceded by Stokoe notation; but it is the first to adequately represent facial expressions and shifts in posture, and to accommodate representation of series of signs longer than compound words and short phrases. It is the only system in regular use, used for example to publish college newsletters in American Sign Language, and has been used for captioning of YouTube videos.

Sutton notes that SignWriting has been used or investigated in over 40 countries on every inhabited continent. However, it is not clear how widespread its use is in each country.

In Brazil, during the FENEIS (National Association of the Deaf) annual meeting in 2001, the association voted to accept SignWriting as the preferred method of transcribing Lingua Brasileira de Sinais (Libras) into a written form. The strong recommendation to the Brazilian government from that association was that SignWriting be taught in all Deaf schools. Currently SignWriting is taught on an academic level at the Federal University of Santa Catarina as part of its Brazilian Sign Language curriculum. SignWriting is also being used in the recently published Brazilian Sign Language Dictionary containing more than 3,600 signs used by the deaf of São Paulo, published by the University of São Paulo under the direction of Prof. Fernando Capovilla (EJ669813 – Brazilian Sign Language Lexicography and Technology: Dictionary, Digital Encyclopedia, Chereme-based Sign Retrieval, and Quadriplegic Deaf Communication Systems. Abstracted from Educational Resources Information Center).

Some initial studies found that Deaf communities prefer video or writing systems for the dominant language; however, this claim has been disputed by the work of Steve and Dianne Parkhurst in Spain where they found initial resistance, later renewed interest, and finally pride. &quot;If Deaf people learn to read and write in their own signing system, that increases their self-esteem&quot;, says Dianne Parkhurst.

, SignWriting is widely used at International Sign forums. It is adopted in as many as 40 countries, among which are Brazil, Ethiopia, France, Germany, Italy, Portugal, Saudi Arabia, Slovenia, Tunisia, and the United States.

SignWriting, as the International Sign Writing Alphabet (ISWA), has been proposed as the manual equivalent to the International Phonetic Alphabet. However, some researchers argue that the SignWriting is not a phonemic orthography and does not have a one-to-one map from phonological forms to written forms. Although such a claim is disputed, it has been recommended that countries adapt this sign on a language-by-language basis. There are two doctoral dissertations that study and promote the application of SignWriting to a specific sign language. Maria Galea wrote about using SignWriting to write Maltese Sign Language. Also, Claudia Savina Bianchini wrote her doctoral dissertation on the implementation of SignWriting to write Italian Sign Language.

== Symbols ==

In SignWriting, a combination of iconic symbols for handshapes, orientation, body locations, facial expressions, contacts, and movement are used to represent words in signed languages. Since SignWriting, as a featural script, represents the actual physical formation of signs rather than their meaning, no phonemic or semantic analysis of a language is required to write it. A person who has learned the system can &quot;feel out&quot; an unfamiliar sign in the same way an English speaking person can &quot;sound out&quot; an unfamiliar word written in the Latin alphabet, without even needing to know what the sign means.

The number of symbols is extensive and often provides multiple ways to write a single sign. Just as it took many centuries for English spelling to become standardized, spelling in SignWriting is not yet standardized for any sign language.

Words may be written from the point of view of the signer or the viewer. However, almost all publications use the point of view of the signer, and assume the right hand is dominant. Sutton originally designed the script to be written horizontally (left-to-right), like English, and from the point of view of the observer, but later changed it to vertical (top-to-bottom) and from the point of view of the signer, to conform to the wishes of Deaf writers.

=== Orientation ===

All SignWriting shows the perspective of the signer. For some hand shapes the orientation is unambiguous, but the color of the glyph always indicates hand orientation: Black indicates the back of the hand, white the palm. A hollow outline (white) glyph indicates that the palm faces the signer, and a filled (black) glyph indicates that the palm faces away from the signer. Split shading (half black, half white) indicates side views, with the order of the colors showing which side view is meant. Although in reality the wrist may turn to intermediate positions, only the four orientations are represented in SignWriting, as they are enough to represent signed languages.

If an unbroken glyph is used, then the hand is placed in the vertical (wall or face) plane in front of the signer, as occurs when finger spelling. A band erased across the glyph through the knuckles shows that the hand lies in the horizontal plane, parallel to the floor. (If one of the basic hand-shape glyphs is used, such as the simple square or circle, this band breaks it in two; however, if there are lines for fingers extended from the base, then they become detached from the base, but the base itself remains intact.)

The diagram to the left shows a BA-hand (flat hand) in six orientations. For the three vertical orientations on the left side, the hand is held in front of the signer, fingers pointing upward. All three glyphs can be rotated, like the hands of a clock, to show the fingers pointing at an angle, to the side, or downward. For the three horizontal orientations on the right side of the diagram, the hand is held outward, with the fingers pointing away from the signer, and presumably toward the viewer. They can also be rotated to show the fingers pointing to the side or toward the signer. Although an indefinite number of orientations can be represented this way, in practice only eight are used for each plane—that is, only multiples of 45° are found.

=== Hand shapes ===

There are over a hundred glyphs for hand shapes, but all the ones used in ASL are based on five basic elements:
* A square represents a closed fist, with the knuckles of the flexed fingers bent 90° so that the fingers touch the palm and the thumb lies over the fingers. Unadorned, this square represents the S hand of fingerspelling. Modified as described below, it indicates that at least one of the four fingers touches the palm of the hand.
* A circle represents an &quot;open fist&quot;, a hand where the thumb and fingers are flexed so as to touch at their tips. Unadorned, this is the O hand of fingerspelling. Modified, it indicates that at least one finger touches the thumb this way.
* A pentagon (triangle atop a rectangle), as in the illustration used for the Orientation section above, represents a flat hand, where all fingers are straight and in contact. This is similar to the B hand of fingerspelling, though without the thumb crossing over the palm.
* A &#x27;C&#x27; shape represents a hand where the thumb and fingers are curved, but not enough to touch. This is used for the C hand of fingerspelling, and can be modified to show that the fingers are spread apart.
* An angled shape, like a fat L, shows that the four fingers are flat (straight and in contact), but bent at 90° from the plane of the palm. It does not occur as a simple shape, but must include an indication of where the thumb is, either out to the side or touching the tips of the fingers.

A line halfway across the square or pentagon shows the thumb across the palm. These are the E, B, and (with spread fingers) 4 hands of fingerspelling.

These basic shapes are modified with lines jutting from their faces and corners to represent fingers that are not positioned as described above. Straight lines represent straight fingers (these may be at an angle to indicate that they are not in line with the palm; if they point toward or away from the signer, they have a diamond shape at the tip); curved lines for curved (cupped) fingers; hooked lines for hooked fingers; right-angle lines, for fingers bent at only one joint; and crossed lines, for crossed fingers, as shown in the chart at right. The pentagon and C are only modified to show that the fingers are spread rather than in contact; the angle is only modified to show whether the thumb touches the finger tips or juts out to the side. Although there are some generalizations which can be made for the dozens of other glyphs, which are based on the circle and square, the details are somewhat idiosyncratic and each needs to be memorized.

For the top sign, the arrows show that the two &#x27;1&#x27; hands move in vertical circles, and that although they move at the same time (tie bar), the left hand (hollow arrowhead) starts away from the body (thin line) going up while the right hand (solid arrowhead) starts near the body (thick line) going down.

With the bottom sign, the right &#x27;X&#x27; palm-down hand moves down-side-down relative to the stationary palm-up &#x27;B&#x27; hand. This is overly exact: The ASL sign will work with any downward zigzag motion, and the direction and starting point of the circles is irrelevant.

=== Finger movement ===

There are only a few symbols for finger movement. They may be doubled to show that the movement is repeated.

A solid bullet represents flexing the middle joint of a finger or fingers, and a hollow bullet represents straightening a flexed finger. That is, a &#x27;D&#x27; hand with a solid bullet means that it becomes an &#x27;X&#x27; hand, while an &#x27;X&#x27; hand with a hollow bullet means that it becomes a &#x27;D&#x27; hand. If the fingers are already flexed, then a solid bullet shows that they squeeze. For example, a square (closed fist, &#x27;S&#x27; hand) with double solid bullets is the sign for &#x27;milk&#x27; (iconically squeezing an udder).

A downward-pointing chevron represents flexing at the knuckles, while an upward-pointing chevron (^) shows that the knuckles straighten. That is, a &#x27;U&#x27; hand with a down chevron becomes an &#x27;N&#x27; hand, while and &#x27;N&#x27; hand with an up chevron becomes a &#x27;U&#x27; hand.

A zigzag like two chevrons (^^) joined means that the fingers flex repeatedly and in sync. A double-line zigzag means that the fingers wriggle or flutter out of sync.

=== Hand movement ===

Hundreds of arrows of various sorts are used to indicate movement of the hands through space. Movement notation gets quite complex, and because it is more exact than it needs to be for any one sign language, different people may choose to write the same sign in different ways.

For movement with the left hand, the Δ-shaped arrowhead is hollow (white); for movement with the right hand, it is solid (black). When both hands move as one, an open (Λ-shaped) arrowhead is used.

As with orientation, movement arrows distinguish two planes: Movement in the vertical plane (up &amp; down) is represented by arrows with double stems, as at the bottom of the diagram at left, while single-stemmed arrows represent movement parallel to the floor (to &amp; fro). In addition, movement in a diagonal plane uses modified double-stemmed arrows: A cross bar on the stem indicates that the motion is away as well up or down, and a solid dot indicates approaching motion. To &amp; fro movement that also goes over or under something uses modified single-stemmed arrows, with the part of the arrow representing near motion thicker than the rest. These are iconic, but conventionalized, and so need to be learned individually.

Straight movements are in one of eight directions for either plane, as in the eight principal directions of a compass. A long straight arrow indicates movement from the elbow, a short arrow with a cross bar behind it indicates motion from the wrist, and a simple short arrow indicates a small movement. (Doubled, in opposite directions, these can show nodding from the wrist.) A secondary curved arrow crossing the main arrow shows that the arm twists while it moves. (Doubled, in opposite directions, these can show shaking of the hand.) Arrows can turn, curve, zigzag, and loop-the-loop.

=== Shoulder, head, and eye movement ===

Arrows on the face at the eyes show the direction of gaze.

=== Contact ===

Six contact glyphs show hand contact with the location of the sign. That is, a handshape glyph located at the side of the face, together with a contact glyph, indicates that the hand touches the side of the face. The choice of the contact glyph indicates the manner of the contact:
* an asterisk (∗ or *) for simply touching the place;
* a plus sign (+) for grasping the place (usually the other hand);
* a pound/hash sign (#) for striking the place;
* a circle with a dot inside (⊙) for brushing along the place and then leaving it;
* a spiral (꩜ or may be approximated with @) for rubbing the place and not leaving; if there is no additional arrow, this is understood to be in circles; and
* two bars on either side of a contact symbol (|∗|) to indicate the contact happens between elements of the place of contact; usually between fingers, or inside a circular hand shape. (A contact other than the basic asterisk is rarely used between bars.)

=== Location ===

If the signing hand is located at the other hand, the symbol for it is one of the hand shapes above. In practice, only a subset of the more simple hand shapes occurs.

Additional symbols are used to represent sign locations at the face or body parts other than the hands. A circle shows the head.

=== Expression ===

There are symbols to represent facial movements that are used in various sign languages, including eyes, eyebrows, nose movements, cheeks, mouth movements, and breathing changes. The direction of head movement and eyegaze can also be shown.

=== Body movement ===

Shoulders are shown with a horizontal line. Small arrows can be added to show shoulder and torso movement. Arms and even legs can be added if necessary.

=== Prosody ===

There are also symbols that indicate speed of movement, whether movement is simultaneous or alternating, and punctuation.

=== Punctuation ===

Various punctuation symbols exist that correspond to commas, periods, question and exclamation marks, and other punctuation symbols of other scripts. These are written between signs, and lines do not break between a sign and its following punctuation symbol.

== Arrangement of symbols ==

One of the unusual characteristics of SignWriting is its use of two-dimensional layout within an invisible &#x27;sign box&#x27;. The relative positions of the symbols within the box iconically represent the locations of the hands and other parts of the body involved in the sign being represented. As such, there is no obvious linear relationship between the symbols within each sign box, unlike the sequence of characters within each word in most scripts for spoken languages. This is also unlike other sign language scripts which arrange symbols linearly as in spoken languages. However, since in sign languages many phonetic parameters are articulated simultaneously, these other scripts require arbitrary conventions for specifying the order of different parameters of handshape, location, motion, etc. Although SignWriting does have conventions for how symbols are to be arranged relative to each other within a sign, the two-dimensional layout results in less arbitrariness and more iconicity than other sign language scripts.

Outside of each sign, however, the script is linear, reflecting the temporal order of signs. Signs are most commonly now written in vertical columns (although formerly they were written horizontally). Sign boxes are arranged from top to bottom within the column, interspersed with punctuation symbols, and the columns progress left to right across the page. Within a column, signs may be written down the center or shifted left or right in &#x27;lanes&#x27; to indicate side-to-side shifts of the body.

== Sequencing of signs in dictionaries ==

Sutton orders signs in ten groups based on which fingers are extended on the dominant hand. These are equivalent to the numerals one through ten in ASL. Each group is then subdivided according to the actual hand shape, and then subdivided again according to the plane the hand is in (vertical, then horizontal), then again according to the basic orientation of the hand (palm, side, back). An ordering system has been proposed using this beginning and examples from both American Sign Language and Brazilian Sign Language (LIBRAS). The current system of ordering for SignWriting is called the Sign Symbol Sequence which is parsed by the creator of each sign as recorded into the on-line dictionary. This system allows for internal ordering by features including handshape, orientation, speed, location, and other clustered features not found in spoken dictionaries.

== Advantages and disadvantages ==

Some of the advantages of SignWriting, compared to other writing systems for sign languages, are:
* Its iconicity makes it easy to learn to read, in particular the iconicity that results from layout in two dimensions instead of just one.
* It has detailed mechanisms for representing facial expression and other non-manuals.
* It has been adapted for use with many different sign languages. 
However, it has a few disadvantages as well:
* The sheer size of its symbol set and the fine details which can be written create a challenge in learning how to write. It also means that the written form is largely situational and inventive; different people may write the same sign different ways, and a single person may alternate between transcriptions. 
* The two-dimensional spatial layout of SignWriting symbols within each sign, although it is more iconic than a linear layout, comes at a cost. SignWriting currently requires special software; SignWriting cannot be used as ordinary text within normal word processors or other application software. As a work-around, software (SignMaker and Rand Keyboard) is available on the SignWriting website which allows a sign, once assembled with special SignWriting software, to be copied easily as a graphic image into word processing or desktop publishing software.

SignPuddle is a plain-text (ASCII) string representation of signs. It can be stored as plain text anywhere and be replaced by signs with special programs such as the SignWriting Icon Server. An RFC standard draft for it has been proposed, which later evolved into a stricter draft standard known as &quot;Formal Signwriting&quot; (FSW). It can also use Unicode characters instead of ASCII escapes. There is also an experimental TrueType font that uses the SIL Graphite technology to automatically turn these sequences into signs.

== Unicode ==

SignWriting is the first writing system for sign languages to be included in the Unicode Standard. 672 characters were added in the Sutton SignWriting (Unicode block) of Unicode version 8.0 released in June 2015. This set of characters is based on SignWriting&#x27;s standardized symbol set and defined character encoding model.

The Unicode Standard only covers the symbol set. It does not address layout, the positioning of the symbols in two dimensions. Historically, software has recorded position using Cartesian (&quot;x&quot;–&quot;y&quot;) coordinates for each symbol. Since Unicode focuses on symbols that make sense in a one-dimensional plain-text context, the number characters required for two-dimensional placement were not included in the Unicode proposal.

The Unicode block for Sutton SignWriting is U+1D800–U+1DAAF:

Current software records each sign as a string of characters in either ASCII or Unicode. Older software may use XML or a custom binary format to represent a sign. Formal SignWriting uses ASCII characters to define the two-dimensional layout within a sign and other simple structures. It would be possible to fully define a sign in Unicode with seventeen additional characters. With either character set (Unicode or ASCII), the spelling of a sign produces a word that the can be efficiently processed with regular expressions. These sets are isomorphic.

== Accessibility ==
Sutton has released the International SignWriting Alphabet 2010 under the SIL Open Font License. The symbols of the ISWA 2010 are available as individual SVG or as TrueType Fonts.
* SignWriting 2010 Fonts project on GitHub

Google has released an open type font called Noto Sans SignWriting that supports the SignWriting in Unicode 8 (uni8) specification with modifying characters and facial diacritics.

SignWriting is enabled on with &quot;The Javascript-based SignWriting Keyboard for Use on Wikimedia and throughout the Web&quot; by Yair Rand. Test wikis include the and the other .

The Sutton SignWriting SignMaker (@sutton-signwriting/signmaker) is a sign editor that can be accessed directly, embedded in an iFrame, and downloaded. It uses both Formal SignWriting in ASCII (FSW) and SignWriting in Unicode (SWU) character sets, along with the associated style string. See draft-slevinski-formal-signwriting for detailed specification.

For modern web and app development, several packages are available on GitHub and NPM.
* @sutton-signwriting/core - a JavaScript package for node and browsers that supports general processing of the Sutton SignWriting script
* @sutton-signwriting/unicode8 - a JavaScript package for processing SignWriting in Unicode 8 (uni8) characters
* @sutton-signwriting/font-ttf - a JavaScript package for the web components and browser that generates SVG and PNG images for individual symbols, complete signs, and vertical paragraphs
* @sutton-signwriting/font-db - a JavaScript package for node that generates SVG and PNG images for individual symbols, complete signs, and vertical paragraphs
* @sutton-signwriting/sgnw-components - a JavaScript package of Web Components for individual symbols, symbol palettes, complete signs, and vertical paragraphs
* @sutton-signwriting/signmaker - a JavaScript package for sign editing page with URL parameters and iFrame messaging

For sign language translation, SignWriting text is a useful abstraction layer between video and the natural language processing of sign language.
The usefulness of SignWriting in natural language processing was validated with a new method of machine translation that has achieved over 30 BLEU.
The conversion of sign language video to SignWriting text is an emerging field with open source options.

Additional machine learning projects are available for handwriting recognition of SignWriting, SignWriting to spoken language, and spoken language to SignWriting.

== See also ==

* Other writing systems for sign languages, including:
** ASL-phabet, a minimal script for ASL
** Hamburg Notation System (HamNoSys), a phonetic transcription system for sign languages developed by linguists in Europe
** Si5s, a handwritten script for ASL
** Stokoe notation, a script devised by a pioneer of sign-language linguistics originally for ASL, which has been adapted for other sign languages
* International Movement Writing Alphabet (IMWA)

== References ==

== Relevant literature ==

* Hoffmann-Dilloway, Erika. 2017. Feeling your own (or someone else&#x27;s) face: Writing signs from the expressive viewpoint. &quot;Language &amp; Communication&quot;.

== External links ==
* for Sutton SignWriting
* ISWA 2010 HTML Reference
* ISWA 2010 Font Reference
* Modern SignWriting Specifications
* SignWriting Image Server
* Noto SignWriting
* SignWriting MediaWiki Plugin
* Handwritten forms of SignWriting
* SignPuddle Online – Dictionaries and documents
* Dictionary of the Flemish Sign Language (uses SignWriting)
* The King James Bible in SignWriting
 </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1497335" start="0" end="18" title="SignWriting" label="Sutton SignWriting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497335" start="30" end="41" title="SignWriting" label="SignWriting"/>
<link wikidata="Q34228" start="58" end="79" title="written sign language" label="written sign language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191127" start="95" end="103" title="featural alphabet" label="featural"/>
<link wikidata="Q2402185" start="355" end="369" title="Valerie Sutton" label="Valerie Sutton"/>
<link wikidata="Q11639" start="373" end="379" title="dancer" label="dancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6052079" start="418" end="430" title="DanceWriting" label="DanceWriting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497335" start="479" end="514" title="SignWriting" label="International Sign Writing Alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q6052079" start="562" end="574" title="DanceWriting" label="DanceWriting"/>
<link wikidata="Q5252864" start="582" end="601" title="Royal Danish Ballet" label="Royal Danish Ballet"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="603" end="621" title="Lars von der Lieth" label="Lars von der Lieth"/>
<link wikidata="Q186285" start="672" end="696" title="University of Copenhagen" label="University of Copenhagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q34228" start="772" end="785" title="sign language" label="sign language"/>
<link wikidata="Q6052079" start="892" end="907" title="MovementWriting" label="MovementWriting"/>
<link wikidata="Q7618587" start="1059" end="1074" title="Stokoe notation" label="Stokoe notation"/>
<link wikidata="Q187931" start="1252" end="1258" title="phrase" label="phrase"/>
<link wikidata="Q866" start="1410" end="1417" title="YouTube" label="YouTube"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1629" end="1635" title="FENEIS" label="FENEIS"/>
<link wikidata="Q3436689" start="1779" end="1806" title="Lingua Brasileira de Sinais" label="Lingua Brasileira de Sinais"/>
<link wikidata="Q1851075" start="2025" end="2061" title="Federal University of Santa Catarina" label="Federal University of Santa Catarina"/>
<link wikidata="Q835960" start="2286" end="2309" title="University of São Paulo" label="University of São Paulo"/>
<link wikidata="Q35754" start="3039" end="3057" title="International Sign" label="International Sign"/>
<link wikidata="Q21204" start="3347" end="3378" title="International Phonetic Alphabet" label="International Phonetic Alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033526" start="3442" end="3462" title="phonemic orthography" label="phonemic orthography"/>
<link wikidata="Q6744816" start="3834" end="3855" title="Maltese Sign Language" label="Maltese Sign Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q375619" start="3966" end="3987" title="Italian Sign Language" label="Italian Sign Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q17020668" start="4057" end="4066" title="handshape" label="handshape"/>
<link wikidata="Q7102403" start="4069" end="4080" title="Orientation (sign language)" label="orientation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6664775" start="4082" end="4096" title="Location (sign language)" label="body locations"/>
<link wikidata="Q5421699" start="4098" end="4116" title="Expression (sign language)" label="facial expressions"/>
<link wikidata="Q6926579" start="4132" end="4140" title="Movement (sign language)" label="movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q34228" start="4172" end="4188" title="sign language" label="signed languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191127" start="4214" end="4229" title="Featural alphabet" label="featural script"/>
<link wikidata="Q40998" start="4311" end="4319" title="phonology" label="phonemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q796212" start="4323" end="4331" title="semantics" label="semantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q41670" start="4563" end="4577" title="Latin alphabet" label="Latin alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q126731" start="10650" end="10656" title="bullet (typography)" label="bullet"/>
<link wikidata="Q190212" start="13893" end="13901" title="asterisk" label="asterisk"/>
<link wikidata="Q55637909" start="19503" end="19518" title="word processor program" label="word processing"/>
<link wikidata="Q188610" start="19522" end="19540" title="desktop publishing" label="desktop publishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q212971" start="19746" end="19749" title="Request for Comments" label="RFC"/>
<link wikidata="Q751800" start="19980" end="19993" title="TrueType font" label="TrueType font"/>
<link wikidata="Q8819" start="20179" end="20195" title="Unicode" label="Unicode Standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q21040766" start="20230" end="20264" title="Sutton SignWriting (Unicode block)" label="Sutton SignWriting (Unicode block)"/>
<link wikidata="Q62912" start="20606" end="20657" title="Cartesian coordinates" label="Cartesian (&amp;quot;x&amp;quot;–&amp;quot;y&amp;quot;) coordinates"/>
<link wikidata="Q192161" start="20972" end="20992" title="Formal language" label="string of characters"/>
<link wikidata="Q189112" start="21473" end="21483" title="isomorphism" label="isomorphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150837" start="21580" end="21601" title="SIL Open Font License" label="SIL Open Font License"/>
<link wikidata="Q18217380" start="23197" end="23211" title="Web Components" label="Web Components"/>
<link wikidata="Q3500773" start="23700" end="23704" title="BLEU" label="BLEU"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23994" end="24034" title="Sign language#Written forms" label="Other writing systems for sign languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q16962254" start="24050" end="24060" title="ASL-phabet" label="ASL-phabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5644311" start="24090" end="24113" title="Hamburg Notation System" label="Hamburg Notation System"/>
<link wikidata="Q7506310" start="24213" end="24217" title="Si5s" label="Si5s"/>
<link wikidata="Q7618587" start="24251" end="24266" title="Stokoe notation" label="Stokoe notation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6052079" start="24397" end="24436" title="International Movement Writing Alphabet" label="International Movement Writing Alphabet"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="29323" wikidata="Q899" url="?curid=29323" title="Suez Canal">
<text>The Suez Canal (; , &quot;&quot;) is an artificial sea-level waterway in Egypt, connecting the Mediterranean Sea to the Red Sea through the Isthmus of Suez and dividing Africa and Asia (and by extension, the Sinai Peninsula from the rest of Egypt). The canal is a key trade route between Europe and Asia.

In 1858, French diplomat Ferdinand de Lesseps formed the Compagnie de Suez for the express purpose of building the canal. Construction of the canal lasted from 1859 to 1869. The canal officially opened on 17 November 1869. It offers vessels a direct route between the North Atlantic and northern Indian oceans via the Mediterranean Sea and the Red Sea, avoiding the South Atlantic and southern Indian oceans and reducing the journey distance from the Arabian Sea to London by approximately , to 10 days at or 8 days at . The canal extends from the northern terminus of Port Said to the southern terminus of Port Tewfik at the city of Suez. In 2021, more than 20,600 vessels traversed the canal (an average of 56 per day).

The original canal featured a single-lane waterway with passing locations in the Ballah Bypass and the Great Bitter Lake. It contained, according to Alois Negrelli&#x27;s plans, no locks, with seawater flowing freely through it. In general, the water in the canal north of the Bitter Lakes flows north in winter and south in summer. South of the lakes, the current changes with the tide at Suez.

The canal was the property of the Egyptian government, but European shareholders, mostly British and French, owned the concessionary company which operated it until July 1956, when President Gamal Abdel Nasser nationalised it—an event which led to the Suez Crisis of October–November 1956. The canal is operated and maintained by the state-owned Suez Canal Authority (SCA) of Egypt. Under the Convention of Constantinople, it may be used &quot;in time of war as in time of peace, by every vessel of commerce or of war, without distinction of flag.&quot; Nevertheless, the canal has played an important military strategic role as a naval short-cut and choke point. Navies with coastlines and bases on both the Mediterranean Sea and the Red Sea (Egypt and Israel) have a particular interest in the Suez Canal. After Egypt closed the Suez Canal at the beginning of the Six-Day War on 5 June 1967, the canal remained closed for eight years, reopening on 5 June 1975.

The Egyptian government launched construction in 2014 to expand and widen the Ballah Bypass for to speed up the canal&#x27;s transit time. The expansion intended to nearly double the capacity of the Suez Canal, from 49 to 97 ships per day. At a cost of LE 59.4 billion (US$9 billion), this project was funded with interest-bearing investment certificates issued exclusively to Egyptian entities and individuals.

The Suez Canal Authority officially opened the new side channel in 2016. This side channel, at the northern side of the east extension of the Suez Canal, serves the East Terminal for berthing and unberthing vessels from the terminal. As the East Container Terminal is located on the Canal itself, before the construction of the new side channel it was not possible to berth or unberth vessels at the terminal while a convoy was running.

== Precursors ==
Ancient west–east canals were built to facilitate travel from the Nile to the Red Sea. One smaller canal is believed to have been constructed under the auspices of Senusret II or Ramesses II. Another canal, probably incorporating a portion of the first, was constructed under the reign of Necho II (610–595 BCE), but the only fully functional canal was engineered and completed by Darius I (522–486 BC).

=== Second millennium BC ===
James Henry Breasted attributes the earliest-known attempt to construct a canal to the first cataract, near Aswan, to the Sixth Dynasty of Egypt and its completion to Senusret III (1878–1839 BCE) of the Twelfth Dynasty of Egypt.

The legendary Sesostris (likely either Pharaoh Senusret II or Senusret III of the Twelfth Dynasty of Egypt) may have constructed the ancient canal, the Canal of the Pharaohs, joining the Nile with the Red Sea (1897–1839 BCE), when an irrigation channel was constructed around 1848 BCE that was navigable during the flood season, leading into a dry river valley east of the Nile River Delta named Wadi Tumilat. (It is said that in ancient times the Red Sea reached northward to the Bitter Lakes and Lake Timsah).

In his &quot;Meteorology&quot;, Aristotle (384–322 BC) wrote:
One of their kings tried to make a canal to it (for it would have been of no little advantage to them for the whole region to have become navigable; Sesostris is said to have been the first of the ancient kings to try), but he found that the sea was higher than the land. So he first, and Darius afterwards, stopped making the canal, lest the sea should mix with the river water and spoil it.

Strabo wrote that Sesostris started to build a canal, and Pliny the Elder (23/24–79 AD) wrote:

165. Next comes the Tyro tribe and, the harbour of the Daneoi, from which Sesostris, king of Egypt, intended to carry a ship-canal to where the Nile flows into what is known as the Delta; this is a distance of over . Later the Persian king Darius had the same idea, and yet again Ptolemy II, who made a trench wide, deep and about long, as far as the Bitter Lakes.
In the 20th century, the northward extension of the later Darius I canal was discovered, extending from Lake Timsah to the Ballah Lakes. This was dated to the Middle Kingdom of Egypt by extrapolating the dates of ancient sites along its course.

The reliefs of the Punt expedition under Hatshepsut, 1470 BCE, depict seagoing vessels carrying the expeditionary force returning from Punt. This suggests that a navigable link existed between the Red Sea and the Nile. Recent excavations in Wadi Gawasis may indicate that Egypt&#x27;s maritime trade started from the Red Sea and did not require a canal. Evidence seems to indicate its existence by the 13th century BCE during the time of Ramesses II.

=== Canals dug by Necho, Darius I and Ptolemy ===
Remnants of an ancient west–east canal through the ancient Egyptian cities of Bubastis, Pi-Ramesses, and Pithom were discovered by Napoleon Bonaparte and his engineers and cartographers in 1799.

According to the &quot;Histories&quot; of the Greek historian Herodotus, about 600 BCE, Necho II undertook to dig a west–east canal through the Wadi Tumilat between Bubastis and Heroopolis, and perhaps continued it to the Heroopolite Gulf and the Red Sea. Regardless, Necho is reported as having never completed his project.

Herodotus was told that 120,000 men perished in this undertaking, but this figure is doubtless exaggerated. According to Pliny the Elder, Necho&#x27;s extension to the canal was about , equal to the total distance between Bubastis and the Great Bitter Lake, allowing for winding through valleys. The length that Herodotus tells, of over 1,000 stadia (i.e., over ), must be understood to include the entire distance between the Nile and the Red Sea at that time.

With Necho&#x27;s death, work was discontinued. Herodotus tells that the reason the project was abandoned was because of a warning received from an oracle that others would benefit from its successful completion. Necho&#x27;s war with Nebuchadnezzar II most probably prevented the canal&#x27;s continuation.

Necho&#x27;s project was completed by Darius I of Persia, who ruled over Ancient Egypt after it had been conquered by his predecessor Cambyses II. It may be that by Darius&#x27;s time a natural waterway passage which had existed between the Heroopolite Gulf and the Red Sea in the vicinity of the Egyptian town of Shaluf (alt. &quot;Chalouf&quot; or &quot;Shaloof&quot;), located just south of the Great Bitter Lake, had become so blocked with silt that Darius needed to clear it out so as to allow navigation once again. According to Herodotus, Darius&#x27;s canal was wide enough that two triremes could pass each other with oars extended, and required four days to traverse. Darius commemorated his achievement with a number of granite stelae that he set up on the Nile bank, including one near Kabret, and a further one a few kilometres north of Suez. Darius the Great&#x27;s Suez Inscriptions read:

The canal left the Nile at Bubastis. An inscription on a pillar at Pithom records that in 270 or 269 BCE, it was again reopened, by Ptolemy II Philadelphus. In Arsinoe, Ptolemy constructed a navigable lock, with sluices, at the Heroopolite Gulf of the Red Sea, which allowed the passage of vessels but prevented salt water from the Red Sea from mingling with the fresh water in the canal.

In the second half of the 19th century, French cartographers discovered the remnants of an ancient north–south canal past the east side of Lake Timsah and ending near the north end of the Great Bitter Lake. This proved to be the canal made by Darius I, as his stele commemorating its construction was found at the site. (This ancient, second canal may have followed a course along the shoreline of the Red Sea when it once extended north to Lake Timsah.)

=== Receding Red Sea and the dwindling Nile ===
The Red Sea is believed by some historians to have gradually receded over the centuries, its coastline slowly moving southward away from Lake Timsah and the Great Bitter Lake. Coupled with persistent accumulations of Nile silt, maintenance and repair of Ptolemy&#x27;s canal became increasingly cumbersome over each passing century.

Two hundred years after the construction of Ptolemy&#x27;s canal, Cleopatra seems to have had no west–east waterway passage, because the Pelusiac branch of the Nile, which fed Ptolemy&#x27;s west–east canal, had by that time dwindled, being choked with silt. In support of this contention one can note that in 31 BCE, during a reversal of fortune in Mark Antony&#x27;s and Cleopatra&#x27;s war against Octavian, she attempted to escape Egypt with her fleet by raising the ships out of the Mediterranean and dragging them across the isthmus of Suez to the Red Sea. Then, according to Plutarch, the Arabs of Petra attacked and burned the first wave of these ships and Cleopatra abandoned the effort. (Modern historians, however, maintain that her ships were burned by the enemy forces of Malichus I.)

=== Cairo to the Red Sea ===
The ancient canal was re-excavated by Roman emperor Trajan in the first century AD, who named it after himself. He reportedly moved its mouth on the Nile further south, at the site of what is now Old Cairo. By the time of the Arab conquest in 641 AD, this canal had fallen out of use. The commander of the Muslim force, Amr ibn al-As, ordered that it be restored so as to improve connections between Egypt and Medina, the Muslim capital at the time. The Muslim canal was excavated further north from Trajan&#x27;s canal, joining the Nile close to what is now the Sayyida Zaynab neighbourhood of Cairo. This canal reportedly ended near modern Suez. The site of the former Roman channel near the Nile was absorbed into the new city of Fustat.

A geography treatise &quot;De Mensura Orbis Terrae&quot; written by the Irish monk Dicuil (born late 8th century) reports a conversation with another monk, Fidelis, who had sailed on the canal from the Nile to the Red Sea during a pilgrimage to the Holy Land in the first half of the 8th century.

The Abbasid caliph al-Mansur is said to have ordered this canal closed in 767 to prevent supplies from reaching Arabian detractors. The Fatimid caliph al-Hakim is claimed to have repaired the Cairo to Red Sea passageway, but only briefly, circa 1000 CE, as it soon &quot;became choked with sand&quot;. The remaining section of the canal near the Nile, known as the &quot;Khalij&quot;, continued to serve as part of Cairo&#x27;s water infrastructure until the 19th century. In later periods, the canal was closed with a dike for much of the year and reopened during the flood season.

=== Conception by Venice ===
The successful 1488 navigation of southern Africa by Bartolomeu Dias opened a direct maritime trading route to India and the Spice Islands, and forever changed the balance of Mediterranean trade. One of the most prominent losers in the new order, as former middlemen, was the former spice trading center of Venice.

Despite entering negotiations with Egypt&#x27;s ruling Mamelukes, the Venetian plan to build the canal was quickly put to rest by the Ottoman conquest of Egypt in 1517, led by Sultan Selim I.

=== Ottoman attempts ===
During the 16th century, the Ottoman Grand Vizier Sokollu Mehmed Pasha attempted to construct a canal connecting the Red Sea and the Mediterranean. This was motivated by a desire to connect Constantinople to the pilgrimage and trade routes of the Indian Ocean, as well as by strategic concerns—as the European presence in the Indian Ocean was growing, Ottoman mercantile and strategic interests were increasingly challenged, and the Sublime Porte was increasingly pressed to assert its position. A navigable canal would allow the Ottoman Navy to connect its Red Sea, Black Sea, and Mediterranean fleets. However, this project was deemed too expensive, and was never completed.

=== Napoleon&#x27;s discovery of an ancient canal ===
During the French campaign in Egypt and Syria in late 1798, Napoleon expressed interest in finding the remnants of an ancient waterway passage. This culminated in a cadre of archaeologists, scientists, cartographers and engineers scouring northern Egypt. Their findings, recorded in the &quot;Description de l&#x27;Égypte&quot;, include detailed maps that depict the discovery of an ancient canal extending northward from the Red Sea and then westward toward the Nile.

After becoming Emperor of France in 1804, Napoleon contemplated the construction of a north–south canal to connect the Mediterranean with the Red Sea. By avoiding the silt-laden Nile, such a canal would be easier to maintain. But the plan was abandoned because of the erroneous belief that the Red Sea was higher than the Mediterranean, and the waterway would thus require the costly and time-consuming construction of locks to operate. This was the result of using fragmentary survey measurements taken during the aforementioned war.

As late as 1861, the unnavigable ancient route discovered by Napoleon from Bubastis to the Red Sea still channelled water as far east as Kassassin.

==History of the Suez Canal==
=== Interim period ===
Despite the construction challenges that could have been the result of the alleged difference in sea levels, the idea of finding a shorter route to the east remained alive. In 1830, General Francis Chesney submitted a report to the British government that stated that there was no difference in elevation and that the Suez Canal was feasible, but his report received no further attention. Lieutenant Waghorn established his &quot;Overland Route&quot;, which transported post and passengers to India via Egypt. The usefulness of this route for the British Empire was shown when dealing with the Indian Rebellion of 1857, with 5,000 British troops having passed through Egypt.

Linant de Bellefonds, a French explorer of Egypt, became chief engineer of Egypt&#x27;s Public Works. In addition to his normal duties, he surveyed the Isthmus of Suez and made plans for the Suez Canal. French Saint-Simonianists showed an interest in the canal and in 1833, Barthélemy Prosper Enfantin tried to draw Muhammad Ali&#x27;s attention to the canal but was unsuccessful. Alois Negrelli, the Italian-Austrian railroad pioneer, became interested in the idea in 1836.

In 1846, Prosper Enfantin&#x27;s Société d&#x27;Études du Canal de Suez invited a number of experts, among them Robert Stephenson, Negrelli and Paul-Adrien Bourdaloue to study the feasibility of the Suez Canal (with the assistance of Linant de Bellefonds). Bourdaloue&#x27;s survey of the isthmus was the first generally accepted evidence that there was no practical difference in elevation between the two seas. Britain, however, feared that a canal open to everyone might interfere with its India trade and therefore preferred a connection by train from Alexandria via Cairo to Suez, which Stephenson eventually built.

===Construction by the Suez Canal Company===

====Preparations (1854–1858)====

In 1854 and 1856, Ferdinand de Lesseps obtained a concession from Sa&#x27;id Pasha, the Khedive of Egypt and Sudan, to create a company to construct a canal open to ships of all nations. The company was to operate the canal for 99 years from its opening. De Lesseps had used his friendly relationship with Sa&#x27;id, which he had developed while he was a French diplomat in the 1830s. As stipulated in the concessions, de Lesseps convened the International Commission for the piercing of the isthmus of Suez (&quot;Commission Internationale pour le percement de l&#x27;isthme de Suez&quot;) consisting of 13 experts from seven countries, among them John Robinson McClean, later President of the Institution of Civil Engineers in London, and again Negrelli, to examine the plans developed by Linant de Bellefonds, and to advise on the feasibility of and the best route for the canal. After surveys and analyses in Egypt and discussions in Paris on various aspects of the canal, where many of Negrelli&#x27;s ideas prevailed, the commission produced a unanimous report in December 1856 containing a detailed description of the canal complete with plans and profiles. The Suez Canal Company (&quot;Compagnie universelle du canal maritime de Suez&quot;) came into being on 15 December 1858.

The British government had opposed the project from the outset to its completion. The British, who controlled both the Cape route and the Overland route to India and the Far East, favored the &quot;status quo&quot;, given that a canal might disrupt their commercial and maritime supremacy. Lord Palmerston, the project&#x27;s most unwavering foe, confessed in the mid-1850s the real motive behind his opposition: that Britain&#x27;s commercial and maritime relations would be overthrown by the opening of a new route, open to all nations, and thus deprive his country of its present exclusive advantages. As one of the diplomatic moves against the project when it nevertheless went ahead, it disapproved of the use of &quot;forced labour&quot; for construction of the canal. Involuntary labour on the project ceased, and the viceroy condemned the corvée, halting the project.

International opinion was initially skeptical, and shares of the Suez Canal Company did not sell well overseas. Britain, Austria, and Russia did not buy a significant number of shares. With assistance from the Cattaui banking family, and their relationship with James de Rothschild of the French House of Rothschild bonds and shares were successfully promoted in France and other parts of Europe. All French shares were quickly sold in France. A contemporary British skeptic claimed &quot;One thing is sure... our local merchant community doesn&#x27;t pay practical attention at all to this grand work, and it is legitimate to doubt that the canal&#x27;s receipts... could ever be sufficient to recover its maintenance fee. It will never become a large ship&#x27;s accessible way in any case.&quot;

====Construction (1859–1869)====
Work started on the shore of the future Port Said on 25 April 1859.

The excavation took some 10 years, with forced labour (corvée) being employed until 1864 to dig out the canal. Some sources estimate that over 30,000 people were working on the canal at any given period, that more than 1.5 million people from various countries were employed, and that tens of thousands of labourers died, many of them from cholera and similar epidemics.

Estimates of the number of deaths vary widely with Gamal Abdel Nasser citing 120,000 deaths upon nationalisation of the canal in a 26 July 1956 speech and the company&#x27;s chief medical officer reporting no higher than 2.49 deaths per thousand in 1866. Doubling these estimates with a generous assumption of 50,000 working staff per year over 11 years would put a conservative estimate at fewer than 3,000 deaths. More closely relying on the limited reported data of the time, the number would be fewer than 1,000.

=== Company towns ===
From its inauguration, till 1925, the Suez Canal Company built a series of company towns along the canal to serve its operation. They included ports and their facilities as well as housing for employees segregated by race or nationality. These were Port Said (1869) and Port Fuad (1925) at the canal&#x27;s northern entrance by the Mediterranenan, Ismailia (1862) near the middle and north of Lake Timsah, and Port Twefik (1867) at the canal&#x27;s southern entrance on the Red Sea.

===Inauguration (17 November 1869)===
The canal opened under French control in November 1869. The opening ceremonies began at Port Said on the evening of 15 November, with illuminations, fireworks, and a banquet on the yacht of the Khedive Isma&#x27;il Pasha of Egypt and Sudan. The royal guests arrived the following morning: the Emperor Franz Joseph I, the French Empress Eugenie in the Imperial yacht &quot;L&#x27;Aigle&quot;, the Crown Prince of Prussia, and Prince Louis of Hesse. Other international guests included the American natural historian H. W. Harkness. In the afternoon there were blessings of the canal with both Muslim and Christian ceremonies, a temporary mosque and church having been built side by side on the beach. In the evening there were more illuminations and fireworks.
On the morning of 17 November, a procession of ships entered the canal, headed by the &quot;L&#x27;Aigle&quot;. Among the ships following was HMS &quot;Newport&quot;, captained by George Nares, which surveyed the canal on behalf of the Admiralty a few months later. The &quot;Newport&quot; was involved in an incident that demonstrated some of the problems with the canal. There were suggestions that the depth of parts of the canal at the time of the inauguration were not as great as promised, and that the deepest part of the channel was not always clear, leading to a risk of grounding. The first day of the passage ended at Lake Timsah, south of Port Said. The French ship &quot;Péluse&quot; anchored close to the entrance, then swung around and grounded, the ship and its hawser blocking the way into the lake. The following ships had to anchor in the canal itself until the &quot;Péluse&quot; was hauled clear the next morning, making it difficult for them to join that night&#x27;s celebration in Ismailia. Except for the &quot;Newport&quot;: Nares sent out a boat to carry out soundings, and was able to manoeuver around the &quot;Péluse&quot; to enter the lake and anchor there for the night.

Ismailia was the scene of more celebrations the following day, including a military &quot;march past&quot;, illuminations and fireworks, and a ball at the Governor&#x27;s Palace. The convoy set off again on the morning of 19 November, for the remainder of the trip to Suez. After Suez, many of the participants headed for Cairo, and then to the Pyramids, where a new road had been built for the occasion.

An Anchor Line ship, the S.S. &quot;Dido&quot;, became the first to pass through the Canal from South to North.

====Initial difficulties (1869–1871)====

Although numerous technical, political, and financial problems had been overcome, the final cost was more than double the original estimate.

The Khedive, in particular, was able to overcome initial reservations held by both British and French creditors by enlisting the help of the Sursock family, whose deep connections proved invaluable in securing much international support for the project.

After the opening, the Suez Canal Company was in financial difficulties. The remaining works were completed only in 1871, and traffic was below expectations in the first two years. De Lesseps therefore tried to increase revenues by interpreting the kind of net ton referred to in the second concession (&quot;tonneau de capacité&quot;) as meaning a ship&#x27;s cargo capacity and not only the theoretical net tonnage of the &quot;Moorsom System&quot; introduced in Britain by the Merchant Shipping Act in 1854. The ensuing commercial and diplomatic activities resulted in the International Commission of Constantinople establishing a specific kind of net tonnage and settling the question of tariffs in its protocol of 18 December 1873. This was the origin of the Suez Canal Net Tonnage and the Suez Canal Special Tonnage Certificate, both of which are still in use today.

=== Growth and reorganisation ===

The canal had an immediate and dramatic effect on world trade. Combined with the American transcontinental railroad completed six months earlier, it allowed the world to be circled in record time. It played an important role in increasing European colonization of Africa. The construction of the canal was one of the reasons for the Panic of 1873 in Great Britain, because goods from the Far East had, until then, been carried in sailing vessels around the Cape of Good Hope and stored in British warehouses. An inability to pay his bank debts led Said Pasha&#x27;s successor, Isma&#x27;il Pasha, in 1875 to sell his 44% share in the canal for £4,000,000 ($19.2 million), equivalent to £432 million to £456 million ($540 million to $570 million) in 2019, to the government of the United Kingdom. French shareholders still held the majority. Local unrest caused the British to invade in 1882 and take full control, although nominally Egypt remained part of the Ottoman Empire. The British representative from 1883 to 1907 was Evelyn Baring, 1st Earl of Cromer, who reorganized and modernized the government and suppressed rebellions and corruption, thereby facilitating increased traffic on the canal.

The European Mediterranean countries in particular benefited economically from the Suez Canal, as they now had much faster connections to Asia and East Africa than the North and West European maritime trading nations such as Great Britain, the Netherlands or Germany. The biggest beneficiary in the Mediterranean was Austria-Hungary, which had participated in the planning and construction of the canal. The largest Austrian maritime trading company, Österreichischer Lloyd, experienced rapid expansion after the canal was completed, as did the port city of Trieste, then an Austrian possession. The company was a partner in the Compagnie Universelle du Canal de Suez, whose vice-president was the Lloyd co-founder Pasquale Revoltella.

In 1900, a dredging trial was held by the Suez Canal Company to determine which ship would assist in the widening and deepening of the canal. One of the ships trialed in the dredging was The &quot;Hercules&quot;, a ship owned by the Queensland Government in Australia. The &quot;Hercules&quot; dredged deposits of granite and limestone, but it was determined at the end of the trial that the &quot;Hercules&quot; would not be used for the dredging of the Suez Canal. The ship was then returned to Brisbane, Australia in January 1901.

The Convention of Constantinople in 1888 declared the canal a neutral zone under the protection of the British, who had occupied Egypt and Sudan at the request of Khedive Tewfiq to suppress the Urabi Revolt against his rule. The revolt went on from 1879 to 1882. The British defended the strategically important passage against a major Ottoman attack in 1915, during the First World War. Under the Anglo-Egyptian Treaty of 1936, the UK retained control over the canal. With outbreak of World War II the canal was again strategically important; Italo-German attempts to capture it were repulsed during the North Africa Campaign, which ensured the canal remained closed to Axis shipping. After the war the British Army continued to maintain a large garrison of some 70,000 troops in the Suez Canal Zone.

=== Suez Crisis ===

In 1951 Egypt repudiated the 1936 treaty with Great Britain. In October 1954 the UK tentatively agreed to remove its troops from the Canal Zone. Because of Egyptian overtures towards the Soviet Union, both the United Kingdom and the United States withdrew their pledge to financially support construction of the Aswan Dam. Egyptian President Gamal Abdel Nasser responded by nationalising the canal on 26 July 1956 and transferring it to the Suez Canal Authority, intending to finance the dam project using revenue from the canal. On the same day that the canal was nationalised Nasser also closed the Straits of Tiran to all Israeli ships. This led to the Suez Crisis in which the UK, France, and Israel invaded Egypt. According to the pre-agreed war plans under the Protocol of Sèvres, Israel invaded the Sinai Peninsula on 29 October, forcing Egypt to engage them militarily, and allowing the Anglo-French partnership to declare the resultant fighting a threat to stability in the Middle East and enter the war – officially to separate the two forces but in reality to regain the Canal and bring down the Nasser government.

To save the British from what he thought was a disastrous action and to stop the war from a possible escalation, Canadian Secretary of State for External Affairs Lester B. Pearson proposed the creation of the first United Nations peacekeeping force to ensure access to the canal for all and an Israeli withdrawal from the Sinai Peninsula. On 4 November 1956, a majority at the United Nations voted for Pearson&#x27;s peacekeeping resolution, which mandated the UN peacekeepers to stay in Sinai unless both Egypt and Israel agreed to their withdrawal. The United States backed this proposal by putting pressure on the British government through the selling of sterling, which would cause it to depreciate. Britain then called a ceasefire, and later agreed to withdraw its troops by the end of the year. Pearson was later awarded the Nobel Peace Prize. As a result of damage and ships sunk under orders from Nasser the canal was closed from November 1956 to April 1957, when it was cleared with UN assistance. A UN force (UNEF) was established to maintain the free navigability of the canal, and peace in the Sinai Peninsula.

===Arab–Israeli wars of 1967 and 1973===

After the 1948 Arab–Israeli War, Egypt closed the Canal to Israeli shipping, despite UN Security Council resolutions from 1949 and 1951 urging it not to, on the grounds that hostilities had ended with the 1949 armistice agreement.

On 16 May 1967, Nasser ordered UNEF peacekeeping forces out of the Sinai Peninsula, including the Suez Canal area. Egyptian troops were sent into Sinai to take their place. On 21 May, Israel protested Nasser&#x27;s order to close the Straits of Tiran to Israeli trade.

After the 1967 Six-Day War, Israeli forces occupied the Sinai Peninsula, including the entire east bank of the Suez Canal. In the following years the tensions between Egypt and Israel intensified and from March 1969 until August 1970, a war of attrition took place as the then Egyptian president, Gamal Abdel Nasser, tried to retake the territories occupied by Israel during the conflict. The fighting ceased after the death of Nasser on 28 September 1970. After this conflict there were no changes in the distribution of territory, but the underlying tensions persisted.

Unwilling to allow the Israelis to use the canal, Egypt imposed a blockade which closed the canal to all shipping immediately after the beginning of the Six-Day War. The canal remained blocked for eight years. There was no anticipation of this event and consequently fifteen cargo ships, known as the &quot;Yellow Fleet&quot;, were trapped in the canal, and remained there until its reopening in 1975.

On 6 October 1973, during the Yom Kippur War, the Canal was the scene of Operation Badr, in which the Egyptian army crossed into Israeli-occupied Sinai. Much wreckage from this conflict remains visible along the canal&#x27;s edges. On 22 October 1973, Israeli forces counter-attacked by crossing the Suez Canal into Egypt and advancing towards Suez City, where they remained until after Israel and Egypt signed on 18 January 1974, an agreement, commonly known as Sinai I, with the official name of &quot;Sinai Separation of Forces Agreement,&quot; which included a withdrawal of Israeli forces from the western side of the Suez Canal.

===Mine clearing operations (1974–75)===

After the Yom Kippur War, the United States initiated Operation Nimbus Moon. The amphibious assault ship USS &quot;Inchon (LPH-12)&quot; was sent to the Canal, carrying 12 RH-53D minesweeping helicopters of Helicopter Mine Countermeasures Squadron 12. These partly cleared the canal between May and December 1974. It was relieved by the LST USS &quot;Barnstable County&quot; (LST1197). The British Royal Navy initiated Operation Rheostat and Task Group 65.2 provided for Operation Rheostat One (six months in 1974), the minehunters HMS &quot;Maxton&quot;, HMS &quot;Bossington&quot;, and HMS &quot;Wilton&quot;, the Fleet Clearance Diving Team (FCDT) and HMS &quot;Abdiel&quot;, a practice minelayer/MCMV support ship; and for Operation Rheostat Two (six months in 1975) the minehunters HMS &quot;Hubberston&quot; and HMS &quot;Sheraton&quot;, and HMS &quot;Abdiel&quot;. When the Canal Clearance Operations were completed, the canal and its lakes were considered 99% clear of mines. The canal was then reopened by Egyptian President Anwar Sadat aboard an Egyptian destroyer, which led the first convoy northbound to Port Said in 1975, at his side stood the Iranian Crown Prince Reza Pahlavi.

===UN presence===
The UNEF mandate expired in 1979. Despite the efforts of the United States, Israel, Egypt, and others to obtain an extension of the UN role in observing the peace between Israel and Egypt, as called for under the Egypt–Israel peace treaty of 1979, the mandate could not be extended because of the veto by the Soviet Union in the UN Security Council, at the request of Syria. Accordingly, negotiations for a new observer force in the Sinai produced the Multinational Force and Observers (MFO), stationed in Sinai in 1981 in coordination with a phased Israeli withdrawal. The MFO remains active under agreements between the United States, Israel, Egypt, and other nations.

=== Bypass expansion ===

In 2014, months after taking office as President of Egypt, Abdel Fattah el-Sisi ordered the expansion of the Ballah Bypass from wide to wide for . The project was called the New Suez Canal, as it allows ships to transit the canal in both directions simultaneously. The project cost more than LE 59.4 billion (US$9 billion) and was completed within a year. Sisi declared the expanded channel open to business in a ceremony on 6 August 2015.

=== Second channel extension ===
Following the grounding of the Chinese vessel Ever Given in 2021, Egypt accelerated plans to extend and widen the canal&#x27;s second channel. In early 2025, new sections of this extension had begun to be tested, with the Suez Canal Authority reporting two vessels had passed through the canal with no issues.

== Incidents ==

In 2004, the canal was closed for three days when the oil tanker &quot;Tropic Brilliance&quot; became stuck.

On 18 October 2017, the &quot;OOCL Japan&quot; ran aground causing an obstruction which blocked the canal for a few hours.

===2021 obstruction===
On 23 March 2021, at around 05:40 UTC (07:40 local time), the Suez Canal was blocked in both directions by ultra-large Evergreen G-class container ship &quot;Ever Given&quot;. The ship, operated by Evergreen Marine, was en route from Malaysia to the Netherlands when it ran aground after strong winds allegedly blew the ship off course. Upon running aground, &quot;Ever Given&quot; turned sideways, completely blocking the canal. Although part of the length of the canal is paralleled by an older narrower channel which can be used to bypass obstructions, this incident occurred to the south, in a section of the canal where there is only one channel.

When the incident began, many economists and trade experts commented on the effects of the obstruction if not resolved quickly, citing how important the Suez was to global trade; the incident was likely to drastically affect the global economy because of the trapped goods scheduled to go through the canal. Among those goods, oil shipments were the most affected in the immediate aftermath, due to a significant number still blocked with no other way to reach their destination. Referring to the European and American market, a few maritime experts have disputed the prediction of a drastic effect on trade, saying this &quot;really isn&#x27;t a substantial transit route for crude&quot; according to Marshall Steeves, energy markets analyst at IHS Markit, and &quot;there are existing stocks&quot; according to Camille Egloff of Boston Consulting Group and alternative sources of supply, noting that traffic only slowed down and that it might only have impacted sectors with existing shortages (such as the semiconductor industry). The International Chamber of Shipping (ICS) estimated that up to $3 billion worth of cargo passes through the Suez Canal every day.

It was said the blockage would have an impact on cargo schedules around the world. Shipping companies were also considering whether to divert their ships along the much longer route around the Cape of Good Hope. The first container ship diverted was &quot;Ever Given&quot;″s sister ship, &quot;Ever Greet&quot;.

&quot;Ever Given&quot; was re-floated on 29 March. Within a few hours, cargo traffic resumed, slowly resolving the backlog of around 450 ships. The first ship to pass through the canal after &quot;Ever Given&quot;&#x27;s recovery was &quot;YM Wish&quot;, a Hong Kong-based cargo ship.

On 2 April 2021, Usama Rabie, chairman of the Suez Canal Authority of Egypt, said that the damage caused by the blockage of the canal could reach about $1 billion. Rabie also revealed that after the Suez Canal resumed navigation, as of noon on 31 March 285 cargo ships had passed through the canal smoothly. He said that the remaining 175 freighters waiting to pass through the canal would all pass by 2 April.

After the incident, the Egyptian government announced that they would be widening the narrower parts of the canal. On 9 September 2021, the canal was briefly blocked again by MV &quot;Coral Crystal&quot;. However, this ship was freed within 15 minutes, presenting minimal disruption to other convoys.

=== 2023 grounding ===
On 25 May 2023, a Hong Kong-flagged cargo ship, MV &quot;Xin Hai Tong 23&quot;, was grounded near the southern end of the canal, but it was refloated by tugboats in less than a day.

== Layout and operation ==
When built, the canal was long and deep. After several enlargements, it is long, deep and wide. It consists of the northern access channel of , the canal itself of and the southern access channel of .

The so-called New Suez Canal, functional since 6 August 2015, currently has a new parallel canal in the middle part, with its length over . The current parameters of the Suez Canal, including both individual canals of the parallel section are: depth and width at least (that width measured at of depth).

=== Capacity ===
The canal allows passage of ships up to draft or 240,000 deadweight tons and up to a height of above water level and a maximum beam of under certain conditions. The canal can handle more traffic and larger ships than the Panama Canal, as Suezmax dimensions are greater than both Panamax and New Panamax. Some supertankers are too large to traverse the canal. Others can offload part of their cargo onto a canal-owned ship to reduce their draft, transit, and reload at the other end of the canal. On 15 April 2021 Egyptian authorities announced that they would widen the southern section of the Suez Canal to improve the efficiency of the canal. The plan mainly covers about from Suez to the Great Bitter Lake. It will be widened by and the maximum depth will be increased from about to about .

=== Navigation ===
Ships approaching the canal from the sea are expected to radio the harbour when they are within of the Fairway Buoy near Port Said. The canal has no locks because of the flat terrain, and the minor sea level difference between each end is inconsequential for shipping. As the canal has no sea surge gates, the ports at the ends would be subject to the sudden impact of tsunamis from the Mediterranean Sea and Red Sea, according to a 2012 article in the &quot;Journal of Coastal Research&quot;.

There is one shipping lane with passing areas in Ballah-Bypass near El Qantara and in the Great Bitter Lake. On a typical day, three convoys transit the canal, two southbound and one northbound. The passage takes between 11 and 16 hours at a speed of around . The low speed helps prevent erosion of the banks by ships&#x27; wakes.

By 1955, about two-thirds of Europe&#x27;s oil passed through the canal. Around 8% of world sea trade is carried via the canal. In 2008, 21,415 vessels passed through the canal and the receipts totalled $5.381 billion, with an average cost per ship of $251,000.

New Rules of Navigation came into force on 1 January 2008, passed by the board of directors of the Suez Canal Authority (SCA) to organise vessels&#x27; transit. The most important amendments include allowing vessels with draught to pass, increasing the allowed breadth from (following improvement operations), and imposing a fine on vessels using pilots from outside the SCA inside the canal boundaries without permission. The amendments allow vessels loaded with dangerous cargo (such as radioactive or flammable materials) to pass if they conform with the latest amendments provided by international conventions.

The SCA has the right to determine the number of tugs required to assist warships traversing the canal, to achieve the highest degree of safety during transit.

=== Operation ===
Before August 2015, the canal was too narrow for free two-way traffic, so ships had to pass in convoys and use bypasses. The bypasses were out of (40%). From north to south, they are Port Said bypass (entrances) , Ballah bypass &amp; anchorage , Timsah bypass , and the Deversoir bypass (northern end of the Great Bitter Lake) . The bypasses were completed in 1980.

Typically, it would take a ship 12 to 16 hours to transit the canal. The canal&#x27;s 24-hour capacity was about 76 standard ships.

In August 2014, Egypt chose a consortium that includes the Egyptian army and global engineering firm Dar Al-Handasah to develop an international industrial and logistics hub in the Suez Canal area, and began the construction of a new canal section from combined with expansion and deep digging of the other of the canal. This will allow navigation in both directions simultaneously in the central section of the canal. These extensions were formally opened on 6 August 2015 by President Al-Sisi.

=== Convoy sailing ===
Since the canal does not cater to unregulated two-way traffic, all ships transit in convoys on regular times, scheduled on a 24-hour basis. Each day, a single northbound convoy starts at 04:00 EET from Suez. At dual lane sections, the convoy uses the eastern route. Synchronised with this convoy&#x27;s passage is the southbound convoy. It starts at 03:30 EET from Port Said and so passes the Northbound convoy in the two-lane section.

=== Canal crossings ===
From north to south, the crossings are:
* The El Nasr pontoon bridge (), connecting Port Said to Port Fuad. Opened in 2016, length.
* The Abanoub Gerges pontoon bridge (), north of the Suez Canal Bridge
* The Suez Canal Bridge (), also called the Egyptian-Japanese Friendship Bridge, a high-level road bridge at El Qantara. In Arabic, &quot;al qantara&quot; means &quot;arch&quot;. Opened in 2001, it has a clearance over the canal and was built with assistance from the Japanese government and by Kajima.
* El Ferdan Railway Bridge () north of Ismailia () was completed in 2001 and is the longest swing-span bridge in the world, with a span of 340 m (1100 ft). The previous bridge was destroyed in 1967 during the Arab-Israeli conflict. The current bridge is no longer functional due to the expansion of the Suez Canal, as the parallel shipping lane completed in 2015 just east of the bridge lacks a structure spanning it. However, plans surfaced in 2017 to build a new bridge spanning the parallel canal and converting the old single track railway on the Ferdan to a double track, which as of October 2023, were near completion.
* The Ahmed el-Mansy pontoon bridge (), a pair of pontoons bridging both channels
* The Taha Zaki Abdullah pontoon bridge (), a pair of pontoons bridging both channels
* Pipelines taking fresh water under the canal to Sinai, about north of Suez, at .
* Ahmed Hamdi Tunnel () south of the Great Bitter Lake () was built in 1983. Because of leakage problems, a new water-tight tunnel was built inside the old one from 1992 to 1995.
* The Ahmed Omar Shabrawy pontoon bridge ()
* The Suez Canal overhead powerline crossing () was built in 1999.

A railway on the west bank runs parallel to the canal for its entire length.

The five pontoon bridges were opened between 2016 and 2019. They are designed to be movable, and can be completely rotated against the banks of the canal to allow shipping through, or else individual sections can be moved to create a narrower channel.

Six new tunnels for cars and trains are also planned across the canal. Currently the Ahmed Hamdi is the only tunnel connecting Suez to the Sinai.

== Economic impact ==
Economically, after its completion, the Suez Canal benefited primarily the sea trading powers of the Mediterranean countries, which now had much faster connections to the Near and Far East than the North and West European sea trading nations such as Great Britain or Germany. The main Habsburg trading port of Trieste with its direct connections to Central Europe experienced a meteoric rise at that time.

The time saved in the 19th century for an assumed steamship trip to Bombay from Brindisi and Trieste was 37 days, from Genoa 32, from Marseille 31, from Bordeaux, Liverpool, London, Amsterdam and Hamburg 24 days. At that time, it was also necessary to consider whether the goods to be transported could bear the costly canal tariff. This led to a rapid growth of Mediterranean ports with their land routes to Central and Eastern Europe. According to today&#x27;s information from the shipping companies, the route from Singapore to Rotterdam through the Suez Canal will be shortened by and thus by nine days compared to the route around Africa. As a result, liner services between Asia and Europe save 44 per cent CO2 (carbon dioxide) thanks to this shorter route. The Suez Canal has a correspondingly important role in the connection between East Africa and the Mediterranean region.

In the 20th century, trade through the Suez Canal came to a standstill several times, due to the two world wars and the Suez Canal crisis. Many trade flows were also shifted away from the Mediterranean ports towards Northern European terminals, such as Hamburg and Rotterdam. Only after the end of the Cold War, the growth in European economic integration, the consideration of CO2 emission and the Chinese Silk Road Initiative, are Mediterranean ports such as Piraeus and Trieste again at the focus of growth and investment.

The Suez Canal set a new record with annual revenue of $9.4 billion in USD for the fiscal year that ended 30 June 2023.

== Alternative routes ==
Before the canal&#x27;s opening in 1869, goods were sometimes offloaded from ships and carried overland between the Mediterranean and the Red Sea.

=== Cape Agulhas ===
The main alternative is around Cape Agulhas, the southernmost point of Africa, commonly referred to as the Cape of Good Hope route. This was the only sea route before the canal was constructed, and when the canal was closed. It is still the only route for ships that are too large for the canal. In the early 21st century, the Suez Canal has suffered from diminished traffic due to piracy in Somalia, with many shipping companies choosing to take the long route instead. Between 2008 and 2010, it is estimated that the canal lost 10% of traffic due to the threat of piracy, and another 10% due to the financial crisis. An oil tanker going from Saudi Arabia to the United States has farther to go when taking the route south of Africa rather than the canal.

=== Northern Sea Route ===
In recent years, the shrinking Arctic sea ice has made the Northern Sea Route feasible for commercial cargo ships between Europe and East Asia during a six-to-eight-week window in the summer months, shortening the voyage by thousands of kilometres compared to that through the Suez Canal. According to polar climate researchers, as the extent of the Arctic summer ice pack recedes the route will become passable without the help of icebreakers for a greater period each summer.

The Bremen-based Beluga Group claimed in 2009 to be the first Western company to attempt using the Northern Sea Route without assistance from icebreakers, cutting off the journey between Ulsan, Korea and Rotterdam, the Netherlands.

=== Cape Horn ===
Sailing ships, such as the windjammers in the heyday of the Great Grain Race between Australia and Europe during the 1930s, often preferred the Cape Horn route when going to Europe, due to prevalent wind directions, even though it is slightly longer from Sydney to Europe this way than past Cape Agulhas.

=== Negev desert railway ===
In February 2012, Israel announced its intention to construct a railway between the Mediterranean and Eilat through the Negev desert to compete with the canal. By 2019, the project had been put on indefinite hold.

== Environmental impact ==

The opening of the canal created the first salt-water passage between the Mediterranean Sea and the Red Sea. Although the Red Sea is about higher than the eastern Mediterranean, the current between the Mediterranean and the middle of the canal at the Bitter Lakes flows north in winter and south in summer. The current south of the Bitter Lakes is tidal, varying with the tide at Suez. The Bitter Lakes, which were hypersaline natural lakes, blocked the migration of Red Sea species into the Mediterranean for many decades, but as the salinity of the lakes gradually equalised with that of the Red Sea the barrier to migration was removed, and plants and animals from the Red Sea have begun to colonise the eastern Mediterranean.

The Red Sea is generally saltier and less nutrient-rich than the Mediterranean, so that Erythrean species will often do well in the &#x27;milder&#x27; eastern Mediterranean environment. To the contrary very few Mediterranean species have been able to settle in the &#x27;harsher&#x27; conditions of the Red Sea. The dominant, south to north, migratory passage across the canal is often called Lessepsian migration (after Ferdinand de Lesseps) or &quot;Erythrean invasion&quot;. The recent construction by the Egyptian government of a major canal extension – allowing for two-way traffic in the central section of the canal and finally implemented in 2015 – raised concerns from marine biologists, who fear that it will enhance the arrival of Red Sea species in the Mediterranean.

Exotic species from the Indo-Pacific Ocean and introduced into the Mediterranean via the canal since the 1880s have become a significant component of the Mediterranean ecosystem. They already impact its ecology, endangering some local and endemic species. Since the piercing of the canal, over a thousand species from the Red Sea—plankton, seaweeds, invertebrates, fishes—have been recorded in the Mediterranean, and many others will clearly follow. The resulting change in biodiversity is without precedent in human memory and is accelerating: a long-term cross-Basin survey engaged by the Mediterranean Science Commission recently documented that in the first twenty years of this century more exotic fish species from the Indian Ocean had reached the Mediterranean than during the entire 20th century.

Historically, the construction of the canal was preceded by cutting a small fresh-water canal called Sweet Water Canal from the Nile delta along Wadi Tumilat to the future canal, with a southern branch to Suez and a northern branch to Port Said. Completed in 1863, these brought fresh water to a previously arid area, initially for canal construction, and subsequently facilitating growth of agriculture and settlements along the canal. However the Aswan High Dam construction across the Nile, which started operating in 1968, much reduced the inflow of freshwater and cut all natural nutrient-rich silt entering the eastern Mediterranean at the Nile Delta.

== Suez Canal Economic Zone ==

The Suez Canal Economic Zone, sometimes shortened to SCZONE, describes the set of locations neighbouring the canal where customs rates have been reduced to zero in order to attract investment. The zone comprises over within the governorates of Port Said, Ismailia and Suez. Projects in the zone are collectively described as the Suez Canal Area Development Project (SCADP).

The plan focuses on development of East Port Said and the port of Ain Sokhna, and hopes to extend to four more ports at West Port Said, El-Adabiya, Arish and El Tor.

The zone incorporates the four &quot;Qualifying Industrial Zones&quot; at Port Said, Ismailia and Suez, a 1996 American initiative to encourage economic ties between Israel and its neighbours.

== See also ==
* Canal des Deux Mers
* Container transport
* Corinth Canal
* Istanbul Canal
* Maritime Silk Road
* Mediterranean–Dead Sea Canal
* New Imperialism
* New Suez Canal
* Panama Canal
* Red Sea–Dead Sea Water Conveyance
* Suezmax
* Qantara Sharq
* Yellow Fleet

== Citations ==
== Bibliography==

* Bogaars, George. &quot;The Effect of the Opening of the Suez Canal on the Trade and Development of Singapore.&quot; &quot;Journal of the Malayan Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society&quot; 28.1 (1955): 99–143. online
* Bonin, Hubert. &quot;History of the Suez Canal Company 1858–2008&quot; (Librairie Droz, 2010).
* Britannica (2007) &quot;Suez Canal&quot;, in: &quot;The new Encyclopædia Britannica&quot;, 15th ed., 28, Chicago: Encyclopædia Britannica, 
* Bulfin, Ailise. &quot;The Fiction of Gothic Egypt and British Imperial Paranoia: The Curse of the Suez Canal.&quot; &quot;English Literature in Transition, 1880–1920&quot; 54.4 (2011): 411–443. online
* Burchell, S.C. &quot;Getting to Know The Suez Canal&quot; (1971), for middle schools online
* Carminati, Lucia. &quot;Seeking Bread and Fortune in Port Said: Labor Migration and the Making of the Suez Canal, 1859–1906&quot; (University of California Press, 2023) see also review of this book
* Farnie, D.A. &quot;East and West of Suez: Suez Canal in History, 1854–1956&quot; (1969), a standard scholarly history; 870 pp
* Fletcher, Max E. &quot;The Suez Canal and world shipping, 1869–1914.&quot; &quot;Journal of Economic History&quot; 18.4 (1958): 556–573.
* Galil, B.S. and Zenetos, A. (2002). &quot;A sea change: exotics in the eastern Mediterranean Sea&quot;, in: Leppäkoski, E., Gollasch, S. and Olenin, S. (eds), &quot;Invasive aquatic species of Europe : distribution, impacts, and management&quot;, Dordrecht; Boston : Kluwer Academic, , pp. 325–336
* Garrison, Ervan G. (1999) &quot;A history of engineering and technology : artful methods&quot;, 2nd ed., Boca Raton, Fla.; London : CRC Press, 
* Hallberg, Charles W. &quot;The Suez Canal: Its History and Diplomatic Importance&quot; (1931), a standard scholarly history; 440 pp; online
* Huber, Valeska. &quot;Connecting colonial seas: the &#x27;international colonisation&#x27; of Port Said and the Suez Canal during and after the First World War.&quot; &quot;European Review of History: Revue europeenne d&#x27;histoire&quot; 19.1 (2012): 141–161. * Karabell, Zachary (2003) &quot;Parting the Desert: The Creation of the Suez Canal&quot;, Knopf, [https://archive.org/details/partingdesertcre0000kara online
* Obieta, Joseph A. &quot;The international status of the Suez canal&quot; (Springer Science &amp; Business Media, 2012).
* Pudney, John. &quot;Suez; De Lesseps&#x27; Canal&quot; (Praeger, 1969). 
* Sanford, Eva Matthews (1938) &quot;The Mediterranean world in ancient times&quot;, Ronald series in history, New York : The Ronald Press Company, 618 p.
* Wilson, Arnold. &quot;The Suez Canal.&quot; &quot;International Affairs&quot; 18#3, (1939), pp. 380–95. online
===Historiography and memory===

* Carminati, Lucia. &quot;Suez: A hollow canal in need of peopling. Currents and stoppages in the historiography, 1859–1956.&quot; &quot;History Compass&quot; 19.5 (2021): 1–14. online
* Curli, Barbara. &quot;Italy and the Suez Canal: Historical and Historiographical Passages from a Euro-Mediterranean Perspective.&quot; in &quot;Italy and the Suez Canal, from the Mid-nineteenth Century to the Cold War: A Mediterranean History&quot; (Springer International Publishing, 2022) pp. 1–26.
* Oster, Uwe (2006) &quot;Le fabuleux destin des inventions : le canal de Suez&quot;, TV documentary produced by ZDF and directed by Axel Engstfeld (Germany)
* Searight, S. &quot;A dismal but Profitable Ditch: The Suez Canal Then and now&quot; &quot;Asian Affairs,&quot; (2016) 47, 93–100. https://doi.org/10.1080/03068374.2015.1129870 online]
== External links ==

* Suez Canal Authority
* Darius the Great&#x27;s Suez Inscriptions
* Suez Canal on OpenStreetMap
* Encyclopedia of the Orient: &quot;Suez Canal&quot; 
* Entrance of the Suez Canal1882
* Suez Canal Container Terminal at Port Said 
* Bibliography on Water Resources and International Law Peace Palace Library
* , including the new section
* American Society of Civil Engineers – Suez Canal
* Suez Canal map by Strommer, 19th century. Eran Laor Cartographic Collection, The National Library of Israel. Historic Cities Research Project. 
* Images of container ship Ever Given aground in Suez Canal BBC News
*Explained: The Whole Scenario Of Suez Canal. How Would It Have Impacted The Trade If It Persisted Longer? – Inventiva</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q899" start="4" end="14" title="Suez Canal" label="Suez Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1267889" start="61" end="69" title="waterway" label="waterway"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="73" end="78" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q130778103" start="80" end="90" title="Indo-Mediterranean" label="connecting"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="95" end="112" title="Mediterranean Sea" label="Mediterranean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q23406" start="120" end="127" title="Red Sea" label="Red Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q46291" start="140" end="155" title="Isthmus of Suez" label="Isthmus of Suez"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="169" end="175" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q48" start="180" end="184" title="Asia" label="Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q36755" start="208" end="223" title="Sinai Peninsula" label="Sinai Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q405155" start="268" end="279" title="trade route" label="trade route"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="288" end="294" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q48" start="299" end="303" title="Asia" label="Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q209169" start="331" end="351" title="Ferdinand de Lesseps" label="Ferdinand de Lesseps"/>
<link wikidata="Q959814" start="363" end="380" title="Suez Canal Company" label="Compagnie de Suez"/>
<link wikidata="Q12284" start="421" end="426" title="canal" label="canal"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="574" end="588" title="Atlantic Ocean#North Atlantic" label="North Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239" start="602" end="608" title="Indian Ocean" label="Indian"/>
<link wikidata="Q134509" start="875" end="884" title="Port Said" label="Port Said"/>
<link wikidata="Q6349617" start="913" end="924" title="Port Tewfik" label="Port Tewfik"/>
<link wikidata="Q134514" start="940" end="944" title="Suez" label="Suez"/>
<link wikidata="Q526440" start="1132" end="1149" title="Great Bitter Lake" label="Great Bitter Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q78836" start="1178" end="1192" title="Alois Negrelli" label="Alois Negrelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q105731" start="1210" end="1215" title="Lock (water transport)" label="locks"/>
<link wikidata="Q23384" start="1411" end="1415" title="tide" label="tide"/>
<link wikidata="Q959814" start="1545" end="1566" title="Suez Canal Company" label="concessionary company"/>
<link wikidata="Q39524" start="1617" end="1635" title="Gamal Abdel Nasser" label="Gamal Abdel Nasser"/>
<link wikidata="Q49101" start="1678" end="1689" title="Suez Crisis" label="Suez Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542301" start="1772" end="1792" title="Suez Canal Authority" label="Suez Canal Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q761454" start="1819" end="1847" title="Convention of Constantinople" label="Convention of Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q400005" start="2077" end="2088" title="choke point" label="choke point"/>
<link wikidata="Q382551" start="2170" end="2175" title="Egyptian Navy" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q510534" start="2180" end="2186" title="Israeli Navy" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q49077" start="2292" end="2303" title="Six-Day War" label="Six-Day War"/>
<link wikidata="Q12284" start="3276" end="3282" title="canals" label="canals"/>
<link wikidata="Q3392" start="3324" end="3328" title="Nile" label="Nile"/>
<link wikidata="Q23406" start="3336" end="3343" title="Red Sea" label="Red Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q18722" start="3422" end="3433" title="Senusret II" label="Senusret II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1523" start="3437" end="3448" title="Ramesses II" label="Ramesses II"/>
<link wikidata="Q125102" start="3547" end="3555" title="Necho II" label="Necho II"/>
<link wikidata="Q44387" start="3639" end="3647" title="Darius I" label="Darius I"/>
<link wikidata="Q365982" start="3692" end="3712" title="James Henry Breasted" label="James Henry Breasted"/>
<link wikidata="Q649907" start="3779" end="3793" title="Cataracts of the Nile" label="first cataract"/>
<link wikidata="Q269979" start="3814" end="3836" title="Sixth Dynasty of Egypt" label="Sixth Dynasty of Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q19248" start="3859" end="3871" title="Senusret III" label="Senusret III"/>
<link wikidata="Q719639" start="3895" end="3919" title="Twelfth Dynasty of Egypt" label="Twelfth Dynasty of Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q16879570" start="3936" end="3945" title="Sesostris" label="Sesostris"/>
<link wikidata="Q37110" start="3961" end="3968" title="Pharaoh" label="Pharaoh"/>
<link wikidata="Q18722" start="3969" end="3980" title="Senusret II" label="Senusret II"/>
<link wikidata="Q959073" start="4074" end="4095" title="Canal of the Pharaohs" label="Canal of the Pharaohs"/>
<link wikidata="Q23406" start="4123" end="4130" title="Red Sea" label="Red Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519552" start="4237" end="4249" title="Flooding of the Nile" label="flood season"/>
<link wikidata="Q179528" start="4295" end="4311" title="Nile River Delta" label="Nile River Delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2538734" start="4318" end="4330" title="Wadi Tumilat" label="Wadi Tumilat"/>
<link wikidata="Q41493" start="4352" end="4365" title="ancient times" label="ancient times"/>
<link wikidata="Q526440" start="4403" end="4415" title="Bitter Lakes" label="Bitter Lakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1724581" start="4420" end="4431" title="Lake Timsah" label="Lake Timsah"/>
<link wikidata="Q2741164" start="4448" end="4459" title="Meteorology (Aristotle)" label="Meteorology"/>
<link wikidata="Q868" start="4467" end="4476" title="Aristotle" label="Aristotle"/>
<link wikidata="Q44387" start="4786" end="4792" title="Darius the Great" label="Darius"/>
<link wikidata="Q45936" start="4891" end="4897" title="Strabo" label="Strabo"/>
<link wikidata="Q82778" start="4949" end="4964" title="Pliny the Elder" label="Pliny the Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126715" start="5007" end="5011" title="Tyro" label="Tyro"/>
<link wikidata="Q959073" start="5042" end="5048" title="Daneoi" label="Daneoi"/>
<link wikidata="Q39576" start="5267" end="5277" title="Ptolemy II" label="Ptolemy II"/>
<link wikidata="Q191324" start="5511" end="5534" title="Middle Kingdom of Egypt" label="Middle Kingdom of Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q282350" start="5617" end="5621" title="Land of Punt" label="Punt"/>
<link wikidata="Q129234" start="5639" end="5649" title="Hatshepsut" label="Hatshepsut"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536350" start="5824" end="5851" title="Wadi Gawasis" label="excavations in Wadi Gawasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1523" start="6036" end="6047" title="Ramesses II" label="Ramesses II"/>
<link wikidata="Q11768" start="6151" end="6164" title="ancient Egypt" label="ancient Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q603841" start="6178" end="6186" title="Bubastis" label="Bubastis"/>
<link wikidata="Q309282" start="6188" end="6199" title="Avaris" label="Pi-Ramesses"/>
<link wikidata="Q1630019" start="6205" end="6211" title="Pithom" label="Pithom"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="6231" end="6249" title="Napoleon Bonaparte" label="Napoleon Bonaparte"/>
<link wikidata="Q746583" start="6319" end="6328" title="The Histories of Herodotus" label="Histories"/>
<link wikidata="Q539051" start="6342" end="6347" title="Greeks" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q26825" start="6358" end="6367" title="Herodotus" label="Herodotus"/>
<link wikidata="Q125102" start="6384" end="6392" title="Necho II" label="Necho II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1630019" start="6474" end="6484" title="Pithom" label="Heroopolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q12095856" start="6518" end="6534" title="Heroopolite Gulf" label="Heroopolite Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q82778" start="6743" end="6758" title="Pliny the Elder" label="Pliny the Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q39816" start="6909" end="6915" title="valley" label="valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645966" start="6965" end="6971" title="Stadia (length)" label="stadia"/>
<link wikidata="Q217123" start="7233" end="7239" title="oracle" label="oracle"/>
<link wikidata="Q12591" start="7320" end="7337" title="Nebuchadnezzar II" label="Nebuchadnezzar II"/>
<link wikidata="Q44387" start="7432" end="7450" title="Darius I of Persia" label="Darius I of Persia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11768" start="7467" end="7480" title="Ancient Egypt" label="Ancient Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q182483" start="7528" end="7539" title="Cambyses II" label="Cambyses II"/>
<link wikidata="Q270699" start="7838" end="7842" title="silt" label="silt"/>
<link wikidata="Q102066" start="7893" end="7903" title="navigation" label="navigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q208420" start="7985" end="7992" title="trireme" label="trireme"/>
<link wikidata="Q41177" start="8125" end="8132" title="granite" label="granite"/>
<link wikidata="Q178743" start="8133" end="8138" title="stela" label="stela"/>
<link wikidata="Q5222972" start="8250" end="8291" title="Darius the Great&amp;#x27;s Suez Inscriptions" label="Darius the Great&amp;#x27;s Suez Inscriptions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1630019" start="8366" end="8372" title="Pithom" label="Pithom"/>
<link wikidata="Q39576" start="8431" end="8454" title="Ptolemy II Philadelphus" label="Ptolemy II Philadelphus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3623994" start="8459" end="8466" title="Arsinoe (Gulf of Suez)" label="Arsinoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q105731" start="8490" end="8504" title="Lock (water transport)" label="navigable lock"/>
<link wikidata="Q610559" start="8511" end="8517" title="sluice" label="sluice"/>
<link wikidata="Q12095856" start="8527" end="8543" title="Heroopolite Gulf" label="Heroopolite Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q42515" start="8736" end="8748" title="cartographer" label="cartographer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1724581" start="8828" end="8839" title="Lake Timsah" label="Lake Timsah"/>
<link wikidata="Q23406" start="9197" end="9204" title="Red Sea" label="Red Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q201788" start="9225" end="9234" title="historian" label="historian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1724581" start="9330" end="9341" title="Lake Timsah" label="Lake Timsah"/>
<link wikidata="Q270699" start="9415" end="9419" title="silt" label="silt"/>
<link wikidata="Q635" start="9593" end="9602" title="Cleopatra VII" label="Cleopatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q51673" start="9877" end="9888" title="Mark Antony" label="Mark Antony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405" start="9929" end="9937" title="Octavian" label="Octavian"/>
<link wikidata="Q41523" start="10110" end="10118" title="Plutarch" label="Plutarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q35323" start="10124" end="10128" title="Arab" label="Arab"/>
<link wikidata="Q5788" start="10133" end="10138" title="Petra" label="Petra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1597868" start="10313" end="10323" title="Malichus I" label="Malichus I"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="10394" end="10399" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425" start="10408" end="10414" title="Trajan" label="Trajan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2993461" start="10552" end="10561" title="Old Cairo" label="Old Cairo"/>
<link wikidata="Q317519" start="10582" end="10595" title="Arab conquest of Egypt" label="Arab conquest"/>
<link wikidata="Q314781" start="10676" end="10689" title="Amr ibn al-As" label="Amr ibn al-As"/>
<link wikidata="Q35484" start="10766" end="10772" title="Medina" label="Medina"/>
<link wikidata="Q134514" start="10998" end="11002" title="Suez" label="Suez"/>
<link wikidata="Q839456" start="11089" end="11095" title="Fustat" label="Fustat"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11119" end="11154" title="Dicuil#De mensura Orbis terrae" label="&amp;quot;De Mensura Orbis Terrae&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q905114" start="11181" end="11187" title="Dicuil" label="Dicuil"/>
<link wikidata="Q12536" start="11400" end="11407" title="Abbasid" label="Abbasid"/>
<link wikidata="Q31066" start="11415" end="11424" title="al-Mansur" label="al-Mansur"/>
<link wikidata="Q31945" start="11508" end="11515" title="Arabian Peninsula" label="Arabian"/>
<link wikidata="Q160307" start="11532" end="11539" title="Fatimid Caliphate" label="Fatimid"/>
<link wikidata="Q342137" start="11547" end="11555" title="Al-Hakim bi-Amr Allah" label="al-Hakim"/>
<link wikidata="Q124661416" start="11767" end="11773" title="Khalij (Cairo)" label="Khalij"/>
<link wikidata="Q130377" start="12062" end="12077" title="Bartolomeu Dias" label="Bartolomeu Dias"/>
<link wikidata="Q2903677" start="12103" end="12125" title="trading route to India" label="trading route to India"/>
<link wikidata="Q3827" start="12134" end="12147" title="Maluku Islands" label="Spice Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q641" start="12316" end="12322" title="Venice" label="Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q947784" start="12380" end="12389" title="Mamelukes" label="Mamelukes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948" start="12395" end="12403" title="Republic of Venice" label="Venetian"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="12459" end="12466" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4338038" start="12467" end="12492" title="Ottoman–Mamluk War (1516–17)" label="conquest of Egypt in 1517"/>
<link wikidata="Q494660" start="12508" end="12515" title="Selim I" label="Selim I"/>
<link wikidata="Q18811" start="12580" end="12592" title="Grand Vizier" label="Grand Vizier"/>
<link wikidata="Q298419" start="12593" end="12613" title="Sokollu Mehmed Pasha" label="Sokollu Mehmed Pasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q23406" start="12660" end="12667" title="Red Sea" label="Red Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="12676" end="12689" title="Mediterranean" label="Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="12733" end="12747" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q234915" start="12755" end="12765" title="Hajj" label="pilgrimage"/>
<link wikidata="Q405155" start="12770" end="12782" title="trade routes" label="trade routes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239" start="12790" end="12802" title="Indian Ocean" label="Indian Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187249" start="12943" end="12966" title="Ottoman-Portuguese confrontations" label="increasingly challenged"/>
<link wikidata="Q18871" start="12976" end="12989" title="Sublime Porte" label="Sublime Porte"/>
<link wikidata="Q762191" start="13018" end="13037" title="Ottoman naval expeditions in the Indian Ocean" label="assert its position"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062125" start="13073" end="13085" title="Ottoman Navy" label="Ottoman Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q23406" start="13101" end="13108" title="Red Sea" label="Red Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q166" start="13110" end="13119" title="Black Sea" label="Black Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="13125" end="13138" title="Mediterranean Sea" label="Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q253684" start="13286" end="13320" title="French campaign in Egypt and Syria" label="French campaign in Egypt and Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="13335" end="13343" title="Napoleon" label="Napoleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q23498" start="13449" end="13462" title="archaeologist" label="archaeologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q42515" start="13477" end="13489" title="cartographer" label="cartographer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200564" start="13568" end="13596" title="Description de l&amp;#x27;Égypte" label="Description de l&amp;#x27;Égypte"/>
<link wikidata="Q603841" start="14356" end="14364" title="Bubastis" label="Bubastis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5601921" start="14418" end="14427" title="Kassassin" label="Kassassin"/>
<link wikidata="Q708134" start="14673" end="14688" title="Francis Rawdon Chesney" label="Francis Chesney"/>
<link wikidata="Q2423914" start="14872" end="14890" title="Thomas Fletcher Waghorn" label="Lieutenant Waghorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q129864" start="15077" end="15101" title="Indian Rebellion of 1857" label="Indian Rebellion of 1857"/>
<link wikidata="Q960740" start="15159" end="15179" title="Louis Maurice Adolphe Linant de Bellefonds" label="Linant de Bellefonds"/>
<link wikidata="Q5348437" start="15234" end="15259" title="Egyptian Public Works" label="Egypt&amp;#x27;s Public Works"/>
<link wikidata="Q46291" start="15311" end="15326" title="Isthmus of Suez" label="Isthmus of Suez"/>
<link wikidata="Q82934" start="15369" end="15387" title="Saint-Simonianism" label="Saint-Simonianists"/>
<link wikidata="Q809420" start="15433" end="15460" title="Barthélemy Prosper Enfantin" label="Barthélemy Prosper Enfantin"/>
<link wikidata="Q182781" start="15475" end="15494" title="Muhammad Ali of Egypt" label="Muhammad Ali&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q78836" start="15540" end="15554" title="Alois Negrelli" label="Alois Negrelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q50001" start="15560" end="15567" title="Italians" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q131964" start="15568" end="15576" title="Austrian Empire" label="Austrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297116" start="15668" end="15706" title="Société d&amp;#x27;Études du Canal de Suez" label="Société d&amp;#x27;Études du Canal de Suez"/>
<link wikidata="Q328728" start="15747" end="15764" title="Robert Stephenson" label="Robert Stephenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q246715" start="15779" end="15801" title="Paul-Adrien Bourdaloue" label="Paul-Adrien Bourdaloue"/>
<link wikidata="Q129286" start="16128" end="16133" title="British Raj" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q87" start="16191" end="16201" title="Alexandria" label="Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q85" start="16206" end="16211" title="Cairo" label="Cairo"/>
<link wikidata="Q209169" start="16355" end="16375" title="Ferdinand de Lesseps" label="Ferdinand de Lesseps"/>
<link wikidata="Q366744" start="16403" end="16419" title="Sa&amp;#x27;id of Egypt" label="Sa&amp;#x27;id Pasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q127878" start="16425" end="16432" title="Khedive" label="Khedive"/>
<link wikidata="Q127861" start="16436" end="16451" title="Khedivate of Egypt" label="Egypt and Sudan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420215" start="16781" end="16845" title="International Commission for the piercing of the isthmus of Suez" label="International Commission for the piercing of the isthmus of Suez"/>
<link wikidata="Q6255297" start="16987" end="17008" title="John Robinson McClean" label="John Robinson McClean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1665181" start="17033" end="17063" title="Institution of Civil Engineers" label="Institution of Civil Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q960740" start="17129" end="17149" title="Louis Maurice Adolphe Linant de Bellefonds" label="Linant de Bellefonds"/>
<link wikidata="Q959814" start="17533" end="17580" title="Compagnie universelle du canal maritime de Suez" label="Compagnie universelle du canal maritime de Suez"/>
<link wikidata="Q2903677" start="17745" end="17755" title="Cape route" label="Cape route"/>
<link wikidata="Q193656" start="17916" end="17931" title="Henry John Temple, 3rd Viscount Palmerston" label="Lord Palmerston"/>
<link wikidata="Q131964" start="18624" end="18631" title="Austrian Empire" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="18637" end="18643" title="Russian Empire" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q922667" start="18765" end="18784" title="James Mayer de Rothschild" label="James de Rothschild"/>
<link wikidata="Q2882957" start="18792" end="18818" title="Rothschild banking family of France" label="French House of Rothschild"/>
<link wikidata="Q134509" start="19376" end="19385" title="Port Said" label="Port Said"/>
<link wikidata="Q705818" start="19445" end="19458" title="forced labour" label="forced labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q466259" start="19460" end="19466" title="corvée" label="corvée"/>
<link wikidata="Q12090" start="19745" end="19752" title="cholera" label="cholera"/>
<link wikidata="Q39524" start="19828" end="19846" title="Gamal Abdel Nasser" label="Gamal Abdel Nasser"/>
<link wikidata="Q627236" start="20392" end="20404" title="company town" label="company town"/>
<link wikidata="Q134509" start="20566" end="20575" title="Port Said" label="Port Said"/>
<link wikidata="Q1991268" start="20587" end="20596" title="Port Fuad" label="Port Fuad"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="20649" end="20663" title="Mediterranean Sea" label="Mediterranenan"/>
<link wikidata="Q217156" start="20665" end="20673" title="Ismailia" label="Ismailia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1724581" start="20710" end="20721" title="Lake Timsah" label="Lake Timsah"/>
<link wikidata="Q6349617" start="20727" end="20738" title="Suez Port" label="Port Twefik"/>
<link wikidata="Q127878" start="21033" end="21040" title="Khedive" label="Khedive"/>
<link wikidata="Q159378" start="21041" end="21059" title="Isma&amp;#x27;il Pasha" label="Isma&amp;#x27;il Pasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q127861" start="21063" end="21078" title="Khedivate of Egypt" label="Egypt and Sudan"/>
<link wikidata="Q51056" start="21132" end="21154" title="Franz Joseph I of Austria" label="Emperor Franz Joseph I"/>
<link wikidata="Q157130" start="21160" end="21182" title="Eugénie de Montijo" label="French Empress Eugenie"/>
<link wikidata="Q58600" start="21235" end="21247" title="Frederick III, German Emperor" label="Crown Prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q38872" start="21251" end="21258" title="Prussia" label="Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q57508" start="21264" end="21285" title="Louis III, Grand Duke of Hesse" label="Prince Louis of Hesse"/>
<link wikidata="Q4495965" start="21354" end="21368" title="H. W. Harkness" label="H. W. Harkness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1938366" start="21741" end="21764" title="HMS Newport (1867)" label="HMS &amp;quot;Newport&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q504761" start="21779" end="21791" title="George Nares" label="George Nares"/>
<link wikidata="Q396266" start="21835" end="21844" title="British Admiralty" label="Admiralty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1724581" start="22228" end="22239" title="Lake Timsah" label="Lake Timsah"/>
<link wikidata="Q217156" start="22604" end="22612" title="Ismailia" label="Ismailia"/>
<link wikidata="Q489192" start="23212" end="23223" title="Anchor Line (steamship company)" label="Anchor Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q2682100" start="23450" end="23460" title="Cost overrun" label="final cost"/>
<link wikidata="Q7646943" start="23647" end="23661" title="Sursock family" label="Sursock family"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781855" start="24166" end="24177" title="net tonnage" label="net tonnage"/>
<link wikidata="Q2753293" start="24191" end="24205" title="Moorsom System" label="Moorsom System"/>
<link wikidata="Q178803" start="24720" end="24731" title="Global trade" label="world trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753108" start="24751" end="24785" title="First transcontinental railroad" label="American transcontinental railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q179848" start="24909" end="24940" title="European colonization of Africa" label="European colonization of Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q695566" start="25003" end="25016" title="Panic of 1873" label="Panic of 1873"/>
<link wikidata="Q4092" start="25127" end="25144" title="Cape of Good Hope" label="Cape of Good Hope"/>
<link wikidata="Q159378" start="25247" end="25265" title="Isma&amp;#x27;il Pasha" label="Isma&amp;#x27;il Pasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q616939" start="25546" end="25560" title="Anglo-Egyptian War" label="invade in 1882"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="25630" end="25644" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q336487" start="25695" end="25728" title="Evelyn Baring, 1st Earl of Cromer" label="Evelyn Baring, 1st Earl of Cromer"/>
<link wikidata="Q72499" start="25885" end="25908" title="Mediterranean region" label="Mediterranean countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q306335" start="26323" end="26345" title="Österreichischer Lloyd" label="Österreichischer Lloyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q546" start="26430" end="26437" title="Trieste" label="Trieste"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112627" start="26842" end="26863" title="Queensland Government" label="Queensland Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="26867" end="26876" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q34932" start="27106" end="27125" title="Brisbane" label="Brisbane, Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q761454" start="27148" end="27176" title="Convention of Constantinople" label="Convention of Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q127878" start="27307" end="27314" title="Khedive" label="Khedive"/>
<link wikidata="Q374306" start="27315" end="27321" title="Tewfik Pasha" label="Tewfiq"/>
<link wikidata="Q2143253" start="27338" end="27350" title="Urabi Revolt" label="Urabi Revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="27480" end="27487" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2382729" start="27488" end="27494" title="First Suez Offensive" label="attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="27515" end="27530" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q617634" start="27542" end="27571" title="Anglo-Egyptian Treaty of 1936" label="Anglo-Egyptian Treaty of 1936"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="27630" end="27642" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q218678" start="27749" end="27770" title="North Africa Campaign" label="North Africa Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q43056" start="27815" end="27819" title="Axis powers" label="Axis"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="28155" end="28167" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q38891" start="28280" end="28289" title="Aswan Dam" label="Aswan Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q39524" start="28310" end="28328" title="Gamal Abdel Nasser" label="Gamal Abdel Nasser"/>
<link wikidata="Q178564" start="28342" end="28355" title="nationalization" label="nationalising"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542301" start="28409" end="28429" title="Suez Canal Authority" label="Suez Canal Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q208157" start="28569" end="28585" title="Straits of Tiran" label="Straits of Tiran"/>
<link wikidata="Q49101" start="28624" end="28635" title="Suez Crisis" label="Suez Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3176586" start="28735" end="28753" title="Protocol of Sèvres" label="Protocol of Sèvres"/>
<link wikidata="Q36755" start="28774" end="28789" title="Sinai Peninsula" label="Sinai Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915155" start="28863" end="28875" title="Operation Musketeer (1956)" label="Anglo-French"/>
<link wikidata="Q128604" start="29257" end="29274" title="Lester B. Pearson" label="Lester B. Pearson"/>
<link wikidata="Q16927562" start="29543" end="29551" title="Mandate (international law)" label="mandated"/>
<link wikidata="Q25224" start="29754" end="29762" title="Pound sterling" label="sterling"/>
<link wikidata="Q35637" start="29927" end="29944" title="Nobel Peace Prize" label="Nobel Peace Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q113946324" start="30008" end="30028" title="Closure of the Suez Canal (1956–1957)" label="the canal was closed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369193" start="30115" end="30119" title="United Nations Emergency Force" label="UNEF"/>
<link wikidata="Q49092" start="30272" end="30293" title="1948 Arab–Israeli War" label="1948 Arab–Israeli War"/>
<link wikidata="Q999143" start="30467" end="30491" title="1949 Armistice Agreements" label="1949 armistice agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369193" start="30525" end="30529" title="United Nations Emergency Force" label="UNEF"/>
<link wikidata="Q36755" start="30561" end="30576" title="Sinai Peninsula" label="Sinai Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q208157" start="30728" end="30744" title="Straits of Tiran" label="Straits of Tiran"/>
<link wikidata="Q49077" start="30779" end="30790" title="Six-Day War" label="Six-Day War"/>
<link wikidata="Q58967" start="30792" end="30806" title="Israel Defense Forces" label="Israeli forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q39524" start="31061" end="31079" title="Gamal Abdel Nasser" label="Gamal Abdel Nasser"/>
<link wikidata="Q490516" start="31644" end="31656" title="Yellow Fleet" label="Yellow Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q49100" start="31770" end="31784" title="Yom Kippur War" label="Yom Kippur War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2704666" start="31813" end="31827" title="Operation Badr (1973)" label="Operation Badr"/>
<link wikidata="Q7097332" start="32472" end="32493" title="Operation Nimbus Moon" label="Operation Nimbus Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q474748" start="32499" end="32522" title="amphibious assault ship" label="amphibious assault ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q5366216" start="32523" end="32554" title="USS Inchon (LPH-12)" label="USS &amp;quot;Inchon (LPH-12)&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q482538" start="32590" end="32596" title="CH-53 Sea Stallion" label="RH-53D"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867591" start="32759" end="32792" title="USS Barnstable County" label="USS &amp;quot;Barnstable County&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="32816" end="32826" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5634975" start="33006" end="33028" title="HMS Wilton (M1116)" label="HMS &amp;quot;Wilton&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5631183" start="33073" end="33095" title="HMS Abdiel (N21)" label="HMS &amp;quot;Abdiel&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q42013" start="33452" end="33463" title="Anwar Sadat" label="Anwar Sadat"/>
<link wikidata="Q334871" start="33597" end="33609" title="Reza Pahlavi, Crown Prince of Iran" label="Reza Pahlavi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369193" start="33634" end="33638" title="United Nations Emergency Force" label="UNEF"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129412" start="33843" end="33868" title="Egypt–Israel peace treaty" label="Egypt–Israel peace treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="33939" end="33951" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q37470" start="33959" end="33978" title="UN Security Council" label="UN Security Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q858" start="33998" end="34003" title="Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069653" start="34082" end="34115" title="Multinational Force and Observers" label="Multinational Force and Observers"/>
<link wikidata="Q15618993" start="34367" end="34385" title="President of Egypt" label="President of Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q307871" start="34387" end="34407" title="Abdel Fattah el-Sisi" label="Abdel Fattah el-Sisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q18211063" start="34502" end="34516" title="New Suez Canal" label="New Suez Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q106185868" start="34816" end="34847" title="2021 Suez Canal obstruction" label="grounding of the Chinese vessel"/>
<link wikidata="Q104378621" start="34848" end="34858" title="Ever Given" label="Ever Given"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542301" start="35024" end="35044" title="Suez Canal Authority" label="Suez Canal Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q55654534" start="35506" end="35538" title="Evergreen G-class container ship" label="Evergreen G-class container ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q104378621" start="35545" end="35555" title="Ever Given" label="Ever Given"/>
<link wikidata="Q706946" start="35585" end="35601" title="Evergreen Marine" label="Evergreen Marine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1662481" start="36786" end="36796" title="IHS Markit" label="IHS Markit"/>
<link wikidata="Q135635" start="36871" end="36894" title="Boston Consulting Group" label="Boston Consulting Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q11456" start="37049" end="37062" title="semiconductor" label="semiconductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4092" start="37400" end="37417" title="Cape of Good Hope" label="Cape of Good Hope"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="37777" end="37786" title="Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q119605244" start="38600" end="38615" title="Xin Hai Tong" label="Xin Hai Tong 23"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210950" start="38884" end="38891" title="channel (geography)" label="channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q18211063" start="38969" end="38983" title="New Suez Canal" label="New Suez Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q244777" start="39317" end="39322" title="draft (hull)" label="draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332978" start="39334" end="39348" title="deadweight ton" label="deadweight ton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2376482" start="39404" end="39408" title="beam (nautical)" label="beam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7350" start="39498" end="39510" title="Panama Canal" label="Panama Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290804" start="39515" end="39522" title="Suezmax" label="Suezmax"/>
<link wikidata="Q852387" start="39556" end="39563" title="Panamax" label="Panamax"/>
<link wikidata="Q852387" start="39568" end="39579" title="New Panamax" label="New Panamax"/>
<link wikidata="Q241157" start="40194" end="40206" title="Safe water mark" label="Fairway Buoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q105731" start="40240" end="40245" title="canal lock" label="locks"/>
<link wikidata="Q8070" start="40460" end="40467" title="tsunami" label="tsunami"/>
<link wikidata="Q5603262" start="40654" end="40664" title="El Qantara" label="El Qantara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362362" start="40910" end="40915" title="Wake (physics)" label="wakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542301" start="41280" end="41300" title="Suez Canal Authority" label="Suez Canal Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q191826" start="41846" end="41850" title="Tugboat" label="tugs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3015909" start="42577" end="42592" title="Dar Al-Handasah" label="Dar Al-Handasah"/>
<link wikidata="Q611964" start="43666" end="43683" title="Suez Canal Bridge" label="Suez Canal Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5603262" start="43769" end="43779" title="El Qantara" label="El Qantara"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="43784" end="43790" title="Arabic" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1081154" start="43955" end="43961" title="Kajima" label="Kajima"/>
<link wikidata="Q610013" start="43965" end="43989" title="El Ferdan Railway Bridge" label="El Ferdan Railway Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q217156" start="44002" end="44010" title="Ismailia" label="Ismailia"/>
<link wikidata="Q950431" start="44055" end="44072" title="swing bridge" label="swing-span bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q56886334" start="44594" end="44608" title="Ahmed Mansi" label="Ahmed el-Mansy"/>
<link wikidata="Q36755" start="44806" end="44811" title="Sinai Peninsula" label="Sinai"/>
<link wikidata="Q609324" start="44841" end="44859" title="Ahmed Hamdi Tunnel" label="Ahmed Hamdi Tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q205193" start="45068" end="45106" title="Suez Canal overhead powerline crossing" label="Suez Canal overhead powerline crossing"/>
<link wikidata="Q609324" start="45546" end="45557" title="Ahmed Hamdi Tunnel" label="Ahmed Hamdi"/>
<link wikidata="Q134514" start="45588" end="45592" title="Suez" label="Suez"/>
<link wikidata="Q72499" start="45731" end="45754" title="Mediterranean region" label="Mediterranean countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q546" start="45940" end="45947" title="Trieste" label="Trieste"/>
<link wikidata="Q27509" start="45979" end="45993" title="Central Europe" label="Central Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q27509" start="46446" end="46453" title="Central Europe" label="Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q27468" start="46458" end="46472" title="Eastern Europe" label="Eastern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997" start="46756" end="46770" title="carbon dioxide" label="carbon dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q27407" start="46880" end="46891" title="East Africa" label="East Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q72499" start="46900" end="46920" title="Mediterranean region" label="Mediterranean region"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="47225" end="47233" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q19692715" start="47322" end="47350" title="Belt and Road Initiative" label="Chinese Silk Road Initiative"/>
<link wikidata="Q58976" start="47384" end="47391" title="Piraeus" label="Piraeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q546" start="47396" end="47403" title="Trieste" label="Trieste"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917" start="47521" end="47524" title="USD" label="USD"/>
<link wikidata="Q191891" start="47533" end="47544" title="fiscal year" label="fiscal year"/>
<link wikidata="Q4085" start="47796" end="47808" title="Cape Agulhas" label="Cape Agulhas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4092" start="47872" end="47889" title="Cape of Good Hope" label="Cape of Good Hope"/>
<link wikidata="Q1034593" start="48036" end="48045" title="Capesize" label="too large"/>
<link wikidata="Q214451" start="48147" end="48164" title="piracy in Somalia" label="piracy in Somalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q896666" start="48366" end="48382" title="Financial crisis of 2007–2008" label="financial crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q14928" start="48387" end="48397" title="oil tanker" label="oil tanker"/>
<link wikidata="Q526925" start="48571" end="48580" title="Climate change in the Arctic" label="shrinking"/>
<link wikidata="Q25322" start="48581" end="48587" title="Arctic" label="Arctic"/>
<link wikidata="Q213926" start="48588" end="48595" title="sea ice" label="sea ice"/>
<link wikidata="Q21707256" start="48609" end="48627" title="Northern Sea Route" label="Northern Sea Route"/>
<link wikidata="Q14978" start="48982" end="48992" title="icebreaker" label="icebreaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q24879" start="49033" end="49039" title="Bremen" label="Bremen"/>
<link wikidata="Q816230" start="49046" end="49058" title="Beluga Group" label="Beluga Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q41278" start="49216" end="49221" title="Ulsan" label="Ulsan"/>
<link wikidata="Q18097" start="49223" end="49228" title="Korea" label="Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q34370" start="49233" end="49242" title="Rotterdam" label="Rotterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q573206" start="49307" end="49317" title="windjammer" label="windjammer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2300997" start="49340" end="49356" title="Grain race" label="Great Grain Race"/>
<link wikidata="Q4078" start="49424" end="49433" title="Cape Horn" label="Cape Horn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2504416" start="49677" end="49686" title="High-speed railway to Eilat" label="a railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q134762" start="49717" end="49722" title="Eilat" label="Eilat"/>
<link wikidata="Q162843" start="49735" end="49740" title="Negev" label="Negev"/>
<link wikidata="Q526440" start="50109" end="50121" title="Bitter Lakes" label="Bitter Lakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778580" start="50982" end="51002" title="Lessepsian migration" label="Lessepsian migration"/>
<link wikidata="Q7173" start="51267" end="51283" title="marine biologist" label="marine biologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065449" start="51417" end="51427" title="introduced species" label="introduced"/>
<link wikidata="Q123452" start="51609" end="51616" title="endemism" label="endemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q429283" start="51961" end="51993" title="Mediterranean Science Commission" label="Mediterranean Science Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q7655573" start="52277" end="52294" title="Sweet Water Canal" label="Sweet Water Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q179528" start="52300" end="52314" title="Nile Delta" label="the Nile delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2538734" start="52321" end="52333" title="Wadi Tumilat" label="Wadi Tumilat"/>
<link wikidata="Q38891" start="52625" end="52639" title="Aswan High Dam" label="Aswan High Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q179528" start="52822" end="52832" title="Nile Delta" label="Nile Delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q31079" start="53111" end="53120" title="Port Said Governorate" label="Port Said"/>
<link wikidata="Q31067" start="53122" end="53130" title="Ismailia Governorate" label="Ismailia"/>
<link wikidata="Q31070" start="53135" end="53139" title="Suez Governorate" label="Suez"/>
<link wikidata="Q18211063" start="53196" end="53231" title="Suez Canal Area Development Project" label="Suez Canal Area Development Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q22935756" start="53277" end="53291" title="East Port Said Industrial Zone" label="East Port Said"/>
<link wikidata="Q405881" start="53308" end="53318" title="Ain Sokhna" label="Ain Sokhna"/>
<link wikidata="Q238452" start="53390" end="53395" title="Arish" label="Arish"/>
<link wikidata="Q867603" start="53400" end="53406" title="El Tor, Egypt" label="El Tor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032615" start="53620" end="53639" title="Canal des Deux Mers" label="Canal des Deux Mers"/>
<link wikidata="Q428072" start="53642" end="53661" title="Container transport" label="Container transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q182873" start="53664" end="53677" title="Corinth Canal" label="Corinth Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2935932" start="53680" end="53694" title="Istanbul Canal" label="Istanbul Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q11149509" start="53697" end="53715" title="Maritime Silk Road" label="Maritime Silk Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q17009869" start="53718" end="53746" title="Mediterranean–Dead Sea Canal" label="Mediterranean–Dead Sea Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q304121" start="53749" end="53764" title="New Imperialism" label="New Imperialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q18211063" start="53767" end="53781" title="New Suez Canal" label="New Suez Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7350" start="53784" end="53796" title="Panama Canal" label="Panama Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1971405" start="53799" end="53832" title="Red Sea–Dead Sea Water Conveyance" label="Red Sea–Dead Sea Water Conveyance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290804" start="53835" end="53842" title="Suezmax" label="Suezmax"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324574" start="53845" end="53858" title="Qantara Sharq" label="Qantara Sharq"/>
<link wikidata="Q490516" start="53861" end="53873" title="Yellow Fleet" label="Yellow Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q21524653" start="56340" end="56361" title="Eva Matthews Sanford" label="Sanford, Eva Matthews"/>
<link wikidata="Q48989" start="57240" end="57243" title="ZDF" label="ZDF"/>
<link wikidata="Q936" start="57576" end="57589" title="OpenStreetMap" label="OpenStreetMap"/>
</links>
</doc>
