<doc id="29970" wikidata="Q12876" url="?curid=29970" title="Tank">
<text>A tank is an armoured fighting vehicle intended as a primary offensive weapon in front-line ground combat. Tank designs are a balance of heavy firepower, strong armour, and battlefield mobility provided by tracks and a powerful engine; their main armament is often mounted within a turret. They are a mainstay of modern 20th and 21st century ground forces and a key part of combined arms combat.

Modern tanks are versatile mobile land weapons platforms whose main armament is a large-calibre tank gun mounted in a rotating gun turret, supplemented by machine guns or other ranged weapons such as anti-tank guided missiles or rocket launchers. They have heavy vehicle armour which provides protection for the crew, the vehicle&#x27;s munition storage, fuel tank and propulsion systems. The use of tracks rather than wheels provides improved operational mobility which allows the tank to overcome rugged terrain and adverse conditions such as mud and ice/snow better than wheeled vehicles, and thus be more flexibly positioned at advantageous locations on the battlefield. These features enable the tank to perform in a variety of intense combat situations, simultaneously both offensively (with direct fire from their powerful main gun) and defensively (as fire support and defilade for friendly troops due to the near invulnerability to common infantry small arms and good resistance against heavier weapons, although anti-tank weapons used in 2022, some of them man-portable, have demonstrated the ability to destroy older generations of tanks with single shots), all while maintaining the mobility needed to exploit changing tactical situations. Fully integrating tanks into modern military forces spawned a new era of combat, armoured warfare.

Until the invention of the main battle tank, tanks were typically categorized either by weight class (light, medium, heavy or superheavy tanks) or doctrinal purpose (breakthrough-, cavalry-, infantry-, cruiser-, or reconnaissance tanks). Some are larger and more thickly armoured and with large guns, while others are smaller, lightly armoured, and equipped with a smaller caliber and lighter gun. These smaller tanks move over terrain with speed and agility and can perform a reconnaissance role in addition to engaging hostile targets. The smaller, faster tank would not normally engage in battle with a larger, heavily armoured tank, except during a surprise flanking manoeuvre.

==Etymology==
The word &quot;tank&quot; was first applied in a military context to British &quot;landships&quot; in 1915 to keep their nature secret before they entered service. 

===Origins===
On 24 December 1915, a meeting took place of the Inter-Departmental Conference (including representatives of the Director of Naval Construction&#x27;s Committee, the Admiralty, the Ministry of Munitions, and the War Office). Its purpose was to discuss the progress of the plans for what were described as &quot;Caterpillar Machine Gun Destroyers or Land Cruisers.&quot; In his autobiography, Albert Gerald Stern (Secretary to the Landship Committee, later head of the Mechanical Warfare Supply Department) says that at that meeting:

He incorrectly added, &quot;and the name has now been adopted by all countries in the world.&quot;

Lieutenant-Colonel Ernest Swinton, who was secretary to the meeting, says that he was instructed to find a non-committal word when writing his report of the proceedings. In the evening he discussed it with a fellow officer, Lt-Col Walter Dally Jones, and they chose the word &quot;tank&quot;. &quot;That night, in the draft report of the conference, the word &#x27;tank&#x27; was employed in its new sense for the first time.&quot; Swinton&#x27;s &quot;Notes on the Employment of Tanks&quot;, in which he uses the word throughout, was published in January 1916.

In July 1918, &quot;Popular Science Monthly&quot; reported:
(*F.J. Gardiner, F.R.Hist.S.)
D&#x27;Eyncourt&#x27;s account differs from Swinton&#x27;s and Tritton&#x27;s:

This appears to be an imperfect recollection. He says that the name problem arose &quot;when we shipped the first two vehicles to France the following year&quot; (August 1916), but by that time the name &quot;tank&quot; had been in use for eight months. The tanks were labelled &quot;With Care to Petrograd,&quot; but the belief was encouraged that they were a type of snowplough.

===International===
The term &quot;tank&quot; is used throughout the English speaking world, but other countries use different terminology. In France, the second country to use tanks in battle, the word or was adopted initially, but was then, largely at the insistence of Colonel J.B.E. Estienne, rejected in favour of (&quot;assault vehicle&quot;) or simply (&quot;vehicle&quot;). During World War I, German sources tended to refer to British tanks as and to their own as . Later, tanks became referred to as &quot;&quot; (lit. &quot;armour&quot;), a shortened form of the full term &quot;&quot;, literally &quot;armoured fighting vehicle&quot;. In the Arab world, tanks are called (after a type of siege engine). In Italian, a tank is a &quot;&quot; (lit. &quot;armed wagon&quot;), without reference to its armour. Norway uses the term and Sweden the similar (lit. &quot;battle wagon&quot;, also used for &quot;chariots&quot;), whereas Denmark uses (lit. fight wagon). Finland uses (armoured wagon), although is also used colloquially. The Polish name , derived from verb (&quot;to crawl&quot;), is used, depicting the way of machine&#x27;s movement and its speed. In Hungarian the tank is called (combat wagon), albeit is also common. In Japanese, the term (, lit. &quot;battle vehicle&quot;) is taken from Chinese and used, and this term is likewise borrowed into Korean as (/); more recent Chinese literature uses the English-derived (tank) as opposed to (battle vehicle) used in earlier days.

==Development overview==
The modern tank is the result of a century of development from the first primitive armoured vehicles, due to improvements in technology such as the internal combustion engine, which allowed the rapid movement of heavy armoured vehicles. As a result of these advances, tanks underwent tremendous shifts in capability in the years since their first appearance. Tanks in World War I were developed separately and simultaneously by Great Britain and France as a means to break the deadlock of trench warfare on the Western Front. The first British prototype, nicknamed Little Willie, was constructed at William Foster &amp; Co. in Lincoln, England in 1915, with leading roles played by Major Walter Gordon Wilson who designed the gearbox and hull, and by William Tritton of William Foster and Co., who designed the track plates. This was a prototype of a new design that would become the British Army&#x27;s Mark I tank, the first tank used in combat in September 1916 during the Battle of the Somme. The name &quot;tank&quot; was adopted by the British during the early stages of their development, as a security measure to conceal their purpose (see etymology). While the British and French built thousands of tanks in World War I, Germany was unconvinced of the tank&#x27;s potential, and did not have enough resources, thus it built only twenty.

Tanks of the interwar period evolved into the much larger and more powerful designs of World War II. Important new concepts of armoured warfare were developed; the Soviet Union launched the first mass tank/air attack at Khalkhin Gol (Nomonhan) in August 1939, and later developed the T-34, one of the predecessors of the main battle tank. Less than two weeks later, Germany began their large-scale armoured campaigns that would become known as blitzkrieg (&quot;lightning war&quot;) – massed concentrations of tanks combined with motorized and mechanized infantry, artillery and air power designed to break through the enemy front and collapse enemy resistance.

The widespread introduction of high-explosive anti-tank warheads during the second half of World War II led to lightweight infantry-carried anti-tank weapons such as the Panzerfaust, which could destroy some types of tanks. Tanks in the Cold War were designed with these weapons in mind, and led to greatly improved armour types during the 1960s, especially composite armour. Improved engines, transmissions and suspensions allowed tanks of this period to grow larger. Aspects of gun technology changed significantly as well, with advances in shell design and aiming technology.

During the Cold War, the main battle tank concept arose and became a key component of modern armies. In the 21st century, with the increasing role of asymmetrical warfare and the end of the Cold War, that also contributed to the increase of cost-effective anti-tank rocket propelled grenades (RPGs) worldwide and its successors, the ability of tanks to operate independently has declined. Modern tanks are more frequently organized into combined arms units which involve the support of infantry, who may accompany the tanks in infantry fighting vehicles, and supported by reconnaissance or ground-attack aircraft.

==History==

===Conceptions===
The tank is the 20th-century realization of an ancient concept: that of providing troops with mobile protection and firepower. The internal combustion engine, armour plate, and continuous track were key innovations leading to the invention of the modern tank.

During the 119 BC Battle of Mobei of the Han–Xiongnu War, the Han general Wei Qing led his army through a fatiguing expeditionary march across the Gobi desert only to find Yizhixie chanyu&#x27;s main force waiting to encircle them on the other side. Using armored heavy wagons known as &quot;Wu Gang Wagon&quot; (Chinese: 武剛車) in ring formations that provided Chinese archers, crossbowmen and infantry protection from the Xiongnu&#x27;s powerful cavalry charges, and allowed Han troops to utilize their ranged weapons&#x27; advantages of precision. This forced a stalemate and allowed time for his troops to recover strength, before using the cover of a sandstorm to launch a counteroffensive which overran the nomads.
Many sources imply that Leonardo da Vinci and H. G. Wells in some way foresaw or &quot;invented&quot; the tank. Leonardo&#x27;s late-15th-century drawings of what some describe as a &quot;tank&quot; show a man-powered, wheeled vehicle surrounded by cannons. However, the human crew would have difficulty moving the heavy vehicle over long distances, while usage of animals was problematic in a space so confined. In the 15th century, Jan Žižka built armoured wagons known as ‘&quot;Wagenburg&quot;’ containing cannons and used them effectively in several battles during the Hussite-wars. The continuous &quot;caterpillar track&quot; arose from attempts to improve the mobility of wheeled vehicles by spreading their weight, reducing ground pressure, and increasing their traction. Experiments can be traced back as far as the 17th century, and by the late nineteenth they existed in various recognizable and practical forms in several countries.

It is frequently claimed that Richard Lovell Edgeworth created a caterpillar track. It is true that in 1770 he patented a &quot;machine, that should carry and lay down its own road&quot;, but this was Edgeworth&#x27;s choice of words. His own account in his autobiography is of a horse-drawn wooden carriage on eight retractable legs, capable of lifting itself over high walls. The description bears no similarity to a caterpillar track. Armoured trains appeared in the mid-19th century, and various armoured steam and petrol-engined vehicles were also proposed.

The machines described in Wells&#x27;s 1903 short story &quot;The Land Ironclads&quot; are a step closer, insofar as they are armour-plated, have an internal power plant, and are able to cross trenches. Some aspects of the story foresee the tactical use and impact of the tanks that later came into being. However, Wells&#x27;s vehicles were driven by steam and moved on pedrail wheels, technologies that were already outdated at the time of writing. After seeing British tanks in 1916, Wells denied having &quot;invented&quot; them, writing, &quot;Yet let me state at once that I was not their prime originator. I took up an idea, manipulated it slightly, and handed it on.&quot; It is, though, possible that one of the British tank pioneers, Ernest Swinton, was subconsciously or otherwise influenced by Wells&#x27;s tale.

The first combinations of the three principal components of the tank appeared in the decade before World War One. In 1903, Captain Léon René Levavasseur of the French artillery proposed mounting a field gun in an armoured box on tracks. Major William E. Donohue, of the British Army&#x27;s Mechanical Transport Committee, suggested fixing a gun and armoured shield on a British type of track-driven vehicle. The first armoured car was produced in Austria in 1904. However, all were restricted to rails or reasonably passable terrain. It was the development of a practical caterpillar track that provided the necessary independent, all-terrain mobility.

In a memorandum of 1908, Antarctic explorer Robert Falcon Scott presented his view that man-hauling to the South Pole was impossible and that motor traction was needed. Snow vehicles did not yet exist, however, and so his engineer Reginald Skelton developed the idea of a caterpillar track for snow surfaces. These tracked motors were built by the Wolseley Tool and Motor Car Company in Birmingham and tested in Switzerland and Norway, and can be seen in action in Herbert Ponting&#x27;s 1911 documentary film of Scott&#x27;s Antarctic Terra Nova Expedition. Scott died during the expedition in 1912, but expedition member and biographer Apsley Cherry-Garrard credited Scott&#x27;s &quot;motors&quot; with the inspiration for the British World War I tanks, writing: &quot;Scott never knew their true possibilities; for they were the direct ancestors of the &#x27;tanks&#x27; in France&quot;.

In 1911, a Lieutenant Engineer in the Austrian Army, Günther Burstyn, presented to the Austrian and Prussian War Ministries plans for a light, three-man tank with a gun in a revolving turret, the so-called Burstyn-Motorgeschütz. In the same year an Australian civil engineer named Lancelot de Mole submitted a basic design for a tracked, armoured vehicle to the British War Office. In Russia, Vasiliy Mendeleev designed a tracked vehicle containing a large naval gun. All of these ideas were rejected and, by 1914, forgotten (although it was officially acknowledged after the war that de Mole&#x27;s design was at least the equal to the initial British tanks). Various individuals continued to contemplate the use of tracked vehicles for military applications, but by the outbreak of the War no one in a position of responsibility in any army seems to have given much thought to tanks.

===World War I===

====United Kingdom====

From late 1914 a small number of middle-ranking British Army officers tried to persuade the War Office and the Government to consider the creation of armoured vehicles. Amongst their suggestions was the use of caterpillar tractors, but although the Army used many such vehicles for towing heavy guns, it could not be persuaded that they could be adapted as armoured vehicles. The consequence was that early tank development in the United Kingdom was carried out by the Royal Navy.

As the result of an approach by Royal Naval Air Service officers who had been operating armoured cars on the Western Front, the First Lord of the Admiralty, Winston Churchill, formed the Landship Committee, on 20 February 1915. The Director of Naval Construction for the Royal Navy, Eustace Tennyson d&#x27;Eyncourt, was appointed to head the Committee in view of his experience with the engineering methods it was felt might be required; the two other members were naval officers, and a number of industrialists were engaged as consultants. So many played a part in its long and complicated development that it is not possible to name any individual as the sole inventor of the tank.

However leading roles were played by Lt Walter Gordon Wilson R.N. who designed the gearbox and developed practical tracks and by William Tritton whose agricultural machinery company, William Foster &amp; Co. in Lincoln, Lincolnshire, England built the prototypes. On 22 July 1915, a commission was placed to design a machine that could cross a trench 4 ft wide. Secrecy surrounded the project with the designers locking themselves in a room at the White Hart Hotel in Lincoln. The committee&#x27;s first design, Little Willie, ran for the first time in September 1915 and served to develop the form of the track but an improved design, better able to cross trenches, swiftly followed and in January 1916 the prototype, nicknamed &quot;Mother&quot;, was adopted as the design for future tanks. The first order for tanks was placed on 12 February 1916, and a second on 21 April. Fosters built 37 (all &quot;male&quot;), and Metropolitan Railway Carriage and Wagon Company, of Birmingham, 113 (38 &quot;male&quot; and 75 &quot;female&quot;), a total of 150. Production models of &quot;Male&quot; tanks (armed with naval cannon and machine guns) and &quot;Females&quot; (carrying only machine-guns) would go on to fight in history&#x27;s first tank action at the Somme in September 1916. Great Britain produced about 2,600 tanks of various types during the war. The first tank to engage in battle was designated &quot;D1&quot;, a British Mark I Male, during the Battle of Flers-Courcelette (part of the wider Somme offensive) on 15 September 1916. Bert Chaney, a nineteen-year-old signaller with the 7th London Territorial Battalion, reported that &quot;three huge mechanical monsters such as [he] had never seen before&quot; rumbled their way onto the battlefield, &quot;frightening the Jerries out of their wits and making them scuttle like frightened rabbits.&quot; When the news of the first use of the tanks emerged, Prime Minister David Lloyd George commented,

====France====
Whilst several experimental machines were investigated in France, it was a colonel of artillery, J.B.E. Estienne, who directly approached the Commander-in-Chief with detailed plans for a tank on caterpillar tracks, in late 1915. The result was two largely unsatisfactory types of tank, 400 each of the Schneider and Saint-Chamond, both based on the Holt tractor.

The following year, the French pioneered the use of a full 360° rotation turret in a tank for the first time, with the creation of the Renault FT light tank, with the turret containing the tank&#x27;s main armament. In addition to the traversable turret, another innovative feature of the FT was its engine located at the rear. This pattern, with the gun located in a mounted turret and the engine at the back, has become the standard for most succeeding tanks across the world even to this day. The FT was the most numerous tank of the war; over 3,000 were made by late 1918.

====Germany====
Germany fielded very few tanks during World War I, and started development only after encountering British tanks on the Somme. The A7V, the only type made, was introduced in March 1918 with just 20 being produced during the war. The first tank &quot;versus&quot; tank action took place on 24 April 1918 at the Second Battle of Villers-Bretonneux, France, when three British Mark IVs met three German A7Vs. Captured British Mk IVs formed the bulk of Germany&#x27;s tank forces during World War I; about 35 were in service at any one time. Plans to expand the tank programme were under way when the War ended.

====Other nations====
The United States Tank Corps used tanks supplied by France and Great Britain during World War I. Production of American-built tanks had just begun when the War came to an end. Italy also manufactured two Fiat 2000s towards the end of the war, too late to see service. Russia independently built and trialed two prototypes early in the War; the tracked, two-man Vezdekhod and the huge Lebedenko, but neither went into production. A tracked self-propelled gun was also designed but not produced.

Although tank tactics developed rapidly during the war, piecemeal deployments, mechanical problems, and poor mobility limited the military significance of the tank in World War I, and the tank did not fulfil its promise of rendering trench warfare obsolete. Nonetheless, it was clear to military thinkers on both sides that tanks in some way could have a significant role in future conflicts.

===Interwar period===
In the interwar period tanks underwent further mechanical development. In terms of tactics, J.F.C. Fuller&#x27;s doctrine of spearhead attacks with massed tank formations was the basis for work by Heinz Guderian in Germany, Percy Hobart in Britain, Adna R. Chaffee, Jr., in the US, Charles de Gaulle in France, and Mikhail Tukhachevsky in the USSR. Liddell Hart held a more moderate view that all arms – cavalry, infantry and artillery – should be mechanized and work together. The British formed the all-arms Experimental Mechanized Force to test the use of tanks with supporting forces.

In the Second World War only Germany would initially put the theory into practice on a large scale, and it was their superior tactics and French blunders, not superior weapons, that made the &quot;blitzkrieg&quot; so successful in May 1940. For information regarding tank development in this period, see tank development between the wars.

Germany, Italy and the Soviet Union all experimented heavily with tank warfare during their clandestine and &quot;volunteer&quot; involvement in the Spanish Civil War, which saw some of the earliest examples of successful mechanized combined arms —such as when Republican troops, equipped with Soviet-supplied tanks and supported by aircraft, eventually routed Italian troops fighting for the Nationalists in the seven-day Battle of Guadalajara in 1937. However, of the nearly 700 tanks deployed during this conflict, only about 64 tanks representing the &quot;Franco&quot; faction and 331 from the &quot;Republican&quot; side were equipped with cannon, and of those 64 nearly all were World War I vintage Renault FT tanks, while the 331 Soviet supplied machines had 45mm main guns and were of 1930s manufacture. The balance of &quot;Nationalist&quot; tanks were machine gun armed. The primary lesson learned from this war was that machine gun armed tanks had to be equipped with cannon, with the associated armour inherent to modern tanks.

The five-month-long war between the Soviet Union and the Japanese 6th Army at &quot;Khalkhin Gol&quot; (Nomonhan) in 1939 brought home some lessons. In this conflict, the Soviets fielded over two thousand tanks, to the around 73 cannon armed tanks deployed by the Japanese, the major difference being that Japanese armour were equipped with diesel engines as opposed to the Russian tanks equipped with petrol engines. After General Georgy Zhukov inflicted a defeat on the Japanese 6th Army with his massed combined tank and air attack, the Soviets learned a lesson on the use of gasoline engines, and quickly incorporated those newly found experiences into their new T-34 medium tank during World War II.

Prior to World War II, the tactics and strategy of deploying tank forces underwent a revolution. In August 1939, Soviet General Georgy Zhukov used the combined force of tanks and airpower at Nomonhan against the Japanese 6th Army; Heinz Guderian, a tactical theoretician who was heavily involved in the formation of the first independent German tank force, said &quot;Where tanks are, the front is&quot;, and this concept became a reality in World War II. Guderian&#x27;s armoured warfare ideas, combined with Germany&#x27;s existing doctrines of &quot;Bewegungskrieg&quot; (&quot;maneuver warfare&quot;) and infiltration tactics from World War I, became the basis of blitzkrieg in the opening stages of World War II.

===World War II===
During World War II, the first conflict in which armoured vehicles were critical to battlefield success, the tank and related tactics developed rapidly. Armoured forces proved capable of tactical victory in an unprecedentedly short amount of time, yet new anti-tank weaponry showed that the tank was not invulnerable. During the Invasion of Poland, tanks performed in a more traditional role in close cooperation with infantry units, but in the Battle of France deep independent armoured penetrations were executed by the Germans, a technique later called &quot;blitzkrieg&quot;. Blitzkrieg used innovative combined arms tactics and radios in all of the tanks to provide a level of tactical flexibility and power that surpassed that of the Allied armour. The French Army, with tanks equal or superior to the German tanks in both quality and quantity, employed a linear defensive strategy in which the armoured cavalry units were made subservient to the needs of the infantry armies to cover their entrenchment in Belgium. In addition, they lacked radios in many of their tanks and headquarters, which limited their ability to respond to German attacks.

In accordance with blitzkrieg methods, German tanks bypassed enemy strongpoints and could radio for close air support to destroy them, or leave them to the infantry. A related development, motorized infantry, allowed some of the troops to keep up with the tanks and create highly mobile combined arms forces. The defeat of a major military power within weeks shocked the rest of the world, spurring tank and anti-tank weapon development.
The North African Campaign also provided an important battleground for tanks, as the flat, desolate terrain with relatively few obstacles or urban environments was ideal for conducting mobile armoured warfare. However, this battlefield also showed the importance of logistics, especially in an armoured force, as the principal warring armies, the German Afrika Korps and the British Eighth Army, often outpaced their supply trains in repeated attacks and counter-attacks on each other, resulting in complete stalemate. This situation would not be resolved until 1942, when during the Second Battle of El Alamein, the Afrika Korps, crippled by disruptions in their supply lines, had 95% of its tanks destroyed and was forced to retreat by a massively reinforced Eighth Army, the first in a series of defeats that would eventually lead to the surrender of the remaining Axis forces in Tunisia.
When Germany launched its invasion of the Soviet Union, Operation Barbarossa, the Soviets had a superior tank design, the T-34. A lack of preparations for the Axis surprise attack, mechanical problems, poor training of the crews and incompetent leadership caused the Soviet machines to be surrounded and destroyed in large numbers. However, interference from Adolf Hitler, the geographic scale of the conflict, the dogged resistance of the Soviet combat troops, and the Soviets&#x27; massive advantages in manpower and production capability prevented a repeat of the German successes of 1940. Despite early successes against the Soviets, the Germans were forced to up-gun their Panzer IVs, and to design and build both the larger and more expensive Tiger heavy tank in 1942, and the Panther medium tank the following year. In doing so, the &quot;Wehrmacht&quot; denied the infantry and other support arms the production priorities that they needed to remain equal partners with the increasingly sophisticated tanks, in turn violating the principle of combined arms they had pioneered. Soviet developments following the invasion included upgunning the T-34, development of self-propelled anti-tank guns such as the SU-152, and deployment of the IS-2 in the closing stages of the war, with the T-34 being the most produced tank of World War II, totalling up to some 65,000 examples by May 1945.
Much like the Soviets, when entering World War II six months later (December 1941), the United States&#x27; mass production capacity enabled it to rapidly construct thousands of relatively cheap M4 Sherman medium tanks. A compromise all round, the Sherman was reliable and formed a large part of the Anglo-American ground forces, but in a tank-versus-tank battle was no match for the Panther or Tiger. Numerical and logistical superiority and the successful use of combined arms allowed the Allies to overrun the German forces during the Battle of Normandy. Upgunned versions with the 76 mm gun M1 and the 17-pounder were introduced to improve the M4&#x27;s firepower, but concerns about protection remained—despite the apparent armour deficiencies, a total of some 42,000 Shermans were built and delivered to the Allied nations using it during the war years, a total second only to the T-34.

Tank hulls were modified to produce flame tanks, mobile rocket artillery, and combat engineering vehicles for tasks including mine-clearing and bridging. Specialized self-propelled guns, most of which could double as tank destroyers, were also both developed by the Germans—with their &quot;Sturmgeschütz&quot;, &quot;Panzerjäger&quot; and &quot;Jagdpanzer&quot; vehicles—and the &quot;Samokhodnaya ustanovka&quot; families of AFV&#x27;s for the Soviets: such turretless, casemate-style tank destroyers and assault guns were less complex, stripped down tanks carrying heavy guns, solely firing forward. The firepower and low cost of these vehicles made them attractive but as manufacturing techniques improved and larger turret rings made larger tank guns feasible, the gun turret was recognized as the most effective mounting for the main gun to allow movement in a different direction from firing, enhancing tactical flexibility.

===Cold War===

During the Cold War, tension between the Warsaw Pact countries and North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) countries created an arms race that ensured that tank development proceeded largely as it had during World War II. The essence of tank designs during the Cold War had been hammered out in the closing stages of World War II. Large turrets, capable suspension systems, greatly improved engines, sloped armour and large-caliber (90 mm and larger) guns were standard. Tank design during the Cold War built on this foundation and included improvements to fire control, gyroscopic gun stabilization, communications (primarily radio) and crew comfort and saw the introduction of laser rangefinders and infrared night vision equipment. Armour technology progressed in an ongoing race against improvements in anti-tank weapons, especially antitank guided missiles like the TOW.

Medium tanks of World War II evolved into the &quot;main battle tank&quot; (MBT) of the Cold War and took over the majority of tank roles on the battlefield. This gradual transition occurred in the 1950s and 1960s due to anti-tank guided missiles, sabot ammunition and high-explosive anti-tank warheads. World War II had shown that the speed of a light tank was no substitute for armour &amp; firepower and medium tanks were vulnerable to newer weapon technology, rendering them obsolete.

In a trend started in World War II, economies of scale led to serial production of progressively upgraded models of all major tanks during the Cold War. For the same reason many upgraded post-World War II tanks and their derivatives (for example, the T-55 and T-72) remain in active service around the world, and even an obsolete tank may be the most formidable weapon on battlefields in many parts of the world. Among the tanks of the 1950s were the British Centurion and Soviet T-54/55 in service from 1946, and the US M48 from 1951. These three vehicles formed the bulk of the armoured forces of NATO and the Warsaw Pact throughout much of the Cold War. Lessons learned from tanks such as the Leopard 1, M48 Patton series, Chieftain, and T-72 led to the contemporary Leopard 2, M1 Abrams, Challenger 2, C1 Ariete, T-90 and Merkava IV.

Tanks and anti-tank weapons of the Cold War era saw action in a number of proxy wars like the Korean War, Vietnam War, Indo-Pakistani War of 1971, Soviet–Afghan War and Arab-Israeli conflicts, culminating with the Yom Kippur War. The T-55, for example, has seen action in no fewer than 32 conflicts. In these wars the U.S. or NATO countries and the Soviet Union or China consistently backed opposing forces. Proxy wars were studied by Western and Soviet military analysts and provided a contribution to the Cold War tank development process.

===21st century===
The role of tank vs. tank combat is becoming diminished. Tanks work in concert with infantry in urban warfare by deploying them ahead of the platoon. When engaging enemy infantry, tanks can provide covering fire on the battlefield. Conversely, tanks can spearhead attacks when infantry are deployed in personnel carriers.

Tanks were used to spearhead the initial US invasion of Iraq in 2003. As of 2005, there were 1,100 M1 Abrams used by the United States Army in the course of the Iraq War, and they have proven to have an unexpectedly high level of vulnerability to roadside bombs. A relatively new type of remotely detonated mine, the explosively formed penetrator has been used with some success against American armoured vehicles (particularly the Bradley fighting vehicle). However, with upgrades to their armour in the rear, M1s have proven invaluable in fighting insurgents in urban combat, particularly at the Battle of Fallujah, where the US Marines brought in two extra brigades. Israeli Merkava tanks contain features that enable them to support infantry in low intensity conflicts (LIC) and counter-terrorism operations. Such features are the rear door and rear corridor, enabling the tank to carry infantry and embark safely; the IMI APAM-MP-T multi-purpose ammunition round, advanced C4IS systems and recently: TROPHY active protection system which protects the tank from shoulder-launched anti-tank weapons. During the Second Intifada further modifications were made, designated as &quot;Merkava Mk. 3d Baz LIC&quot;.

====Research and development====
In terms of firepower, the focus of 2010s-era R&amp;D was increased detection capability such as thermal imagers, automated fire control systems for the guns and increased muzzle energy from the gun to improve range, accuracy and armour penetration. The most mature future gun technology is the electrothermal-chemical gun. The XM291 electrothermal-chemical tank gun has gone through successful multiple firing sequences on a modified American M8 Armored Gun System chassis. To improve tank protection, one field of research involves making the tank invisible to radar by adapting stealth technologies originally designed for aircraft. Improvements to camouflage or and attempts to render it invisible through active camouflage, which changes according to where the tank is located, are being pursued. Research is also ongoing in electromagnetic armour systems to disperse or deflect incoming shaped charges, as well as various forms of active protection systems to prevent incoming projectiles (RPGs, missiles, etc.) from striking the tank.

Mobility may be enhanced in future tanks by the use of diesel–electric or turbine–electric series hybrid drives—first used in a primitive, gasoline-engined form with Porsche&#x27;s &quot;Elefant&quot; German tank destroyer of 1943—improving fuel efficiency while reducing the size and weight of the power plant. Furthermore, advances in gas turbine technology, including the use of advanced recuperators, have allowed for reduction in engine volume and mass to less than 1 m3 and 1 metric ton, respectively, while maintaining fuel efficiency similar to that of a diesel engine. In line with the new doctrine of network-centric warfare, the 2010s-era modern battle tank shows increasing sophistication in its electronics and communication systems. The future of tanks has been challenged by the proliferation of relatively inexpensive anti tank guided missiles and rockets during the Russo-Ukrainian War.

==Design==
The three traditional factors determining a tank&#x27;s capability effectiveness are its &quot;firepower&quot;, &quot;protection&quot;, and &quot;mobility&quot;. Firepower is the ability of a tank&#x27;s crew to identify, engage, and destroy enemy tanks and other targets using its large-caliber cannon. Protection is the degree to which the tank&#x27;s armour, profile and camouflage enables the tank crew to evade detection, protect themselves from enemy fire, and retain vehicle functionality during and after combat. Mobility includes how well the tank can be transported by rail, sea, or air to the operational staging area; from the staging area by road or over terrain towards the enemy; and tactical movement by the tank over the battlefield during combat, including traversing of obstacles and rough terrain. The variations of tank designs have been determined by the way these three fundamental features are blended. For instance, in 1937, the French doctrine focused on firepower and protection more than mobility because tanks worked in intimate liaison with the infantry. There was also the case of the development of a heavy cruiser tank, which focused on armour and firepower to challenge Germany&#x27;s Tiger and Panther tanks.

===Classification===

Tanks have been classified by weight, role, or other criteria, that has changed over time and place. Classification is determined by the prevailing theories of armoured warfare, which have been altered in turn by rapid advances in technology. No one classification system works across all periods or all nations; in particular, weight-based classification is inconsistent between countries and eras.

In World War I, the first tank designs focused on crossing wide trenches, requiring very long and large vehicles, such as the British Mark I; these became classified as heavy tanks. Tanks that fulfilled other combat roles were smaller, like the French Renault FT; these were classified as light tanks or tankettes. Many late-war and inter-war tank designs diverged from these according to new, though mostly untried, concepts for future tank roles and tactics. Tank classifications varied considerably according to each nation&#x27;s own tank development, such as &quot;cavalry tanks&quot;, &quot;fast tanks&quot;, and &quot;breakthrough tanks&quot;.

During World War II, many tank concepts were found unsatisfactory and discarded, mostly leaving the more multi-role tanks; these became easier to classify. Tank classes based on weight (and the corresponding transport and logistical needs) led to new definitions of heavy and light tank classes, with medium tanks covering the balance of those between. The British maintained cruiser tanks, focused on speed, and infantry tanks that traded speed for more armour. Tank destroyers are tanks or other armoured fighting vehicles specifically designed to defeat enemy tanks. Assault guns are armoured fighting vehicles that could combine the roles of infantry tanks and tank destroyers. Some tanks were converted to flame tanks, specializing on close-in attacks on enemy strongholds with flamethrowers. As the war went on, tanks tended to become larger and more powerful, shifting some tank classifications and leading to super-heavy tanks.

Experience and technology advances during the Cold War continued to consolidate tank roles. With the worldwide adoption of the modern main battle tank designs, which favour a modular universal design, most other classifications are dropped from modern terminology. All main battle tanks tend to have a good balance of speed, armour, and firepower, even while technology continues to improve all three. Being fairly large, main battle tanks can be complemented with light tanks, armoured personnel carriers, infantry fighting vehicles or similar relatively lighter armoured fighting vehicles, typically in the roles of armoured reconnaissance, amphibious or air assault operations, or against enemies lacking main battle tanks.

===Offensive capabilities===


The main weapon of modern tanks is typically a single, large-caliber cannon mounted in a fully traversing (rotating) gun turret. The typical modern tank gun is a smoothbore weapon capable of firing a variety of ammunition, including armour-piercing kinetic energy penetrators (KEP), also known as armour-piercing discarding sabot (APDS), and/or armour-piercing fin-stabilized discarding sabot (APFSDS) and high-explosive anti-tank (HEAT) shells, and/or high-explosive squash head (HESH) and/or anti-tank guided missiles (ATGM) to destroy armoured targets, as well as high-explosive (HE) shells for shooting at &quot;soft&quot; targets (unarmoured vehicles or troops) or fortifications. Canister shot may be used in close or urban combat situations where the risk of hitting friendly forces with shrapnel from HE rounds is unacceptably high.

A gyroscope is used to stabilise the main gun, allowing it to be effectively aimed and fired at the &quot;short halt&quot; or on the move. Modern tank guns are also commonly fitted with insulating thermal sleeves to reduce gun-barrel warping caused by uneven thermal expansion, bore evacuators to minimise gun firing fumes entering the crew compartment and sometimes muzzle brakes to minimise the effect of recoil on accuracy and rate of fire.

Traditionally, target detection relied on visual identification. This was accomplished from within the tank through telescopic periscopes; often, however, tank commanders would open up the hatch to view the outside surroundings, which improved situational awareness but incurred the penalty of vulnerability to sniper fire. Though several developments in target detection have taken place, these methods are still common practice. In the 2010s, more electronic target detection methods are available.

In some cases spotting rifles were used to confirm proper trajectory and range to a target. These spotting rifles were mounted co-axially to the main gun, and fired tracer ammunition ballistically matched to the gun itself. The gunner would track the movement of the tracer round in flight, and upon impact with a hard surface, it would give off a flash and a puff of smoke, after which the main gun was immediately fired. However this slow method has been mostly superseded by laser rangefinding equipment.

Modern tanks also use sophisticated light intensification and thermal imaging equipment to improve fighting capability at night, in poor weather and in smoke. The accuracy of modern tank guns is pushed to the mechanical limit by computerized fire-control systems. A fire-control system uses a laser rangefinder to determine the range to the target, a thermocouple, anemometer and wind vane to correct for weather effects and a muzzle referencing system to correct for gun-barrel temperature, warping and wear. Two sightings of a target with the range-finder enable calculation of the target movement vector. This information is combined with the known movement of the tank and the principles of ballistics to calculate the elevation and aim point that maximises the probability of hitting the target.

Usually, tanks carry smaller caliber armament for short-range defense where fire from the main weapon would be ineffective or wasteful, for example when engaging infantry, light vehicles or close air support aircraft. A typical complement of secondary weapons is a general-purpose machine gun mounted coaxially with the main gun, and a heavier anti-aircraft-capable machine gun on the turret roof. Some tanks also have a hull-mounted machine gun. These weapons are often modified variants of those used by infantry, and so use the same kinds of ammunition.

===Protection and countermeasures===

The measure of a tank&#x27;s protection is the combination of its ability to avoid detection (due to having a low profile and through the use of camouflage), to avoid being hit by enemy fire, its resistance to the effects of enemy fire, and its capacity to sustain damage whilst still completing its objective, or at least protecting its crew. This is done by a variety of countermeasures, such as armour plating and reactive defenses, as well as more complex ones such as heat-emissions reduction.

In common with most unit types, tanks are subject to additional hazards in dense wooded and urban combat environments which largely negate the advantages of the tank&#x27;s long-range firepower and mobility, limit the crew&#x27;s detection capabilities and can restrict turret traverse. Despite these disadvantages, tanks retain high survivability against previous-generation rocket-propelled grenades aimed at the most-armoured sections.

However, as effective and advanced as armour plating has become, tank survivability against newer-generation tandem-warhead anti-tank missiles is a concern for military planners. Tandem-warhead RPGs use two warheads to fool active protection systems; a first dummy warhead is fired first, to trigger the active defenses, with the real warhead following it. For example, the RPG-29 from the 1980s is able to penetrate the frontal hull armour of the Challenger II and also managed to damage a M1 Abrams. As well, even tanks with advanced armour plating can have their tracks or gear cogs damaged by RPGs, which may render them immobile or hinder their mobility. Despite all of the advances in armour plating, a tank with its hatches open remains vulnerable to Molotov cocktail (gasoline bombs) and grenades. Even a &quot;buttoned up&quot; tank may have components which are vulnerable to Molotov cocktails, such as optics, extra gas cans and extra ammunition stored on the outside of the tank.

====Avoiding detection====
A tank avoids detection using the doctrine of countermeasures known as CCD: camouflage (looks the same as the surroundings), concealment (cannot be seen) and deception (looks like something else).

=====Camouflage=====
Camouflage can include disruptive painted shapes on the tank to break up the distinctive appearance and silhouette of a tank. Netting or actual branches from the surrounding landscape are also used. Prior to development of infrared technology, tanks were often given a coating of camouflage paint that, depending on environmental region or season, would allow it to blend in with the rest of its environment. A tank operating in wooded areas would typically get a green and brown paintjob; a tank in a winter environment would get white paint (often mixed with some darker colors); tanks in the desert often get khaki paintjobs.

The Russian Nakidka camouflage kit was designed to reduce the optical, thermal, infrared, and radar signatures of a tank, so that acquisition of the tank would be difficult. According to Nii Stali, the designers of Nakidka, Nakidka would reduce the probabilities of detection via &quot;visual and near-IR bands by 30%, the thermal band by 2–3-fold, radar band by 6-fold, and radar-thermal band to near-background levels.

=====Concealment=====
Concealment can include hiding the tank among trees or digging in the tank by having a combat bulldozer dig out part of a hill, so that much of the tank will be hidden. A tank commander can conceal the tank by using &quot;hull down&quot; approaches to going over upward-sloping hills, so that she or he can look out the commander&#x27;s cupola without the distinctive-looking main cannon cresting over the hill. Adopting a turret-down or hull-down position reduces the visible silhouette of a tank as well as providing the added protection of a position in defilade.

Working against efforts to avoid detection is the fact that a tank is a large metallic object with a distinctive, angular silhouette that emits copious heat and engine noise. A tank that is operating in cold weather or which needs to use its radio or other communications or target-detecting electronics will need to start its engine regularly to maintain its battery power, which will create engine noise. Consequently, it is difficult to effectively camouflage a tank in the absence of some form of cover or concealment (e.g., woods) it can hide its hull behind. The tank becomes easier to detect when moving (typically, whenever it is in use) due to the large, distinctive auditory, vibration and thermal signature of its engine and power plant. Tank tracks and dust clouds also betray past or present tank movement.

Switched-off tanks are vulnerable to infra-red detection due to differences between the thermal conductivity and therefore heat dissipation of the metallic tank and its surroundings. At close range the tank can be detected even when powered down and fully concealed due to the column of warmer air above the tank and the smell of diesel or gasoline. Thermal blankets slow the rate of heat emission and some thermal camouflage nets use a mix of materials with differing thermal properties to operate in the infra-red as well as the visible spectrum.

Grenade launchers can rapidly deploy a smoke screen that is opaque to infrared light, to hide it from the thermal viewer of another tank. In addition to using its own grenade launchers, a tank commander could call in an artillery unit to provide smoke cover. Some tanks can produce a smoke screen.

Sometimes camouflage and concealment are used at the same time. For example, a camouflage-painted and branch-covered tank (camouflage) may be hidden in a behind a hill or in a dug-in-emplacement (concealment).

=====Deception=====

Some armoured recovery vehicles (often tracked, tank chassis-based &quot;tow trucks&quot; for tanks) have dummy turrets and cannons. This makes it less likely that enemy tanks will fire on these vehicles. Some armies have fake &quot;dummy&quot; tanks made of wood which troops can carry into position and hide behind obstacles. These &quot;dummy&quot; tanks may cause the enemy to think that there are more tanks than are actually possessed.

====Armour====

To effectively protect the tank and its crew, tank armour must counter a wide variety of antitank threats. Protection against kinetic energy penetrators and high-explosive anti-tank (HEAT) shells fired by other tanks is of primary importance, but tank armour also aims to protect against infantry mortars, grenades, rocket-propelled grenades, anti-tank guided missiles, anti-tank mines, anti-tank rifles, bombs, direct artillery hits, and (less often) nuclear, biological and chemical threats, any of which could disable or destroy a tank or its crew.

Steel armour plate was the earliest type of armour. The Germans pioneered the use of face hardened steel during World War II and the Soviets also achieved improved protection with sloped armour technology. World War II developments led to the obsolescence of homogeneous steel armour with the development of shaped-charge warheads, exemplified by the Panzerfaust and bazooka infantry-carried weapons which were effective, despite some early success with spaced armour. Magnetic mines led to the development of anti-magnetic paste and paint. From WWII to the modern era, troops have added improvised armour to tanks while in combat settings, such as sandbags or pieces of old armour plating.

British tank researchers took the next step with the development of Chobham armour, or more generally composite armour, incorporating ceramics and plastics in a resin matrix between steel plates, which provided good protection against HEAT weapons. High-explosive squash head warheads led to anti-spall armour linings, and kinetic energy penetrators led to the inclusion of exotic materials like a matrix of depleted uranium into a composite armour configuration.
Reactive armour consists of small explosive-filled metal boxes that detonate when hit by the metallic jet projected by an exploding HEAT warhead, causing their metal plates to disrupt it. Tandem warheads defeat reactive armour by causing the armour to detonate prematurely. Modern reactive armour protects itself from Tandem warheads by having a thicker front metal plate to prevent the precursor charge from detonating the explosive in the reactive armour. Reactive armours can also reduce the penetrative abilities of kinetic energy penetrators by deforming the penetrator with the metal plates on the Reactive armour, thereby reducing its effectiveness against the main armour of the tank.

====Active protection system====
The latest generation of protective measures for tanks are active protection systems. The term &quot;active&quot; is used to contrast these approaches with the armour used as the primary protective approach in earlier tanks.
* Soft kill measures, such as the Russian Shtora countermeasure system, provide protection by interfering with enemy targeting and fire-control systems, thus making it harder for the enemy threats to lock onto the targeted tank.
* Hard kill systems intercept incoming threats with a projectile(s) of its own, destroying the threat. For example, the Israeli Trophy destroys an incoming rocket or missile with shotgun-like projectiles. The Soviet Drozd, the Russian Arena, the Israeli Trophy and Iron Fist, Polish ERAWA, and the American Quick Kill systems show the potential to dramatically improve protection for tanks against missiles, RPGs and potentially kinetic energy penetrator attacks, but concerns regarding a danger zone for nearby troops remain.

===Mobility===
The mobility of a tank is described by its battlefield or tactical mobility, its operational mobility, and its strategic mobility.
* Tactical mobility is the tank&#x27;s ability to move through the battle area. This could include acceleration, braking, speed and rate of turn on varying terrain, and obstacle clearance: the tank&#x27;s ability to travel over or through obstacles like walls, trenches, and water.
* Operational mobility is the ability to move tanks hundreds of kilometers from a staging area to the battle area, for example, by using transport helicopters. 
* Strategic mobility is the ability of the tanks to be transported over long distances, usually by air or sea. For tanks to be transported efficiently by air, weight and volume must be kept within the transport aircraft&#x27;s capabilities.
Tanks have high tactical mobility and can travel over most types of terrain due to their continuous tracks and advanced suspension. The tracks disperse the weight of the vehicle over a large area, resulting in less ground pressure. A tank can travel at approximately across flat terrain and up to on roads, but due to the mechanical strain this places on the vehicle and the logistical strain on fuel delivery and tank maintenance, these must be considered exceptional &quot;burst&quot; speeds.

Tanks are susceptible to mechanical failure of engine and transmission systems, particularly at maximum burst speeds. Consequently, wheeled tank transporters and rail transport are used wherever possible for non-combat tank transport. Tank mobility is very restricted compared to wheeled armoured fighting vehicles. Most operational mobility in blitzkrieg tank operations was conducted at the pedestrian pace of , and that was only achieved on the roads of France.
===Suspension and running gear===

Tank agility is a function of the weight of the tank due to its inertia while manoeuvring and its ground pressure, the power output of the installed power plant and the tank transmission and track design. In addition, rough terrain effectively limits the tank&#x27;s speed through the stress it puts on the suspension and the crew. A breakthrough in this area was achieved during World War II when improved suspension systems were developed that allowed better cross-country performance and limited firing on the move. Systems like the earlier Christie or later torsion-bar suspension developed by Ferdinand Porsche dramatically improved the tank&#x27;s cross-country performance and overall mobility.

=== Engine ===
The tank&#x27;s power plant supplies kinetic energy to move the tank, and electric power via a generator to components such as the turret rotation motors and the tank&#x27;s electronic systems. 

The tank power plant evolved from predominantly petrol and adapted large-displacement aeronautical or automotive engines to diesel engines. Japan was the first to begin transitioning to this engine type beginning with the Type 89B in 1934. The main advantage of diesel is their higher fuel economy, which allows for greater operating ranges. Diesel engines can also run on a variety of fuels, such as aviation kerosene and even gasoline. Advanced multi-fuel diesel engines have been adopted. Gas turbines are powerful per unit weight but fuel-hungry; they have been used in a few tanks, including the Soviet T-80 and American M1 Abrams.

===Fording===
In the absence of combat engineers, most tanks can only ford small rivers. The typical fording depth for MBTs is approximately , being limited by the height of the engine air intake and driver&#x27;s position. Modern tanks such as the Russian T-90 and the German Leopard 1 and Leopard 2 tanks can ford to a depth of when properly prepared and equipped with a snorkel to supply air for the crew and engine. Tank crews usually strongly dislike deep fording, but it adds considerable scope for surprise and tactical flexibility in water-crossing operations by opening new and unexpected avenues of attack.

Amphibious tanks are specially designed or adapted for water operations, such as by including snorkels and skirts, but they are rare in modern armies. Purpose-built amphibious assault vehicles or armoured personnel carriers are used, without tanks, in amphibious assaults. Advances such as the EFA mobile bridge and armoured vehicle-launched scissors bridges have also reduced the impediment to tank advance that rivers posed in World War II.

===Crew===


Most modern tanks most often have four crew members, or three if an auto-loader is installed. These are the:
* Commander – The commander is responsible for commanding the tank, with all-round vision devices rather than the limited vision of the driver and gunner. He guides the gunner roughly onto target and guides the driver around turns and obstacles.
* Gunner – The gunner is responsible for laying (aiming) the gun. It may be laying for direct fire, where the gun is aimed similarly to a rifle, or indirect fire, where firing data is calculated and applied to the sights. The term includes automated aiming using, for example, radar-derived target data and computer-controlled guns. Gun laying involves moving the axis of the bore of the barrel in two planes, horizontal and vertical. A gun is &quot;traversed&quot; (rotated in a horizontal plane) to align it with the target, and &quot;elevated&quot; (moved in the vertical plane) to range it to the target.
* Loader – The loader loads the gun, with a round appropriate to the target (HEAT, smoke, etc.) as ordered by either the commander or the gunner. The loader is usually the lowest-ranked member of the crew. In tanks with auto-loaders this position is omitted.
* Driver – The driver drives the tank, and also performs routine maintenance on the automotive features.
Operating a tank is a team effort. For example, the loader is assisted by the rest of the crew in stowing ammunition. The driver is assisted in maintaining the automotive features.

Historically, crews have varied from two to twelve members. First World War tanks carried the crew needed to man the multiple guns and machine guns, and up to four crewmen to drive the tank: the commander drove the tank and manned the brakes, steering via orders to his gears-men; a co-driver operated the gearbox and throttle; and two gears-men, one for each track, steered by setting their side to idle, allowing the track on the other side to slew the tank to one side. Pre-World War II French tanks were noted for having a two-man crew, in which the overworked commander had to load and fire the gun in addition to commanding the tank.

With World War II the multi-turreted tanks proved impracticable, and as the single turret on a low hull design became standard, crews became standardized around a crew of four or five. In those tanks with a fifth crew member, usually three were located in the turret (as described above) while the fifth was most often seated in the hull next to the driver, and operated the hull machine gun in addition to acting as a co-driver or radio operator. Well-designed crew stations, giving proper consideration to comfort and ergonomics, are important to the combat-effectiveness of a tank, as they limit fatigue and speed up individual actions.

===Engineering constraints===

A noted author on the subject of tank design engineering, Richard Ogorkiewicz, outlined the following basic engineering sub-systems that are commonly incorporated into a tank&#x27;s technological development:
* Mobility (through chassis design)
* Engines
* Transmissions
* Suspensions and running gear
* Soil-vehicle mechanics
* Guns and ammunition
* Ballistics and mechanics of guns
* Vision and sighting systems
* Illuminating and night vision systems
* Fire control systems for main and auxiliary weapons
* Gun control systems
* Guided weapons
* Armour protection
* Configuration
To the above can be added unit communication systems and electronic anti-tank countermeasures, crew ergonomic and survival systems (including flame suppression), and provision for technological upgrading.
Few tank designs have survived their entire service lives without some upgrading or modernization, particularly during wartime, including some that have changed almost beyond recognition, such as the latest Israeli Magach versions.

The characteristics of a tank are determined by the performance criteria required for the tank. The obstacles that must be traversed affect the vehicle&#x27;s front and rear profiles. The types of terrain specified to be traversed determine the maximum permissible track ground pressure.

Tank design is a compromise between technological and budgetary constraints and tactical capability requirements. It is not possible to maximise firepower, protection and mobility simultaneously, while also incorporating the latest technology and being economically viable.
For example, in the case of tactical capability requirements, increasing protection by adding armour will result in an increase in weight and therefore decrease in mobility; increasing firepower by installing a larger gun will force the designer team to increase armour, the therefore weight of the tank by retaining same internal volume to ensure crew efficiency during combat. In the case of the Abrams MBT which has good firepower, speed and armour, these advantages are counterbalanced by its engine&#x27;s notably high fuel consumption, which ultimately reduces its range, and in a larger sense its mobility. And most enhancements add to cost.

Since the Second World War the economics of tank production, governed by the complexity of manufacture and cost and the impact of a given tank design on logistics and field maintenance capabilities, have also been accepted as important in determining how many tanks a nation can afford to field in its force structure.

Some tank designs that were fielded in significant numbers, such as Tiger I and M60A2 proved to be too complex or expensive to manufacture, and made unsustainable demands on the logistics services support of the armed forces. The &quot;affordability of the design&quot; therefore takes precedence over the combat capability requirements.
Nowhere was this principle illustrated better than during the Second World War when two Allied designs, the Soviet T-34 and the US M4 Sherman, although both simple designs which accepted engineering compromises, were used successfully against more sophisticated designs by Germany that were more complex and expensive to produce, and more demanding on overstretched logistics of the Wehrmacht. Given that a tank crew will spend most of its time occupied with maintenance of the vehicle, engineering simplicity has become the primary constraint on tank design since the Second World War despite advances in mechanical, electrical and electronics technologies.

Since the Second World War, tank development has incorporated experimenting with significant mechanical changes to the tank design while focusing on technological advances in the tank&#x27;s many subsystems to improve its performance. However, a number of novel designs appeared, with mixed success, including the firepower of the Soviet IT-1 and T-64, and the crew protection of the Israeli Merkava and Swedish S-tank, while for decades the US&#x27;s M551 remained the only light tank deployable by parachute.

==Command, control, and communications==
Commanding and coordinating tanks in the field has always been subject to particular problems, particularly in the area of communications, but in modern armies these problems have been partially alleviated by networked, integrated systems that enable communications and contribute to enhanced situational awareness.

===20th century===
====World War I and Interwar period====
Armoured bulkheads, engine noise, intervening terrain, dust and smoke, and the need to operate with hatches closed are severe detriments to communication and lead to a sense of isolation for small tank units, individual vehicles, and tank crew. Radios were not portable or robust enough to be mounted in a tank, although Morse code transmitters were installed in some Mark IVs at Cambrai as messaging vehicles. The mounting of a field telephone to the rear was not a practice. During World War I when these failed or were unavailable, situation reports were sent back to headquarters by some crews releasing carrier pigeons through loopholes or hatches and communications between vehicles was accomplished using hand signals, handheld semaphore flags which continued in use in the Red Army/Soviet Army through the Second and Cold wars, or by foot or horse-mounted messengers.

====World War II====
From the beginning, the German military stressed wireless communications, equipping their combat vehicles with radios, and drilled all units to rely on disciplined radio use as a basic element of tactics. This allowed them to respond to developing threats and opportunities during battles, giving the Germans a notable tactical advantage early in the war; even where Allied tanks initially had better firepower and armour, they generally lacked individual radios. By mid-war, Western Allied tanks adopted full use of radios, although Russian use of radios remained relatively limited.

====Cold War era====

On the modern battlefield an intercom mounted in the crew helmet provides internal communications and a link to the radio network, and on some tanks an external intercom on the rear of the tank provides communication with co-operating infantry. Radio networks employ radio voice procedure to minimize confusion and &quot;chatter&quot;.
A recent development in AFV equipment and doctrine is integration of information from the fire control system, laser rangefinder, Global Positioning System and terrain information via hardened military specification electronics and a battlefield network to display information on enemy targets and friendly units on a monitor in the tank. The sensor data can be sourced from nearby tanks, planes, UAVs or, in the future infantry (such as the US Future Force Warrior project). This improves the tank commander&#x27;s situational awareness and ability to navigate the battlefield and select and engage targets. In addition to easing the reporting burden by automatically logging all orders and actions, orders are sent via the network with text and graphical overlays. This is known as Network-centric warfare by the US, Network Enabled Capability (UK) or Digital Army Battle Management System צי&quot;ד (Israel). Advanced battle tanks, including the K-2 Black Panther, have taken up the first major step forward in adopting a fully radar integrated Fire Control System which allows it to detect tanks from a further distance and identify it as a friend-or-foe as well as increasing the tank&#x27;s accuracy as well as its capability to lock onto tanks.

====21st century====
Performing situational awareness and communication is the one of four primary MBT functions in the 21st century. 
To improve the crew&#x27;s situational awareness MBTs use circular review system with a combination of Augmented reality and Artificial Intelligence technologies.

Further advancements in tank defense systems have led to the development of active protection systems, which may be classified as either:

* Soft-kill – Soft-kill protection systems use integrated on-board radar warning receivers which can detect incoming anti-tank missiles and projectiles. Once detected, measures such as smoke screens or smoke grenades are deployed, interfering with the incoming missile&#x27;s tracking system, causing it to miss the tank or to deactivate.
* Hard-kill – The more advanced approach involves destroying the incoming enemy missile or projectile by deploying anti-missile projectiles. This is seen more reliable protection.

Both these active protection systems can be found on several main battle tanks including the K2 Black Panther, the Merkava and the Leopard 2A7.

==Combat milestones==

==See also==
== Notes ==
==References==
==Bibliography==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
==External links==
* OnWar&#x27;s Tanks of World War II Comprehensive specifications and diagrams of World War II tanks.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q12876" start="2" end="6" title="Tank" label="tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q130368" start="13" end="38" title="armoured fighting vehicle" label="armoured fighting vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4384456" start="81" end="91" title="Front line" label="front-line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190472" start="92" end="105" title="Land warfare" label="ground combat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1409574" start="143" end="152" title="firepower" label="firepower"/>
<link wikidata="Q1937453" start="161" end="167" title="Vehicle armour" label="armour"/>
<link wikidata="Q4895508" start="173" end="184" title="battlefield" label="battlefield"/>
<link wikidata="Q6887290" start="185" end="193" title="Mobility (military)" label="mobility"/>
<link wikidata="Q940913" start="206" end="212" title="Continuous track" label="tracks"/>
<link wikidata="Q558591" start="282" end="288" title="Gun turret" label="turret"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418029" start="374" end="387" title="combined arms" label="combined arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q7978115" start="436" end="452" title="weapons platform" label="weapons platform"/>
<link wikidata="Q170417" start="485" end="492" title="calibre" label="calibre"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241267" start="493" end="501" title="tank gun" label="tank gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q558591" start="524" end="534" title="gun turret" label="gun turret"/>
<link wikidata="Q12800" start="552" end="563" title="machine gun" label="machine gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q282472" start="597" end="621" title="anti-tank guided missile" label="anti-tank guided missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q3216918" start="626" end="641" title="rocket launcher" label="rocket launcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1937453" start="660" end="674" title="vehicle armour" label="vehicle armour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411232" start="752" end="761" title="fuel tank" label="fuel tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q2287072" start="841" end="861" title="operational mobility" label="operational mobility"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001676" start="1177" end="1188" title="offensive (military)" label="offensively"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097241" start="1195" end="1206" title="direct fire" label="direct fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q8473" start="1241" end="1252" title="defence (military)" label="defensively"/>
<link wikidata="Q935181" start="1257" end="1269" title="fire support" label="fire support"/>
<link wikidata="Q112481674" start="1274" end="1282" title="defilade" label="defilade"/>
<link wikidata="Q12796" start="1354" end="1363" title="small arm" label="small arm"/>
<link wikidata="Q568312" start="1730" end="1746" title="armoured warfare" label="armoured warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q920182" start="1776" end="1792" title="main battle tank" label="main battle tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q17080472" start="1837" end="1849" title="weight class" label="weight class"/>
<link wikidata="Q875583" start="1851" end="1856" title="light tank" label="light"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069116" start="1858" end="1864" title="medium tank" label="medium"/>
<link wikidata="Q771712" start="1866" end="1871" title="heavy tank" label="heavy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205451" start="1875" end="1890" title="superheavy tank" label="superheavy tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920535" start="1915" end="1928" title="breakthrough (military)" label="breakthrough-"/>
<link wikidata="Q770487" start="1930" end="1938" title="cavalry tank" label="cavalry-"/>
<link wikidata="Q2267919" start="1940" end="1949" title="infantry tank" label="infantry-"/>
<link wikidata="Q770487" start="1951" end="1959" title="Cruiser tank" label="cruiser-"/>
<link wikidata="Q880637" start="1964" end="1978" title="armoured reconnaissance" label="reconnaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427134" start="2411" end="2429" title="flanking manoeuvre" label="flanking manoeuvre"/>
<link wikidata="Q4710297" start="3018" end="3037" title="Albert Gerald Stern" label="Albert Gerald Stern"/>
<link wikidata="Q28465171" start="3484" end="3509" title="Walter Dally Jones" label="Lt-Col Walter Dally Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q375484" start="4647" end="4670" title="Jean Baptiste Eugène Estienne" label="Colonel J.B.E. Estienne"/>
<link wikidata="Q655697" start="5075" end="5087" title="siege engine" label="siege engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757867" start="6259" end="6279" title="Tanks in World War I" label="Tanks in World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q241059" start="6389" end="6403" title="trench warfare" label="trench warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q152989" start="6411" end="6424" title="Western Front (WWI)" label="Western Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q943358" start="6465" end="6478" title="Little Willie" label="Little Willie"/>
<link wikidata="Q8009239" start="6499" end="6523" title="William Foster &amp;amp; Co." label="William Foster &amp;amp; Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q180057" start="6527" end="6534" title="Lincoln, England" label="Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q7964992" start="6588" end="6608" title="Walter Gordon Wilson" label="Walter Gordon Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q531695" start="6651" end="6666" title="William Tritton" label="William Tritton"/>
<link wikidata="Q8009239" start="6670" end="6692" title="William Foster &amp;amp; Co." label="William Foster and Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q105272093" start="6804" end="6815" title="Mark I tank" label="Mark I tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q132568" start="6876" end="6895" title="Battle of the Somme" label="Battle of the Somme"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7048" end="7057" title="#Etymology" label="etymology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7683581" start="7247" end="7275" title="Tanks of the interwar period" label="Tanks of the interwar period"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790079" start="7323" end="7346" title="Tanks in World War II" label="designs of World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q188925" start="7433" end="7479" title="Battles of Khalkhin Gol" label="the first mass tank/air attack at Khalkhin Gol"/>
<link wikidata="Q993299" start="7481" end="7489" title="Nomonhan" label="Nomonhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q172233" start="7531" end="7535" title="T-34" label="T-34"/>
<link wikidata="Q920182" start="7568" end="7584" title="main battle tank" label="main battle tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q56506" start="7691" end="7701" title="blitzkrieg" label="blitzkrieg"/>
<link wikidata="Q692886" start="7777" end="7786" title="Motorized infantry" label="motorized"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053481" start="7791" end="7810" title="mechanized infantry" label="mechanized infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q64418" start="7812" end="7821" title="artillery" label="artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698988" start="7826" end="7835" title="air power" label="air power"/>
<link wikidata="Q842332" start="7866" end="7877" title="front (military)" label="enemy front"/>
<link wikidata="Q60124" start="7941" end="7965" title="high-explosive anti-tank" label="high-explosive anti-tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q159142" start="8080" end="8091" title="Panzerfaust" label="Panzerfaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q261715" start="8134" end="8155" title="Tanks in the Cold War" label="Tanks in the Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q966330" start="8268" end="8284" title="composite armour" label="composite armour"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="8501" end="8509" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q920182" start="8515" end="8531" title="main battle tank" label="main battle tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q752673" start="8640" end="8660" title="asymmetrical warfare" label="asymmetrical warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q327394" start="8746" end="8781" title="Rocket propelled grenade" label="anti-tank rocket propelled grenades"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418029" start="8927" end="8940" title="combined arms" label="combined arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q29171" start="8976" end="8984" title="infantry" label="infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q202825" start="9017" end="9042" title="infantry fighting vehicle" label="infantry fighting vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3041792" start="9062" end="9076" title="reconnaissance aircraft" label="reconnaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q208187" start="9080" end="9102" title="ground-attack aircraft" label="ground-attack aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q12757" start="9267" end="9293" title="internal combustion engine" label="internal combustion engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1937453" start="9295" end="9307" title="armour plate" label="armour plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q940913" start="9313" end="9329" title="continuous track" label="continuous track"/>
<link wikidata="Q280345" start="9415" end="9430" title="Battle of Mobei" label="Battle of Mobei"/>
<link wikidata="Q744969" start="9438" end="9453" title="Han–Xiongnu War" label="Han–Xiongnu War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209" start="9459" end="9462" title="Han dynasty" label="Han"/>
<link wikidata="Q701330" start="9471" end="9479" title="Wei Qing" label="Wei Qing"/>
<link wikidata="Q42070" start="9544" end="9555" title="Gobi desert" label="Gobi desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q2660255" start="9569" end="9577" title="Yizhixie" label="Yizhixie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062502" start="9578" end="9584" title="chanyu" label="chanyu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7850" start="9710" end="9717" title="Chinese language" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q108429" start="9765" end="9772" title="Archery" label="archers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2859615" start="9774" end="9785" title="crossbowmen" label="crossbowmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q29171" start="9790" end="9798" title="infantry" label="infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q543461" start="9843" end="9858" title="Charge (warfare)" label="cavalry charges"/>
<link wikidata="Q272035" start="9935" end="9944" title="Accuracy and precision" label="precision"/>
<link wikidata="Q208330" start="9960" end="9969" title="stalemate" label="stalemate"/>
<link wikidata="Q182878" start="10051" end="10060" title="sandstorm" label="sandstorm"/>
<link wikidata="Q128393" start="10108" end="10114" title="Nomad" label="nomads"/>
<link wikidata="Q762" start="10140" end="10157" title="Leonardo da Vinci" label="Leonardo da Vinci"/>
<link wikidata="Q42511" start="10162" end="10173" title="H. G. Wells" label="H. G. Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q215968" start="10550" end="10559" title="Jan Žižka" label="Jan Žižka"/>
<link wikidata="Q478301" start="10690" end="10702" title="Hussite Wars" label="Hussite-wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q940913" start="10725" end="10742" title="Continuous track" label="caterpillar track"/>
<link wikidata="Q979865" start="11093" end="11117" title="Richard Lovell Edgeworth" label="Richard Lovell Edgeworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7745355" start="11689" end="11707" title="The Land Ironclads" label="The Land Ironclads"/>
<link wikidata="Q7159369" start="11998" end="12011" title="pedrail wheel" label="pedrail wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3847508" start="12371" end="12385" title="Ernest Swinton" label="Ernest Swinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534957" start="12630" end="12688" title="Levavasseur project" label="proposed mounting a field gun in an armoured box on tracks"/>
<link wikidata="Q649062" start="12871" end="12883" title="Armored car (military)" label="armoured car"/>
<link wikidata="Q102527" start="13151" end="13170" title="Robert Falcon Scott" label="Robert Falcon Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q2393768" start="13338" end="13354" title="Reginald Skelton" label="Reginald Skelton"/>
<link wikidata="Q530099" start="13455" end="13490" title="Wolseley Motors" label="Wolseley Tool and Motor Car Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q127805" start="13572" end="13587" title="Herbert Ponting" label="Herbert Ponting"/>
<link wikidata="Q973919" start="13643" end="13664" title="Terra Nova Expedition" label="Terra Nova Expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q498976" start="13745" end="13766" title="Apsley Cherry-Garrard" label="Apsley Cherry-Garrard"/>
<link wikidata="Q79130" start="14053" end="14068" title="Günther Burstyn" label="Günther Burstyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q6483660" start="14281" end="14297" title="Lancelot de Mole" label="Lancelot de Mole"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060703" start="14370" end="14380" title="War Office" label="War Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q222595" start="14978" end="14990" title="British Army" label="British Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="15399" end="15409" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q21561383" start="15540" end="15567" title="First Lord of the Admiralty" label="First Lord of the Admiralty"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016" start="15569" end="15586" title="Winston Churchill" label="Winston Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q3217124" start="15599" end="15617" title="Landship Committee" label="Landship Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q959266" start="15644" end="15674" title="Director of Naval Construction" label="Director of Naval Construction"/>
<link wikidata="Q7526657" start="15695" end="15727" title="Eustace Tennyson d&amp;#x27;Eyncourt" label="Eustace Tennyson d&amp;#x27;Eyncourt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7964992" start="16138" end="16158" title="Walter Gordon Wilson" label="Walter Gordon Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q531695" start="16227" end="16242" title="William Tritton" label="William Tritton"/>
<link wikidata="Q8009239" start="16281" end="16305" title="William Foster &amp;amp; Co." label="William Foster &amp;amp; Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q180057" start="16309" end="16330" title="Lincoln, Lincolnshire" label="Lincoln, Lincolnshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q207977" start="16350" end="16359" title="prototype" label="prototype"/>
<link wikidata="Q943358" start="16610" end="16623" title="Little Willie" label="Little Willie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112198" start="17020" end="17067" title="Metro-Cammell" label="Metropolitan Railway Carriage and Wagon Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q6742933" start="17174" end="17190" title="Male tank" label="&amp;quot;Male&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5442774" start="17244" end="17263" title="Female tank" label="&amp;quot;Females&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q105272093" start="17532" end="17538" title="Mark I tank" label="Mark I"/>
<link wikidata="Q3381142" start="17556" end="17583" title="Battle of Flers-Courcelette" label="Battle of Flers-Courcelette"/>
<link wikidata="Q132568" start="17603" end="17618" title="battle of the Somme" label="Somme offensive"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17882" end="17889" title="List of terms used for Germans#Jerry" label="Jerries"/>
<link wikidata="Q134982" start="18031" end="18049" title="David Lloyd George" label="David Lloyd George"/>
<link wikidata="Q375484" start="18174" end="18189" title="Jean Baptiste Eugène Estienne" label="J.B.E. Estienne"/>
<link wikidata="Q739761" start="18379" end="18388" title="Schneider CA1" label="Schneider"/>
<link wikidata="Q754758" start="18393" end="18406" title="Saint-Chamond (tank)" label="Saint-Chamond"/>
<link wikidata="Q11338061" start="18426" end="18438" title="Holt tractor" label="Holt tractor"/>
<link wikidata="Q558591" start="18514" end="18520" title="gun turret" label="turret"/>
<link wikidata="Q207734" start="18576" end="18586" title="Renault FT" label="Renault FT"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="19073" end="19084" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q239364" start="19166" end="19169" title="A7V" label="A7V"/>
<link wikidata="Q3953976" start="19345" end="19380" title="Second Battle of Villers-Bretonneux" label="Second Battle of Villers-Bretonneux"/>
<link wikidata="Q846336" start="19409" end="19417" title="Mark IV tank" label="Mark IVs"/>
<link wikidata="Q239364" start="19435" end="19438" title="A7V" label="A7V"/>
<link wikidata="Q7683472" start="19684" end="19694" title="Tank Corps of the American Expeditionary Force" label="Tank Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q602773" start="19870" end="19879" title="Fiat 2000" label="Fiat 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q2528304" start="20027" end="20036" title="Vezdekhod" label="Vezdekhod"/>
<link wikidata="Q147586" start="20050" end="20059" title="Tsar Tank" label="Lebedenko"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20584" end="20599" title="History of the tank#Between the wars" label="interwar period"/>
<link wikidata="Q548803" start="20669" end="20682" title="J.F.C. Fuller" label="J.F.C. Fuller"/>
<link wikidata="Q70560" start="20774" end="20788" title="Heinz Guderian" label="Heinz Guderian"/>
<link wikidata="Q966007" start="20801" end="20813" title="Percy Hobart" label="Percy Hobart"/>
<link wikidata="Q2824671" start="20826" end="20846" title="Adna R. Chaffee, Jr." label="Adna R. Chaffee, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q2042" start="20859" end="20876" title="Charles de Gaulle" label="Charles de Gaulle"/>
<link wikidata="Q142141" start="20892" end="20912" title="Mikhail Tukhachevsky" label="Mikhail Tukhachevsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q299431" start="20926" end="20938" title="B. H. Liddell Hart" label="Liddell Hart"/>
<link wikidata="Q5421120" start="21087" end="21116" title="Experimental Mechanized Force" label="Experimental Mechanized Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="21174" end="21190" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21471" end="21504" title="History of the tank#Between the wars" label="tank development between the wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859" start="21656" end="21673" title="Spanish Civil War" label="Spanish Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q178038" start="21768" end="21778" title="Second Spanish Republic" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q6235" start="21900" end="21912" title="Nationalists" label="Nationalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641241" start="21930" end="21951" title="Battle of Guadalajara" label="Battle of Guadalajara"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="22193" end="22204" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q207734" start="22213" end="22223" title="Renault FT" label="Renault FT"/>
<link wikidata="Q993299" start="22653" end="22661" title="Nomonhan" label="Nomonhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q174174" start="22890" end="22896" title="diesel engine" label="diesel"/>
<link wikidata="Q124617" start="22981" end="22994" title="Georgy Zhukov" label="Georgy Zhukov"/>
<link wikidata="Q172233" start="23216" end="23220" title="T-34" label="T-34"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="23240" end="23252" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q124617" start="23383" end="23396" title="Georgy Zhukov" label="Georgy Zhukov"/>
<link wikidata="Q993299" start="23446" end="23454" title="Nomonhan" label="Nomonhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q70560" start="23486" end="23500" title="Heinz Guderian" label="Heinz Guderian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283371" start="23836" end="23852" title="maneuver warfare" label="maneuver warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q460942" start="23864" end="23884" title="infiltration tactics" label="infiltration tactics"/>
<link wikidata="Q56506" start="23923" end="23933" title="blitzkrieg" label="blitzkrieg"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="24000" end="24012" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q316936" start="24249" end="24258" title="anti-tank" label="anti-tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q151340" start="24438" end="24454" title="Battle of France" label="Battle of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418029" start="24600" end="24613" title="combined arms" label="combined arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076619" start="24752" end="24763" title="French Army" label="French Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050818" start="25247" end="25264" title="close air support" label="close air support"/>
<link wikidata="Q692886" start="25336" end="25354" title="motorized infantry" label="motorized infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q218678" start="25589" end="25611" title="North African Campaign" label="North African Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q153113" start="25939" end="25951" title="Afrika Korps" label="Afrika Korps"/>
<link wikidata="Q270202" start="25960" end="25979" title="British Eighth Army" label="British Eighth Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q153376" start="26169" end="26196" title="Second Battle of El Alamein" label="Second Battle of El Alamein"/>
<link wikidata="Q270202" start="26346" end="26357" title="Eighth Army (United Kingdom)" label="Eighth Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q852365" start="26468" end="26475" title="Tunisian Campaign" label="Tunisia"/>
<link wikidata="Q83055" start="26533" end="26553" title="Operation Barbarossa" label="Operation Barbarossa"/>
<link wikidata="Q172233" start="26599" end="26603" title="T-34" label="T-34"/>
<link wikidata="Q43056" start="26636" end="26640" title="Axis powers" label="Axis"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="26836" end="26848" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q151221" start="27226" end="27231" title="Tiger I" label="Tiger"/>
<link wikidata="Q151960" start="27260" end="27267" title="Panther tank" label="Panther"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435707" start="27691" end="27697" title="SU-152" label="SU-152"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066792" start="27721" end="27725" title="IS-2" label="IS-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q215768" start="27978" end="27993" title="mass production" label="mass production"/>
<link wikidata="Q191643" start="28065" end="28075" title="M4 Sherman" label="M4 Sherman"/>
<link wikidata="Q8641370" start="28408" end="28426" title="Invasion of Normandy" label="Battle of Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4643496" start="28455" end="28467" title="76 mm gun M1" label="76 mm gun M1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152505" start="28476" end="28486" title="Sherman Firefly" label="17-pounder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068107" start="28769" end="28774" title="Chassis" label="hulls"/>
<link wikidata="Q1687222" start="28800" end="28810" title="flame tank" label="flame tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q167682" start="28820" end="28836" title="rocket artillery" label="rocket artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q151197" start="28842" end="28860" title="combat engineering" label="combat engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345044" start="28890" end="28903" title="demining" label="mine-clearing"/>
<link wikidata="Q12280" start="28908" end="28916" title="bridge" label="bridging"/>
<link wikidata="Q161161" start="28981" end="28995" title="tank destroyer" label="tank destroyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3658811" start="29055" end="29068" title="Sturmgeschütz" label="Sturmgeschütz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920860" start="29082" end="29093" title="Panzerjäger" label="Panzerjäger"/>
<link wikidata="Q17049870" start="29110" end="29120" title="Jagdpanzer" label="Jagdpanzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7410002" start="29150" end="29172" title="Samokhodnaya ustanovka" label="Samokhodnaya ustanovka"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29236" end="29244" title="Casemate#Armoured vehicles" label="casemate"/>
<link wikidata="Q161161" start="29251" end="29265" title="tank destroyer" label="tank destroyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q745798" start="29271" end="29282" title="assault gun" label="assault gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q558591" start="29534" end="29544" title="gun turret" label="gun turret"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="29724" end="29732" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q41644" start="29754" end="29765" title="Warsaw Pact" label="Warsaw Pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="29816" end="29820" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q322348" start="29843" end="29852" title="arms race" label="arms race"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150924" start="30115" end="30128" title="sloped armour" label="sloped armour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568940" start="30272" end="30284" title="fire-control system" label="fire control"/>
<link wikidata="Q483400" start="30286" end="30296" title="gyroscopic" label="gyroscopic"/>
<link wikidata="Q38867" start="30394" end="30399" title="laser" label="laser"/>
<link wikidata="Q11388" start="30417" end="30425" title="infrared" label="infrared"/>
<link wikidata="Q966330" start="30450" end="30467" title="Composite armour" label="Armour technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q316936" start="30522" end="30539" title="anti-tank weapons" label="anti-tank weapons"/>
<link wikidata="Q974850" start="30552" end="30576" title="guided missiles" label="antitank guided missiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q747313" start="30586" end="30589" title="BGM-71 TOW" label="TOW"/>
<link wikidata="Q920182" start="30644" end="30660" title="main battle tank" label="main battle tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q316936" start="30813" end="30822" title="anti-tank" label="anti-tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q974850" start="30823" end="30838" title="guided missiles" label="guided missiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q73116" start="30840" end="30845" title="armour-piercing discarding sabot" label="sabot"/>
<link wikidata="Q60124" start="30861" end="30885" title="high-explosive anti-tank" label="high-explosive anti-tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q282744" start="31071" end="31079" title="obsolete" label="obsolete"/>
<link wikidata="Q5970087" start="31118" end="31136" title="economies of scale" label="economies of scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q328272" start="31333" end="31337" title="T-55" label="T-55"/>
<link wikidata="Q155658" start="31342" end="31346" title="T-72" label="T-72"/>
<link wikidata="Q504320" start="31541" end="31550" title="Centurion Tank" label="Centurion"/>
<link wikidata="Q160327" start="31603" end="31606" title="M48 Patton" label="M48"/>
<link wikidata="Q153440" start="31778" end="31787" title="Leopard 1" label="Leopard 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q160327" start="31789" end="31799" title="M48 Patton" label="M48 Patton"/>
<link wikidata="Q741609" start="31808" end="31817" title="Chieftain tank" label="Chieftain"/>
<link wikidata="Q151968" start="31852" end="31861" title="Leopard 2" label="Leopard 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q173684" start="31863" end="31872" title="M1 Abrams" label="M1 Abrams"/>
<link wikidata="Q234676" start="31874" end="31886" title="Challenger 2 tank" label="Challenger 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q660378" start="31888" end="31897" title="C1 Ariete" label="C1 Ariete"/>
<link wikidata="Q192757" start="31899" end="31903" title="T-90" label="T-90"/>
<link wikidata="Q190986" start="31908" end="31915" title="Merkava" label="Merkava"/>
<link wikidata="Q864113" start="31995" end="32004" title="proxy war" label="proxy war"/>
<link wikidata="Q8663" start="32015" end="32025" title="Korean War" label="Korean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="32027" end="32038" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1922071" start="32040" end="32066" title="Indo-Pakistani War of 1971" label="Indo-Pakistani War of 1971"/>
<link wikidata="Q83085" start="32068" end="32085" title="Soviet–Afghan War" label="Soviet–Afghan War"/>
<link wikidata="Q49100" start="32135" end="32149" title="Yom Kippur War" label="Yom Kippur War"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32207" end="32219" title="T-54/55#Other conflicts" label="32 conflicts"/>
<link wikidata="Q4168000" start="32375" end="32392" title="military intelligence" label="military analysts"/>
<link wikidata="Q173684" start="32905" end="32914" title="M1 Abrams" label="M1 Abrams"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="32927" end="32945" title="United States Army" label="United States Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q545449" start="32967" end="32975" title="Iraq War" label="Iraq War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249453" start="33053" end="33066" title="roadside bomb" label="roadside bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1632676" start="33123" end="33152" title="explosively formed penetrator" label="explosively formed penetrator"/>
<link wikidata="Q20030127" start="33238" end="33262" title="Bradley fighting vehicle" label="Bradley fighting vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330136" start="33404" end="33422" title="Second Battle of Fallujah" label="Battle of Fallujah"/>
<link wikidata="Q190986" start="33484" end="33491" title="Merkava" label="Merkava"/>
<link wikidata="Q29171" start="33543" end="33551" title="infantry" label="infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q369799" start="33555" end="33577" title="low intensity conflict" label="low intensity conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q909459" start="33589" end="33606" title="counter-terrorism" label="counter-terrorism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148423" start="33729" end="33732" title="Israeli Military Industries" label="IMI"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="33733" end="33742" title="APAM-MP-T" label="APAM-MP-T"/>
<link wikidata="Q21662260" start="33784" end="33788" title="C4IS" label="C4IS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156840" start="33811" end="33842" title="Trophy (countermeasure)" label="TROPHY active protection system"/>
<link wikidata="Q49106" start="33920" end="33935" title="Second Intifada" label="Second Intifada"/>
<link wikidata="Q276099" start="34099" end="34106" title="Research and development" label="R&amp;amp;D"/>
<link wikidata="Q624587" start="34150" end="34165" title="Thermography" label="thermal imagers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410940" start="34225" end="34238" title="muzzle energy" label="muzzle energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326682" start="34348" end="34371" title="Electrothermal-chemical technology" label="electrothermal-chemical"/>
<link wikidata="Q2597520" start="34381" end="34386" title="XM291" label="XM291"/>
<link wikidata="Q777527" start="34497" end="34518" title="M8 Armored Gun System" label="M8 Armored Gun System"/>
<link wikidata="Q339042" start="34634" end="34641" title="Stealth technology" label="stealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q196113" start="34705" end="34715" title="camouflage" label="camouflage"/>
<link wikidata="Q196295" start="34763" end="34780" title="active camouflage" label="active camouflage"/>
<link wikidata="Q11406" start="34883" end="34898" title="Electromagnetism" label="electromagnetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q284813" start="34946" end="34960" title="hollow charge" label="shaped charges"/>
<link wikidata="Q333043" start="34990" end="35014" title="active protection system" label="active protection system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163778" start="35151" end="35166" title="diesel–electric powertrain" label="diesel–electric"/>
<link wikidata="Q5953345" start="35187" end="35200" title="series hybrid" label="series hybrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q81661" start="35283" end="35290" title="Elefant" label="Elefant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2993367" start="35487" end="35498" title="recuperator" label="recuperator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140666" start="35707" end="35730" title="network-centric warfare" label="network-centric warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q15860072" start="35979" end="35998" title="Russo-Ukrainian War" label="Russo-Ukrainian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q771712" start="37849" end="37859" title="heavy tank" label="heavy tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q875583" start="37969" end="37979" title="light tank" label="light tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q474079" start="37984" end="37992" title="tankette" label="tankette"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069116" start="38633" end="38644" title="medium tank" label="medium tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q770487" start="38708" end="38720" title="cruiser tank" label="cruiser tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q2267919" start="38745" end="38758" title="infantry tank" label="infantry tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q161161" start="38795" end="38809" title="Tank destroyer" label="Tank destroyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q130368" start="38830" end="38855" title="armoured fighting vehicle" label="armoured fighting vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q745798" start="38902" end="38913" title="Assault gun" label="Assault gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q161161" start="38997" end="39011" title="tank destroyer" label="tank destroyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1687222" start="39043" end="39053" title="flame tank" label="flame tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q45183" start="39115" end="39127" title="flamethrower" label="flamethrower"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205451" start="39249" end="39265" title="super-heavy tank" label="super-heavy tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="39315" end="39323" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q920182" start="39403" end="39419" title="main battle tank" label="main battle tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q4407246" start="39747" end="39773" title="armoured personnel carrier" label="armoured personnel carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q202825" start="39776" end="39801" title="infantry fighting vehicle" label="infantry fighting vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q880637" start="39887" end="39910" title="armoured reconnaissance" label="armoured reconnaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q348120" start="39912" end="39922" title="Amphibious warfare" label="amphibious"/>
<link wikidata="Q939087" start="39926" end="39937" title="air assault" label="air assault"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241267" start="40032" end="40043" title="tank gun" label="main weapon"/>
<link wikidata="Q170417" start="40089" end="40096" title="caliber" label="caliber"/>
<link wikidata="Q81103" start="40097" end="40103" title="cannon" label="cannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131496" start="40117" end="40133" title="Gun laying" label="fully traversing"/>
<link wikidata="Q558591" start="40145" end="40155" title="gun turret" label="gun turret"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064392" start="40190" end="40200" title="smoothbore" label="smoothbore"/>
<link wikidata="Q868534" start="40261" end="40276" title="armour-piercing" label="armour-piercing"/>
<link wikidata="Q858329" start="40277" end="40302" title="kinetic energy penetrator" label="kinetic energy penetrator"/>
<link wikidata="Q73116" start="40325" end="40357" title="armour-piercing discarding sabot" label="armour-piercing discarding sabot"/>
<link wikidata="Q14624303" start="40373" end="40420" title="APFSDS" label="armour-piercing fin-stabilized discarding sabot"/>
<link wikidata="Q60124" start="40434" end="40458" title="high-explosive anti-tank" label="high-explosive anti-tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q318028" start="40466" end="40472" title="shell (projectile)" label="shells"/>
<link wikidata="Q1034063" start="40481" end="40507" title="high-explosive squash head" label="high-explosive squash head"/>
<link wikidata="Q282472" start="40522" end="40546" title="anti-tank guided missile" label="anti-tank guided missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q318028" start="40595" end="40609" title="High-explosive fragmentation" label="high-explosive"/>
<link wikidata="Q318028" start="40615" end="40621" title="High-explosive fragmentation" label="shells"/>
<link wikidata="Q57821" start="40698" end="40712" title="fortifications" label="fortifications"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427237" start="40714" end="40727" title="Canister shot" label="Canister shot"/>
<link wikidata="Q110877588" start="40823" end="40831" title="Shrapnel (fragment)" label="shrapnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q483400" start="40872" end="40881" title="gyroscope" label="gyroscope"/>
<link wikidata="Q918306" start="41056" end="41066" title="thermal insulation" label="insulating"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918757" start="41067" end="41082" title="Thermal sleeve" label="thermal sleeves"/>
<link wikidata="Q6583695" start="41129" end="41146" title="thermal expansion" label="thermal expansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2133085" start="41148" end="41162" title="bore evacuator" label="bore evacuator"/>
<link wikidata="Q840773" start="41237" end="41249" title="muzzle brake" label="muzzle brake"/>
<link wikidata="Q749601" start="41277" end="41283" title="recoil" label="recoil"/>
<link wikidata="Q753454" start="41300" end="41312" title="rate of fire" label="rate of fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q4213" start="41431" end="41441" title="telescope" label="telescopic"/>
<link wikidata="Q183122" start="41442" end="41451" title="periscope" label="periscope"/>
<link wikidata="Q7580142" start="41831" end="41845" title="spotting rifle" label="spotting rifle"/>
<link wikidata="Q518184" start="41982" end="41999" title="tracer ammunition" label="tracer ammunition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426632" start="42295" end="42313" title="laser rangefinder" label="laser rangefinding"/>
<link wikidata="Q328989" start="42362" end="42383" title="night vision device" label="light intensification"/>
<link wikidata="Q624587" start="42388" end="42403" title="thermal imaging" label="thermal imaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568940" start="42568" end="42587" title="fire-control system" label="fire-control system"/>
<link wikidata="Q190241" start="42677" end="42689" title="thermocouple" label="thermocouple"/>
<link wikidata="Q175029" start="42691" end="42701" title="anemometer" label="anemometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q524738" start="42706" end="42715" title="wind vane" label="wind vane"/>
<link wikidata="Q44528" start="42926" end="42932" title="Vector (geometric)" label="vector"/>
<link wikidata="Q789762" start="43021" end="43031" title="External ballistics" label="ballistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q641888" start="43049" end="43058" title="elevation (ballistics)" label="elevation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4697166" start="43063" end="43072" title="Aiming point" label="aim point"/>
<link wikidata="Q29171" start="43290" end="43298" title="infantry" label="infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q649062" start="43300" end="43314" title="Armoured car (military)" label="light vehicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050818" start="43318" end="43335" title="close air support" label="close air support"/>
<link wikidata="Q1700804" start="43429" end="43438" title="coaxial weapon" label="coaxially"/>
<link wikidata="Q86739852" start="43472" end="43485" title="anti-aircraft" label="anti-aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088669" start="44558" end="44571" title="survivability" label="survivability"/>
<link wikidata="Q327394" start="44600" end="44624" title="rocket-propelled grenade" label="rocket-propelled grenade"/>
<link wikidata="Q2303491" start="44773" end="44787" title="tandem-warhead" label="tandem-warhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123804" start="45038" end="45044" title="RPG-29" label="RPG-29"/>
<link wikidata="Q167096" start="45422" end="45438" title="Molotov cocktail" label="Molotov cocktail"/>
<link wikidata="Q123516842" start="45730" end="45744" title="countermeasure" label="countermeasure"/>
<link wikidata="Q196086" start="45760" end="45770" title="military camouflage" label="camouflage"/>
<link wikidata="Q4312534" start="46545" end="46552" title="Nakidka" label="Nakidka"/>
<link wikidata="Q14620" start="46595" end="46602" title="optical" label="optical"/>
<link wikidata="Q192593" start="46604" end="46611" title="Thermal radiation" label="thermal"/>
<link wikidata="Q11388" start="46613" end="46621" title="infrared" label="infrared"/>
<link wikidata="Q47528" start="46627" end="46632" title="radar" label="radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4451185" start="47415" end="47424" title="hull-down" label="hull-down"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="47534" end="47542" title="Enfilade and defilade#Defilade" label="defilade"/>
<link wikidata="Q898700" start="47667" end="47677" title="silhouette" label="silhouette"/>
<link wikidata="Q624587" start="47697" end="47701" title="thermal imaging" label="heat"/>
<link wikidata="Q4451185" start="48088" end="48092" title="hull-down" label="hide"/>
<link wikidata="Q624587" start="48413" end="48422" title="thermal imaging" label="detection"/>
<link wikidata="Q487005" start="48454" end="48474" title="thermal conductivity" label="thermal conductivity"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="48489" end="48505" title="heat#Heat dissipation" label="heat dissipation"/>
<link wikidata="Q308762" start="48643" end="48663" title="heat haze" label="column of warmer air"/>
<link wikidata="Q76299" start="48897" end="48913" title="visible spectrum" label="visible spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q184613" start="48916" end="48932" title="Grenade launcher" label="Grenade launcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q909879" start="48955" end="48967" title="smoke screen" label="smoke screen"/>
<link wikidata="Q11388" start="48986" end="48994" title="infrared" label="infrared"/>
<link wikidata="Q819577" start="49452" end="49477" title="armoured recovery vehicle" label="armoured recovery vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q858329" start="50032" end="50057" title="kinetic energy penetrator" label="kinetic energy penetrator"/>
<link wikidata="Q60124" start="50063" end="50087" title="high-explosive anti-tank" label="high-explosive anti-tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q7905205" start="50203" end="50210" title="Mortar (weapon)" label="mortars"/>
<link wikidata="Q173517" start="50212" end="50220" title="grenades" label="grenades"/>
<link wikidata="Q327394" start="50222" end="50246" title="rocket-propelled grenade" label="rocket-propelled grenade"/>
<link wikidata="Q282472" start="50249" end="50273" title="anti-tank guided missile" label="anti-tank guided missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q178795" start="50276" end="50291" title="land mine" label="anti-tank mines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131614" start="50293" end="50309" title="anti-tank rifles" label="anti-tank rifles"/>
<link wikidata="Q127197" start="50311" end="50315" title="bomb" label="bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q64418" start="50325" end="50334" title="artillery" label="artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q49394" start="50358" end="50390" title="Weapon of mass destruction" label="nuclear, biological and chemical"/>
<link wikidata="Q670061" start="50459" end="50477" title="rolled homogeneous armour" label="Steel armour plate"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="50544" end="50557" title="carbon steel#Case hardening" label="face hardened"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150924" start="50639" end="50652" title="sloped armour" label="sloped armour"/>
<link wikidata="Q284813" start="50767" end="50780" title="shaped-charge" label="shaped-charge"/>
<link wikidata="Q159142" start="50810" end="50821" title="Panzerfaust" label="Panzerfaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q319432" start="50826" end="50833" title="bazooka" label="bazooka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566984" start="50913" end="50926" title="spaced armour" label="spaced armour"/>
<link wikidata="Q201048" start="50969" end="50982" title="diamagnetism" label="anti-magnetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q672645" start="51219" end="51233" title="Chobham armour" label="Chobham armour"/>
<link wikidata="Q966330" start="51253" end="51269" title="composite armour" label="composite armour"/>
<link wikidata="Q45621" start="51285" end="51292" title="ceramic" label="ceramic"/>
<link wikidata="Q145205" start="51312" end="51317" title="resin" label="resin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1034063" start="51400" end="51426" title="High-explosive squash head" label="High-explosive squash head"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024411" start="51443" end="51453" title="spall" label="anti-spall"/>
<link wikidata="Q9698" start="51559" end="51575" title="depleted uranium" label="depleted uranium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052411" start="51615" end="51630" title="Reactive armour" label="Reactive armour"/>
<link wikidata="Q2303491" start="51803" end="51817" title="Tandem warhead" label="Tandem warhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q858329" start="52135" end="52160" title="kinetic energy penetrator" label="kinetic energy penetrator"/>
<link wikidata="Q333043" start="52401" end="52425" title="active protection system" label="active protection system"/>
<link wikidata="Q333043" start="52569" end="52578" title="Soft kill" label="Soft kill"/>
<link wikidata="Q912748" start="52609" end="52615" title="Shtora" label="Shtora"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156840" start="52924" end="52930" title="Trophy (countermeasure)" label="Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155450" start="53012" end="53017" title="Drozd" label="Drozd"/>
<link wikidata="Q296600" start="53031" end="53036" title="Arena active protection system" label="Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156840" start="53050" end="53056" title="Trophy (countermeasure)" label="Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q942242" start="53061" end="53070" title="Iron Fist (countermeasure)" label="Iron Fist"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="53079" end="53084" title="ERAWA" label="ERAWA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7271698" start="53103" end="53113" title="Quick Kill" label="Quick Kill"/>
<link wikidata="Q282472" start="53194" end="53202" title="anti-tank missile" label="missiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q327394" start="53204" end="53208" title="rocket-propelled grenade" label="RPGs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1303061" start="53285" end="53314" title="Friendly fire" label="danger zone for nearby troops"/>
<link wikidata="Q940913" start="54243" end="54259" title="continuous track" label="continuous track"/>
<link wikidata="Q5610964" start="54369" end="54384" title="ground pressure" label="ground pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q130368" start="54938" end="54963" title="armoured fighting vehicle" label="armoured fighting vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5610964" start="55248" end="55263" title="ground pressure" label="ground pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q16259746" start="55324" end="55336" title="Transmission (mechanics)" label="transmission"/>
<link wikidata="Q940913" start="55341" end="55346" title="Continuous track" label="track"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="55457" end="55467" title="suspension (vehicle)#Armoured fighting vehicle suspension" label="suspension"/>
<link wikidata="Q513614" start="55694" end="55702" title="Christie suspension" label="Christie"/>
<link wikidata="Q668566" start="55712" end="55723" title="torsion-bar" label="torsion-bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q57249" start="55748" end="55765" title="Ferdinand Porsche" label="Ferdinand Porsche"/>
<link wikidata="Q46276" start="55905" end="55919" title="kinetic energy" label="kinetic energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11651" start="55942" end="55950" title="electric current" label="electric"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="55963" end="55972" title="Electrical generator#Vehicle-mounted generators" label="generator"/>
<link wikidata="Q558591" start="55999" end="56005" title="gun turret" label="turret"/>
<link wikidata="Q12757" start="56177" end="56184" title="internal combustion engines" label="engines"/>
<link wikidata="Q174174" start="56188" end="56201" title="diesel engine" label="diesel engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q129128" start="56286" end="56294" title="Type 89B" label="Type 89B"/>
<link wikidata="Q5042317" start="56349" end="56361" title="fuel efficiency" label="fuel economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752590" start="56511" end="56521" title="multi-fuel" label="multi-fuel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="56522" end="56536" title="Diesel engine#Quality and variety of fuels" label="diesel engines"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="56556" end="56568" title="Gas turbine#Tanks" label="Gas turbines"/>
<link wikidata="Q237135" start="56672" end="56676" title="T-80" label="T-80"/>
<link wikidata="Q173684" start="56690" end="56699" title="M1 Abrams" label="M1 Abrams"/>
<link wikidata="Q151197" start="56734" end="56749" title="combat engineer" label="combat engineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q12743" start="56772" end="56776" title="Ford (crossing)" label="ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q192757" start="56959" end="56963" title="T-90" label="T-90"/>
<link wikidata="Q153440" start="56979" end="56988" title="Leopard 1" label="Leopard 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q151968" start="56993" end="57002" title="Leopard 2" label="Leopard 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q7918609" start="57075" end="57082" title="Vehicle snorkel" label="snorkel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6628565" start="57207" end="57215" title="List of military tactics" label="surprise"/>
<link wikidata="Q474698" start="57320" end="57335" title="Amphibious tank" label="Amphibious tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q700689" start="57485" end="57511" title="amphibious assault vehicle" label="amphibious assault vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4407246" start="57516" end="57542" title="armoured personnel carrier" label="armoured personnel carrier"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="57572" end="57591" title="Amphibious warfare#Post–World War II" label="amphibious assaults"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342357" start="57614" end="57631" title="EFA (mobile bridge)" label="EFA mobile bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q996525" start="57636" end="57678" title="Armoured vehicle-launched bridge" label="armoured vehicle-launched scissors bridges"/>
<link wikidata="Q3275913" start="57845" end="57856" title="auto-loader" label="auto-loader"/>
<link wikidata="Q11247470" start="57888" end="57897" title="Commanding officer" label="Commander"/>
<link wikidata="Q64418" start="58134" end="58140" title="Gunner (artillery)" label="Gunner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131496" start="58173" end="58196" title="Gun laying" label="laying (aiming) the gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q999646" start="59002" end="59008" title="Driver (person)" label="Driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q65169798" start="60658" end="60677" title="Richard Ogorkiewicz" label="Richard Ogorkiewicz"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="60847" end="60854" title="Engine#Combustion engine" label="Engines"/>
<link wikidata="Q16259746" start="60857" end="60870" title="Transmission (mechanics)" label="Transmissions"/>
<link wikidata="Q272870" start="60873" end="60884" title="Suspension (vehicle)" label="Suspensions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1807549" start="60889" end="60901" title="running gear" label="running gear"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241267" start="60929" end="60933" title="Tank gun" label="Guns"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="60938" end="60948" title="Ammunition#Ordnance ammunition" label="ammunition"/>
<link wikidata="Q184631" start="60951" end="60961" title="Ballistics" label="Ballistics"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="61033" end="61045" title="Night Vision#Night vision technologies" label="night vision"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568940" start="61056" end="61076" title="Fire-control system" label="Fire control systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q5618355" start="61110" end="61129" title="Gun data computer" label="Gun control systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q32050" start="61132" end="61146" title="Precision-guided munition" label="Guided weapons"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="61149" end="61155" title="Vehicle armour#Armoured fighting vehicles" label="Armour"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="61603" end="61609" title="Magach#Versions" label="Magach"/>
<link wikidata="Q151221" start="63222" end="63229" title="Tiger I" label="Tiger I"/>
<link wikidata="Q382421" start="63234" end="63239" title="M60A2 Starship" label="M60A2"/>
<link wikidata="Q172233" start="63607" end="63611" title="T-34" label="T-34"/>
<link wikidata="Q191643" start="63623" end="63633" title="M4 Sherman" label="M4 Sherman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1654960" start="64490" end="64494" title="IT-1" label="IT-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q270697" start="64499" end="64503" title="T-64" label="T-64"/>
<link wikidata="Q190986" start="64544" end="64551" title="Merkava" label="Merkava"/>
<link wikidata="Q684337" start="64564" end="64570" title="S-tank" label="S-tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q495189" start="64604" end="64608" title="M551" label="M551"/>
<link wikidata="Q21662260" start="64705" end="64732" title="C4ISTAR" label="Commanding and coordinating"/>
<link wikidata="Q1301371" start="64914" end="64923" title="computer network" label="networked"/>
<link wikidata="Q1665453" start="64925" end="64943" title="system integration" label="integrated systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q478123" start="64998" end="65019" title="situational awareness" label="situational awareness"/>
<link wikidata="Q12053830" start="65090" end="65099" title="bulkhead (partition)" label="bulkheads"/>
<link wikidata="Q79897" start="65402" end="65412" title="Morse code" label="Morse code"/>
<link wikidata="Q107969857" start="65508" end="65537" title="Tank phone" label="a field telephone to the rear"/>
<link wikidata="Q250796" start="65816" end="65831" title="Flag semaphore" label="semaphore flags"/>
<link wikidata="Q251395" start="65862" end="65870" title="Red Army" label="Red Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q43456" start="65871" end="65882" title="Soviet Army" label="Soviet Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q2603074" start="66616" end="66624" title="intercom" label="intercom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068715" start="66703" end="66716" title="communications network" label="radio network"/>
<link wikidata="Q17157420" start="66860" end="66875" title="voice procedure" label="voice procedure"/>
<link wikidata="Q16969536" start="66951" end="66960" title="Equipment of the Italian Army" label="equipment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568940" start="67013" end="67032" title="fire control system" label="fire control system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426632" start="67034" end="67051" title="laser rangefinder" label="laser rangefinder"/>
<link wikidata="Q18822" start="67053" end="67078" title="Global Positioning System" label="Global Positioning System"/>
<link wikidata="Q64122" start="67107" end="67115" title="Electromagnetic pulse" label="hardened"/>
<link wikidata="Q11650" start="67139" end="67150" title="electronics" label="electronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1301371" start="67157" end="67176" title="computer networks" label="battlefield network"/>
<link wikidata="Q5290" start="67241" end="67248" title="computer monitor" label="monitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q484000" start="67320" end="67324" title="Unmanned aerial vehicles" label="UAVs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475592" start="67368" end="67388" title="Future Force Warrior" label="Future Force Warrior"/>
<link wikidata="Q478123" start="67439" end="67460" title="situational awareness" label="situational awareness"/>
<link wikidata="Q102066" start="67476" end="67484" title="navigate" label="navigate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140666" start="67707" end="67730" title="Network-centric warfare" label="Network-centric warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q7000680" start="67742" end="67768" title="Network Enabled Capability" label="Network Enabled Capability"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="67777" end="67814" title="Digital Army (IDF)" label="Digital Army Battle Management System"/>
<link wikidata="Q495177" start="67872" end="67889" title="K2 Black Panther" label="K-2 Black Panther"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="67954" end="67990" title="radar integrated Fire Control System" label="radar integrated Fire Control System"/>
<link wikidata="Q65670791" start="68369" end="68391" title="circular review system" label="circular review system"/>
<link wikidata="Q254183" start="68414" end="68431" title="Augmented reality" label="Augmented reality"/>
<link wikidata="Q11660" start="68436" end="68459" title="Artificial Intelligence" label="Artificial Intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q333043" start="68551" end="68575" title="active protection system" label="active protection system"/>
<link wikidata="Q4402369" start="68681" end="68703" title="radar warning receiver" label="radar warning receiver"/>
<link wikidata="Q909879" start="68799" end="68811" title="smoke screen" label="smoke screen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067247" start="68816" end="68829" title="smoke grenade" label="smoke grenade"/>
<link wikidata="Q920182" start="69195" end="69211" title="main battle tank" label="main battle tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q495177" start="69227" end="69243" title="K2 Black Panther" label="K2 Black Panther"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="29972" wikidata="Q379932" url="?curid=29972" title="Herbal tea">
<text>Herbal teas, technically known as herbal infusions, and less commonly called tisanes (UK and US , US also ), are beverages made from the infusion or decoction of herbs, spices, or other plant material in hot water. Often herb tea, or the plain term tea, is used as a reference to all sorts of herbal teas. Many herbs used in teas/tisanes are also used in herbal medicine and in folk medicine.

These &quot;teas&quot; do not usually contain any true &quot;tea&quot; (&quot;Camellia sinensis&quot;), but some herbal blends do contain true tea (e.g., the Indian classic masala chai). The term &quot;herbal&quot; tea is often used to distinguish these beverages from &quot;true&quot; teas (e.g., black, green, white, yellow, oolong), which are prepared from the cured leaves of the tea plant, &quot;Camellia sinensis&quot;. Unlike true teas, most tisanes do not naturally contain caffeine (though tea can be decaffeinated, i.e., processed to remove caffeine). 

A number of plants, however, &quot;do&quot; contain psychoactive compounds, such as caffeine or another stimulant, like theobromine, cocaine or ephedrine. Some have the opposite effect, acting as a sedative. Some common infusions have specific names such as &quot;mate&quot; (yerba mate) and &quot;rooibos&quot; (red bush). Hibiscus tea is one type of herbal infusion, but many described as some other plant have hibiscus as the main ingredient, or a major one.

== Etymology ==

Some feel that the term &quot;tisane&quot; is more correct than &quot;herbal tea&quot; or that the latter is even misleading, but most dictionaries record that the word &quot;tea&quot; is also used to refer to other plants beside the tea plant and to beverages made from these other plants. In any case, the term &quot;herbal tea&quot; is very well established and much more common than &quot;tisane&quot;. 

Furthermore, in the &quot;Etymology of tea,&quot; the most ancient term for tea was (pronounced &quot;tu&quot;) which originally referred to various plants such as sow thistle, chicory, or smartweed, and was later used to exclusively refer to &quot;Camellia sinensis&quot; (true &quot;tea&quot;). 

The word &quot;tisane&quot; was rare in its modern sense before the 20th century, when it was borrowed in the modern sense from French. This is why some people feel it should be pronounced as in French, but the original English pronunciation continues to be more common in US English and especially in UK English.

The word had already existed in late Middle English in the sense of &quot;medicinal drink&quot; and had already been borrowed from French (Old French). The Old French word came from the Latin word , which came from the Ancient Greek word (), which meant &quot;peeled&quot; barley, in other words pearl barley, and a drink made from this that is similar to modern barley water.

== Composition and usage ==
Herbal teas can be made with any part of a plant, including fresh or dried flowers, fruit, leaves, stems, seeds or roots. These parts may be steeped fully raw (as picked) or processed in some way (such as drying, roasting, crushing, tearing / cutting, steaming, etc.). 
Herbal infusions may be made by pouring hot or boiling water over the plant parts and letting them steep for a period of time. The infusion temperature and time can vary depending on the type of plant part used and their properties. For example, some plant parts are covered in oils which may take some time to separate. Brewing with cold water will take much longer as well, usually several hours. 

An herbal tea may be strained or not (as with mate where a special straw called a bombilla is used for drinking). 

Some herbal teas are blends which include various different herbs or plant parts. Herbal infusions may also be sweetened, spiced, salted, or combined with other additives, like milk or lemon juice. 

Some herbal teas are also infused in alcohol, either for medicinal purposes or to make an herbal liquor.

Herbal teas are commonly used in Herbal medicine and in traditional medical cultures, like Indian Ayurveda and Traditional Chinese medicine. Many ancient and medieval Herbal texts contain evidence for the use of various herb infusions throughout human history. Various herbal teas have been promoted throughout history as folk remedies for various diseases and in some cultures they retain their status as local folk cures. 

Many companies produce herbal tea bags for such infusions or sell bottled herbal teas.

== Varieties ==
Herbal teas can be made from any edible plant material, below is a list of common herbal infusions. Some herbal teas are made from plants which contain caffeine, and other herbal infusions may contain other psychoactive compounds. However, many other common herbal teas have not been shown psychoactive properties when compared to placebos, though they may still have some physical effects. 

Many herbal teas on the market may also be blends which include various herbs or plant parts. These blends may also include additives, like flavorings.

=== Caffeinated infusions ===

* Cacao bean tea, which contains theobromine and a small amount of caffeine. 
* Coffee-leaf tea, coffee fruit tea, and coffee blossom tea are herbal teas made using the leaves, fruits and flowers of the coffee plant
* Guayusa tea, made from the caffeinated leaves of the &quot;ilex guayusa&quot; holly, native to the Amazon rainforest
* Mate, a South American caffeinated tea made from the holly yerba mate (&quot;Ilex paraguariensis&quot;)
* Yaupon tea, caffeinated leaves of the yaupon holly, native to North America
* Tea made from &quot;Ilex cassine,&quot; which has less caffeine than yaupon, but more theobromine.
=== Other psychoactive infusions ===
* Cannabis tea, which contains the psychoactive THC. It is a common drink in India, where it is known as bhang.
* Coca tea, infusion made from coca leaves. Contains trace amounts of cocaine and similar alkaloids. In some countries where coca is illegal, products marketed as &quot;coca tea&quot; are supposed to be &quot;decocainized&quot;, i.e., the pharmacologically active components have been removed from the leaf using the same chemicals as manufacturing cocaine.
* Kava root tea, common in Pacific island cultures (Polynesia, Melanesia, Micronesia), which has sedative effects and anesthetic effects caused by compounds called kavalactones. The traditional form is a water-based suspension of kava roots.
* Kratom tea made from the dried leaves of the kratom tree. It has opioid-like properties and some stimulant-like effects.
* St. John&#x27;s wort tea, the plant has been shown to have antidepressant properties according to a 2017 meta-analysis. 
* Ephedra tea, mainly from the plant &quot;Ephedra sinica&quot;. It contains the stimulant ephedrine. It has been used in traditional Chinese medicine, where it is called &quot;máhuáng,&quot; for more than 2,000 years. Ephedra tea was also used by Native Americans and Mormons, hence the name &quot;Mormon tea&quot; and &quot;Indian tea&quot;. 
* Poppy tea, brewed from the poppy straw or seeds of several species of poppy (most commonly &quot;Papaver somniferum&quot;). Since it contains opium, it is consumed for its narcotic, sedative and analgesic properties. 
* &quot;Salvia divinorum&quot; (&quot;Sage of the diviners&quot;) tea which contains &quot;salvinorin A&quot;, a compound that induces a dissociative state and hallucinations. 
* Dream herb (&quot;Calea ternifolia&quot;) an oneirogen (dream inducing herb) native to the Americas made into a tea by Mexican peoples. 
* African dream root &quot;(Silene undulata)&quot; which is an oneirogen used by the Xhosa people as a sacred plant. 
* Ayahuasca, a highly psychoactive and hallucinogenic infusion brewed from the &quot;Banisteriopsis caapi&quot; vine and the leaves of the &quot;Psychotria viridis&quot; shrub. It is prepared and drunk by native peoples of the Amazon basin as a healing drug and as a spiritual shamanic brew. 
* &quot;Tabernanthe iboga,&quot; which can be made into an infusion, is traditionally used by the peoples of Central Africa and in African traditional medicine as a stimulant (in low doses) or as a powerful ritual hallucinogen (in larger quantities)&quot;.&quot; 
* Tobacco tea, which contains nicotine and is traditionally used by the indigenous peoples of the Americas as a medicine for various ills (dizziness, headaches), as a laxative, as an emetic and as an expectorant. 

=== Non-caffeinated and non-psychoactive infusions ===

* Anise tea, made from either the seeds or the leaves
* Asiatic penny-wort leaf, in South Asia and Southeast Asia
* Artichoke tea
* Commiphora gileadensis tea, in the Hijaz region of western Arabia.
* Bael fruit tea
* Bee balm
* Boldo, used in South America
* Burdock; the seeds, leaves, and roots have been used
* Butterfly pea flower tea (from &quot;Clitoria ternatea&quot;), also called &quot;Blue tea&quot; since it produces a blue infusion
* Caraway, tea made from the seeds
* Catnip, tea used as a relaxant, sedative, and to calm
* Chamomile
* Che dang, bitter tea made from &quot;Ilex &quot; leaves
* Chinese knotweed tea
* Chrysanthemum tea, made from dried flowers
* Cinnamon tea
* Clover tea, made from the blossoms
* Cerasse, bitter Jamaican herb
* Citrus peel, including bergamot, lemon and orange peel
* Dandelion coffee, which does not contain caffeine despite the name
* Dill tea
* Dried lime tea, made from dried limes common in western Asia
* Echinacea tea
* Elderberry
* European mistletoe (&quot;Viscum album&quot;), (steep in cold water for 2–6 hours)
* Essiac tea, blended herbal tea
* Fennel
* Gentian
* Ginger root can be made into herbal tea, known in the Philippines as &quot;salabat&quot;
* Ginkgo biloba
* Ginseng, a common tea in China and Korea, commonly used as a stimulant and as a caffeine substitute
* Goji berry tea
* Hawthorn
* Hibiscus (often blended with rose hip), a common tea in the Middle East or Asia
* Honeybush, similar to rooibos and grows in a nearby area of South Africa, but tastes slightly sweeter. Has a low tannin content, no caffeine.
* Horehound
* Houttuynia
* Hydrangea tea, dried leaves of hydrangeas; considerable care must be taken because most species contain a toxin. The &quot;safe&quot; hydrangeas belong to the &quot;Hydrangea serrata&quot; Amacha (&quot;sweet tea&quot;) cultivar group.
* Jasmine flower tea, though it is commonly blended with tea leaves, jasmine flowers are also sometimes infused on their own
* Jiaogulan (also known as &quot;xiancao&quot; or &quot;poor man&#x27;s ginseng&quot;)
* Kapor tea, dried leaves of fireweed
* Kelp tea, East Asian tea made from kelp, known as &quot;konbu-cha&quot; in Japan
* Kuzuyu, a thick white Japanese tea made by adding kudzu flour to hot water
* Labrador tea, made from the shrub by the same name, found in the northern part of North America
* Lavender tea 
* Lemon balm
* Lemon and ginger tea
* Lemongrass tea
* Luo han guo
* Licorice root
* Lime blossom, dried flowers of the lime tree (&quot;tilia&quot; in Latin).
* Meadowsweet herb
* Mint (mint tea), made from various mints, especially peppermint and spearmint. It is also commonly mixed with green tea, as in Maghrebi mint tea. Korean mint tea is one popular pure mint herbal tea.
* Mound of termites tea in Merauke
* Moringa
* Mountain tea, common in the Balkans and other areas of the Mediterranean region. Made from a variety of the &quot;Sideritis syriaca&quot; plant which grows in warm climates above 3,000 feet. Records of its use date back 2,000 years.
* Neem leaf
* Nettle leaf
* New Jersey tea (&quot;Ceanothus americanus&quot;), which has a mild blood pressure lowering effect.
* Noni tea
* Oksusu cha, traditional roasted corn tea found in Korea
* Olive leaf tea
* Oregano tea
* Osmanthus tea, dried flowers of the sweet olive tree, are used alone or blended with tea leaves in China.
* Pandan tea
* Patchouli tea
* Pennyroyal leaf, an abortifacient
* Pine tea, or &quot;tallstrunt&quot;, made from needles of pine trees
* Qishr, Yemeni drink with coffee husks and ginger
* Red clover tea
* Red raspberry leaf
* Barley tea, East Asian drink with roasted barley
* Rosa × damascena tea, in the Middle East.
* Roasted wheat, used in Postum, a coffee substitute
* Rooibos (red bush), a reddish plant used to make an infusion and grown in South Africa. In the US it is sometimes called red tea. It has many of the antioxidant characteristics of green tea, but because it does not come from tea leaves, it has no caffeine.
* Rose hip (often blended with hibiscus)
* Roselle petals (species of hibiscus; known by other names including &quot;bissau&quot; and &quot;dah&quot;), consumed in the Sahel and elsewhere
* Rosemary
* Sagebrush, California sagebrush
* Sage
* Sakurayu, Japanese herbal tea made with pickled cherry blossom petals
* Sassafras roots were steeped to make tea, a practice which was common among Native Americans. They were also used in the flavoring of root beer until being banned by the FDA.
* Scorched rice, known as &quot;hyeonmi cha&quot; in Korea
* Skullcap
* Shallot peel tea from Kalimantan
* Serendib (tea), tea from Sri Lanka
* Sobacha
* Spicebush (&quot;Lindera benzoin&quot;) leaves used to make a tea by some native peoples of eastern North America
* Spruce tea, made from needles of spruce trees
* Staghorn sumac, fruit can be made into a lemonade
* Stevia, can be used to make herbal tea, or as a sweetener in other beverages
* Sweet potato leaf tea, a common herbal tea in Chinese medicine
* Thyme, contains thymol
* Tulsi, or holy basil
* Turmeric tea
* &quot;Uncaria tomentosa&quot;, commonly known as cat&#x27;s claw
* Valerian is used as a sedative, but clinical evidence for its psychoactive properties are inconclusive.
* Verbena (vervain)
* Wax gourd in East Asia and Southeast Asia.
* Wong Lo Kat, a recipe for herbal tea from Guangdong, China since the Qing Dynasty
* Woodruff
* Yarrow

== Health risks ==
While most herbal teas are safe for regular consumption, some herbs have toxic or allergenic effects. Among the greatest causes of concern are:
* Comfrey, which contains alkaloids which may be harmful to the liver from chronic use, and particularly is not recommended during pregnancy or when prescription drugs are used; comfrey is not recommended for oral use.
* Lobelia, which contains alkaloids and has traditional medicine uses for smoking cessation, may cause nausea, vomiting, or dizziness at high doses.

Herbal teas can also have different effects from person to person, and this is further compounded by the problem of potential misidentification. The deadly foxglove, for example, can be mistaken for the much more benign (but still relatively toxic to the liver) comfrey. Care must be taken not to use any poisonous plants.

The US does not require herbal teas to have any evidence concerning their efficacy, but does treat them technically as food products and require that they be safe for consumption.

Fruit or fruit-flavored tea is usually acidic and thus may contribute to erosion of tooth enamel.

=== Adverse herb‑drug interactions ===

Some phytochemicals found in herbs and fruits can adversely interact with others and over the counter or prescription medications, among other ways by affecting their metabolism by the body. Herbs and fruits that inhibit or induce the body&#x27;s Cytochrome P450 enzyme complex function can either cause the drug to be dangerously ineffective, or increase its effective absorbed dose to potentially toxic levels, respectively. Best known examples of adverse herb‑drug interactions are grapefruit or St John&#x27;s wort, contraindicated for several medications including Paxlovid and oral contraceptives, but other herbs also affect the CYP enzyme family, showing herb‑drug interactions.

=== Contamination ===

Depending on the source of the herbal ingredients, herbal teas, like any crop, may be contaminated with pesticides or heavy metals.
According to Naithani &amp; Kakkar (2004), &quot;all herbal preparations should be checked for toxic chemical residues to allay consumer fears of exposure to known neuro-toxicant pesticides and to aid in promoting global acceptance of these products&quot;.

== See also ==

* List of hot beverages
* Tea culture
* Health effects of tea
* Tincture, the often more concentrated plant extracts made in pure grain alcohol, glycerin, or vinegar
* Yerba mate
* Hot chocolate
* Coffee substitute
* Tea in France
*Chinese sweet tea

==References==
==External links==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q379932" start="0" end="11" title="Herbal tea" label="Herbal teas"/>
<link wikidata="Q379932" start="34" end="50" title="Herbal tea" label="herbal infusions"/>
<link wikidata="Q379932" start="77" end="84" title="Herbal tea" label="tisanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q61951" start="137" end="145" title="infusion" label="infusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136912" start="149" end="158" title="decoction" label="decoction"/>
<link wikidata="Q207123" start="162" end="166" title="herb" label="herb"/>
<link wikidata="Q42527" start="169" end="174" title="spice" label="spice"/>
<link wikidata="Q756" start="186" end="191" title="plant" label="plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q379932" start="221" end="229" title="Herbal tea" label="herb tea"/>
<link wikidata="Q861699" start="355" end="370" title="herbal medicine" label="herbal medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q771035" start="378" end="391" title="Traditional medicine" label="folk medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6097" start="455" end="458" title="tea" label="tea"/>
<link wikidata="Q101815" start="472" end="489" title="Camellia sinensis" label="Camellia sinensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q877661" start="567" end="578" title="masala chai" label="masala chai"/>
<link wikidata="Q203415" start="692" end="697" title="black tea" label="black"/>
<link wikidata="Q484083" start="699" end="704" title="green tea" label="green"/>
<link wikidata="Q238306" start="706" end="711" title="white tea" label="white"/>
<link wikidata="Q824529" start="713" end="719" title="yellow tea" label="yellow"/>
<link wikidata="Q231587" start="721" end="727" title="oolong" label="oolong"/>
<link wikidata="Q101815" start="795" end="812" title="Camellia sinensis" label="Camellia sinensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q60235" start="876" end="884" title="caffeine" label="caffeine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3497571" start="904" end="917" title="decaffeinated" label="decaffeinated"/>
<link wikidata="Q211036" start="1062" end="1071" title="stimulant" label="stimulant"/>
<link wikidata="Q206844" start="1078" end="1089" title="theobromine" label="theobromine"/>
<link wikidata="Q41576" start="1091" end="1098" title="cocaine" label="cocaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q219626" start="1102" end="1111" title="ephedrine" label="ephedrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q847705" start="1156" end="1164" title="sedative" label="sedative"/>
<link wikidata="Q61951" start="1178" end="1186" title="infusion" label="infusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q203540" start="1216" end="1232" title="Mate (drink)" label="&amp;quot;mate&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q272181" start="1256" end="1263" title="rooibos" label="rooibos"/>
<link wikidata="Q940047" start="1282" end="1294" title="Hibiscus tea" label="Hibiscus tea"/>
<link wikidata="Q101815" start="1672" end="1681" title="Camellia sinensis" label="tea plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q18354145" start="1873" end="1889" title="Etymology of tea" label="Etymology of tea"/>
<link wikidata="Q7571842" start="2011" end="2022" title="sow thistle" label="sow thistle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2544599" start="2024" end="2031" title="chicory" label="chicory"/>
<link wikidata="Q271400" start="2036" end="2045" title="Polygonum" label="smartweed"/>
<link wikidata="Q101815" start="2096" end="2113" title="Camellia sinensis" label="Camellia sinensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="2341" end="2347" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q36395" start="2498" end="2512" title="Middle English" label="Middle English"/>
<link wikidata="Q35222" start="2600" end="2610" title="Old French" label="Old French"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="2680" end="2693" title="Ancient Greek" label="Ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q2743860" start="2757" end="2769" title="pearl barley" label="pearl barley"/>
<link wikidata="Q397762" start="2824" end="2836" title="barley water" label="barley water"/>
<link wikidata="Q506" start="2942" end="2949" title="Flower" label="flowers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3314483" start="2951" end="2956" title="fruit" label="fruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q33971" start="2958" end="2964" title="Leaf" label="leaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q41500" start="2982" end="2987" title="Root" label="roots"/>
<link wikidata="Q41716" start="3184" end="3191" title="boiling" label="boiling"/>
<link wikidata="Q17118910" start="3458" end="3481" title="Cold brew tea" label="Brewing with cold water"/>
<link wikidata="Q203540" start="3584" end="3588" title="Mate (drink)" label="mate"/>
<link wikidata="Q891922" start="3620" end="3628" title="bombilla" label="bombilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q47146337" start="3891" end="3898" title="Alcohol (drug)" label="alcohol"/>
<link wikidata="Q56139" start="3951" end="3957" title="liquor" label="liquor"/>
<link wikidata="Q861699" start="3993" end="4008" title="Herbal medicine" label="Herbal medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q132325" start="4058" end="4066" title="Ayurveda" label="Ayurveda"/>
<link wikidata="Q200253" start="4071" end="4099" title="Traditional Chinese medicine" label="Traditional Chinese medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6165948" start="4127" end="4139" title="Herbal" label="Herbal texts"/>
<link wikidata="Q771035" start="4282" end="4295" title="Traditional medicine" label="folk remedies"/>
<link wikidata="Q863250" start="4416" end="4423" title="tea bag" label="tea bag"/>
<link wikidata="Q60235" start="4642" end="4650" title="caffeine" label="caffeine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3706669" start="4697" end="4709" title="Psychoactive drug" label="psychoactive"/>
<link wikidata="Q269829" start="4821" end="4829" title="Placebo" label="placebos"/>
<link wikidata="Q4173974" start="5023" end="5033" title="Flavoring" label="flavorings"/>
<link wikidata="Q208008" start="5069" end="5079" title="Cacao bean" label="Cacao bean"/>
<link wikidata="Q206844" start="5100" end="5111" title="theobromine" label="theobromine"/>
<link wikidata="Q60235" start="5134" end="5142" title="caffeine" label="caffeine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5140969" start="5147" end="5162" title="Coffee-leaf tea" label="Coffee-leaf tea"/>
<link wikidata="Q5140938" start="5164" end="5180" title="coffee cherry tea" label="coffee fruit tea"/>
<link wikidata="Q8486" start="5270" end="5276" title="coffee" label="coffee"/>
<link wikidata="Q3772280" start="5285" end="5292" title="Ilex guayusa" label="Guayusa"/>
<link wikidata="Q117085" start="5363" end="5368" title="holly" label="holly"/>
<link wikidata="Q177567" start="5384" end="5401" title="Amazon rainforest" label="Amazon rainforest"/>
<link wikidata="Q203540" start="5404" end="5408" title="Mate_(drink)" label="Mate"/>
<link wikidata="Q117068" start="5463" end="5473" title="yerba mate" label="yerba mate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2611017" start="5510" end="5520" title="Black drink" label="Yaupon tea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010694" start="5548" end="5560" title="Ilex vomitoria" label="yaupon holly"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="5572" end="5585" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141413" start="5608" end="5620" title="Ilex cassine" label="Ilex cassine"/>
<link wikidata="Q206844" start="5674" end="5685" title="theobromine" label="theobromine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3503102" start="5726" end="5738" title="Cannabis tea" label="Cannabis tea"/>
<link wikidata="Q190067" start="5772" end="5775" title="Thc" label="THC"/>
<link wikidata="Q685071" start="5829" end="5834" title="bhang" label="bhang"/>
<link wikidata="Q969567" start="5838" end="5846" title="Coca tea" label="Coca tea"/>
<link wikidata="Q66793593" start="5867" end="5871" title="coca" label="coca"/>
<link wikidata="Q41576" start="5906" end="5913" title="cocaine" label="cocaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q161067" start="6196" end="6200" title="Kava" label="Kava"/>
<link wikidata="Q35942" start="6246" end="6255" title="Polynesia" label="Polynesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q37394" start="6257" end="6266" title="Melanesia" label="Melanesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3359409" start="6268" end="6278" title="Micronesia" label="Micronesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q574801" start="6291" end="6307" title="Sedation" label="sedative effects"/>
<link wikidata="Q4990531" start="6312" end="6322" title="anesthetic" label="anesthetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q408171" start="6358" end="6370" title="Kavalactone" label="kavalactones"/>
<link wikidata="Q139698" start="6438" end="6444" title="Kratom" label="Kratom"/>
<link wikidata="Q427523" start="6503" end="6509" title="opioid" label="opioid"/>
<link wikidata="Q211036" start="6535" end="6544" title="stimulant" label="stimulant"/>
<link wikidata="Q158289" start="6561" end="6581" title="St. John&amp;#x27;s wort" label="St. John&amp;#x27;s wort"/>
<link wikidata="Q76560" start="6620" end="6634" title="antidepressant" label="antidepressant"/>
<link wikidata="Q815382" start="6666" end="6679" title="meta-analysis" label="meta-analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q838000" start="6684" end="6691" title="Ephedra (plant)" label="Ephedra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2602813" start="6725" end="6739" title="Ephedra sinica" label="Ephedra sinica"/>
<link wikidata="Q219626" start="6773" end="6782" title="ephedrine" label="ephedrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q200253" start="6804" end="6832" title="traditional Chinese medicine" label="traditional Chinese medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="6930" end="6946" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="Native Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q476148" start="6951" end="6958" title="Mormon pioneers" label="Mormons"/>
<link wikidata="Q904422" start="7029" end="7038" title="Poppy tea" label="Poppy tea"/>
<link wikidata="Q4275875" start="7056" end="7067" title="poppy straw" label="poppy straw"/>
<link wikidata="Q2007388" start="7071" end="7076" title="Poppy seed" label="seeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q967457" start="7099" end="7104" title="poppy" label="poppy"/>
<link wikidata="Q131584" start="7126" end="7144" title="Papaver somniferum" label="Papaver somniferum"/>
<link wikidata="Q46452" start="7171" end="7176" title="opium" label="opium"/>
<link wikidata="Q940" start="7201" end="7209" title="narcotic" label="narcotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q173235" start="7224" end="7233" title="analgesic" label="analgesic"/>
<link wikidata="Q320584" start="7255" end="7271" title="Salvia divinorum" label="Salvia divinorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q413512" start="7338" end="7350" title="salvinorin A" label="salvinorin A"/>
<link wikidata="Q18663" start="7384" end="7402" title="Dissociation (psychology)" label="dissociative state"/>
<link wikidata="Q130741" start="7407" end="7421" title="Hallucination" label="hallucinations"/>
<link wikidata="Q150607" start="7426" end="7436" title="Calea ternifolia" label="Dream herb"/>
<link wikidata="Q5836105" start="7471" end="7480" title="oneirogen" label="oneirogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q150591" start="7565" end="7583" title="Silene undulata" label="African dream root"/>
<link wikidata="Q207996" start="7648" end="7660" title="Xhosa people" label="Xhosa people"/>
<link wikidata="Q310491" start="7666" end="7678" title="Entheogen" label="sacred plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q380436" start="7683" end="7692" title="Ayahuasca" label="Ayahuasca"/>
<link wikidata="Q194270" start="7720" end="7734" title="Hallucinogen" label="hallucinogenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q133573" start="7766" end="7786" title="Banisteriopsis caapi" label="Banisteriopsis caapi"/>
<link wikidata="Q133533" start="7826" end="7844" title="Psychotria viridis" label="Psychotria viridis"/>
<link wikidata="Q244451" start="7908" end="7920" title="Amazon basin" label="Amazon basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q42042" start="7958" end="7966" title="Shamanism" label="shamanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q132677" start="7982" end="7999" title="Tabernanthe iboga" label="Tabernanthe iboga"/>
<link wikidata="Q27433" start="8083" end="8097" title="Central Africa" label="Central Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2329068" start="8105" end="8133" title="African traditional medicine" label="African traditional medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566" start="8240" end="8247" title="Tobacco" label="Tobacco"/>
<link wikidata="Q28086552" start="8268" end="8276" title="nicotine" label="nicotine"/>
<link wikidata="Q217972" start="8405" end="8413" title="laxative" label="laxative"/>
<link wikidata="Q127076" start="8421" end="8427" title="Vomiting" label="emetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384342" start="8438" end="8449" title="Mucoactive agent" label="expectorant"/>
<link wikidata="Q28692" start="8511" end="8516" title="Anise" label="Anise"/>
<link wikidata="Q324714" start="8565" end="8583" title="Centella asiatica" label="Asiatic penny-wort"/>
<link wikidata="Q771405" start="8593" end="8603" title="South Asia" label="South Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="8608" end="8622" title="Southeast Asia" label="Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q23041430" start="8625" end="8634" title="Artichoke" label="Artichoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q15543125" start="8641" end="8663" title="Commiphora gileadensis" label="Commiphora gileadensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q234126" start="8710" end="8720" title="Aegle marmelos" label="Bael fruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q157665" start="8727" end="8735" title="Bee balm" label="Bee balm"/>
<link wikidata="Q833994" start="8738" end="8743" title="Boldo" label="Boldo"/>
<link wikidata="Q27257" start="8769" end="8776" title="Burdock" label="Burdock"/>
<link wikidata="Q28208975" start="8824" end="8848" title="Butterfly pea flower tea" label="Butterfly pea flower tea"/>
<link wikidata="Q312265" start="8861" end="8878" title="Clitoria ternatea" label="Clitoria ternatea"/>
<link wikidata="Q26811" start="8956" end="8963" title="Caraway" label="Caraway"/>
<link wikidata="Q303820" start="8991" end="8997" title="Nepeta" label="Catnip"/>
<link wikidata="Q847705" start="9023" end="9031" title="sedative" label="sedative"/>
<link wikidata="Q14169150" start="9047" end="9056" title="Chamomile" label="Chamomile"/>
<link wikidata="Q22771026" start="9117" end="9133" title="Chinese knotweed" label="Chinese knotweed"/>
<link wikidata="Q708203" start="9140" end="9157" title="Chrysanthemum tea" label="Chrysanthemum tea"/>
<link wikidata="Q28165" start="9185" end="9193" title="Cinnamon" label="Cinnamon"/>
<link wikidata="Q101538" start="9200" end="9206" title="Clover" label="Clover"/>
<link wikidata="Q428750" start="9237" end="9244" title="Cerasse" label="Cerasse"/>
<link wikidata="Q766" start="9253" end="9260" title="Jamaica" label="Jamaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q81513" start="9269" end="9275" title="Citrus" label="Citrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q109196" start="9292" end="9300" title="bergamot orange" label="bergamot"/>
<link wikidata="Q500" start="9302" end="9307" title="lemon" label="lemon"/>
<link wikidata="Q13191" start="9312" end="9318" title="Orange (fruit)" label="orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q3269640" start="9326" end="9342" title="Dandelion coffee" label="Dandelion coffee"/>
<link wikidata="Q26686" start="9395" end="9399" title="Dill" label="Dill"/>
<link wikidata="Q56276135" start="9406" end="9420" title="Dried lime tea" label="Dried lime tea"/>
<link wikidata="Q460570" start="9432" end="9442" title="dried lime" label="dried lime"/>
<link wikidata="Q27293" start="9454" end="9466" title="western Asia" label="western Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642983" start="9469" end="9478" title="Echinacea" label="Echinacea"/>
<link wikidata="Q131448" start="9485" end="9495" title="Elderberry" label="Elderberry"/>
<link wikidata="Q144940" start="9498" end="9516" title="European mistletoe" label="European mistletoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747778" start="9583" end="9593" title="Essiac" label="Essiac tea"/>
<link wikidata="Q43511" start="9616" end="9622" title="Fennel" label="Fennel"/>
<link wikidata="Q144682" start="9625" end="9632" title="Gentian" label="Gentian"/>
<link wikidata="Q35625" start="9635" end="9646" title="Ginger root" label="Ginger root"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="9689" end="9700" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061187" start="9710" end="9717" title="salabat" label="salabat"/>
<link wikidata="Q43284" start="9726" end="9739" title="Ginkgo biloba" label="Ginkgo biloba"/>
<link wikidata="Q20817212" start="9742" end="9749" title="Ginseng" label="Ginseng"/>
<link wikidata="Q2617260" start="9844" end="9848" title="Goji" label="Goji"/>
<link wikidata="Q132557" start="9861" end="9869" title="Crataegus" label="Hawthorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q157124" start="9872" end="9880" title="Hibiscus" label="Hibiscus"/>
<link wikidata="Q46740" start="9901" end="9909" title="rose hip" label="rose hip"/>
<link wikidata="Q1627092" start="9954" end="9963" title="Honeybush" label="Honeybush"/>
<link wikidata="Q272181" start="9976" end="9983" title="rooibos" label="rooibos"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="10014" end="10026" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q157631" start="10098" end="10107" title="Marrubium vulgare" label="Horehound"/>
<link wikidata="Q162194" start="10110" end="10120" title="Houttuynia" label="Houttuynia"/>
<link wikidata="Q155997" start="10123" end="10132" title="Hydrangea" label="Hydrangea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006867" start="10288" end="10305" title="Hydrangea serrata" label="Hydrangea serrata"/>
<link wikidata="Q82014" start="10361" end="10375" title="Jasmine" label="Jasmine flower"/>
<link wikidata="Q134253" start="10486" end="10495" title="Jiaogulan" label="Jiaogulan"/>
<link wikidata="Q160104" start="10573" end="10582" title="Kapor tea" label="Kapor tea"/>
<link wikidata="Q160104" start="10600" end="10608" title="Epilobium angustifolium" label="fireweed"/>
<link wikidata="Q11511886" start="10611" end="10619" title="Kelp tea" label="Kelp tea"/>
<link wikidata="Q6449330" start="10694" end="10700" title="Kuzuyu" label="Kuzuyu"/>
<link wikidata="Q15525444" start="10744" end="10749" title="kudzu" label="kudzu"/>
<link wikidata="Q249775" start="10771" end="10783" title="Labrador tea" label="Labrador tea"/>
<link wikidata="Q171892" start="10869" end="10877" title="Lavandula" label="Lavender"/>
<link wikidata="Q148396" start="10885" end="10895" title="Lemon balm" label="Lemon balm"/>
<link wikidata="Q5727732" start="10921" end="10931" title="Cymbopogon" label="Lemongrass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544966" start="10938" end="10949" title="Luo han guo" label="Luo han guo"/>
<link wikidata="Q257106" start="10952" end="10960" title="Licorice" label="Licorice"/>
<link wikidata="Q127849" start="10968" end="10980" title="Lime Blossom" label="Lime blossom"/>
<link wikidata="Q127849" start="11003" end="11012" title="Tilia" label="lime tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="11035" end="11040" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q147176" start="11045" end="11056" title="Filipendula ulmaria" label="Meadowsweet"/>
<link wikidata="Q47859" start="11064" end="11068" title="Mentha" label="Mint"/>
<link wikidata="Q156037" start="11117" end="11127" title="peppermint" label="peppermint"/>
<link wikidata="Q160114" start="11132" end="11141" title="spearmint" label="spearmint"/>
<link wikidata="Q484083" start="11174" end="11183" title="green tea" label="green tea"/>
<link wikidata="Q937101" start="11191" end="11208" title="Maghrebi mint tea" label="Maghrebi mint tea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071940" start="11210" end="11225" title="Korean mint tea" label="Korean mint tea"/>
<link wikidata="Q388245" start="11290" end="11297" title="Merauke" label="Merauke"/>
<link wikidata="Q234193" start="11300" end="11307" title="Moringa oleifera" label="Moringa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2376648" start="11310" end="11322" title="Sideritis syriaca" label="Mountain tea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2376648" start="11424" end="11441" title="Sideritis syriaca" label="Sideritis syriaca"/>
<link wikidata="Q170461" start="11545" end="11549" title="Neem" label="Neem"/>
<link wikidata="Q121671" start="11557" end="11563" title="Urtica" label="Nettle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5055704" start="11593" end="11613" title="Ceanothus americanus" label="Ceanothus americanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q234238" start="11673" end="11677" title="Noni" label="Noni"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195324" start="11684" end="11694" title="Oksusu cha" label="Oksusu cha"/>
<link wikidata="Q11575" start="11716" end="11720" title="maize" label="corn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7087231" start="11742" end="11752" title="Olive leaf" label="Olive leaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q134283" start="11759" end="11766" title="Oregano" label="Oregano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209922" start="11773" end="11782" title="Osmanthus fragrans" label="Osmanthus"/>
<link wikidata="Q311090" start="11881" end="11887" title="Pandanus amaryllifolius" label="Pandan"/>
<link wikidata="Q257757" start="11894" end="11903" title="Patchouli" label="Patchouli"/>
<link wikidata="Q161235" start="11910" end="11920" title="Mentha pulegium" label="Pennyroyal"/>
<link wikidata="Q323047" start="11930" end="11943" title="abortifacient" label="abortifacient"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11946" end="11950" title="Pine#Food" label="Pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7267922" start="12017" end="12022" title="Qishr" label="Qishr"/>
<link wikidata="Q156635" start="12068" end="12078" title="Red clover" label="Red clover"/>
<link wikidata="Q13179" start="12089" end="12098" title="raspberry" label="raspberry"/>
<link wikidata="Q31625" start="12106" end="12116" title="Barley tea" label="Barley tea"/>
<link wikidata="Q11577" start="12148" end="12154" title="barley" label="barley"/>
<link wikidata="Q578904" start="12157" end="12173" title="Rosa × damascena" label="Rosa × damascena"/>
<link wikidata="Q15645384" start="12209" end="12214" title="wheat" label="wheat"/>
<link wikidata="Q3309124" start="12224" end="12230" title="Postum" label="Postum"/>
<link wikidata="Q272181" start="12254" end="12261" title="Rooibos" label="Rooibos"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="12328" end="12340" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q133948" start="12403" end="12414" title="antioxidant" label="antioxidant"/>
<link wikidata="Q484083" start="12434" end="12443" title="green tea" label="green tea"/>
<link wikidata="Q60235" start="12501" end="12509" title="caffeine" label="caffeine"/>
<link wikidata="Q46740" start="12513" end="12521" title="Rose hip" label="Rose hip"/>
<link wikidata="Q157124" start="12542" end="12550" title="hibiscus" label="hibiscus"/>
<link wikidata="Q319390" start="12554" end="12561" title="Roselle (plant)" label="Roselle"/>
<link wikidata="Q66065" start="12679" end="12684" title="Sahel" label="Sahel"/>
<link wikidata="Q102240169" start="12701" end="12709" title="Rosemary" label="Rosemary"/>
<link wikidata="Q7399162" start="12712" end="12721" title="Sagebrush" label="Sagebrush"/>
<link wikidata="Q4797496" start="12723" end="12743" title="California sagebrush" label="California sagebrush"/>
<link wikidata="Q1111359" start="12746" end="12750" title="Common sage" label="Sage"/>
<link wikidata="Q865751" start="12753" end="12761" title="Sakurayu" label="Sakurayu"/>
<link wikidata="Q871991" start="12801" end="12815" title="cherry blossom" label="cherry blossom"/>
<link wikidata="Q131532" start="12825" end="12834" title="Sassafras" label="Sassafras"/>
<link wikidata="Q36275" start="12959" end="12968" title="root beer" label="root beer"/>
<link wikidata="Q204711" start="12995" end="12998" title="U.S. Food and Drug Administration" label="FDA"/>
<link wikidata="Q5090" start="13011" end="13015" title="rice" label="rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074092" start="13032" end="13043" title="hyeonmi cha" label="hyeonmi cha"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115797" start="13061" end="13069" title="Scutellaria barbata" label="Skullcap"/>
<link wikidata="Q193498" start="13072" end="13079" title="Shallot" label="Shallot"/>
<link wikidata="Q3795" start="13094" end="13104" title="Kalimantan" label="Kalimantan"/>
<link wikidata="Q854" start="13132" end="13141" title="Sri Lanka" label="Sri Lanka"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13144" end="13151" title="Soba#Other uses of the word soba" label="Sobacha"/>
<link wikidata="Q3024124" start="13154" end="13163" title="Lindera benzoin" label="Spicebush"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13270" end="13276" title="Spruce#Uses" label="Spruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q148986" start="13318" end="13332" title="Staghorn sumac" label="Staghorn sumac"/>
<link wikidata="Q3644010" start="13370" end="13376" title="Stevia" label="Stevia"/>
<link wikidata="Q37937" start="13449" end="13461" title="Sweet potato" label="Sweet potato"/>
<link wikidata="Q3215980" start="13514" end="13519" title="Thyme" label="Thyme"/>
<link wikidata="Q408883" start="13530" end="13536" title="thymol" label="thymol"/>
<link wikidata="Q960124" start="13539" end="13544" title="Tulsi" label="Tulsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q960124" start="13549" end="13559" title="holy basil" label="holy basil"/>
<link wikidata="Q42562" start="13562" end="13570" title="Turmeric" label="Turmeric"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123391" start="13583" end="13600" title="Uncaria tomentosa" label="Uncaria tomentosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q157819" start="13644" end="13652" title="Valerian (plant)" label="Valerian"/>
<link wikidata="Q165290" start="13750" end="13767" title="Verbena" label="Verbena (vervain)"/>
<link wikidata="Q652206" start="13770" end="13779" title="Wax gourd" label="Wax gourd"/>
<link wikidata="Q701395" start="13815" end="13826" title="Wong Lo Kat" label="Wong Lo Kat"/>
<link wikidata="Q161090" start="13899" end="13907" title="Galium odoratum" label="Woodruff"/>
<link wikidata="Q25408" start="13910" end="13916" title="Yarrow" label="Yarrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q184651" start="14010" end="14015" title="toxin" label="toxic"/>
<link wikidata="Q42982" start="14019" end="14029" title="allergy" label="allergenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q161566" start="14083" end="14090" title="Comfrey" label="Comfrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q70702" start="14107" end="14115" title="alkaloid" label="alkaloid"/>
<link wikidata="Q9368" start="14145" end="14150" title="liver" label="liver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1643563" start="14230" end="14247" title="prescription drug" label="prescription drug"/>
<link wikidata="Q158182" start="14302" end="14309" title="Lobelia" label="Lobelia"/>
<link wikidata="Q771035" start="14344" end="14364" title="traditional medicine" label="traditional medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q156533" start="14606" end="14614" title="foxglove" label="foxglove"/>
<link wikidata="Q423744" start="14755" end="14771" title="poisonous plants" label="poisonous plants"/>
<link wikidata="Q143942" start="15039" end="15051" title="tooth enamel" label="tooth enamel"/>
<link wikidata="Q41350" start="15579" end="15589" title="grapefruit" label="grapefruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q158289" start="15593" end="15612" title="Hypericum perforatum" label="St John&amp;#x27;s wort"/>
<link wikidata="Q110442458" start="15664" end="15672" title="Paxlovid" label="Paxlovid"/>
<link wikidata="Q3344800" start="15677" end="15696" title="oral contraceptives" label="oral contraceptives"/>
<link wikidata="Q131656" start="15909" end="15918" title="pesticide" label="pesticide"/>
<link wikidata="Q105789" start="15923" end="15935" title="heavy metals" label="heavy metals"/>
<link wikidata="Q18348952" start="16213" end="16234" title="List of hot beverages" label="List of hot beverages"/>
<link wikidata="Q4348225" start="16237" end="16248" title="Tea culture" label="Tea culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q12183232" start="16251" end="16272" title="Health effects of tea" label="Health effects of tea"/>
<link wikidata="Q969804" start="16275" end="16283" title="Tincture" label="Tincture"/>
<link wikidata="Q117068" start="16379" end="16389" title="Yerba mate" label="Yerba mate"/>
<link wikidata="Q13261" start="16392" end="16405" title="Hot chocolate" label="Hot chocolate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147571" start="16408" end="16425" title="Coffee substitute" label="Coffee substitute"/>
<link wikidata="Q79407138" start="16428" end="16441" title="Tea in France" label="Tea in France"/>
<link wikidata="Q5100944" start="16443" end="16460" title="Chinese sweet tea" label="Chinese sweet tea"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="29973" wikidata="Q42562" url="?curid=29973" title="Turmeric">
<text>Turmeric (), or Curcuma longa (), is a flowering plant in the ginger family Zingiberaceae. It is a perennial, rhizomatous, herbaceous plant native to the Indian subcontinent and Southeast Asia that requires temperatures between and high annual rainfall to thrive. Plants are gathered each year for their rhizomes, some for propagation in the following season and some for consumption.

The rhizomes are used fresh or boiled in water and dried, after which they are ground into a deep orange-yellow powder commonly used as a coloring and flavoring agent in many Asian cuisines, especially for curries, as well as for the dyeing characteristics imparted by the principal turmeric constituent, curcumin.

Turmeric powder has a warm, bitter, black pepper-like flavor and earthy, mustard-like aroma.

Curcumin, a bright yellow chemical produced by the turmeric plant, is approved as a food additive by the World Health Organization, European Parliament, and United States Food and Drug Administration.

Although long used in Ayurvedic medicine, there is no high-quality clinical evidence that consuming turmeric or curcumin is effective for treating any disease.

==Origin and distribution==
The greatest diversity of &quot;Curcuma&quot; species by number alone is in India, at around 40 to 45 species. Thailand has a comparable 30 to 40 species... Other countries in tropical Asia also have numerous wild species of &quot;Curcuma&quot;. Recent studies have also shown that the taxonomy of &quot;C. longa&quot; is problematic, with only the specimens from South India being identifiable as &quot;C. longa&quot;. The phylogeny, relationships, intraspecific and interspecific variation, and even identity of other species and cultivars in other parts of the world still need to be established and validated. Various species currently utilized and sold as &quot;turmeric&quot; in other parts of Asia have been shown to belong to several physically similar taxa, with overlapping local names.

==History==
Turmeric has been used in Asia for centuries and is a major part of Ayurveda, Siddha medicine, traditional Chinese medicine, Unani, and the animistic rituals of Austronesian peoples. It was first used as a dye, and then later for its supposed properties in folk medicine.

In India, it spread with Hinduism and Buddhism, as the yellow dye is used to color the robes of monks and priests. 

In Island Southeast Asia, there is linguistic and circumstantial evidence of the ancient use of turmeric among the Austronesian peoples soon after dispersal from Taiwan (starting ), before contact with India. In Indonesia and the Philippines, turmeric was used for food, dyeing textiles, medicine, as well as body painting. It was commonly an important ingredient in various animistic rituals. Kikusawa and Reid (2007) have concluded that *kunij, the oldest reconstructed Proto-Malayo-Polynesian form for &quot;turmeric&quot; in the Austronesian languages, is primarily associated with the importance of its use as a dye. Other members of the genus &quot;Curcuma&quot; native to Southeast Asia (like &quot;Curcuma zedoaria&quot;) were also used for food and spice, but not as dyes.

Turmeric (along with &quot;Curcuma zedoaria&quot;) was also spread with the Lapita people of the Austronesian expansion into Oceania. Turmeric can only be propagated with rhizomes, thus its pre-contact distribution into the Pacific Islands can only be via human introduction. The populations in Micronesia, Island Melanesia, and Polynesia (including as far as Hawaii and Easter Island) use turmeric widely for both food and dye before European contact. In Micronesia, it was an important trade item in the &quot;sawei&quot; maritime exchange between Yap and further atolls in the Carolines, where it couldn&#x27;t grow. In some smaller islands, the dye was extracted from the leaves, since the rhizomes remained too small in sandy soils. It was also carried by the Austronesian migrations to Madagascar.

Turmeric was found in Farmana, dating to between 2600 and 2200 BCE, and in a merchant&#x27;s tomb in Megiddo, Israel, dating from the second millennium BCE. It was noted as a dye plant in the Assyrians&#x27; Cuneiform medical texts from Ashurbanipal’s library at Nineveh from 7th century BCE. In Medieval Europe, turmeric was called &quot;Indian saffron.&quot;

==Etymology==
The name possibly derives from Middle English or Early Modern English as &#x27; or &#x27;. It may be of Latin origin, &quot;&quot; (&quot;meritorious earth&quot;). The Latin specific epithet &quot;longa&quot; means long.

==Description==

Turmeric is a perennial herbaceous plant that reaches up to tall. It has highly branched, yellow to orange, cylindrical, aromatic rhizomes.

The leaves are alternate and arranged in two rows. They are divided into leaf sheath, petiole, and leaf blade. From the leaf sheaths, a false stem is formed. The petiole is long. The simple leaf blades are usually long and rarely up to . They have a width of and are oblong to elliptical, narrowing at the tip.

===Inflorescence, flower, and fruit===
At the top of the inflorescence, stem bracts are present on which no flowers occur; these are white to green and sometimes tinged reddish-purple, and the upper ends are tapered.

The hermaphrodite flowers are zygomorphic and threefold. The three sepals are long, fused, and white, and have fluffy hairs; the three calyx teeth are unequal. The three bright-yellow petals are fused into a corolla tube up to long. The three corolla lobes have a length of and are triangular with soft-spiny upper ends. While the average corolla lobe is larger than the two lateral, only the median stamen of the inner circle is fertile. The dust bag is spurred at its base. All other stamens are converted to staminodes. The outer staminodes are shorter than the labellum. The labellum is yellowish, with a yellow ribbon in its center and it is obovate, with a length from . Three carpels are under a constant, trilobed ovary adherent, which is sparsely hairy. The fruit capsule opens with three compartments.

In East Asia, the flowering time is usually in August. Terminally on the false stem is an inflorescence stem, long, containing many flowers. The bracts are light green and ovate to oblong with a blunt upper end with a length of .

==Phytochemistry==
Turmeric powder is about 60–70% carbohydrates, 6–13% water, 6–8% protein, 5–10% fat, 3–7% dietary minerals, 3–7% essential oils, 2–7% dietary fiber, and 1–6% curcuminoids. The golden yellow color of turmeric is due to curcumin.

Phytochemical components of turmeric include diarylheptanoids, a class including numerous curcuminoids, such as curcumin, demethoxycurcumin, and bisdemethoxycurcumin. Curcumin constitutes up to 3.14% of assayed commercial samples of turmeric powder (the average was 1.51%); curry powder contains much less (an average of 0.29%). Some 34 essential oils are present in turmeric, among which turmerone, germacrone, atlantone, and zingiberene are major constituents.

==Uses==

===Culinary===

Turmeric is one of the key ingredients in many Asian dishes, imparting a mustard-like, earthy aroma and pungent, slightly bitter flavor to foods. It is used mostly in savory dishes, but also is used in some sweet dishes, such as the cake &quot;sfouf&quot;. In India, turmeric leaf is used to prepare special sweet dishes, &quot;patoleo&quot;, by layering rice flour and coconut-jaggery mixture on the leaf, then closing and steaming it in a special utensil (&quot;chondrõ&quot;). Most turmeric is used in the form of rhizome powder to impart a golden yellow color. It is used in many products such as canned beverages, baked products, dairy products, ice cream, yogurt, yellow cakes, orange juice, biscuits, popcorn, cereals and sauces. It is a principal ingredient in curry powders. Although typically used in its dried, powdered form, turmeric also is used fresh, like ginger. 

Turmeric is used widely as a spice in South Asian and Middle Eastern cooking. Various Iranian &quot;khoresh&quot; recipes begin with onions caramelized in oil and turmeric. The Moroccan spice mix ras el hanout typically includes turmeric. In South Africa, turmeric is used to give boiled white rice a golden color, known as &quot;geelrys&quot; (yellow rice) traditionally served with bobotie. In Vietnamese cuisine, turmeric powder is used to color and enhance the flavors of certain dishes, such as &quot;bánh xèo&quot;, &quot;bánh khọt&quot;, and &quot;mì Quảng&quot;. The staple Cambodian curry paste, &quot;kroeung&quot;, used in many dishes, including fish amok, typically contains fresh turmeric. In Indonesia, turmeric leaves are used for Minang or Padang curry base of Sumatra, such as &quot;rendang&quot;, &quot;sate padang&quot;, and many other varieties. In the Philippines, turmeric is used in the preparation and cooking of &quot;kuning&quot;, &quot;satti&quot;, and some variants of &quot;adobo&quot;. In Thailand, fresh turmeric rhizomes are used widely in many dishes, in particular in the southern Thai cuisine, such as yellow curry and turmeric soup. Turmeric is used in a hot drink called &quot;turmeric latte&quot; or &quot;golden milk&quot; that is made with milk, frequently coconut milk. The turmeric milk drink known as &quot;haldī dūdh&quot; (&quot;haldī&quot; [] means turmeric in Hindi) is a traditional Indian recipe. Sold in the US and UK, the drink known as &quot;golden milk&quot; uses nondairy milk and sweetener, and sometimes black pepper after the traditional recipe (which may also use ghee).

Turmeric is approved for use as a food color, assigned the code E100. The oleoresin is used for oil-containing products.

In combination with annatto (E160b), turmeric has been used to color numerous food products. Turmeric is used to give a yellow color to some prepared mustards, canned chicken broths, and other foodsoften as a much cheaper replacement for saffron.

===Traditional uses===

In 2019, the European Medicines Agency concluded that turmeric herbal teas, or other forms taken by mouth, on the basis of their long-standing traditional use, could be used to relieve mild digestive problems, such as feelings of fullness and flatulence.

Turmeric grows wild in the forests of South and Southeast Asia, where it is collected for use in classical Indian medicine (Siddha or Ayurveda). In Eastern India, the plant is used as one of the nine components of along with young plantain or banana plant, taro leaves, barley (), wood apple (), pomegranate (), &quot;Saraca indica&quot;, (&quot;Arum&quot;), or , and rice paddy. The Haldi ceremony called in Bengal (literally &quot;yellow on the body&quot;) is a ceremony observed during wedding celebrations of people of Indian culture all throughout the Indian subcontinent.

In Tamil Nadu and Andhra Pradesh, as a part of the Tamil–Telugu marriage ritual, a dried turmeric tuber tied with a string is used to create a Thali necklace. In western and coastal India, during weddings of the Marathi and Konkani people, Kannada Brahmins, turmeric tubers are tied with strings by the couple to their wrists during a ceremony, &quot;Kankana Bandhana&quot;. In many Hindu communities, turmeric paste is applied to the bride and groom as part of pre-wedding festivities known as the haldi ceremony.

Turmeric makes a poor fabric dye, as it is not light fast, but is commonly used in Indian clothing, such as saris and Buddhist monks&#x27; robes. During the late Edo period (1603–1867), turmeric was used to dilute or substitute more expensive safflower dyestuff in the production of . Friedrich Ratzel reported in &quot;The History of Mankind&quot; during 1896, that in Micronesia, turmeric powder was applied for embellishment of body, clothing, utensils, and ceremonial uses. Native Hawaiians who introduced it to Hawaii () make a bright yellow dye out of it.

===Indicator===

Turmeric paper, also called curcuma paper or in German literature, &quot;Curcumapapier&quot;, is paper steeped in a tincture of turmeric and allowed to dry. It is used in chemical analysis as an indicator for acidity and alkalinity. The paper is yellow in acidic and neutral solutions and turns brown to reddish-brown in alkaline solutions, with transition between pH of 7.4 and 9.2.

==Adulteration==
As turmeric and other spices are commonly sold by weight, the potential exists for powders of toxic, cheaper agents with a similar color to be added, such as lead(II,IV) oxide (&quot;red lead&quot;). These additives give turmeric an orange-red color instead of its native gold-yellow, and such conditions led the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) to issue import alerts from 2013 to 2019 on turmeric originating in India and Bangladesh. Imported into the United States in 2014 were approximately of turmeric, some of which was used for food coloring, traditional medicine, or dietary supplement. Lead detection in turmeric products led to recalls across the United States, Canada, Japan, Korea, and the United Kingdom through 2016.

Lead chromate, a bright yellow chemical compound, was found as an adulterant of turmeric in Bangladesh, where turmeric is used commonly in foods and the contamination levels were up to 500 times higher than the national limit. Researchers identified a chain of sources adulterating the turmeric with lead chromate: from farmers to merchants selling low-grade turmeric roots to &quot;polishers&quot; who added lead chromate for yellow color enhancement, to wholesalers for market distribution, all unaware of the potential consequences of lead toxicity.

Another common adulterant in turmeric, metanil yellow (also known as acid yellow 36), is considered by the British Food Standards Agency as an illegal dye for use in foods.

==Medical research==
Turmeric and curcumin have been studied in numerous clinical trials for various human diseases and conditions, with no high-quality evidence of any anti-disease effect or health benefit. There is no scientific evidence that curcumin reduces inflammation, . There is weak evidence that turmeric extracts may be beneficial for relieving symptoms of knee osteoarthritis, as well as for reducing pain and muscle damage following physical exercise. There is good evidence that turmeric is an allergen.

==See also==
* &quot;Alpinia zerumbet&quot;
* &quot;Curcuma xanthorrhiza&quot;
* &quot;Curcuma zedoaria&quot;
* Domesticated plants and animals of Austronesia
* &quot;Etlingera elatior&quot;
* &quot;Kaempferia galanga&quot;
==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q42562" start="0" end="8" title="Turmeric" label="Turmeric"/>
<link wikidata="Q25314" start="39" end="54" title="flowering plant" label="flowering plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q35625" start="62" end="68" title="ginger" label="ginger"/>
<link wikidata="Q37021" start="76" end="89" title="Zingiberaceae" label="Zingiberaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q157957" start="99" end="108" title="perennial" label="perennial"/>
<link wikidata="Q184208" start="110" end="121" title="rhizomatous" label="rhizomatous"/>
<link wikidata="Q190903" start="123" end="139" title="herbaceous plant" label="herbaceous plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q60140" start="154" end="173" title="Indian subcontinent" label="Indian subcontinent"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="178" end="192" title="Southeast Asia" label="Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091594" start="237" end="252" title="Annual rainfall in india" label="annual rainfall"/>
<link wikidata="Q184208" start="304" end="311" title="rhizome" label="rhizome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="524" end="532" title="food coloring#Natural food dyes" label="coloring"/>
<link wikidata="Q728206" start="561" end="574" title="Asian cuisine" label="Asian cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q164606" start="592" end="599" title="Curry" label="curries"/>
<link wikidata="Q189720" start="620" end="623" title="dye" label="dye"/>
<link wikidata="Q312266" start="691" end="699" title="curcumin" label="curcumin"/>
<link wikidata="Q43084" start="738" end="750" title="black pepper" label="black pepper"/>
<link wikidata="Q30076" start="775" end="782" title="mustard plant" label="mustard"/>
<link wikidata="Q485537" start="788" end="793" title="aroma" label="aroma"/>
<link wikidata="Q189567" start="880" end="893" title="food additive" label="food additive"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="901" end="926" title="World Health Organization" label="World Health Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q8889" start="928" end="947" title="European Parliament" label="European Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q204711" start="967" end="995" title="Food and Drug Administration" label="Food and Drug Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q132325" start="1020" end="1029" title="Ayurveda" label="Ayurvedic"/>
<link wikidata="Q691640" start="1052" end="1082" title="evidence-based medicine" label="high-quality clinical evidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q33551" start="1219" end="1226" title="Curcuma" label="Curcuma"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="1263" end="1268" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="1298" end="1306" title="Thailand" label="Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q132325" start="2065" end="2073" title="Ayurveda" label="Ayurveda"/>
<link wikidata="Q3273355" start="2075" end="2090" title="Siddha medicine" label="Siddha medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q200253" start="2092" end="2120" title="traditional Chinese medicine" label="traditional Chinese medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520176" start="2122" end="2127" title="Unani" label="Unani"/>
<link wikidata="Q861225" start="2158" end="2178" title="Austronesian peoples" label="Austronesian peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q189720" start="2203" end="2206" title="dye" label="dye"/>
<link wikidata="Q771035" start="2254" end="2267" title="traditional medicine" label="folk medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919361" start="2390" end="2411" title="Island Southeast Asia" label="Island Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q861225" start="2502" end="2522" title="Austronesian peoples" label="Austronesian peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="2549" end="2555" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="2599" end="2608" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="2617" end="2628" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q3832960" start="2859" end="2882" title="Proto-Malayo-Polynesian" label="Proto-Malayo-Polynesian"/>
<link wikidata="Q206733" start="3093" end="3109" title="Curcuma zedoaria" label="Curcuma zedoaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q206733" start="3197" end="3213" title="Curcuma zedoaria" label="Curcuma zedoaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021436" start="3246" end="3259" title="Lapita people" label="Lapita people"/>
<link wikidata="Q861225" start="3267" end="3289" title="Austronesian expansion" label="Austronesian expansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q55643" start="3295" end="3302" title="Oceania" label="Oceania"/>
<link wikidata="Q19617380" start="3394" end="3409" title="Pacific Islands" label="Pacific Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q3359409" start="3465" end="3475" title="Micronesia" label="Micronesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6083292" start="3477" end="3493" title="Island Melanesia" label="Island Melanesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q35942" start="3499" end="3508" title="Polynesia" label="Polynesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q782" start="3530" end="3536" title="Hawaii" label="Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q14452" start="3541" end="3554" title="Easter Island" label="Easter Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q3359409" start="3626" end="3636" title="Micronesia" label="Micronesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q117032703" start="3682" end="3687" title="sawei" label="sawei"/>
<link wikidata="Q209638" start="3720" end="3723" title="Yap" label="Yap"/>
<link wikidata="Q42523" start="3736" end="3741" title="atoll" label="atoll"/>
<link wikidata="Q118350" start="3750" end="3759" title="Caroline Islands" label="Carolines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1019" start="3962" end="3972" title="Madagascar" label="Madagascar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5435662" start="3997" end="4004" title="Farmana" label="Farmana"/>
<link wikidata="Q951336" start="4076" end="4091" title="Megiddo, Israel" label="Megiddo, Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q41137" start="4167" end="4174" title="Assyria" label="Assyria"/>
<link wikidata="Q171191" start="4212" end="4224" title="Ashurbanipal" label="Ashurbanipal"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="4271" end="4286" title="Medieval Europe" label="Medieval Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q25434" start="4321" end="4328" title="saffron" label="saffron"/>
<link wikidata="Q36395" start="4382" end="4396" title="Middle English" label="Middle English"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="4455" end="4460" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q157957" start="4604" end="4613" title="Perennial plant" label="perennial"/>
<link wikidata="Q190903" start="4614" end="4630" title="herbaceous plant" label="herbaceous plant"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4746" end="4755" title="Phyllotaxis#Leaf arrangement" label="alternate"/>
<link wikidata="Q10289985" start="4817" end="4824" title="Petiole (botany)" label="petiole"/>
<link wikidata="Q1608538" start="5265" end="5278" title="Hermaphrodite (botany)" label="hermaphrodite"/>
<link wikidata="Q556965" start="5291" end="5302" title="zygomorphic" label="zygomorphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q107216" start="5328" end="5333" title="sepal" label="sepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q107216" start="5396" end="5401" title="Sepal" label="calyx"/>
<link wikidata="Q107412" start="5445" end="5450" title="petal" label="petal"/>
<link wikidata="Q107412" start="5469" end="5476" title="Corolla (flower)" label="corolla"/>
<link wikidata="Q103129" start="5661" end="5667" title="stamen" label="stamen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2348006" start="5772" end="5781" title="staminode" label="staminode"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799403" start="5826" end="5834" title="Labellum (botany)" label="labellum"/>
<link wikidata="Q125537257" start="5908" end="5915" title="obovate" label="obovate"/>
<link wikidata="Q588964" start="5944" end="5951" title="carpels" label="carpels"/>
<link wikidata="Q27231" start="6077" end="6086" title="East Asia" label="East Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q156428" start="6164" end="6177" title="inflorescence" label="inflorescence"/>
<link wikidata="Q729496" start="6219" end="6224" title="bract" label="bract"/>
<link wikidata="Q11358" start="6356" end="6369" title="carbohydrates" label="carbohydrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q8054" start="6389" end="6396" title="protein" label="protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q127980" start="6404" end="6407" title="fat" label="fat"/>
<link wikidata="Q189598" start="6414" end="6430" title="dietary minerals" label="dietary minerals"/>
<link wikidata="Q170885" start="6437" end="6450" title="essential oil" label="essential oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q215210" start="6458" end="6471" title="dietary fiber" label="dietary fiber"/>
<link wikidata="Q5194671" start="6482" end="6493" title="curcuminoid" label="curcuminoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q640068" start="6553" end="6566" title="Phytochemistry" label="Phytochemical"/>
<link wikidata="Q13612179" start="6598" end="6613" title="diarylheptanoid" label="diarylheptanoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q312266" start="6665" end="6673" title="curcumin" label="curcumin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5264607" start="6675" end="6692" title="demethoxycurcumin" label="demethoxycurcumin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917168" start="6698" end="6718" title="bisdemethoxycurcumin" label="bisdemethoxycurcumin"/>
<link wikidata="Q113482014" start="6942" end="6951" title="turmerone" label="turmerone"/>
<link wikidata="Q15410959" start="6953" end="6963" title="germacrone" label="germacrone"/>
<link wikidata="Q4117486" start="6980" end="6991" title="zingiberene" label="zingiberene"/>
<link wikidata="Q7459736" start="7287" end="7292" title="sfouf" label="sfouf"/>
<link wikidata="Q16962929" start="7371" end="7378" title="patoleo" label="patoleo"/>
<link wikidata="Q13187" start="7413" end="7420" title="coconut" label="coconut"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148077" start="7421" end="7428" title="jaggery" label="jaggery"/>
<link wikidata="Q184208" start="7560" end="7567" title="rhizome" label="rhizome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342397" start="8010" end="8017" title="Iranian cuisine" label="Iranian"/>
<link wikidata="Q11685351" start="8024" end="8031" title="khoresh" label="khoresh"/>
<link wikidata="Q73185" start="8064" end="8075" title="Caramelization" label="caramelized"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150262" start="8101" end="8109" title="Moroccan cuisine" label="Moroccan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067261" start="8120" end="8133" title="ras el hanout" label="ras el hanout"/>
<link wikidata="Q888832" start="8308" end="8315" title="bobotie" label="bobotie"/>
<link wikidata="Q826059" start="8320" end="8338" title="Vietnamese cuisine" label="Vietnamese cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q50633" start="8430" end="8438" title="bánh xèo" label="bánh xèo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6950186" start="8479" end="8487" title="mì Quảng" label="mì Quảng"/>
<link wikidata="Q139430" start="8506" end="8515" title="Cambodian cuisine" label="Cambodian"/>
<link wikidata="Q958214" start="8535" end="8542" title="kroeung" label="kroeung"/>
<link wikidata="Q4350424" start="8581" end="8590" title="fish amok" label="fish amok"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="8630" end="8639" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130350" start="8670" end="8676" title="Minangkabau people" label="Minang"/>
<link wikidata="Q954297" start="8680" end="8686" title="Padang cuisine" label="Padang"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492" start="8701" end="8708" title="Sumatra" label="Sumatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520293" start="8724" end="8731" title="rendang" label="rendang"/>
<link wikidata="Q7425996" start="8745" end="8756" title="sate padang" label="sate padang"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="8797" end="8808" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q65080153" start="8867" end="8873" title="kuning" label="kuning"/>
<link wikidata="Q209253" start="8881" end="8898" title="Satay" label="&amp;quot;satti&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q11284032" start="8921" end="8938" title="Philippine adobo" label="&amp;quot;adobo&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="8943" end="8951" title="Thailand" label="Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q841984" start="9039" end="9051" title="Thai cuisine" label="Thai cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q841774" start="9147" end="9152" title="latte" label="latte"/>
<link wikidata="Q841779" start="9221" end="9233" title="coconut milk" label="coconut milk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568" start="9331" end="9336" title="Hindi" label="Hindi"/>
<link wikidata="Q753009" start="9588" end="9598" title="food color" label="food color"/>
<link wikidata="Q207810" start="9618" end="9622" title="E number" label="E100"/>
<link wikidata="Q2019407" start="9628" end="9637" title="oleoresin" label="oleoresin"/>
<link wikidata="Q425902" start="9696" end="9703" title="annatto" label="annatto"/>
<link wikidata="Q131748" start="9826" end="9834" title="Mustard (condiment)" label="mustards"/>
<link wikidata="Q275068" start="9851" end="9856" title="broth" label="broth"/>
<link wikidata="Q25434" start="9914" end="9921" title="saffron" label="saffron"/>
<link wikidata="Q130146" start="9961" end="9986" title="European Medicines Agency" label="European Medicines Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q160184" start="10191" end="10201" title="flatulence" label="flatulence"/>
<link wikidata="Q165449" start="10435" end="10443" title="plantain (cooking)" label="plantain"/>
<link wikidata="Q227997" start="10461" end="10465" title="taro" label="taro"/>
<link wikidata="Q11577" start="10474" end="10480" title="barley" label="barley"/>
<link wikidata="Q234126" start="10485" end="10495" title="Aegle marmelos" label="wood apple"/>
<link wikidata="Q13188" start="10500" end="10511" title="pomegranate" label="pomegranate"/>
<link wikidata="Q17484568" start="10522" end="10535" title="Saraca indica" label="Saraca indica"/>
<link wikidata="Q161121" start="10550" end="10554" title="Arum" label="Arum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1445" start="10786" end="10796" title="Tamil Nadu" label="Tamil Nadu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1159" start="10801" end="10815" title="Andhra Pradesh" label="Andhra Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2767663" start="10926" end="10940" title="Thali necklace" label="Thali necklace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265028" start="10995" end="11002" title="Marathi people" label="Marathi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249914" start="11007" end="11021" title="Konkani people" label="Konkani people"/>
<link wikidata="Q118281" start="11023" end="11030" title="Kannada people" label="Kannada"/>
<link wikidata="Q47140" start="11031" end="11039" title="Brahmins" label="Brahmins"/>
<link wikidata="Q189720" start="11328" end="11331" title="dye" label="dye"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396304" start="11346" end="11356" title="Colour fastness" label="light fast"/>
<link wikidata="Q172827" start="11407" end="11411" title="sari" label="sari"/>
<link wikidata="Q504779" start="11417" end="11443" title="Kasaya (clothing)" label="Buddhist monks&amp;#x27; robes"/>
<link wikidata="Q184963" start="11461" end="11471" title="Edo period" label="Edo period"/>
<link wikidata="Q156625" start="11542" end="11551" title="safflower" label="safflower"/>
<link wikidata="Q76762" start="11584" end="11600" title="Friedrich Ratzel" label="Friedrich Ratzel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283606" start="11777" end="11793" title="Native Hawaiians" label="Native Hawaiians"/>
<link wikidata="Q782" start="11815" end="11821" title="Hawaii" label="Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q969804" start="11995" end="12003" title="tincture" label="tincture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2346" start="12050" end="12067" title="chemical analysis" label="chemical analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q300951" start="12074" end="12083" title="pH indicator" label="indicator"/>
<link wikidata="Q11158" start="12088" end="12095" title="acidity" label="acidity"/>
<link wikidata="Q432016" start="12100" end="12110" title="alkalinity" label="alkalinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q40936" start="12146" end="12162" title="neutral solution" label="neutral solution"/>
<link wikidata="Q419205" start="12439" end="12456" title="lead(II,IV) oxide" label="lead(II,IV) oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q204711" start="12597" end="12625" title="Food and Drug Administration" label="Food and Drug Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="12700" end="12705" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q902" start="12710" end="12720" title="Bangladesh" label="Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q753009" start="12821" end="12834" title="food coloring" label="food coloring"/>
<link wikidata="Q771035" start="12836" end="12856" title="traditional medicine" label="traditional medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q645858" start="12861" end="12879" title="dietary supplement" label="dietary supplement"/>
<link wikidata="Q359495" start="12924" end="12931" title="product recall" label="recalls"/>
<link wikidata="Q367871" start="13018" end="13031" title="Lead chromate" label="Lead chromate"/>
<link wikidata="Q220695" start="13474" end="13483" title="wholesale" label="wholesale"/>
<link wikidata="Q27159458" start="13611" end="13625" title="metanil yellow" label="metanil yellow"/>
<link wikidata="Q23666" start="13679" end="13686" title="Great Britain" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q2741994" start="13687" end="13708" title="Food Standards Agency" label="Food Standards Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q189720" start="13723" end="13726" title="dye" label="dye"/>
<link wikidata="Q30612" start="13819" end="13833" title="clinical trial" label="clinical trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q101991" start="14008" end="14020" title="inflammation" label="inflammation"/>
<link wikidata="Q62736" start="14119" end="14133" title="osteoarthritis" label="osteoarthritis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2703227" start="14286" end="14302" title="Alpinia zerumbet" label="Alpinia zerumbet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3091624" start="14317" end="14337" title="Curcuma xanthorrhiza" label="Curcuma xanthorrhiza"/>
<link wikidata="Q206733" start="14352" end="14368" title="Curcuma zedoaria" label="Curcuma zedoaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q60771146" start="14377" end="14423" title="Domesticated plants and animals of Austronesia" label="Domesticated plants and animals of Austronesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3442435" start="14432" end="14449" title="Etlingera elatior" label="Etlingera elatior"/>
<link wikidata="Q1113398" start="14464" end="14482" title="Kaempferia galanga" label="Kaempferia galanga"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="29974" wikidata="Q154605" url="?curid=29974" title="Total war">
<text>Total war is a type of warfare that includes any and all (including civilian-associated) resources and infrastructure as legitimate military targets, mobilises all of the resources of society to fight the war, and gives priority to warfare over non-combatant needs.

The term has been defined as &quot;A war that is unrestricted in terms of the weapons used, the territory or combatants involved, or the objectives pursued, especially one in which the laws of war are disregarded.&quot;

In the mid-19th century, scholars identified what later became known as total war as a separate class of warfare. In a total war, the differentiation between combatants and non-combatants diminishes due to the capacity of opposing sides to consider nearly every human, including non-combatants, as resources that are used in the war effort.

==Characteristics==
Total war is a concept that has been extensively studied by scholars of conflict and war. One of the most notable contributions to this field of research is the work of Stig Förster, who has identified four dimensions of total war: total purposes, total methods, total mobilisation, and total control. Tiziano Peccia has built upon Förster&#x27;s work by adding a fifth dimension of &quot;total change.&quot; Peccia argues that total war not only has a profound impact on the outcome of the conflict but also produces significant changes in the political, cultural, economic, and social realms beyond the end of the conflict. As Peccia puts it, &quot;total war is an earthquake that has the world as its epicenter.&quot;

The four dimensions of total war identified by Förster are:

1) Total purposes: The aim of continuous growth of the power of the parties involved and hegemonic visions.

2) Total methods: Similar and common methodologies among countries that intend to increase their spheres of influence.

3) Total mobilisation: Inclusion in the conflict of parties not traditionally involved, such as women and children or individuals who are not part of the armed bodies.

4) Total control: Multisectoral centralisation of the powers and orchestration of the activities of the countries in a small circle of dictators or oligarchs, with cross-functional control over education and culture, media/propaganda, economic, and political activities.

Peccia&#x27;s contribution of &quot;total change&quot; adds to this framework by emphasising the long-term effects of total war on society.

5) Total change: This includes changes in social attitudes, cultural norms, and political structures, as well as economic and technological developments.

In Peccia&#x27;s view, total war not only transforms the military and political landscape but also has far-reaching and long-time implications for society as a whole.

Actions that may characterise the post-19th century concept of total war include:
* Strategic bombing, as during World War II, the Korean War, and the Vietnam War (Operations Barrel Roll, Rolling Thunder and Linebacker II)
* Blockade and besieging of population centres, as with the Allied blockade of Germany and the Siege of Leningrad during the First and Second World Wars
* Scorched earth policy, as with the March to the Sea during the American Civil War and the Japanese &quot;Three Alls Policy&quot; during the Second Sino-Japanese War
* Commerce raiding, tonnage war, and unrestricted submarine warfare, as with privateering, the German U-boat campaigns of the First and Second World Wars, and the United States submarine campaign against Japan during World War II
* Collective punishment, pacification operations, and reprisals against populations deemed hostile, as with the execution and deportation of suspected Communards following the fall of the 1871 Paris Commune or the German reprisal policy targeting resistance movements, insurgents, and Untermenschen such as in France (e.g. Maillé massacre) and Poland during World War II
* Industrial warfare, as with all belligerents in their respective home fronts during World War I and World War II
* The use of civilians and prisoners of war as forced labour for military operations, as with Japan, USSR and Germany&#x27;s massive use of forced labourers of other nations during World War II (see Slavery in Japan and forced labour under German rule during World War II)
* Giving no quarter (i.e. take no prisoners), as with Hitler&#x27;s Commando Order during World War II

==Background==
The phrase &quot;total war&quot; seemingly originated amongst French writers during World War I and French writer Léon Daudet published a collection of essays called &quot;La Guerre Totale&quot; (&quot;The total war&quot;) in 1918. The phrase was popularised by the 1935 publication of German general Erich Ludendorff&#x27;s World War I memoir, &quot;Der totale Krieg&quot; (&quot;The total war&quot;). Some authors extend the concept back as far as classic work of Carl von Clausewitz, &quot;On War&quot;, as &quot;absoluter Krieg&quot; (absolute war), even though he did not use the term; others interpret Clausewitz differently. Total war also describes the French &quot;guerre à outrance&quot; during the Franco-Prussian War.

In his 24 December 1864 letter to his chief of staff during the American Civil War, Union general William Tecumseh Sherman wrote the Union was &quot;not only fighting hostile armies, but a hostile people, and must make old and young, rich and poor, feel the hard hand of war, as well as their organized armies,&quot; defending Sherman&#x27;s March to the Sea, the operation that inflicted widespread destruction of infrastructure in Georgia.

United States Air Force General Curtis LeMay updated the concept for the nuclear age. In 1949, he first proposed that a total war in the nuclear age would consist of delivering the entire nuclear arsenal in a single overwhelming blow, going as far as &quot;killing a nation&quot;.

==History==

===Middle Ages===
Written by academics at Eastern Michigan University, the &quot;Cengage Advantage Books: World History&quot; textbook claims that while total war &quot;is traditionally associated with the two global wars of the twentieth century... it would seem that instances of total war predate the twentieth century.&quot; They write:

===18th and 19th centuries===

====Europe====
In his book, &quot;The First Total War: Napoleon&#x27;s Europe and the Birth of Warfare as We Know it&quot;, David A Bell, a French History professor at Princeton University argues that the French Revolutionary Wars introduced to mainland Europe some of the first concepts of total war, such as mass conscription. He claims that the new republic found itself threatened by a powerful coalition of European nations and used the entire nation&#x27;s resources in an unprecedented war effort that included levée en masse (mass conscription). By 23 August 1793, the French front line forces grew to some 800,000 with a total of 1.5 million in all services—the first time an army in excess of a million had been mobilised in Western history:


During the Russian campaign of 1812 the Russians retreated while destroying infrastructure and agriculture in order to effectively hamper the French and strip them of adequate supplies. In the campaign of 1813, Allied forces in the German theatre alone amounted to nearly one million whilst two years later in the Hundred Days a French decree called for the total mobilisation of some 2.5 million men (though at most a fifth of this was managed by the time of the French defeat at Waterloo). During the prolonged Peninsular War from 1808 to 1814 some 300,000 French troops were kept permanently occupied by, in addition to several hundred thousand Spanish, Portuguese and British regulars, an enormous and sustained guerrilla insurgency—ultimately French deaths would amount to 300,000 in the Peninsular War alone.

The Franco-Prussian War was fought in breach of the recently signed Geneva Convention of 1864, when &quot;European opinion increasingly expected that civilians and soldiers should be treated humanely in war&quot;.

==== North America ====
The Sullivan Expedition of 1779 was an example of total warfare. As Native American and Loyalist forces massacred American farmers, killed livestock and burned buildings in remote frontier areas, General George Washington sent General John Sullivan with 4,000 troops to seek &quot;the total destruction and devastation of their settlements&quot; in upstate New York. There was only one small battle as the expedition devastated &quot;14 towns and most flourishing crops of corn.&quot; The Native Americans escaped to Canada where the British fed them; they remained there after the war.

Sherman&#x27;s March to the Sea in the American Civil War—from 15 November 1864, through 21 December 1864—is sometimes considered to be an example of total war, for which Sherman used the term hard war. Some historians challenge this designation, as Sherman&#x27;s campaign assaulted primarily military targets and Sherman ordered his men to spare civilian homes.

===20th century===
====World War I====
=====Air Warfare=====

Bombing civilians from the air was adopted as a strategy for the first time in World War I, and a leading advocate of this strategy was Peter Strasser &quot;Leader of Airships&quot; (&quot;Führer der Luftschiffe&quot;; &quot;F.d.L.&quot;). Strasser, who was chief commander of German Imperial Navy Zeppelins during World War I, the main force operating German strategic bombing across Europe and the UK, saw bombing of civilians as well as military targets as an essential element of total war. He argued that causing civilian casualties and damaging domestic infrastructure served both as propaganda and as a means of diverting resources from the front line.

=====Propaganda=====

One of the features of total war in Britain was the use of government propaganda posters to divert all attention to the war on the home front. Posters were used to influence public opinion about what to eat and what occupations to take, and to change the attitude of support towards the war effort. Even music halls were used as propaganda, with propaganda songs aimed at recruitment.

After the failure of the Battle of Neuve Chapelle, the large British offensive in March 1915, the British Commander-in-Chief Field Marshal John French blamed the lack of progress on insufficient and poor-quality artillery shells. This led to the Shell Crisis of 1915 which brought down both the Liberal government and Premiership of H. H. Asquith. He formed a new coalition government dominated by Liberals and appointed David Lloyd George as Minister of Munitions. It was a recognition that the whole economy would have to be geared for war if the Allies were to prevail on the Western Front.

Carl Schmitt, a supporter of Nazi Germany, wrote that total war meant &quot;total politics&quot;—authoritarian domestic policies that imposed direct control of the press and economy. In Schmitt&#x27;s view the total state, which directs fully the mobilisation of all social and economic resources to war, is antecedent to total war. Scholars consider that the seeds of this total state concept already existed in the German state of World War I, which exercised full control of the press and other aspects economic and social life as espoused in the statement of state ideology known as the &quot;Ideas of 1914&quot;.

=====Rationing=====

As young men left the farms for the front, domestic food production in Britain and Germany fell. In Britain, the response was to import more food, which was done despite the German introduction of unrestricted submarine warfare, and to introduce rationing. The Royal Navy&#x27;s blockade of German ports prevented Germany from importing food and hastened German capitulation by creating a food crisis in Germany.

Almost the whole of Europe and some of the European colonial empires mobilised soldiers. Rationing occurred on the home fronts. Bulgaria went so far as to mobilise a quarter of its population, or 800,000 people, a greater share of its population than any other country during the war.

====World War II====
The Second World War was the quintessential total war of modernity. The level of national mobilisation of resources on all sides of the conflict, the battlespace being contested, the scale of the armies, navies, and air forces raised through conscription, the active targeting of non-combatants (and non-combatant property), the general disregard for collateral damage, and the unrestricted aims of the belligerents marked total war on an unprecedented and unsurpassed, multicontinental scale.

=====Imperial Japan=====
During the first part of the Shōwa era, the government of Imperial Japan launched a string of policies to promote a total war effort against China and occidental powers and increase industrial production. Among these were the National Spiritual Mobilization Movement and the Imperial Rule Assistance Association.

The State General Mobilization Law had fifty clauses, which provided for government controls over civilian organisations (including labour unions), nationalisation of strategic industries, price controls and rationing, and nationalised the news media. The laws gave the government the authority to use unlimited budgets to subsidise war production and to compensate manufacturers for losses caused by war-time mobilisation. Eighteen of the fifty articles outlined penalties for violators.

To improve its production, Imperial Japan used millions of slave labourers and pressed more than 18 million people in East Asia into forced labour.

=====United Kingdom=====

Before the onset of the Second World War, Great Britain drew on its First World War experience to prepare legislation that would allow immediate mobilisation of the economy for war, should future hostilities break out. Rationing of most goods and services was introduced, not only for consumers but also for manufacturers. This meant that factories manufacturing products that were irrelevant to the war effort had more appropriate tasks imposed. All artificial light was subject to legal blackouts.
Not only were men conscripted into the armed forces from the beginning of the war (something which had not happened until the middle of World War I), but women were also conscripted as Land Girls to aid farmers and the Bevin Boys were conscripted to work down the coal mines.

Enormous casualties were expected in bombing raids, so children were evacuated from London and other cities en masse to the countryside for compulsory billeting in households. In the long term this was one of the most profound and longer-lasting social consequences of the whole war for Britain. This is because it mixed up children with adults of other classes. Not only did the middle and upper classes become familiar with the urban squalor suffered by working class children from the slums, but the children got a chance to see animals and the countryside, often for the first time, and experience rural life.

The use of statistical analysis, by a branch of science which has become known as Operational Research to influence military tactics, was a departure from anything previously attempted. It was a very powerful tool but it further dehumanised war particularly when it suggested strategies that were counter-intuitive. Examples, where statistical analysis directly influenced tactics include the work done by Patrick Blackett&#x27;s team on the optimum size and speed of convoys and the introduction of bomber streams, by the Royal Air Force to counter the night fighter defences of the Kammhuber Line.

=====Nazi Germany=====
In 1935 General Ludendorff in the book &quot;Der Totale Krieg&quot; gave life to the term &quot;Total War&quot; in the German lexicon. However, being followers of the stab-in-the-back myth, military and Nazi leadership believed that Germany hadn&#x27;t lost World War I on the battlefield but solely on the home front.

Therefore, Germany started the war under the concept which was later named blitzkrieg. Officially, it did not accept that it was in a total war until Joseph Goebbels&#x27; Sportpalast speech of 18 February 1943—in which the crowd was told &quot;Totaler Krieg – Kürzester Krieg&quot; (&quot;Total War – Shortest War”.)

Goebbels and Hitler had spoken in March 1942 about Goebbels&#x27; idea to put the entire home front on a war footing. Hitler appeared to accept the concept, but took no action. Goebbels had the support of minister of armaments Albert Speer, economics minister Walther Funk and Robert Ley, head of the German Labour Front, and they pressed Hitler in October 1942 to take action, but Hitler, while outwardly agreeing, continued to dither. Finally, after the holidays in 1942, Hitler sent his powerful personal secretary, Martin Bormann, to discuss the question with Goebbels and Hans Lammers, the head of the Reich Chancellery. As a result, Bormann told Goebbels to go ahead and draw up a draft of the necessary decree, to be signed in January 1943. Hitler signed the decree on 13 January, almost a year after Goebbels first discussed the concept with him. The decree set up a steering committee consisting of Bormann, Lammers, and General Wilhelm Keitel to oversee the effort, with Goebbels and Speer as advisors; Goebbels had expected to be one of the triumvirate. Hitler remained aloof from the project, and it was Goebbels and Hermann Göring who gave the &quot;total war&quot; radio address from the Sportspalast the next month, on the 10th anniversary of the Nazi&#x27;s &quot;seizure of power&quot;.

The commitment to the doctrine of the short war was a continuing handicap for the Germans; neither plans nor state of mind were adjusted to the idea of a long war until the failure of the Operation Barbarossa. A major strategic defeat in the Battle of Moscow forced Speer to nationalise German war production and eliminate the worst inefficiencies.

===== Canada =====

In Canada early use of the term concerned whether or not the country was committing enough to mobilising its resources, rather than whether or not to target civilians of the enemy countries. During the early days of the Second World War, whether or not Canada was committed to a &quot;total war effort&quot; was point of partisan political debate between the governing Liberals and the opposition Conservatives. The Conservatives elected as their national leader Arthur Meighen, who had been the cabinet minister responsible for implementing conscription during the First World War, and advocated for conscription again. Prime Minister W.L. Mackenzie King argued that Canada could still be said to have a &quot;total war effort&quot; without conscription, and delivered nationally broadcast speeches to this effect 1942. Meighen failed to win his seat in by-election in 1942, and the issue subsided for a short time. But eventually, national conscription was introduced in Canada in 1944, as well as dramatically increased taxation, another symbol of the &quot;total war effort&quot;.

=====Soviet Union=====
The Soviet Union (USSR) was a command economy which already had an economic and legal system allowing the economy and society to be redirected into fighting a total war. The transportation of factories and whole labour forces east of the Urals as the Germans advanced across the USSR in 1941 was an impressive feat of planning. Only those factories which were useful for war production were moved because of the total war commitment of the Soviet government.

The Eastern Front of the European Theatre of World War II encompassed the conflict in central and eastern Europe from 22 June 1941, to 9 May 1945. It was the largest theatre of war in history in terms of numbers of soldiers, equipment and casualties and was notorious for its unprecedented ferocity, destruction, and immense loss of life (see World War II casualties). The fighting involved millions of German, Hungarian, Romanian and Soviet troops along a broad front hundreds of kilometres long. It was by far the deadliest single theatre of World War II. Scholars now believe that at most 27 million Soviet citizens died during the war, including at least 8.7 million soldiers who fell in battle against Hitler&#x27;s armies or died in POW camps. Millions of civilians died from starvation, exposure, atrocities, and massacres. The Axis lost over 5 million soldiers in the east as well as many thousands of civilians.

During the Battle of Stalingrad, newly built T-34 tanks were driven—unpainted because of a paint shortage—from the factory floor straight to the front. This came to symbolise the USSR&#x27;s commitment to a policy of total war.

=====United States=====

The United States underwent an unprecedented mobilisation of national resources for the Second World War, creating a military-industrial complex. Although the United States was not in existential danger, the national sense after Pearl Harbor was to use all the nation&#x27;s resources to defeat Germany and Japan. Most non-essential activities were rationed, prohibited or restrained, and most of the fit unmarried young men were drafted. There was little urgency before 1940, when the collapse of France ended the Phoney War and revealed urgent needs. Nevertheless, President Franklin Roosevelt moved to first solidify public opinion before acting. In 1940 the first peacetime draft was instituted, along with Lend-Lease programs to aid the British, and covert aid was passed to the Chinese as well.
American public opinion was still opposed to involvement in the problems of Europe and Asia, however. In 1941, the Soviet Union became the latest nation to be invaded, and the U.S. gave its aid as well. American ships began defending aid convoys to the Allied nations against submarine attacks, and a total trade embargo against the Empire of Japan was instituted to deny its military the raw materials its factories and military forces required to continue its offensive actions in China.

In late 1941, Japan&#x27;s Army-dominated government decided to seize by military force the strategic resources of South-East Asia and Indonesia since the Western powers would not give Japan these goods by trade. Planning for this action included surprise attacks on American and British forces in Hong Kong, the Philippines, Malaya, and the U.S. naval base and warships at Pearl Harbor. In response to these attacks, the UK and U.S. declared war the next day. Nazi Germany declared war on the U.S. a few days later, along with Fascist Italy; the U.S. found itself fully involved in a second world war.

As the United States began to gear up for a major war, information and propaganda efforts were set in motion. Civilians (including children) were encouraged to take part in fat, grease, and scrap metal collection drives. Many factories making non-essential goods retooled for war production. Levels of industrial productivity previously unheard of were attained during the war; multi-thousand-ton convoy ships were routinely built in a month and a half, and tanks poured out of the former automobile factories. Within a few years of the U.S. entry into the Second World War, nearly every man without children fit for service, between 18 and 30, was conscripted into the military &quot;for the duration&quot; of the conflict, and unprecedented numbers of women took up jobs previously held by them. Strict systems of rationing of consumer staples were introduced to redirect productive capacity to war needs.

Previously untouched sections of the nation mobilised for the war effort. Academics became technocrats; home-makers became bomb-makers (massive numbers of women worked in industry during the war); union leaders and businessmen became commanders in the massive armies of production. The great scientific communities of the United States were mobilised as never before, and mathematicians, doctors, engineers, and chemists turned their minds to the problems ahead of them.

By the war&#x27;s end, a multitude of advances had been made in medicine, physics, engineering, and the other sciences. This included the efforts of the theoretical physicists working at the Los Alamos National Laboratory on the Manhattan Project, which led to the Trinity nuclear test and thus brought about the Atomic Age.

In the war, the United States lost 407,316 military personnel, but had managed to avoid the extensive level of damage to civilian and industrial infrastructure that other participants suffered. The U.S. emerged as one of the two superpowers after the war.

=====Unconditional surrender=====

After the United States entered World War II, Franklin D. Roosevelt declared at Casablanca conference to the other Allies and the press that unconditional surrender was the objective of the war against the Axis Powers of Germany, Italy, and Japan. Prior to this declaration, the individual regimes of the Axis Powers could have negotiated an armistice similar to that at the end of World War I and then a conditional surrender when they perceived that the war was lost.

The unconditional surrender of the major Axis powers caused a legal problem at the post-war Nuremberg Trials, because the trials appeared to be in conflict with Articles 63 and 64 of the Geneva Convention of 1929. Usually if such trials are held, they would be held under the auspices of the defeated power&#x27;s own legal system as happened with some of the minor Axis powers, for example in the post World War II Romanian People&#x27;s Tribunals. To circumvent this, the Allies argued that the major war criminals were captured after the end of the war, so they were not prisoners of war and the Geneva Conventions did not cover them. Further, the collapse of the Axis regimes created a legal condition of total defeat (&quot;debellatio&quot;) so the provisions of the 1907 Hague Convention over military occupation were not applicable.

===Post-World War II===

Since the end of World War II, no industrial nation has fought such a large, decisive war. This is likely due to the availability of nuclear weapons, whose destructive power and quick deployment render a full mobilisation of a country&#x27;s resources such as in World War II logistically impractical and strategically irrelevant.

By the end of the 1950s, the ideological stand-off of the Cold War between the Western world and the Soviet Union had resulted in thousands of nuclear weapons being aimed by each side at the other. Strategically, the equal balance of destructive power possessed by each side manifests in the doctrine of mutually assured destruction (MAD), which determines that a nuclear attack by one superpower would result in a nuclear counter-strike by the other. This would result in hundreds of millions of deaths in a world where, in words widely attributed to Nikita Khrushchev, &quot;The living will envy the dead&quot;.

During the Cold War, the two superpowers sought to avoid open conflict between their respective forces, as both sides recognised that such a clash could very easily escalate, and quickly involve nuclear weapons. Instead, the superpowers fought each other through their involvement in proxy wars, military buildups, and diplomatic standoffs.

In the case of proxy wars, each superpower supported its respective allies in conflicts with forces aligned with the other superpower, such as in the Vietnam War and the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan.

==Other conflicts==

The following post-World War II conflicts have been characterized as &quot;total war&quot;:

* 1948 Arab–Israeli War (1948–1949)
* Iran–Iraq War (1980–1988)
* Russian invasion of Ukraine (2022–present)

==See also==

* Black-and-white dualism
* Cannon fodder
* Carthaginian peace
* Conventional warfare
* Economic warfare
* Psychology of genocide
* Roerich Pact
* The bomber will always get through
* War economy
* War of annihilation
==References==
===Bibliography===

* Barnhart, Michael A. &quot;Japan prepares for total war: The search for economic security, 1919–1941&quot; (Cornell UP, 2013).
* Barrett, John G. &quot;Sherman and Total War in the Carolinas.&quot; &quot;North Carolina Historical Review&quot; 37.3 (1960): 367–381. online
* Black, Jeremy. &quot;The age of total war, 1860–1945&quot; (Rowman &amp; Littlefield Publishers, 2010).
* Broers, Michael. &quot;The Concept of Total War in the Revolutionary – Napoleonic Period.&quot; &quot;War in History&quot; 15.3 (2008): 247–268.
* Craig, Campbell. &quot;Glimmer of a new Leviathan: Total war in the realism of Niebuhr, Morgenthau, and Waltz&quot; (Columbia University Press, 2004), Intellectual history.
* Fisher, Noel C. &quot;&#x27;Prepare Them For My Coming&#x27;: General William T. Sherman, Total War, and Pacification in West Tennessee.&quot; &quot;Tennessee Historical Quarterly&quot; 51.2 (1992): 75–86.
* Förster, Stig, and Jorg Nagler. &quot;On the Road to Total War: The American Civil War and the German Wars of Unification, 1861–1871&quot; (Cambridge University Press, 2002).
* Hewitson, Mark. &quot;Princes’ Wars, Wars of the People, or Total War? Mass Armies and the Question of a Military Revolution in Germany, 1792–1815.&quot; &quot;War in History&quot; 20.4 (2013): 452–490.
* Hoffman, Christopher S. &quot;Major General William T. Sherman&#x27;s total war in the Savannah and Carolina campaigns&quot; (US Army Command and General Staff College, School for Advanced Military Studies Fort Leavenworth, 2018) online.
* Hsieh, Wayne Wei-Siang. &quot;Total War and the American Civil War Reconsidered: The End of an Outdated&quot; Master Narrative&quot;.&quot; &quot;Journal of the Civil War Era&quot; 1.3 (2011): 394–408. online
* Marwick, Arthur, Clive Emsley, and Wendy Simpson. &quot;Total war and historical change: Europe 1914–1955&quot; (Open University Press, 2001).
* Royster, Charles. &quot;The Destructive War: William Tecumseh Sherman, Stonewall Jackson, and the Americans&quot; (1993)
* Walters, John Bennett. &quot;General William T. Sherman and total war.&quot; &quot;Journal of Southern History&quot; 14.4 (1948): 447–480. online
** Walters, John Bennett. &quot;Merchant of terror: General Sherman and total war&quot; (1973); adds nothing new says John F. Marszalek, &quot;Journal of American History&quot; (Dec. 1974), pp. 784–785.
==External links==
* Israel&#x27;s 1948 War of Independence as a Total War
* A collection of papers relating to the Sullivan Expedition
* Daniel Marc Segesser: Controversy: Total War, in: 1914–1918-online. International Encyclopedia of the First World War.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q154605" start="0" end="9" title="Total war" label="Total war"/>
<link wikidata="Q198" start="23" end="26" title="war" label="war"/>
<link wikidata="Q206887" start="68" end="76" title="civilian" label="civilian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6518482" start="121" end="147" title="legitimate military target" label="legitimate military target"/>
<link wikidata="Q465727" start="245" end="258" title="non-combatant" label="non-combatant"/>
<link wikidata="Q183366" start="363" end="372" title="Territory (country subdivision)" label="territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414937" start="376" end="385" title="combatant" label="combatant"/>
<link wikidata="Q6833880" start="452" end="463" title="law of war" label="laws of war"/>
<link wikidata="Q3049087" start="817" end="827" title="war effort" label="war effort"/>
<link wikidata="Q841418" start="2851" end="2868" title="Strategic bombing" label="Strategic bombing"/>
<link wikidata="Q715695" start="2880" end="2892" title="Strategic bombing during World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2898" end="2908" title="Korean War#Bombing of North Korea" label="Korean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="2918" end="2929" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7096792" start="2942" end="2953" title="Operation Barrel Roll" label="Barrel Roll"/>
<link wikidata="Q547247" start="2955" end="2970" title="Operation Rolling Thunder" label="Rolling Thunder"/>
<link wikidata="Q486866" start="2975" end="2988" title="Operation Linebacker II" label="Linebacker II"/>
<link wikidata="Q273976" start="2992" end="3000" title="Blockade" label="Blockade"/>
<link wikidata="Q188055" start="3005" end="3014" title="siege" label="besieging"/>
<link wikidata="Q215669" start="3050" end="3056" title="Allies of World War I" label="Allied"/>
<link wikidata="Q2906848" start="3057" end="3076" title="Blockade of Germany (1914–1919)" label="blockade of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q151860" start="3085" end="3103" title="Siege of Leningrad" label="Siege of Leningrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2906848" start="3115" end="3120" title="Blockade of Germany (1914–1919)" label="First"/>
<link wikidata="Q115702" start="3125" end="3131" title="Blockade of Germany (1939–45)" label="Second"/>
<link wikidata="Q208485" start="3145" end="3159" title="Scorched earth" label="Scorched earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052780" start="3180" end="3196" title="Sherman&amp;#x27;s March to the Sea" label="March to the Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="3208" end="3226" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q648346" start="3250" end="3267" title="Three Alls Policy" label="Three Alls Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q170314" start="3285" end="3309" title="Second Sino-Japanese War" label="Second Sino-Japanese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q986676" start="3312" end="3328" title="Commerce raiding" label="Commerce raiding"/>
<link wikidata="Q7821582" start="3330" end="3341" title="tonnage war" label="tonnage war"/>
<link wikidata="Q1119089" start="3347" end="3377" title="unrestricted submarine warfare" label="unrestricted submarine warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q201559" start="3387" end="3396" title="privateer" label="privateer"/>
<link wikidata="Q428661" start="3412" end="3418" title="U-boat" label="U-boat"/>
<link wikidata="Q4732623" start="3487" end="3519" title="Allied submarines in the Pacific War" label="submarine campaign against Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1690716" start="3542" end="3563" title="Collective punishment" label="Collective punishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365756" start="3594" end="3602" title="reprisal" label="reprisal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780490" start="3691" end="3701" title="Communards" label="Communards"/>
<link wikidata="Q133132" start="3733" end="3746" title="Paris Commune" label="Paris Commune"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094191" start="3787" end="3807" title="Resistance during World War II" label="resistance movements"/>
<link wikidata="Q326822" start="3825" end="3836" title="Untermensch" label="Untermensch"/>
<link wikidata="Q324215" start="3863" end="3878" title="Maillé massacre" label="Maillé massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7122819" start="3884" end="3890" title="Pacification actions in German-occupied Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2290702" start="3913" end="3931" title="Industrial warfare" label="Industrial warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q703006" start="3978" end="3988" title="home front" label="home front"/>
<link wikidata="Q5889051" start="3997" end="4008" title="Home front during World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q5889055" start="4013" end="4025" title="Home front during World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q206887" start="4039" end="4047" title="civilian" label="civilian"/>
<link wikidata="Q179637" start="4053" end="4069" title="Prisoner of war" label="prisoners of war"/>
<link wikidata="Q705818" start="4073" end="4086" title="forced labour" label="forced labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q645883" start="4091" end="4109" title="military operation" label="military operation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3057910" start="4225" end="4241" title="Slavery in Japan" label="Slavery in Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q513760" start="4246" end="4297" title="forced labour under German rule during World War II" label="forced labour under German rule during World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q641319" start="4308" end="4318" title="no quarter" label="no quarter"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="4353" end="4359" title="Hitler" label="Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q581891" start="4367" end="4381" title="Commando Order" label="Commando Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q92562" start="4532" end="4543" title="Léon Daudet" label="Léon Daudet"/>
<link wikidata="Q58579" start="4719" end="4735" title="Erich Ludendorff" label="Erich Ludendorff"/>
<link wikidata="Q76430" start="4884" end="4903" title="Carl von Clausewitz" label="Carl von Clausewitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1981770" start="4911" end="4917" title="On War" label="On War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4348173" start="4957" end="4969" title="absolute war" label="absolute war"/>
<link wikidata="Q46083" start="5127" end="5146" title="Franco-Prussian War" label="Franco-Prussian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q112119463" start="5187" end="5201" title="chief of staff" label="chief of staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="5213" end="5231" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q188936" start="5247" end="5271" title="William Tecumseh Sherman" label="William Tecumseh Sherman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052780" start="5476" end="5507" title="Sherman&amp;#x27;s March to the Sea" label="Sherman&amp;#x27;s March to the Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q11223" start="5592" end="5615" title="United States Air Force" label="United States Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q15866" start="5624" end="5636" title="Curtis LeMay" label="Curtis LeMay"/>
<link wikidata="Q757669" start="5665" end="5676" title="nuclear age" label="nuclear age"/>
<link wikidata="Q189062" start="5780" end="5795" title="nuclear arsenal" label="nuclear arsenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278221" start="5929" end="5956" title="Eastern Michigan University" label="Eastern Michigan University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7778" start="6400" end="6414" title="French History" label="French History"/>
<link wikidata="Q21578" start="6428" end="6448" title="Princeton University" label="Princeton University"/>
<link wikidata="Q207318" start="6465" end="6490" title="French Revolutionary Wars" label="French Revolutionary Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1821974" start="6778" end="6792" title="levée en masse" label="levée en masse"/>
<link wikidata="Q179250" start="7025" end="7041" title="French invasion of Russia" label="Russian campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q199955" start="7324" end="7340" title="the Hundred Days" label="the Hundred Days"/>
<link wikidata="Q48314" start="7495" end="7503" title="Battle of Waterloo" label="Waterloo"/>
<link wikidata="Q152499" start="7527" end="7541" title="Peninsular War" label="Peninsular War"/>
<link wikidata="Q610272" start="7898" end="7923" title="First Geneva Convention" label="Geneva Convention of 1864"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426614" start="8073" end="8092" title="Sullivan Expedition" label="Sullivan Expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q935481" start="8157" end="8165" title="Loyalist (American Revolution)" label="Loyalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q23" start="8273" end="8290" title="George Washington" label="George Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q886420" start="8304" end="8317" title="John Sullivan (general)" label="John Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052780" start="8657" end="8688" title="Sherman&amp;#x27;s March to the Sea" label="Sherman&amp;#x27;s March to the Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="8696" end="8714" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q67825" start="9220" end="9234" title="Peter Strasser" label="Peter Strasser"/>
<link wikidata="Q156649" start="9361" end="9381" title="German Imperial Navy" label="German Imperial Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q191413" start="9382" end="9390" title="Zeppelin" label="Zeppelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7281" start="9837" end="9847" title="propaganda" label="propaganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q703006" start="9898" end="9908" title="home front" label="home front"/>
<link wikidata="Q940462" start="10071" end="10081" title="music hall" label="music hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2331555" start="10178" end="10202" title="Battle of Neuve Chapelle" label="Battle of Neuve Chapelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7821620" start="10278" end="10291" title="Field Marshal" label="Field Marshal"/>
<link wikidata="Q318028" start="10365" end="10381" title="Shell (projectile)" label="artillery shells"/>
<link wikidata="Q3002754" start="10399" end="10419" title="Shell Crisis of 1915" label="Shell Crisis of 1915"/>
<link wikidata="Q622441" start="10448" end="10455" title="Liberal Party (UK)" label="Liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q14211" start="10471" end="10482" title="Prime Minister of the United Kingdom" label="Premiership"/>
<link wikidata="Q166714" start="10486" end="10499" title="H. H. Asquith" label="H. H. Asquith"/>
<link wikidata="Q134982" start="10574" end="10592" title="David Lloyd George" label="David Lloyd George"/>
<link wikidata="Q1446566" start="10596" end="10617" title="Minister of Munitions" label="Minister of Munitions"/>
<link wikidata="Q77148" start="10748" end="10760" title="Carl Schmitt" label="Carl Schmitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="10777" end="10789" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11345" end="11358" title="Fascism#World War I and its aftermath (1914–1929)" label="Ideas of 1914"/>
<link wikidata="Q1119089" start="11585" end="11615" title="unrestricted submarine warfare" label="unrestricted submarine warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q2906848" start="11667" end="11691" title="Blockade of Germany (1914–1919)" label="blockade of German ports"/>
<link wikidata="Q219" start="11930" end="11938" title="Bulgaria" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="12113" end="12129" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002407" start="12259" end="12270" title="battlespace" label="battlespace"/>
<link wikidata="Q37726" start="12305" end="12311" title="army" label="armies"/>
<link wikidata="Q4508" start="12313" end="12319" title="navy" label="navies"/>
<link wikidata="Q61883" start="12325" end="12334" title="air force" label="air force"/>
<link wikidata="Q580750" start="12351" end="12363" title="conscription" label="conscription"/>
<link wikidata="Q45939" start="12460" end="12477" title="collateral damage" label="collateral damage"/>
<link wikidata="Q327567" start="12658" end="12667" title="Shōwa era" label="Shōwa era"/>
<link wikidata="Q188712" start="12687" end="12701" title="Empire of Japan" label="Imperial Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q170314" start="12762" end="12775" title="Second Sino-Japanese War" label="against China"/>
<link wikidata="Q184425" start="12780" end="12797" title="Pacific war" label="occidental powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q81914984" start="12855" end="12895" title="National Spiritual Mobilization Movement" label="National Spiritual Mobilization Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q714797" start="12904" end="12940" title="Taisei Yokusankai" label="Imperial Rule Assistance Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q850913" start="12947" end="12977" title="State General Mobilization Law" label="State General Mobilization Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q178790" start="13075" end="13087" title="labour union" label="labour union"/>
<link wikidata="Q178564" start="13091" end="13106" title="nationalisation" label="nationalisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q843478" start="13151" end="13160" title="rationing" label="rationing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193236" start="13183" end="13193" title="news media" label="news media"/>
<link wikidata="Q8463" start="13492" end="13504" title="slave labour" label="slave labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q3057910" start="13512" end="13547" title="Slavery in Japan" label="pressed more than 18 million people"/>
<link wikidata="Q27231" start="13551" end="13560" title="East Asia" label="East Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770547" start="14097" end="14106" title="Blackout (wartime)" label="blackouts"/>
<link wikidata="Q85816028" start="14293" end="14303" title="Women&amp;#x27;s Land Army (World War II)" label="Land Girls"/>
<link wikidata="Q4899669" start="14327" end="14337" title="Bevin Boys" label="Bevin Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q2917386" start="14440" end="14520" title="Evacuations of civilians in Britain during the Second World War" label="children were evacuated from London and other cities en masse to the countryside"/>
<link wikidata="Q1308509" start="14536" end="14542" title="billet" label="billet"/>
<link wikidata="Q201759" start="14873" end="14877" title="slum" label="slum"/>
<link wikidata="Q194292" start="15082" end="15102" title="Operational Research" label="Operational Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q184499" start="15406" end="15422" title="Patrick Blackett" label="Patrick Blackett"/>
<link wikidata="Q891906" start="15500" end="15513" title="bomber stream" label="bomber stream"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="15523" end="15538" title="Royal Air Force" label="Royal Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q283965" start="15584" end="15598" title="Kammhuber Line" label="Kammhuber Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q58579" start="15632" end="15650" title="General Ludendorff" label="General Ludendorff"/>
<link wikidata="Q160944" start="15791" end="15812" title="stab-in-the-back myth" label="stab-in-the-back myth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5889051" start="15931" end="15941" title="Home front during World War I" label="home front"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="15955" end="15962" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q56506" start="16019" end="16029" title="blitzkrieg" label="blitzkrieg"/>
<link wikidata="Q41749" start="16094" end="16109" title="Joseph Goebbels" label="Joseph Goebbels"/>
<link wikidata="Q698255" start="16116" end="16134" title="Sportpalast speech" label="Sportpalast speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q60045" start="16490" end="16502" title="Albert Speer" label="Albert Speer"/>
<link wikidata="Q57237" start="16523" end="16535" title="Walther Funk" label="Walther Funk"/>
<link wikidata="Q58645" start="16540" end="16550" title="Robert Ley" label="Robert Ley"/>
<link wikidata="Q312526" start="16564" end="16583" title="German Labour Front" label="German Labour Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q76367" start="16782" end="16796" title="Martin Bormann" label="Martin Bormann"/>
<link wikidata="Q57472" start="16840" end="16852" title="Hans Lammers" label="Hans Lammers"/>
<link wikidata="Q698208" start="16870" end="16887" title="Reich Chancellery" label="Reich Chancellery"/>
<link wikidata="Q76361" start="17201" end="17215" title="Wilhelm Keitel" label="Wilhelm Keitel"/>
<link wikidata="Q47906" start="17392" end="17406" title="Hermann Göring" label="Hermann Göring"/>
<link wikidata="Q4684105" start="17525" end="17565" title="Nazi seizure of power" label="Nazi&amp;#x27;s &amp;quot;seizure of power&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q83055" start="17756" end="17776" title="Operation Barbarossa" label="Operation Barbarossa"/>
<link wikidata="Q151290" start="17810" end="17826" title="Battle of Moscow" label="Battle of Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q138345" start="18307" end="18315" title="Liberal Party of Canada" label="Liberals"/>
<link wikidata="Q909827" start="18335" end="18348" title="Conservative Party of Canada (1867–1942)" label="Conservatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q128645" start="18401" end="18415" title="Arthur Meighen" label="Arthur Meighen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1735502" start="18480" end="18519" title="Conscription Crisis of 1917" label="conscription during the First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q128633" start="18574" end="18593" title="W.L. Mackenzie King" label="W.L. Mackenzie King"/>
<link wikidata="Q189724" start="19077" end="19092" title="planned economy" label="command economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q35600" start="19285" end="19290" title="Urals" label="Urals"/>
<link wikidata="Q44700" start="19532" end="19564" title="European Theatre of World War II" label="European Theatre of World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q27509" start="19593" end="19600" title="central Europe" label="central"/>
<link wikidata="Q27468" start="19605" end="19619" title="eastern Europe" label="eastern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q471779" start="19746" end="19756" title="World War II casualties" label="casualties"/>
<link wikidata="Q471779" start="19850" end="19873" title="World War II casualties" label="World War II casualties"/>
<link wikidata="Q128781" start="19910" end="19916" title="Nazi army" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q251395" start="19942" end="19948" title="Red army" label="Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="20214" end="20220" title="Hitler" label="Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q179637" start="20246" end="20249" title="POW" label="POW"/>
<link wikidata="Q853930" start="20289" end="20299" title="starvation" label="starvation"/>
<link wikidata="Q38789" start="20440" end="20460" title="Battle of Stalingrad" label="Battle of Stalingrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q172233" start="20474" end="20483" title="T-34 tank" label="T-34 tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q744593" start="20800" end="20827" title="military-industrial complex" label="military-industrial complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q190882" start="21198" end="21208" title="Phoney War" label="Phoney War"/>
<link wikidata="Q207637" start="21394" end="21404" title="Lend-Lease" label="Lend-Lease"/>
<link wikidata="Q17946" start="21493" end="21507" title="public opinion" label="public opinion"/>
<link wikidata="Q188712" start="21817" end="21832" title="Empire of Japan" label="Empire of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q276535" start="22002" end="22006" title="Imperial Japanese Army" label="Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q2832578" start="22222" end="22237" title="surprise attack" label="surprise attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q127091" start="22349" end="22361" title="Pearl Harbor" label="Pearl Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="22436" end="22448" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22503" end="22516" title="Kingdom of Italy#Fascist regime (1922–1943)" label="Fascist Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q103495" start="22567" end="22576" title="world war" label="world war"/>
<link wikidata="Q18362" start="24113" end="24135" title="theoretical physics" label="theoretical physicists"/>
<link wikidata="Q379848" start="24151" end="24181" title="Los Alamos National Laboratory" label="Los Alamos National Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q127050" start="24189" end="24206" title="Manhattan Project" label="Manhattan Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q207342" start="24225" end="24245" title="Trinity (nuclear test)" label="Trinity nuclear test"/>
<link wikidata="Q757669" start="24273" end="24283" title="Atomic Age" label="Atomic Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q1489259" start="24515" end="24525" title="superpower" label="superpower"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="24624" end="24645" title="Franklin D. Roosevelt" label="Franklin D. Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q502093" start="24658" end="24679" title="Casablanca conference" label="Casablanca conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q813919" start="24719" end="24742" title="unconditional surrender" label="unconditional surrender"/>
<link wikidata="Q107706" start="24920" end="24929" title="armistice" label="armistice"/>
<link wikidata="Q80130" start="25141" end="25157" title="Nuremberg Trials" label="Nuremberg Trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q2594768" start="25236" end="25261" title="Geneva Convention on Prisoners of War (1929)" label="Geneva Convention of 1929"/>
<link wikidata="Q7362569" start="25465" end="25497" title="Romanian People&amp;#x27;s Tribunals" label="Romanian People&amp;#x27;s Tribunals"/>
<link wikidata="Q135010" start="25552" end="25565" title="war criminals" label="war criminals"/>
<link wikidata="Q971076" start="25778" end="25788" title="debellatio" label="debellatio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566316" start="25821" end="25842" title="Hague Convention of 1907" label="1907 Hague Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q188686" start="25848" end="25867" title="military occupation" label="military occupation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7257" start="26276" end="26287" title="ideology" label="ideological"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="26305" end="26313" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q160381" start="26326" end="26339" title="Western world" label="Western world"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="26348" end="26360" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q637802" start="26551" end="26579" title="Mutual assured destruction" label="mutually assured destruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q35314" start="26799" end="26816" title="Nikita Khrushchev" label="Nikita Khrushchev"/>
<link wikidata="Q1489259" start="26891" end="26901" title="superpower" label="superpower"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="27354" end="27365" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q83085" start="27374" end="27404" title="Soviet invasion of Afghanistan" label="Soviet invasion of Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q49092" start="27523" end="27544" title="1948 Arab–Israeli War" label="1948 Arab–Israeli War"/>
<link wikidata="Q82664" start="27559" end="27572" title="Iran–Iraq War" label="Iran–Iraq War"/>
<link wikidata="Q110999040" start="27587" end="27614" title="Russian invasion of Ukraine" label="Russian invasion of Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4920066" start="27647" end="27670" title="Black-and-white dualism" label="Black-and-white dualism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570324" start="27673" end="27686" title="Cannon fodder" label="Cannon fodder"/>
<link wikidata="Q3888431" start="27689" end="27707" title="Carthaginian peace" label="Carthaginian peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q429245" start="27710" end="27730" title="Conventional warfare" label="Conventional warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296073" start="27733" end="27749" title="Economic warfare" label="Economic warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q97574271" start="27752" end="27774" title="Psychology of genocide" label="Psychology of genocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1850313" start="27777" end="27789" title="Roerich Pact" label="Roerich Pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q3228376" start="27792" end="27826" title="The bomber will always get through" label="The bomber will always get through"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476218" start="27829" end="27840" title="War economy" label="War economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q752646" start="27843" end="27862" title="War of annihilation" label="War of annihilation"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="29980" wikidata="Q7805281" url="?curid=29980" title="Time constraint">
<text>In law, time constraints are placed on certain actions and filings in the interest of speedy justice, and additionally to prevent the evasion of the ends of justice by waiting until a matter is moot. The penalty for violating a legislative or court-imposed time constraint may be anything from a small fine to judicial determination of an entire case against one&#x27;s interests.

For example, if a complaining party files an action and then fails to cause the papers pertaining thereto to be served on the opposing party within the time established by local rules, and is unable to convince the court that there was good and sufficient reason for the delay, he risks having his action dismissed with prejudice. If the opposing party is served with the papers and Anil fails to respond within the time limit provided for his answer, he risks having the case decided against him by default.

If one is aggrieved by the judicial outcome of an action and wishes to appeal, he may be forever barred from doing so if he fails to meet the deadline by which his appeal may be filed.

By court order, or by local rule, there may be other time constraints. One may be required to answer interrogatories or a request to produce or other discovery pleadings within a given time. He may be required to give a certain number of days&#x27; advance notice before he intends to depose a party or witness. A court may order that there will be only a certain number of weeks or months allowed during which the parties to an action may conduct discovery. There may be a limitation placed upon a deposition, requiring that the party taking it conclude his questioning within a certain number of hours or days.

==See also==
*Statute of limitations
*Statute of repose

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7748" start="3" end="6" title="law" label="law"/>
<link wikidata="Q7805281" start="8" end="24" title="Time constraint" label="time constraints"/>
<link wikidata="Q697327" start="47" end="53" title="lawsuit" label="action"/>
<link wikidata="Q17146064" start="59" end="66" title="Filing (legal)" label="filings"/>
<link wikidata="Q883942" start="194" end="198" title="Mootness (law)" label="moot"/>
<link wikidata="Q109701697" start="697" end="711" title="with prejudice" label="with prejudice"/>
<link wikidata="Q13422045" start="882" end="889" title="default (law)" label="default"/>
<link wikidata="Q329777" start="963" end="969" title="appeal" label="appeal"/>
<link wikidata="Q11273023" start="1179" end="1194" title="interrogatories" label="interrogatories"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314802" start="1200" end="1218" title="request to produce" label="request to produce"/>
<link wikidata="Q902342" start="1228" end="1237" title="discovery (law)" label="discovery"/>
<link wikidata="Q329381" start="1238" end="1246" title="pleading" label="pleading"/>
<link wikidata="Q5260784" start="1363" end="1369" title="deposition (law)" label="depose"/>
<link wikidata="Q1686000" start="1372" end="1377" title="party (law)" label="party"/>
<link wikidata="Q196939" start="1381" end="1388" title="witness" label="witness"/>
<link wikidata="Q5260784" start="1577" end="1587" title="Deposition (law)" label="deposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1899048" start="1706" end="1728" title="Statute of limitations" label="Statute of limitations"/>
<link wikidata="Q457585" start="1730" end="1747" title="Statute of repose" label="Statute of repose"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="29981" wikidata="Q219247" url="?curid=29981" title="TS">
<text>TS or Ts may refer to:

==Businesses and organizations==
* Air Transat (IATA code TS), a Canadian airline
* Tenaris (NYSE symbol), a global manufacturer of steel pipe products
* Theosophical Society, religious philosophy
* Tidewater Southern Railway (reporting mark TS), a former US railroad
* Trabzonspor, a Turkish Football Club
* Transcendental Students, a former radical student group at NYU
* TS Ferries, an Estonian ferry line

==Linguistics==
* Ts (digraph), a digraph in the Latin alphabet
* Voiceless alveolar sibilant affricate (, , or ), a type of consonantal sound
** Tse (Cyrillic) (Ц ц), the Cyrillic letter representing the voiceless alveolar affricate
* Tsonga language (ISO 639 code: ts), of southern Africa

==Science and technology==
* Tensile strength, in materials science

===Biology and medicine===
* Transverse section, a term used in microscopy when prepared slide has a sample transversely dissected.
* Thymidylate synthase, the enzyme used to generate thymidine monophosphate
* Tourette syndrome, a neurological condition involving involuntary tics
* Turner syndrome, a condition in which a female is partly or completely missing an X chromosome

===Chemistry===
* Tennessine, symbol Ts, a chemical element
* Tosyl, a group in organic chemistry
* Transition state, of a chemical reaction

===Electronics and computing===
* Adobe Technical Communication Suite, an Adobe software family
* MPEG transport stream (file extension .ts), a digital media container format
* Telesync, a bootleg recording of a film recorded in a movie theater
* Terminal Services, a component of Microsoft Windows operating systems
* Tip-Sleeve, a standard monaural phone connector
* TypeScript (file extension .ts), a Microsoft programming language

===Mathematics===
* Tabu search, a search method
* Tate–Shafarevich group, in arithmetic geometry

==Transportation==
* Twin Spark, an Alfa Romeo car engine technology
* Turbine Steamship (ship prefix)
* Turn and slip indicator, an avionics instrument
* Training Ship (ship prefix)
* Telangana State (vehicle registration code TS), India
* Tunisia (aircraft registration prefix TS)

==Other uses==
* Teaspoon (ts.), a measure in cooking
* ISO Technical Specification, e.g. ISO/TS 16949:2009
* Top Secret, a security classification
* TeamSpeak, a proprietary voice-over-Internet Protocol application for audio communication
*TS postcode area, UK
*Transition School, a one-year program at the University of Washington; see Transition School and Early Entrance Program

==See also==
* T&amp;S (disambiguation)
* Models of Ibanez Tube Screamer guitar overdrive pedal, e.g. TS7</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q219247" start="0" end="2" title="TS" label="TS"/>
<link wikidata="Q219247" start="6" end="8" title="TS" label="Ts"/>
<link wikidata="Q407869" start="59" end="70" title="Air Transat" label="Air Transat"/>
<link wikidata="Q642106" start="108" end="115" title="Tenaris" label="Tenaris"/>
<link wikidata="Q327625" start="178" end="198" title="Theosophical Society" label="Theosophical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q7800886" start="223" end="249" title="Tidewater Southern Railway" label="Tidewater Southern Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q192641" start="294" end="305" title="Trabzonspor" label="Trabzonspor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7833860" start="333" end="356" title="Transcendental Students" label="Transcendental Students"/>
<link wikidata="Q31273033" start="398" end="408" title="TS Ferries" label="TS Ferries"/>
<link wikidata="Q14932387" start="452" end="464" title="Ts (digraph)" label="Ts (digraph)"/>
<link wikidata="Q862614" start="500" end="537" title="Voiceless alveolar sibilant affricate" label="Voiceless alveolar sibilant affricate"/>
<link wikidata="Q179855" start="580" end="594" title="Tse (Cyrillic)" label="Tse (Cyrillic)"/>
<link wikidata="Q34327" start="670" end="685" title="Tsonga language" label="Tsonga language"/>
<link wikidata="Q76005" start="755" end="771" title="Tensile strength" label="Tensile strength"/>
<link wikidata="Q1604164" start="824" end="842" title="Transverse plane" label="Transverse section"/>
<link wikidata="Q22676802" start="929" end="949" title="Thymidylate synthase" label="Thymidylate synthase"/>
<link wikidata="Q191779" start="1005" end="1022" title="Tourette syndrome" label="Tourette syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q202849" start="1078" end="1093" title="Turner syndrome" label="Turner syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1306" start="1192" end="1202" title="Tennessine" label="Tennessine"/>
<link wikidata="Q539566" start="1236" end="1241" title="Tosyl" label="Tosyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q906964" start="1274" end="1290" title="Transition state" label="Transition state"/>
<link wikidata="Q4684004" start="1350" end="1385" title="Adobe Technical Communication Suite" label="Adobe Technical Communication Suite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194435" start="1414" end="1435" title="MPEG transport stream" label="MPEG transport stream"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755983" start="1493" end="1501" title="Telesync" label="Telesync"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745718" start="1563" end="1580" title="Terminal Services" label="Terminal Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q394226" start="1667" end="1682" title="phone connector (audio)" label="phone connector"/>
<link wikidata="Q978185" start="1685" end="1695" title="TypeScript" label="TypeScript"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424540" start="1772" end="1783" title="Tabu search" label="Tabu search"/>
<link wikidata="Q7688027" start="1803" end="1825" title="Tate–Shafarevich group" label="Tate–Shafarevich group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1243499" start="1872" end="1882" title="Twin Spark" label="Twin Spark"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1941" end="1952" title="ship prefix#Generic (merchant navy) prefixes" label="ship prefix"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142970" start="1956" end="1979" title="Turn and slip indicator" label="Turn and slip indicator"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2021" end="2032" title="ship prefix#Generic (merchant navy) prefixes" label="ship prefix"/>
<link wikidata="Q677037" start="2036" end="2051" title="Telangana State" label="Telangana State"/>
<link wikidata="Q838849" start="2101" end="2122" title="aircraft registration" label="aircraft registration"/>
<link wikidata="Q216425" start="2152" end="2160" title="Teaspoon" label="Teaspoon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2191" end="2218" title="ISO technical specification#Standardization process" label="ISO Technical Specification"/>
<link wikidata="Q846498" start="2245" end="2255" title="Top Secret" label="Top Secret"/>
<link wikidata="Q71421" start="2285" end="2294" title="TeamSpeak" label="TeamSpeak"/>
<link wikidata="Q7671809" start="2376" end="2392" title="TS postcode area" label="TS postcode area"/>
<link wikidata="Q7834403" start="2473" end="2517" title="Transition School and Early Entrance Program" label="Transition School and Early Entrance Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q126493750" start="2534" end="2558" title="T&amp;amp;S (disambiguation)" label="T&amp;amp;S (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2571" end="2591" title="Ibanez Tube Screamer#Variations" label="Ibanez Tube Screamer"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="29984" wikidata="Q10570" url="?curid=29984" title="Taurus (constellation)">
<text>Taurus (Latin, &#x27;Bull&#x27;) is one of the constellations of the zodiac and is located in the northern celestial hemisphere. Taurus is a large and prominent constellation in the Northern Hemisphere&#x27;s winter sky. It is one of the oldest constellations, dating back to the Early Bronze Age at least, when it marked the location of the Sun during the spring equinox. Its importance to the agricultural calendar influenced various bull figures in the mythologies of Ancient Sumer, Akkad, Assyria, Babylon, Egypt, Greece, and Rome. Its old astronomical symbol is (♉︎), which resembles a bull&#x27;s head.

A number of features exist that are of interest to astronomers. Taurus hosts two of the nearest open clusters to Earth, the Pleiades and the Hyades, both of which are visible to the naked eye. At first magnitude, the red giant Aldebaran is the brightest star in the constellation. In the northeast part of Taurus is Messier 1, more commonly known as the Crab Nebula, a supernova remnant containing a pulsar. One of the closest regions of active star formation, the Taurus-Auriga complex, crosses into the northern part of the constellation. The variable star T Tauri is the prototype of a class of pre-main-sequence stars.

==Characteristics==
Taurus is a large and prominent constellation in the northern hemisphere&#x27;s winter sky, between Aries to the west and Gemini to the east; to the north lies Perseus and Auriga, to the southeast Orion, to the south Eridanus, and to the southwest Cetus. In late November-early December, Taurus reaches opposition (furthest point from the Sun) and is visible the entire night. By late March, it is setting at sunset and completely disappears behind the Sun&#x27;s glare from May to July.

This constellation forms part of the zodiac and hence is intersected by the ecliptic. This circle across the celestial sphere forms the apparent path of the Sun as the Earth completes its annual orbit. As the orbital plane of the Moon and the planets lie near the ecliptic, they can usually be found in the constellation Taurus during some part of each year. The galactic plane of the Milky Way intersects the northeast corner of the constellation and the galactic anticenter is located near the border between Taurus and Auriga. Taurus is the only constellation crossed by all three of the galactic equator, celestial equator, and ecliptic. A ring-like galactic structure known as Gould&#x27;s Belt passes through the constellation.

The recommended three-letter abbreviation for the constellation, as adopted by the International Astronomical Union in 1922, is &quot;Tau&quot;. The official constellation boundaries, as set by Belgian astronomer Eugène Delporte in 1930, are defined by a polygon of 26 segments. In the equatorial coordinate system, the right ascension coordinates of these borders lie between and , while the declination coordinates are between 31.10° and −1.35°. Because a small part of the constellation lies to the south of the celestial equator, this can not be a completely circumpolar constellation at any latitude.

==Features==

=== Stars ===
There are four stars above magnitude 3 in Taurus.

The brightest member of this constellation is Aldebaran, an orange-hued, spectral class K5 III giant star. Its name derives from &quot;&quot;, Arabic for &quot;the follower&quot;, probably from the fact that it follows the Pleiades during the nightly motion of the celestial sphere across the sky. Forming the profile of a Bull&#x27;s face is a &quot;V&quot; or &quot;K&quot;-shaped asterism of stars. This outline is created by prominent members of the Hyades, the nearest distinct open star cluster after the Ursa Major Moving Group. In this profile, Aldebaran forms the bull&#x27;s bloodshot eye, which has been described as &quot;glaring menacingly at the hunter Orion&quot;, a constellation that lies just to the southeast. Aldebaran has around 116% the mass of the Sun. It also hosts a candidate exoplanet.

The Hyades span about 5° of the sky, so that they can only be viewed in their entirety with binoculars or the unaided eye. It includes a naked eye double star, Theta Tauri (the proper name of Theta2 Tauri is &quot;Chamukuy&quot;), with a separation of 5.6 arcminutes.
In the northwestern quadrant of the Taurus constellation lie the Pleiades (M45), one of the best known open clusters, easily visible to the naked eye. The seven most prominent stars in this cluster are at least visual magnitude six, and so the cluster is also named the &quot;Seven Sisters&quot;. However, many more stars are visible with even a modest telescope. Astronomers estimate that the cluster has approximately 500–1,000 stars, all of which are around 100 million years old. However, they vary considerably in type. The Pleiades themselves are represented by large, bright stars; also many small brown dwarfs and white dwarfs exist. The cluster is estimated to dissipate in another 250 million years. The Pleiades cluster is classified as a Shapley class c and Trumpler class I 3 r n cluster, indicating that it is irregularly shaped and loose, though concentrated at its center and detached from the star-field.

To the east, the two horns of the bull are formed by Beta (β) Tauri and Zeta (ζ) Tauri; two star systems that are separated by 8°. Beta is a white, spectral class B7 III giant star known as &quot;El Nath&quot;, which comes from the Arabic phrase &quot;the butting&quot;, as in butting by the horns of the bull. At magnitude 1.65, it is the second brightest star in the constellation, and shares the border with the neighboring constellation of Auriga. As a result, it also bears the designation Gamma Aurigae. Zeta Tauri (the proper name is &quot;Tianguan&quot;) is an eclipsing binary star that completes an orbit every 133 days.

The star Lambda (λ) Tauri is an eclipsing binary star. This system consists of a spectral class B3 star being orbited by a less massive class A4 star. The plane of their orbit lies almost along the line of sight to the Earth. Every 3.953 days the system temporarily decreases in brightness by 1.1 magnitudes as the brighter star is partially eclipsed by the dimmer companion. The two stars are separated by only 0.1 astronomical units, so their shapes are modified by mutual tidal interaction. This results in a variation of their net magnitude throughout each orbit.

Located about 1.8° west of Epsilon (ε) Tauri is T Tauri, the prototype of a class of variable stars called T Tauri stars. This star undergoes erratic changes in luminosity, varying between magnitude 9 to 13 over a period of weeks or months. This is a newly formed stellar object that is just emerging from its envelope of gas and dust, but has not yet become a main sequence star. The surrounding reflection nebula NGC 1555 is illuminated by T Tauri, and thus is also variable in luminosity. To the north lies Kappa Tauri, a visual double star consisting of two A7-type components. The pair have a separation of just 5.6 arc minutes, making them a challenge to split with the naked eye.

===Deep-sky objects===

In the northern part of the constellation to the northeast of the Pleiades lies the Crystal Ball Nebula, known by its catalogue designation of NGC 1514. This planetary nebula is of historical interest following its discovery by German-born English astronomer William Herschel in 1790. Prior to that time, astronomers had assumed that nebulae were simply unresolved groups of stars. However, Herschel could clearly resolve a star at the center of the nebula that was surrounded by a nebulous cloud of some type. In 1864, English astronomer William Huggins used the spectrum of this nebula to deduce that the nebula is a luminous gas, rather than stars.

North-west of ζ Tauri by 1.15 degrees is the Crab Nebula (M1), a supernova remnant. This expanding nebula was created by a Type II supernova explosion, which was seen from Earth on July 4, 1054. It was bright enough to be observed during the day and is mentioned in Chinese historical texts. At its peak, the supernova reached magnitude −4, but the nebula is currently magnitude 8.4 and requires a telescope to observe. North American peoples also observed the supernova, as evidenced from a painting on a New Mexican canyon and various pieces of pottery that depict the event. However, the remnant itself was not discovered until 1731, when John Bevis found it.

This constellation includes part of the Taurus-Auriga complex, or Taurus dark clouds, a star-forming region containing sparse, filamentary clouds of gas and dust. This spans a diameter of and contains 35,000 solar masses of material, which is both larger and less massive than the Orion Nebula. At a distance of , this is one of the nearest active star forming regions. Located in this region, about 10° to the northeast of Aldebaran, is an asterism NGC 1746 spanning a width of 45 arcminutes.

=== Meteor showers ===
During November, the Taurid meteor shower appears to radiate from the general direction of this constellation. The Beta Taurid meteor shower occurs during the months of June and July in the daytime, and is normally observed using radio techniques. Between 18 and 29 October, both the Northern Taurids and the Southern Taurids are active; though the latter stream is stronger. However, between November 1 and 10, the two streams equalize.

==History and mythology==


The identification of the constellation of Taurus with a bull is very old, certainly dating to the Chalcolithic, and perhaps even to the Upper Paleolithic. Michael Rappenglück of the University of Munich believes that Taurus is represented in a cave painting at the Hall of the Bulls in the caves at Lascaux (dated to roughly 15,000 BC), which he believes is accompanied by a depiction of the Pleiades. The name &quot;seven sisters&quot; has been used for the Pleiades in the languages of many cultures, including indigenous groups of Australia, North America and Siberia. This suggests that the name may have a common ancient origin.

Taurus marked the point of vernal (spring) equinox in the Chalcolithic and the Early Bronze Age, from about 4000 BC to 1700 BC, after which it moved into the neighboring constellation Aries. The Pleiades were closest to the Sun at vernal equinox around the 23rd century BC. In Babylonian astronomy, the constellation was listed in the MUL.APIN as , &quot;The Bull of Heaven&quot;. Although it has been claimed that &quot;when the Babylonians first set up their zodiac, the vernal equinox lay in Taurus,&quot; there is a claim that the MUL.APIN tablets indicate that the vernal equinox was marked by the Babylonian constellation known as &quot;the hired man&quot; (the modern Aries).

In the Old Babylonian &quot;Epic of Gilgamesh&quot;, the goddess Ishtar sends Taurus, the Bull of Heaven, to kill Gilgamesh for spurning her advances. Enkidu tears off the bull&#x27;s hind part and hurls the quarters into the sky where they become the stars we know as Ursa Major and Ursa Minor. Some locate Gilgamesh as the neighboring constellation of Orion, facing Taurus as if in combat, while others identify him with the sun whose rising on the equinox vanquishes the constellation. In early Mesopotamian art, the Bull of Heaven was closely associated with Inanna, the Sumerian goddess of sexual love, fertility, and warfare. One of the oldest depictions shows the bull standing before the goddess&#x27; standard; since it has 3 stars depicted on its back (the cuneiform sign for &quot;star-constellation&quot;), there is good reason to regard this as the constellation later known as Taurus.

The same iconic representation of the Heavenly Bull was depicted in the Dendera zodiac, an Egyptian bas-relief carving in a ceiling that depicted the celestial hemisphere using a planisphere. In these ancient cultures, the orientation of the horns was portrayed as upward or backward. This differed from the later Greek depiction where the horns pointed forward. To the Egyptians, the constellation Taurus was a sacred bull that was associated with the renewal of life in spring. When the spring equinox entered Taurus, the constellation would become covered by the Sun in the western sky as spring began. This &quot;sacrifice&quot; led to the renewal of the land. To the early Hebrews, Taurus was the first constellation in their zodiac and consequently it was represented by the first letter in their alphabet, Aleph.

In Greek mythology, Taurus was identified with Zeus, who assumed the form of a magnificent white bull to abduct Europa, a legendary Phoenician princess. In illustrations of Greek mythology, only the front portion of this constellation is depicted; this was sometimes explained as Taurus being partly submerged as he carried Europa out to sea. A second Greek myth portrays Taurus as Io, a mistress of Zeus. To hide his lover from his wife Hera, Zeus changed Io into the form of a heifer. Greek mythographer Acusilaus marks the bull Taurus as the same that formed the myth of the Cretan Bull, one of The Twelve Labors of Heracles.

Taurus became an important object of worship among the Druids. Their Tauric religious festival was held while the Sun passed through the constellation. Among the arctic people known as the Inuit, the constellation is called Sakiattiat and the Hyades is Nanurjuk, with the latter representing the spirit of the polar bear. Aldebaran represents the bear, with the remainder of the stars in the Hyades being dogs that are holding the beast at bay.

In Buddhism, legends hold that Gautama Buddha was born when the full moon was in Vaisakha, or Taurus. Buddha&#x27;s birthday is celebrated with the Wesak Festival, or Vesākha, which occurs on the first or second full moon when the Sun is in Taurus.

In 1990, due to the precession of the equinoxes, the position of the Sun on the first day of summer (June 21) crossed the IAU boundary of Gemini into Taurus. The Sun will slowly move through Taurus at a rate of 1° east every 72 years until approximately 2600 AD, at which point it will be in Aries on the first day of summer.

===Astrology===

, the Sun appears in the constellation Taurus from May 13 to June 21. In tropical astrology, the Sun is considered to be in the sign Taurus from April 20 to May 20.

===Space exploration===
The space probe &quot;Pioneer 10&quot; is moving in the direction of this constellation, though it will not be nearing any of the stars in this constellation for many thousands of years, by which time its batteries will be long dead.

===Solar eclipse of May 29, 1919===
Several stars in the Hyades star cluster, including Kappa Tauri, were photographed during the total solar eclipse of May 29, 1919, by the expedition of Arthur Eddington in Príncipe and others in Sobral, Brazil, that confirmed Albert Einstein&#x27;s prediction of the bending of light around the Sun according to his general theory of relativity which he published in 1915.

==See also==
* Pleiades in folklore and literature
* Taurus (Chinese astronomy)

==Notes==
==References==
==Book references==
* 
* 
** 
==External links==
* The Deep Photographic Guide to the Constellations: Taurus
* BBC article on the possibility of Taurus being represented in Lascaux
* Star Tales – Taurus
* Warburg Institute Iconographic Database (medieval and early modern images of Taurus)
* The clickable Taurus</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q10570" start="0" end="6" title="Taurus (constellation)" label="Taurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q693690" start="21" end="25" title="Bull" label="Bull"/>
<link wikidata="Q8928" start="47" end="60" title="constellation" label="constellation"/>
<link wikidata="Q40540" start="69" end="75" title="zodiac" label="zodiac"/>
<link wikidata="Q1998069" start="98" end="127" title="northern celestial hemisphere" label="northern celestial hemisphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q39061" start="182" end="201" title="Northern Hemisphere" label="Northern Hemisphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="280" end="296" title="Early Bronze Age" label="Early Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q1315" start="364" end="371" title="equinox" label="equinox"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427313" start="428" end="448" title="sacred bull" label="various bull figures"/>
<link wikidata="Q275051" start="479" end="484" title="Sumerian religion" label="Sumer"/>
<link wikidata="Q21028568" start="486" end="491" title="Akkadian religion" label="Akkad"/>
<link wikidata="Q21028568" start="493" end="500" title="Assyrian religion" label="Assyria"/>
<link wikidata="Q797944" start="502" end="509" title="Babylonian religion" label="Babylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q447131" start="511" end="516" title="Ancient Egyptian religion" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q855270" start="518" end="524" title="Ancient Greek religion" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q337547" start="530" end="534" title="Religion in ancient Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q11387" start="706" end="718" title="open cluster" label="open cluster"/>
<link wikidata="Q13423" start="734" end="742" title="Pleiades" label="Pleiades"/>
<link wikidata="Q13511" start="751" end="757" title="Hyades (star cluster)" label="Hyades"/>
<link wikidata="Q50081" start="827" end="836" title="red giant" label="red giant"/>
<link wikidata="Q88540091" start="837" end="846" title="Aldebaran" label="Aldebaran"/>
<link wikidata="Q10934" start="926" end="935" title="Messier 1" label="Messier 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q207436" start="979" end="996" title="supernova remnant" label="supernova remnant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044623" start="1010" end="1016" title="Crab pulsar" label="pulsar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6243" start="1155" end="1168" title="variable star" label="variable star"/>
<link wikidata="Q935354" start="1169" end="1176" title="T Tauri" label="T Tauri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062509" start="1208" end="1230" title="pre-main-sequence star" label="pre-main-sequence star"/>
<link wikidata="Q39061" start="1307" end="1326" title="northern hemisphere" label="northern hemisphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q10584" start="1354" end="1359" title="Aries (constellation)" label="Aries"/>
<link wikidata="Q8923" start="1376" end="1382" title="Gemini (constellation)" label="Gemini"/>
<link wikidata="Q10511" start="1414" end="1421" title="Perseus (constellation)" label="Perseus"/>
<link wikidata="Q10476" start="1426" end="1432" title="Auriga (constellation)" label="Auriga"/>
<link wikidata="Q8860" start="1451" end="1456" title="Orion (constellation)" label="Orion"/>
<link wikidata="Q10433" start="1471" end="1479" title="Eridanus (constellation)" label="Eridanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q8839" start="1502" end="1507" title="Cetus" label="Cetus"/>
<link wikidata="Q79852" start="1819" end="1827" title="ecliptic" label="ecliptic"/>
<link wikidata="Q12134" start="1852" end="1868" title="celestial sphere" label="celestial sphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q3239165" start="2106" end="2120" title="galactic plane" label="galactic plane"/>
<link wikidata="Q321" start="2128" end="2137" title="Milky Way" label="Milky Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049115" start="2199" end="2218" title="galactic anticenter" label="galactic anticenter"/>
<link wikidata="Q24469" start="2425" end="2442" title="Gould&amp;#x27;s Belt" label="Gould&amp;#x27;s Belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q6867" start="2561" end="2593" title="International Astronomical Union" label="International Astronomical Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q20009" start="2691" end="2706" title="Eugène Joseph Delporte" label="Eugène Delporte"/>
<link wikidata="Q208617" start="2764" end="2792" title="equatorial coordinate system" label="equatorial coordinate system"/>
<link wikidata="Q13442" start="2798" end="2813" title="right ascension" label="right ascension"/>
<link wikidata="Q76287" start="2871" end="2882" title="declination" label="declination"/>
<link wikidata="Q187646" start="2993" end="3010" title="celestial equator" label="celestial equator"/>
<link wikidata="Q12115" start="3041" end="3066" title="circumpolar constellation" label="circumpolar constellation"/>
<link wikidata="Q124313" start="3140" end="3151" title="apparent magnitude" label="magnitude 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q25377588" start="3237" end="3251" title="spectral class" label="spectral class"/>
<link wikidata="Q5875" start="3259" end="3269" title="giant star" label="giant star"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="3307" end="3313" title="Arabic language" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q13423" start="3387" end="3395" title="Pleiades" label="Pleiades"/>
<link wikidata="Q12134" start="3429" end="3445" title="celestial sphere" label="celestial sphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q9262" start="3547" end="3555" title="Asterism (astronomy)" label="asterism"/>
<link wikidata="Q13511" start="3618" end="3624" title="Hyades (star cluster)" label="Hyades"/>
<link wikidata="Q168845" start="3652" end="3664" title="star cluster" label="star cluster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195678" start="3675" end="3698" title="Ursa Major Moving Group" label="Ursa Major Moving Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151577" start="4138" end="4149" title="Theta Tauri" label="Theta Tauri"/>
<link wikidata="Q12097402" start="4234" end="4244" title="arcminutes" label="arcminutes"/>
<link wikidata="Q14530" start="4321" end="4324" title="Messier object" label="M45"/>
<link wikidata="Q124313" start="4464" end="4473" title="apparent magnitude" label="magnitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q101600" start="4851" end="4862" title="brown dwarf" label="brown dwarf"/>
<link wikidata="Q5871" start="4868" end="4879" title="white dwarf" label="white dwarf"/>
<link wikidata="Q13508" start="5222" end="5236" title="Beta Tauri" label="Beta (β) Tauri"/>
<link wikidata="Q196848" start="5241" end="5255" title="Zeta Tauri" label="Zeta (ζ) Tauri"/>
<link wikidata="Q50053" start="5738" end="5754" title="eclipsing binary" label="eclipsing binary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153671" start="5810" end="5826" title="Lambda Tauri" label="Lambda (λ) Tauri"/>
<link wikidata="Q800358" start="5956" end="5976" title="orbital plane (astronomy)" label="plane of their orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811" start="6217" end="6234" title="astronomical unit" label="astronomical unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q405857" start="6397" end="6414" title="Epsilon Tauri" label="Epsilon (ε) Tauri"/>
<link wikidata="Q935354" start="6418" end="6425" title="T Tauri" label="T Tauri"/>
<link wikidata="Q6243" start="6455" end="6468" title="variable star" label="variable star"/>
<link wikidata="Q6232" start="6477" end="6489" title="T Tauri star" label="T Tauri star"/>
<link wikidata="Q124313" start="6559" end="6568" title="visual magnitude" label="magnitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q3450" start="6731" end="6744" title="main sequence" label="main sequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q203958" start="6767" end="6784" title="reflection nebula" label="reflection nebula"/>
<link wikidata="Q835928" start="6785" end="6793" title="NGC 1555" label="NGC 1555"/>
<link wikidata="Q2604077" start="6880" end="6891" title="Kappa Tauri" label="Kappa Tauri"/>
<link wikidata="Q13890" start="6902" end="6913" title="double star" label="double star"/>
<link wikidata="Q923716" start="7225" end="7233" title="NGC 1514" label="NGC 1514"/>
<link wikidata="Q13632" start="7240" end="7256" title="planetary nebula" label="planetary nebula"/>
<link wikidata="Q14277" start="7341" end="7357" title="William Herschel" label="William Herschel"/>
<link wikidata="Q42372" start="7416" end="7422" title="nebula" label="nebula"/>
<link wikidata="Q160681" start="7621" end="7636" title="William Huggins" label="William Huggins"/>
<link wikidata="Q10934" start="7780" end="7791" title="Crab Nebula" label="Crab Nebula"/>
<link wikidata="Q42372" start="7834" end="7840" title="nebula" label="nebula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049029" start="7858" end="7875" title="Type II supernova" label="Type II supernova"/>
<link wikidata="Q36747" start="8155" end="8177" title="indigenous peoples of the Americas" label="North American peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q437582" start="8377" end="8387" title="John Bevis" label="John Bevis"/>
<link wikidata="Q180892" start="8607" end="8617" title="solar mass" label="solar mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q13903" start="8680" end="8692" title="Orion Nebula" label="Orion Nebula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045078" start="8849" end="8857" title="NGC 1746" label="NGC 1746"/>
<link wikidata="Q12097402" start="8881" end="8890" title="arcminute" label="arcminute"/>
<link wikidata="Q32334" start="8938" end="8944" title="Taurid" label="Taurid"/>
<link wikidata="Q105000" start="8945" end="8958" title="meteor shower" label="meteor shower"/>
<link wikidata="Q1953697" start="9032" end="9043" title="Beta Taurid" label="Beta Taurid"/>
<link wikidata="Q32334" start="9201" end="9217" title="Northern Taurids" label="Northern Taurids"/>
<link wikidata="Q32334" start="9226" end="9242" title="Southern Taurids" label="Southern Taurids"/>
<link wikidata="Q8928" start="9410" end="9423" title="constellation" label="constellation"/>
<link wikidata="Q130253" start="9483" end="9495" title="Chalcolithic" label="Chalcolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q479505" start="9521" end="9538" title="Upper Paleolithic" label="Upper Paleolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q55044" start="9567" end="9587" title="University of Munich" label="University of Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q214334" start="9629" end="9642" title="cave painting" label="cave painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q172125" start="9684" end="9691" title="Lascaux" label="Lascaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="9919" end="9928" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="9930" end="9943" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q5428" start="9948" end="9955" title="Siberia" label="Siberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12889843" start="10047" end="10070" title="March equinox" label="vernal (spring) equinox"/>
<link wikidata="Q130253" start="10078" end="10090" title="Chalcolithic" label="Chalcolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="10099" end="10115" title="Early Bronze Age" label="Early Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q202330" start="10277" end="10292" title="23rd century BC" label="23rd century BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q787929" start="10297" end="10317" title="Babylonian astronomy" label="Babylonian astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q83076" start="10355" end="10363" title="MUL.APIN" label="MUL.APIN"/>
<link wikidata="Q55606125" start="10379" end="10393" title="Bull of Heaven" label="Bull of Heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q35518" start="10711" end="10725" title="Akkadian language" label="Old Babylonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q8272" start="10732" end="10749" title="Epic of Gilgamesh" label="Epic of Gilgamesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q272523" start="10769" end="10775" title="Ishtar" label="Ishtar"/>
<link wikidata="Q55606125" start="10794" end="10808" title="Bull of Heaven" label="Bull of Heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q272523" start="11267" end="11273" title="Inanna" label="Inanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q21028568" start="11279" end="11295" title="Mesopotamian religion" label="Sumerian goddess"/>
<link wikidata="Q3100139" start="11676" end="11690" title="Dendera zodiac" label="Dendera zodiac"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="11695" end="11700" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q12134" start="11754" end="11774" title="celestial hemisphere" label="celestial hemisphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344642" start="11783" end="11794" title="planisphere" label="planisphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q570868" start="12282" end="12289" title="Hebrews" label="Hebrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q15033" start="12417" end="12422" title="Aleph" label="Aleph"/>
<link wikidata="Q34726" start="12428" end="12443" title="Greek mythology" label="Greek mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q34201" start="12472" end="12476" title="Zeus" label="Zeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q165170" start="12537" end="12543" title="Europa (mythology)" label="Europa"/>
<link wikidata="Q179014" start="12807" end="12809" title="Io (mythology)" label="Io"/>
<link wikidata="Q38012" start="12863" end="12867" title="Hera" label="Hera"/>
<link wikidata="Q423894" start="12931" end="12940" title="Acusilaus" label="Acusilaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q746198" start="13003" end="13014" title="Cretan Bull" label="Cretan Bull"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233460" start="13023" end="13040" title="Labors of Hercules" label="The Twelve Labors"/>
<link wikidata="Q122248" start="13044" end="13052" title="Heracles" label="Heracles"/>
<link wikidata="Q131081" start="13110" end="13115" title="Druid" label="Druid"/>
<link wikidata="Q189975" start="13244" end="13249" title="Inuit" label="Inuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q33609" start="13365" end="13375" title="polar bear" label="polar bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="13504" end="13512" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9441" start="13532" end="13546" title="Gautama Buddha" label="Gautama Buddha"/>
<link wikidata="Q104641" start="13565" end="13574" title="full moon" label="full moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2722717" start="13582" end="13590" title="Vaisakha" label="Vaisakha"/>
<link wikidata="Q215700" start="13668" end="13675" title="Vesākha" label="Vesākha"/>
<link wikidata="Q83094" start="13771" end="13798" title="precession of the equinoxes" label="precession of the equinoxes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2281810" start="14168" end="14186" title="tropical astrology" label="tropical astrology"/>
<link wikidata="Q164016" start="14228" end="14234" title="Taurus (astrology)" label="Taurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1528166" start="14289" end="14300" title="space probe" label="space probe"/>
<link wikidata="Q59103" start="14307" end="14317" title="Pioneer 10" label="Pioneer 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q2604077" start="14608" end="14619" title="Kappa Tauri" label="Kappa Tauri"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035756" start="14656" end="14685" title="solar eclipse of May 29, 1919" label="solar eclipse of May 29, 1919"/>
<link wikidata="Q215022" start="14708" end="14724" title="Arthur Eddington" label="Arthur Eddington"/>
<link wikidata="Q210636" start="14728" end="14736" title="Príncipe" label="Príncipe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815899" start="14751" end="14765" title="Sobral, Ceará" label="Sobral, Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297564" start="14772" end="14781" title="tests of general relativity" label="confirmed"/>
<link wikidata="Q937" start="14782" end="14797" title="Albert Einstein" label="Albert Einstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q185243" start="14823" end="14839" title="gravitational lens" label="bending of light"/>
<link wikidata="Q525" start="14851" end="14854" title="Sun" label="Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q11452" start="14872" end="14900" title="general theory of relativity" label="general theory of relativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q3437924" start="14945" end="14980" title="Pleiades in folklore and literature" label="Pleiades in folklore and literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q7688912" start="14983" end="15009" title="Taurus (Chinese astronomy)" label="Taurus (Chinese astronomy)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="29985" wikidata="Q191655" url="?curid=29985" title="Taco">
<text>A taco (, , ) is a traditional Mexican dish consisting of a small hand-sized corn- or wheat-based tortilla topped with a filling. The tortilla is then folded around the filling and eaten by hand. A taco can be made with a variety of fillings, including beef, pork, chicken, seafood, beans, vegetables, and cheese, and garnished with various condiments, such as salsa, guacamole, or sour cream, and vegetables, such as lettuce, coriander, onion, tomatoes, and chiles. Tacos are a common form of antojitos, or Mexican street food, which have spread around the world.

Tacos can be contrasted with similar foods such as burritos, which are often much larger and rolled rather than folded; taquitos, which are rolled and fried; or chalupas/tostadas, in which the tortilla is fried before filling.

==Etymology==
The origins of the taco are not precisely known, and etymologies for the culinary usage of the word are generally theoretical. &quot;Taco&quot; in the sense of a typical Mexican dish comprising a maize tortilla folded around food is just one of the meanings connoted by the word, according to the Real Academia Española, publisher of &quot;Diccionario de la Lengua Española.&quot; This meaning of the Spanish word &quot;taco&quot; is a Mexican innovation, but the word &quot;taco&quot; is used in other contexts to mean &quot;wedge; wad, plug; billiard cue; blowpipe; ramrod; short, stocky person; [or] short, thick piece of wood.&quot; The etymological origin of this sense of the word is Germanic and has cognates in other European languages, including the French word and the English word &quot;tack&quot;.

In Spain, the word &quot;taco&quot; can also be used in the context of &#x27;: these are diced pieces of ham, or sometimes bits and shavings of ham leftover after a larger piece is sliced. They can be served on their own as tapas or street food, or can be added to other dishes such as salmorejo, omelettes, stews, empanadas, or &#x27;.

According to one etymological theory, the culinary origin of the term &quot;taco&quot; in Mexico can be traced to its employment, among Mexican silver miners, as a term signifying &quot;plug.&quot; The miners used explosive charges in plug form, consisting of a paper wrapper and gunpowder filling.

Indigenous origins are also proposed. One possibility is that the word derives from the Nahuatl word , meaning &quot;half&quot; or &quot;in the middle&quot;, in the sense that food would be placed in the middle of a tortilla. Furthermore, dishes analogous to the taco were known to have existed in Pre-Columbian society—for example, the Nahuatl word (a type of corn tortilla).

==History==
There is significant debate about the origins of the taco in Mexico, with some arguing that the taco predates the arrival of the Spanish in Mexico, since there is anthropological evidence that the indigenous people living in the lake region of the Valley of Mexico traditionally ate tacos filled with small fish. Writing at the time of the Spanish conquistadors, Bernal Díaz del Castillo documented the first taco feast enjoyed by Europeans, a meal which Hernán Cortés arranged for his captains in Coyoacán. Others argue that the advent of the taco is much more recent, with one of the more popular theories being that the taco was invented by silver miners in the 18th century.

One of the oldest mentions of the term &quot;taco&quot; comes from an 1836 cookbook —&quot;Nuevo y sencillo arte de cocina, reposteria y refrescos&quot;— by Antonia Carrillo; in a recipe for a rolled pork loin (lomo de cerdo enrollado), she instructs the readers to roll the loin like they would a “&quot;taco de tortilla&quot;” or tortilla taco. 
Another mention of the word taco comes from the novel —&quot;El hombre de la situación&quot; (1861)— by Mexican writer Manuel Payno: These instances disprove the theory that the first mention of the word &quot;taco&quot; in Mexico was in the 1891 novel Los bandidos de Río Frío by Manuel Payno. 

It should also be noted that term &quot;taco&quot; was regional, specifically from Mexico City and surrounding areas, and that other regional names existed. In Guanajuato, Guerrero, Michoacán, and San Luis Potosí, the terms used were &quot;burrito&quot; and &quot;burro&quot;; while in Yucatán and Quintana Roo the term used was &quot;codzito&quot; (coçito). Due to the cultural influence of Mexico City, the term &quot;taco&quot; became the default, and terms like &quot;burrito&quot; and &quot;codzito&quot;, either became forgotten or evolved to mean something different in modern times.

In 2024, El Califa de León in Mexico City became the first taco stand to win a Michelin star.

==Traditional variations==

* Tacos al pastor (&quot;shepherd style&quot;), tacos de adobada, or tacos árabes (&quot;arab tacos&quot;) are made of thin pork steaks seasoned with adobo seasoning, then skewered and overlapped on one another on a vertical rotisserie cooked and flame-broiled as it spins like shawarma. This variation has roots in Mexico&#x27;s Lebanese immigrant population.
* Tacos de asador (&quot;spit&quot; or &quot;grill&quot; tacos) may be composed of any of the following: &quot;carne asada tacos&quot;; tacos de tripita (&quot;tripe tacos&quot;), grilled until crisp; and, &quot;chorizo asado&quot; (traditional Spanish-style sausage). Each type is served on two overlapped small tortillas and sometimes garnished with guacamole, salsa, onions, and cilantro (coriander leaf). Also, prepared on the grill is a sandwiched taco called &quot;mulita&quot; (&quot;little mule&quot;) made with meat served between two tortillas and garnished with Oaxaca style cheese. &quot;Mulita&quot; is used to describe these types of sandwiched tacos in the Northern States of Mexico while they are known as &quot;gringas&quot; in the Mexican south and are prepared using wheat flour tortillas. Tacos may also be served with salsa.
* Tacos de cabeza (&quot;head tacos&quot;), in which there is a flat punctured metal plate from which steam emerges to cook the head of the cow. These include: &quot;Cabeza&quot;, a serving of the muscles of the head; &quot;Sesos&quot; (&quot;brains&quot;); &quot;Lengua&quot; (&quot;tongue&quot;); &quot;Cachete&quot; (&quot;cheeks&quot;); &quot;Trompa&quot; (&quot;lips&quot;); and, &quot;Ojo&quot; (&quot;eye&quot;). Tortillas for these tacos are warmed on the same steaming plate for a different consistency. These tacos are typically served in pairs, and also include salsa, onion, and cilantro (coriander leaf) with occasional use of guacamole.
* Tacos de camarones (&quot;shrimp tacos&quot;) also originated in Baja California in Mexico. Grilled or fried shrimp are used, usually with the same accompaniments as fish tacos: lettuce or cabbage, pico de gallo, avocado and a sour cream or citrus/mayonnaise sauce, all placed on top of a corn or flour tortilla.
* Tacos de cazo (literally &quot;bucket tacos&quot;) for which a metal bowl filled with lard is typically used as a deep-fryer. Meats for these types of tacos typically include &quot;Tripa&quot; (&quot;tripe&quot;, usually from a pig instead of a cow, and can also refer to the intestines); &quot;Suadero&quot; (tender beef cuts), &quot;Carnitas&quot; and &quot;Buche&quot; (literally, &quot;crop&quot;, as in &quot;bird&#x27;s crop&quot;; or the esophagus of any animal).
* Tacos de lengua (beef tongue tacos), which are cooked in water with onions, garlic, and bay leaves for several hours until tender and soft, then sliced and sautéed in a small amount of oil. &quot;It is said that unless a taquería offers tacos de lengua, it is not a real taquería.&quot;

* Tacos de pescado (&quot;fish tacos&quot;) originated in Baja California in Mexico, where they consist of grilled or fried fish, lettuce or cabbage, pico de gallo, and a sour cream or citrus/mayonnaise sauce, all placed on top of a corn or flour tortilla. In the United States, they were first popularized by the Rubio&#x27;s fast-food chain, and remain most popular in California, Colorado, and Washington. In California, they are often found at street vendors, and a regional variation is to serve them with cabbage and coleslaw dressing on top.
* Tacos dorados (fried tacos; literally, &quot;golden tacos&quot;) called &quot;flauta&quot;s (&quot;flute&quot;, because of the shape), or taquitos, for which the tortillas are filled with pre-cooked shredded chicken, beef or &quot;barbacoa&quot;, rolled into an elongated cylinder and deep-fried until crisp. They are sometimes cooked in a microwave oven or broiled.
* Tacos sudados (&quot;sweaty tacos&quot;) are made by filling soft tortillas with a spicy meat mixture, then placing them in a basket covered with cloth. The covering keeps the tacos warm and traps steam (&quot;sweat&quot;) which softens them.
*Tacos de birria (stewed meat tacos) are made with goat or beef roasted or stewed with spices and typically served with the broth from cooking the meat as a dipping sauce. Originating in the Mexican state of Jalisco, birria was mentioned in a 1925 Article in the &quot;El Paso Herald&quot;. The taqueria, &quot;El Remedio&quot; in San Antonio, began offering birria de res tacos in their current form in Texas in 2018. Offerings by taco stands in California and across the Southwest United States began occurring at about the same time.

As an accompaniment to tacos, many taco stands will serve whole or sliced red radishes, lime slices, salt, pickled or grilled chilis (hot peppers), and occasionally cucumber slices, or grilled cambray onions.

==Non-traditional variations==
===Hard-shell tacos===

The hard-shell or crispy taco is a tradition that developed in the United States. This type of taco is typically served as a crisp-fried corn tortilla filled with seasoned ground beef, cheese, lettuce, and sometimes tomato, onion, salsa, sour cream, and avocado or guacamole. Such tacos are sold by restaurants and by fast food chains, while kits are readily available in most supermarkets. Hard shell tacos are sometimes known as (&quot;golden tacos&quot;) in Spanish, a name that they share with taquitos.

Various sources credit different individuals with the invention of the hard-shell taco, but some form of the dish likely predates all of them. Beginning from the early part of the twentieth century, various types of tacos became popular in the country, especially in Texas and California but also elsewhere. By the late 1930s, companies like Ashley Mexican Food and Absolute Mexican Foods were selling appliances and ingredients for cooking hard shell tacos, and the first patents for hard-shell taco cooking appliances were filed in the 1940s. The first cookbook to provide a recipe for the hard-shell taco was &quot;The Good Life: New Mexican food&quot;, written by Fabiola Cabeza de Baca Gilbert and published in Santa Fe, New Mexico, in 1949. 

In the mid-1950s, Glen Bell opened Taco Tia, and began selling a simplified version of the tacos being sold by Mexican restaurants in San Bernardino, particularly the &quot;tacos dorados&quot; being sold at the Mitla Cafe, owned by Lucia and Salvador Rodriguez across the street from another of Bell&#x27;s restaurants. Over the next few years, Bell owned and operated a number of restaurants in southern California including four called El Taco. The tacos sold at Bell&#x27;s restaurants were many Anglo Americans&#x27; first introduction to Mexican food. Bell sold the El Tacos to his partner and built the first Taco Bell in Downey in 1962. Kermit Becky, a former Los Angeles police officer, bought the first Taco Bell franchise from Glen Bell in 1964, and located it in Torrance. The company grew rapidly, and by 1967, the 100th restaurant opened at 400 South Brookhurst in Anaheim. In 1968, its first franchise location east of the Mississippi River opened in Springfield, Ohio.

===Soft-shell tacos===

Traditionally, soft-shelled tacos referred to corn tortillas that were cooked to a softer state than a hard taco – usually by grilling or steaming. More recently, the term has come to include flour-tortilla-based tacos mostly from large manufacturers and restaurant chains. In this context, &quot;soft tacos&quot; are tacos made with wheat flour tortillas and filled with the same ingredients as a hard taco.

===Breakfast taco===
The breakfast taco, found in Tex-Mex cuisine, is a soft corn or flour tortilla filled with meat, eggs, or cheese, which can also contain other ingredients. Some have claimed that Austin, Texas, is the home of the breakfast taco. However, food writer and &quot;OC Weekly&quot; editor Gustavo Arellano responded that such a statement reflects a common trend of &quot;whitewashed&quot; foodways reporting, noting that predominantly Hispanic San Antonio, Texas, &quot;never had to brag about its breakfast taco love—folks there just call it &#x27;breakfast&#x27;.

===Indian taco===
Indian tacos, or &quot;Navajo tacos&quot;, are made using frybread instead of tortillas. They are commonly eaten at pow-wows, festivals, and other gatherings by and for indigenous people in the United States and Canada.

This kind of taco is not known to have been present before the arrival of Europeans in what is now the Southwestern United States. Navajo tradition indicates that frybread came into use in the 1860s when the government forced the tribe to relocate from their homeland in Arizona in a journey known as the Long Walk of the Navajo. It was made from ingredients given to them by the government to supplement their diet since the region could not support growing the agricultural commodities that had been previously used.

===Puffy tacos, taco kits, and tacodillas===
Since at least 1978, a variation called the &quot;puffy taco&quot; has been popular. Henry&#x27;s Puffy Tacos, opened by Henry Lopez in San Antonio, Texas, claims to have invented the variation, in which uncooked corn tortillas (flattened balls of masa dough) are quickly fried in hot oil until they expand and become &quot;puffy&quot;. Fillings are similar to hard-shell versions. Restaurants offering this style of taco have since appeared in other Texas cities, as well as in California, where Henry&#x27;s brother, Arturo Lopez, opened Arturo&#x27;s Puffy Taco in Whittier, not long after Henry&#x27;s opened. Henry&#x27;s continues to thrive, managed by the family&#x27;s second generation.

Kits are available at grocery and convenience stores and usually consist of taco shells (corn tortillas already fried in a U-shape), seasoning mix and taco sauce. Commercial vendors for the home market also market soft taco kits with tortillas instead of taco shells.

The tacodilla contains melted cheese in between the two folded tortillas, thus resembling a quesadilla.

==See also==
* Arepa
* Birria taco
* Burrito
* Choco Taco
* Fajita
* French tacos
* Gyro (food)
* Korean taco
* Pupusas
* Shawarma/Doner kebab
* Taco rice
* Taco salad
* Taco soup
* Tacos de canasta
* Tlayuda
* Tostada
* Tunnbröd
==References==
==Bibliography==
* 

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q191655" start="2" end="6" title="Taco" label="taco"/>
<link wikidata="Q207965" start="31" end="43" title="Mexican cuisine" label="Mexican dish"/>
<link wikidata="Q15660894" start="77" end="82" title="corn tortilla" label="corn-"/>
<link wikidata="Q204251" start="86" end="106" title="Flour tortilla" label="wheat-based tortilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q745361" start="121" end="128" title="Stuffing" label="filling"/>
<link wikidata="Q748611" start="181" end="194" title="finger food" label="eaten by hand"/>
<link wikidata="Q10943" start="306" end="312" title="cheese" label="cheese"/>
<link wikidata="Q249114" start="361" end="366" title="salsa (sauce)" label="salsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q207968" start="368" end="377" title="guacamole" label="guacamole"/>
<link wikidata="Q840171" start="382" end="392" title="sour cream" label="sour cream"/>
<link wikidata="Q165199" start="459" end="465" title="Chili pepper" label="chiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q772542" start="508" end="527" title="Mexican street food" label="Mexican street food"/>
<link wikidata="Q390823" start="617" end="624" title="burrito" label="burrito"/>
<link wikidata="Q2393807" start="686" end="693" title="taquito" label="taquito"/>
<link wikidata="Q5069084" start="727" end="734" title="chalupa" label="chalupa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3280441" start="736" end="744" title="Tostada (tortilla)" label="tostadas"/>
<link wikidata="Q11575" start="1004" end="1009" title="maize" label="maize"/>
<link wikidata="Q55642411" start="1010" end="1018" title="tortilla" label="tortilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q11993457" start="1105" end="1127" title="Real Academia Española" label="Real Academia Española"/>
<link wikidata="Q675538" start="1148" end="1181" title="Diccionario de la lengua española de la Real Academia Española" label="Diccionario de la Lengua Española"/>
<link wikidata="Q220964" start="1843" end="1848" title="tapas" label="tapas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635129" start="1905" end="1914" title="salmorejo" label="salmorejo"/>
<link wikidata="Q20129" start="1916" end="1925" title="omelettes" label="omelettes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920963" start="1927" end="1932" title="stews" label="stews"/>
<link wikidata="Q747457" start="1934" end="1943" title="empanadas" label="empanadas"/>
<link wikidata="Q13300" start="2345" end="2352" title="Nahuatl" label="Nahuatl"/>
<link wikidata="Q202390" start="2555" end="2567" title="Pre-Columbian era" label="Pre-Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q50647" start="2895" end="2911" title="Valley of Mexico" label="Valley of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q315795" start="3010" end="3034" title="Bernal Díaz del Castillo" label="Bernal Díaz del Castillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7326" start="3102" end="3115" title="Hernán Cortés" label="Hernán Cortés"/>
<link wikidata="Q661315" start="3145" end="3153" title="Coyoacán" label="Coyoacán"/>
<link wikidata="Q9028037" start="3794" end="3806" title="Manuel Payno" label="Manuel Payno"/>
<link wikidata="Q9028037" start="3956" end="3968" title="Manuel Payno" label="Manuel Payno"/>
<link wikidata="Q46475" start="4132" end="4142" title="Guanajuato" label="Guanajuato"/>
<link wikidata="Q60158" start="4144" end="4152" title="Guerrero" label="Guerrero"/>
<link wikidata="Q79861" start="4154" end="4163" title="Michoacán" label="Michoacán"/>
<link wikidata="Q78980" start="4169" end="4184" title="San Luis Potosí" label="San Luis Potosí"/>
<link wikidata="Q60176" start="4258" end="4265" title="Yucatán" label="Yucatán"/>
<link wikidata="Q80245" start="4270" end="4282" title="Quintana Roo" label="Quintana Roo"/>
<link wikidata="Q214844" start="4643" end="4656" title="Michelin star" label="Michelin star"/>
<link wikidata="Q2386967" start="4695" end="4704" title="al pastor" label="al pastor"/>
<link wikidata="Q360459" start="4837" end="4842" title="adobo" label="adobo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3412448" start="4965" end="4973" title="shawarma" label="shawarma"/>
<link wikidata="Q7884766" start="5159" end="5170" title="carne asada" label="carne asada"/>
<link wikidata="Q470873" start="5208" end="5213" title="tripe" label="tripe"/>
<link wikidata="Q23374" start="5260" end="5267" title="chorizo" label="chorizo"/>
<link wikidata="Q55642411" start="5361" end="5370" title="tortillas" label="tortillas"/>
<link wikidata="Q207968" start="5400" end="5409" title="guacamole" label="guacamole"/>
<link wikidata="Q249114" start="5411" end="5416" title="salsa (sauce)" label="salsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5414737" start="5621" end="5627" title="Oaxaca cheese" label="Oaxaca"/>
<link wikidata="Q5609489" start="5776" end="5783" title="gringas" label="gringas"/>
<link wikidata="Q15645384" start="5834" end="5839" title="wheat" label="wheat"/>
<link wikidata="Q38595513" start="5905" end="5911" title="cabeza" label="cabeza"/>
<link wikidata="Q38595513" start="6060" end="6066" title="Cabeza" label="Cabeza"/>
<link wikidata="Q18822425" start="6118" end="6123" title="Sesos" label="Sesos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1558649" start="6158" end="6164" title="Beef tongue" label="Lengua"/>
<link wikidata="Q58731" start="6612" end="6627" title="Baja California" label="Baja California"/>
<link wikidata="Q7504001" start="6656" end="6662" title="Shrimp and prawn as food" label="shrimp"/>
<link wikidata="Q177564" start="6745" end="6758" title="pico de gallo" label="pico de gallo"/>
<link wikidata="Q470873" start="7043" end="7048" title="Tripe" label="Tripa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7630441" start="7157" end="7164" title="Suadero" label="Suadero"/>
<link wikidata="Q5044066" start="7197" end="7205" title="Carnitas" label="Carnitas"/>
<link wikidata="Q214934" start="7252" end="7256" title="Crop (anatomy)" label="crop"/>
<link wikidata="Q21010259" start="7556" end="7564" title="taquería" label="taquería"/>
<link wikidata="Q58731" start="7681" end="7696" title="Baja California" label="Baja California"/>
<link wikidata="Q177564" start="7773" end="7786" title="pico de gallo" label="pico de gallo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7376154" start="7937" end="7949" title="Rubio&amp;#x27;s" label="Rubio&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q11405" start="8273" end="8278" title="flute" label="flute"/>
<link wikidata="Q2393807" start="8312" end="8319" title="taquito" label="taquito"/>
<link wikidata="Q2838998" start="8405" end="8413" title="barbacoa" label="barbacoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q127956" start="8514" end="8528" title="microwave oven" label="microwave oven"/>
<link wikidata="Q264619" start="8532" end="8539" title="broiled" label="broiled"/>
<link wikidata="Q21010259" start="9359" end="9369" title="taco stand" label="taco stand"/>
<link wikidata="Q7224565" start="9402" end="9410" title="radishes" label="radishes"/>
<link wikidata="Q13195" start="9412" end="9416" title="Lime (fruit)" label="lime"/>
<link wikidata="Q23425" start="9489" end="9497" title="cucumber" label="cucumber"/>
<link wikidata="Q2393807" start="10087" end="10094" title="taquito" label="taquito"/>
<link wikidata="Q28504149" start="10766" end="10796" title="Fabiola Cabeza de Baca Gilbert" label="Fabiola Cabeza de Baca Gilbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q38555" start="10814" end="10822" title="Santa Fe, New Mexico" label="Santa Fe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522" start="10824" end="10834" title="New Mexico" label="New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q4992052" start="10865" end="10874" title="Glen Bell" label="Glen Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q486168" start="10981" end="10995" title="San Bernardino, California" label="San Bernardino"/>
<link wikidata="Q752941" start="11462" end="11471" title="Taco Bell" label="Taco Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q488946" start="11475" end="11481" title="Downey, California" label="Downey"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="11514" end="11525" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q214126" start="11526" end="11532" title="Los Angeles Police Department" label="police"/>
<link wikidata="Q489197" start="11621" end="11629" title="Torrance, California" label="Torrance"/>
<link wikidata="Q49247" start="11725" end="11732" title="Anaheim, California" label="Anaheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497" start="11784" end="11801" title="Mississippi River" label="Mississippi River"/>
<link wikidata="Q40325" start="11812" end="11829" title="Springfield, Ohio" label="Springfield, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q15645384" start="12190" end="12195" title="wheat" label="wheat"/>
<link wikidata="Q29359" start="12316" end="12331" title="Tex-Mex cuisine" label="Tex-Mex cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q16559" start="12466" end="12479" title="Austin, Texas" label="Austin, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7072409" start="12547" end="12556" title="OC Weekly" label="OC Weekly"/>
<link wikidata="Q975" start="12725" end="12743" title="San Antonio, Texas" label="San Antonio, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q108266" start="12889" end="12895" title="Navajo" label="Navajo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7214426" start="12924" end="12932" title="frybread" label="frybread"/>
<link wikidata="Q254279" start="12982" end="12989" title="pow-wow" label="pow-wow"/>
<link wikidata="Q132241" start="12992" end="13000" title="festival" label="festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="13060" end="13073" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q863284" start="13078" end="13084" title="Aboriginal peoples in Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q858847" start="13190" end="13216" title="Southwestern United States" label="Southwestern United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q108266" start="13218" end="13224" title="Navajo people" label="Navajo"/>
<link wikidata="Q816" start="13358" end="13365" title="Arizona" label="Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q145778" start="13392" end="13415" title="Long Walk of the Navajo" label="Long Walk of the Navajo"/>
<link wikidata="Q975" start="13788" end="13799" title="San Antonio" label="San Antonio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="13801" end="13806" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006089" start="13900" end="13904" title="masa" label="masa"/>
<link wikidata="Q838791" start="14220" end="14228" title="Whittier, California" label="Whittier"/>
<link wikidata="Q7361709" start="14383" end="14400" title="convenience store" label="convenience store"/>
<link wikidata="Q249114" start="14500" end="14510" title="taco sauce" label="taco sauce"/>
<link wikidata="Q865325" start="14710" end="14720" title="quesadilla" label="quesadilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q642702" start="14738" end="14743" title="Arepa" label="Arepa"/>
<link wikidata="Q106977722" start="14746" end="14757" title="Birria taco" label="Birria taco"/>
<link wikidata="Q390823" start="14760" end="14767" title="Burrito" label="Burrito"/>
<link wikidata="Q16987178" start="14770" end="14780" title="Choco Taco" label="Choco Taco"/>
<link wikidata="Q871272" start="14783" end="14789" title="Fajita" label="Fajita"/>
<link wikidata="Q30737843" start="14792" end="14804" title="French tacos" label="French tacos"/>
<link wikidata="Q681596" start="14807" end="14818" title="Gyro (food)" label="Gyro (food)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6432035" start="14821" end="14832" title="Korean taco" label="Korean taco"/>
<link wikidata="Q612128" start="14835" end="14842" title="Pupusas" label="Pupusas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3412448" start="14845" end="14853" title="Shawarma" label="Shawarma"/>
<link wikidata="Q20734" start="14854" end="14865" title="Doner kebab" label="Doner kebab"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137701" start="14868" end="14877" title="Taco rice" label="Taco rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q7673974" start="14880" end="14890" title="Taco salad" label="Taco salad"/>
<link wikidata="Q5644076" start="14893" end="14902" title="Taco soup" label="Taco soup"/>
<link wikidata="Q102393836" start="14905" end="14921" title="Tacos de canasta" label="Tacos de canasta"/>
<link wikidata="Q7810735" start="14924" end="14931" title="Tlayuda" label="Tlayuda"/>
<link wikidata="Q3280441" start="14934" end="14941" title="Tostada (tortilla)" label="Tostada"/>
<link wikidata="Q255048" start="14944" end="14952" title="Tunnbröd" label="Tunnbröd"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="29987" wikidata="Q1114144" url="?curid=29987" title="The Penguins">
<text>The Penguins were an American doo-wop group from Los Angeles, California, that were active during the 1950s and early 1960s. They are known for their 1954 hit song, &quot;Earth Angel&quot;, which was one of the first rhythm and blues songs to cross over to the pop charts. The song would ultimately prove to be their only success. The song peaked at No. 8 on the US &quot;Billboard&quot; Best Sellers in Stores pop chart but had a three-week run at No. 1 on the R&amp;B chart.

==Early career==
The original members of The Penguins were tenor Cleveland Duncan (July 23, 1935 – November 7, 2012), Curtis Williams (baritone/bass)(December 11, 1934 – August 10, 1979), Dexter Tisby (tenor)(March 10, 1935 – May 2019) and Bruce Tate (baritone)(January 27, 1937 – June 20, 1973). Duncan and Williams were former classmates at Fremont High School in Los Angeles, California, and Williams had become a member of The Hollywood Flames. In late 1953, they decided to form a new vocal group and added Tisby and Tate. Their midtempo performance style was a cross between rhythm and blues and rock and roll. Williams brought with him a song, &quot;Earth Angel&quot;, on which he had worked with Gaynel Hodge, another member of the Hollywood Flames.

The Penguins were one of a number of doo-wop groups of the period named after birds (such as The Orioles, The Flamingos, and The Crows). One of the members smoked Kool cigarettes, which, at the time, had &quot;Willie the Penguin&quot; as its cartoon advertising character. They considered themselves &quot;cool&quot; and accordingly decided to call themselves &quot;The Penguins&quot;.

Dootone Records released The Penguins&#x27; single &quot;Hey Senorita&quot; in late 1954 as the intended A-side, but a radio DJ flipped the record over to the B-side: &quot;Earth Angel&quot; worked its way up to No. 1 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; R&amp;B chart (the only Penguins song to chart that high) and held that place for three weeks early in 1955. By 1966, the disc had sold four million copies. The Penguins followed up this hit with a Christmas release &quot;A Christmas prayer&quot; with &quot;Jingle Jangle.&quot;

The Penguins performed for the eleventh famed Cavalcade of Jazz concert held at Wrigley Field in Los Angeles which was produced by Leon Hefflin, Sr. on July 24, 1955. Also featured Big Jay McNeely, Lionel Hampton and his Orchestra, The Medallions and James Moody and his Orchestra.

Duncan sang lead on &quot;Earth Angel&quot;. He reprised his performance a decade later on Frank Zappa&#x27;s &quot;Memories of El Monte&quot;, an elegiac 1963 song in which he suddenly breaks into &quot;Earth Angel&quot; as one of the various songs remembered. El Monte, a city near Los Angeles, had spawned such popular performers as Tony Allan, Marvin &amp; Johnny, and The Shields as well as the Penguins. Those groups were also emulated as part of Zappa&#x27;s tribute to early days of rock and roll.

In a common practice of the time, radio stations frequently featured segregated playlists. Thus, &quot;Earth Angel&quot; was simultaneously recorded by the white group The Crew-Cuts in 1955. The Crew-Cuts cover peaked at No. 3 on the Hot 100 chart, five spots higher than the Penguins version. The single&#x27;s success contributed to the Crew-Cuts&#x27; own successful career of recording crossover-friendly covers of R&amp;B hits.

The songwriting genesis for &quot;Earth Angel&quot; was a matter of some dispute, eventually ending up in a split credit between Penguins bass-baritone Curtis Williams, Gaynel Hodge, and Jesse Belvin.

==After &quot;Earth Angel&quot;==
Coming off the success of &quot;Earth Angel&quot;, the Penguins approached Buck Ram to manage them. Ram&#x27;s primary interest was in managing The Platters, who at that point had no hit singles, but were a profitable touring group. With the Penguins in hand, Ram was able to swing a 2-for-1 deal with Mercury Records, in which the company agreed to take on the Platters as a condition for getting the Penguins (the group that Mercury really wanted). The Platters became the label&#x27;s more successful act, the Penguins never scoring another hit single.

In 1955, Bruce Tate left the group. He was replaced by Randy Jones (who would later sing with the Cadets). During the summer of 1956, Jones and Tisby were briefly out of the group, and were replaced by Ray Brewster and Teddy Harper, respectively. Jones and Tisby returned shortly afterwards. Curtis Williams left in December 1957, with Harper rejoining as his permanent replacement. The Penguins never had another national hit, but their 1957 cover of &quot;Pledge of Love&quot; reached No. 15 on the R&amp;B chart.

==Later years==
The group broke up in 1962. Cleveland Duncan continued recording as &quot;The Penguins&quot;, with new member Walter Saulsberry and a backing group, the Viceroys. Later, the group was Duncan, Saulsberry, Vesta and Evelyn King, and Vera Walker. (Duncan and the King sisters had recorded a record as &quot;Cleve Duncan and the Radiants&quot; in 1959.) By the late 1960s, the group was being billed as the &quot;Fabulous Penguins&quot;, and featured Duncan, Walker, and new member Rudy Wilson. By the 1970s, the members were Duncan, the returning Walter Saulsberry, and new member Glenn Madison, formerly of the Delcos (Indiana). This was the current line up of the group until 2012.

The group performed on the PBS television special, &quot;Doo Wop 50&quot;. Duncan, Madison, and Saulsberry also performed with Randy Jones as guest, in 2001. It was planned for Jones to appear with the Penguins the following year but he suffered a stroke while rehearsing with the group and died shortly thereafter. Jones also performed with the reunited Jacks/Cadets in the 1990s. Duncan died on November 7, 2012, in Los Angeles at the age of 77.

The group is mentioned in the Paul Simon song &quot;Rene and Georgette Magritte with Their Dog after the War&quot;. In interviews, Simon has told about hearing &quot;Earth Angel,&quot; the first R&amp;B song he said he had heard; he describes trying to explain to his father, a big band musician, how great the song was.

==Award==
The Penguins were inducted into The Vocal Group Hall of Fame in 2004.

==References==
==External links==
*Biography of the Penguins
*&#x27;The Penguins&#x27; Vocal Group Hall of Fame Page</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1114144" start="0" end="12" title="The Penguins" label="The Penguins"/>
<link wikidata="Q546359" start="30" end="37" title="doo-wop" label="doo-wop"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="49" end="72" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q281624" start="171" end="182" title="Earth Angel" label="Earth Angel"/>
<link wikidata="Q45981" start="217" end="233" title="rhythm and blues" label="rhythm and blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q373899" start="415" end="420" title="record chart" label="chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639748" start="462" end="469" title="Hot R&amp;amp;B/Hip-Hop Songs" label="R&amp;amp;B"/>
<link wikidata="Q6224415" start="821" end="840" title="John C. Fremont High School" label="Fremont High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q189471" start="844" end="855" title="Cupertino, California" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="857" end="867" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q7739993" start="905" end="925" title="The Hollywood Flames" label="The Hollywood Flames"/>
<link wikidata="Q45981" start="1059" end="1075" title="rhythm and blues" label="rhythm and blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q7749" start="1080" end="1093" title="rock and roll" label="rock and roll"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431711" start="1330" end="1341" title="The Orioles" label="The Orioles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1241507" start="1343" end="1356" title="The Flamingos" label="The Flamingos"/>
<link wikidata="Q666149" start="1362" end="1371" title="The Crows" label="The Crows"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810468" start="1400" end="1415" title="Kool (cigarette)" label="Kool cigarettes"/>
<link wikidata="Q627603" start="1479" end="1486" title="cartoon" label="cartoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q37038" start="1487" end="1498" title="advertising" label="advertising"/>
<link wikidata="Q5297274" start="1624" end="1639" title="Dootone Records" label="Dootone Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q134556" start="1668" end="1674" title="single (music)" label="single"/>
<link wikidata="Q215233" start="1729" end="1735" title="A-side and B-side" label="A-side"/>
<link wikidata="Q273623" start="1743" end="1748" title="radio station" label="radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q130857" start="1749" end="1751" title="Disc jockey" label="DJ"/>
<link wikidata="Q16629185" start="1764" end="1770" title="gramophone record" label="record"/>
<link wikidata="Q485240" start="1855" end="1864" title="Billboard (magazine)" label="Billboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q65067899" start="2197" end="2214" title="Cavalcade of Jazz" label="Cavalcade of Jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q3297716" start="2231" end="2244" title="Wrigley Field (Los Angeles)" label="Wrigley Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q62709531" start="2282" end="2298" title="Leon Hefflin, Sr." label="Leon Hefflin, Sr"/>
<link wikidata="Q352225" start="2332" end="2347" title="Big Jay McNeely" label="Big Jay McNeely"/>
<link wikidata="Q313525" start="2349" end="2381" title="Lionel Hampton and His Orchestra" label="Lionel Hampton and his Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q7750848" start="2383" end="2397" title="The Medallions" label="The Medallions"/>
<link wikidata="Q962310" start="2402" end="2413" title="James Moody (saxophonist)" label="James Moody"/>
<link wikidata="Q127330" start="2525" end="2536" title="Frank Zappa" label="Frank Zappa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6815623" start="2550" end="2570" title="Memories of El Monte" label="Memories of El Monte"/>
<link wikidata="Q5358685" start="2581" end="2588" title="elegiac" label="elegiac"/>
<link wikidata="Q595550" start="2696" end="2704" title="El Monte, California" label="El Monte"/>
<link wikidata="Q1906037" start="2782" end="2801" title="Marvin &amp;amp; Johnny" label="Marvin &amp;amp; Johnny"/>
<link wikidata="Q273623" start="2975" end="2988" title="radio station" label="radio station"/>
<link wikidata="Q59816" start="3010" end="3020" title="Racial segregation" label="segregated"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530752" start="3109" end="3122" title="The Crew-Cuts" label="The Crew-Cuts"/>
<link wikidata="Q504635" start="3331" end="3340" title="Crossover (music)" label="crossover"/>
<link wikidata="Q155171" start="3350" end="3356" title="cover version" label="covers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1688139" start="3562" end="3574" title="Jesse Belvin" label="Jesse Belvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4982926" start="3686" end="3694" title="Buck Ram" label="Buck Ram"/>
<link wikidata="Q753905" start="3755" end="3767" title="The Platters" label="The Platters"/>
<link wikidata="Q26911" start="3818" end="3828" title="Profit (economics)" label="profitable"/>
<link wikidata="Q165745" start="3913" end="3928" title="Mercury Records" label="Mercury Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q18127" start="4086" end="4098" title="Record label" label="label&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q7720909" start="4262" end="4272" title="the Cadets (doo wop)" label="the Cadets"/>
<link wikidata="Q215616" start="5410" end="5413" title="PBS" label="PBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q5296957" start="5440" end="5450" title="Doo Wop 50" label="Doo Wop 50"/>
<link wikidata="Q4028" start="5862" end="5872" title="Paul Simon" label="Paul Simon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7312955" start="5884" end="5940" title="Rene and Georgette Magritte with Their Dog after the War" label="Rene and Georgette Magritte with Their Dog after the War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426142" start="6200" end="6224" title="Vocal Group Hall of Fame" label="Vocal Group Hall of Fame"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="29988" wikidata="Q13695" url="?curid=29988" title="Tenochtitlan">
<text>, also known as Mexico-Tenochtitlan, was a large Mexican in what is now the historic center of Mexico City. The exact date of the founding of the city is unclear, but the date 13 March 1325 was chosen in 1925 to celebrate the 600th anniversary of the city. The city was built on an island in what was then Lake Texcoco in the Valley of Mexico. The city was the capital of the expanding Aztec Empire in the 15th century until it was captured by the Tlaxcaltec and the Spanish in 1521.

At its peak, it was the largest city in the pre-Columbian Americas. It subsequently became a &quot;cabecera&quot; of the Viceroyalty of New Spain. Today, the ruins of are in the historic center of the Mexican capital. The World Heritage Site of contains what remains of the geography (water, boats, floating gardens) of the Mexica capital.

 was one of two Mexica (city-states or polities) on the island, the other being .

== Etymology ==

Traditionally, the name was thought to come from Nahuatl (&quot;rock&quot;) and (&quot;prickly pear&quot;) and is often thought to mean, &quot;Among the prickly pears [growing among] rocks.&quot; However, one attestation in the late 16th-century manuscript known as &quot;the Bancroft dialogues&quot; suggests the second vowel was short, so that the true etymology remains uncertain. However, it is also thought that the city was named after Tenoch.

==Geography==

 covered an estimated , situated on the western side of the shallow Lake Texcoco.

At the time of Spanish conquests, Mexico City comprised both and . The city extended from north to south, from the north border of to the swamps, which by that time were gradually disappearing to the west; the city ended more or less at the present location of .

The city was connected to the mainland by bridges and causeways leading to the north, south, and west. The causeways were interrupted by bridges that allowed canoes and other water traffic to pass freely. The bridges could be pulled away, if necessary, to protect the city. The city was interlaced with a series of canals, so that all sections of the city could be visited either on foot or via canoe.

Lake was the largest of five interconnected lakes. Since it formed in an endorheic basin, Lake was brackish. During the reign of Moctezuma I, the &quot;levee of &quot; was constructed, reputedly designed by . Estimated to be in length, the levee was completed . The levee kept fresh spring-fed water in the waters around and kept the brackish waters beyond the dike, to the east.

Two double aqueducts, each more than long and made of terracotta, provided the city with fresh water from the springs at . This was intended mainly for cleaning and washing. For drinking, water from mountain springs was preferred. Most of the population liked to bathe twice a day; was said to take four baths a day. According to the context of Aztec culture in literature, the soap that they most likely used was the root of a plant called (&quot;Saponaria americana&quot;), and to clean their clothes they used the root of (&quot;Agave americana&quot;). Also, the upper classes and pregnant women washed themselves in a , similar to a sauna bath, which is still used in the south of Mexico. This was also popular in other Mesoamerican cultures.

==City plans==
The city was divided into four zones, or &quot;camps&quot;; each &quot;camp&quot; was divided into 20 districts (&quot;calpullis&quot;, , , meaning &quot;large house&quot;); and each &quot;calpulli&quot;, or &#x27;big house&#x27;, was crossed by streets or . There were three main streets that crossed the city, each leading to one of the three causeways to the mainland of , , and . Bernal Díaz del Castillo reported that they were wide enough for ten horses. Surrounding the raised causeways were artificial floating gardens with canal waterways and gardens of plants, shrubs, and trees. The &quot;calpullis&quot; were divided by channels used for transportation, with wood bridges that were removed at night.

The earliest European images of the city were woodcuts published in Augsburg around 1522.

===Marketplaces===
Each &quot;calpulli&quot; had its own (marketplace), but there was also a main marketplace in – &#x27;s sister city. Spanish conquistador Hernán Cortés estimated it was twice the size of the city of Salamanca with about 60,000 people trading daily. Bernardino de Sahagún provides a more conservative population estimate of 20,000 on ordinary days and 40,000 on feast days. There were also specialized markets in the other central Mexican cities.

===Public buildings===
In the center of the city were the public buildings, temples, and palaces. Inside a walled square, to a side, was the ceremonial center. There were about 45 public buildings, including: the Templo Mayor, which was dedicated to the Aztec patron deity and the Rain God ; the temple of ; the (ball game court) with the or rack of skulls; the Sun Temple, which was dedicated to ; the Eagle&#x27;s House, which was associated with warriors and the ancient power of rulers; the platforms for the gladiatorial sacrifice; and some minor temples.

Outside was the palace of Moctezuma with 100 rooms, each with its own bath, for the lords and ambassadors of allies and conquered people. Also located nearby was the , or house of the songs, and the .

The city had great symmetry. All constructions had to be approved by the , a functionary in charge of the city planning.

===Palaces of Moctezuma II===
The palace of Moctezuma II also had two houses or zoos, one for birds of prey and another for other birds, reptiles, and mammals. About 300 people were dedicated to the care of the animals.

There was also a botanical garden and an aquarium. The aquarium had ten ponds of salt water and ten ponds of fresh water, containing various fish and aquatic birds. Places like this also existed in , , (now called Oaxtepec), and .

==Social classes==

Tenochtitlan can be considered the most complex society in Mesoamerica in regard to social stratification. The complex system involved many social classes. The were commoners who lived outside the island city of Tenochtitlan. The were noblemen who were relatives of leaders and former leaders, and lived in the confines of the island. , or eagle nobles, were commoners who impressed the nobles with their martial prowess, and were treated as nobles. were the highest class, rulers of various parts of the empire, including the king. were slaves or indentured servants. Finally, the were merchants who traveled all of Mesoamerica trading. The membership of this class was based on heredity. could become very rich because they did not pay taxes, but they had to sponsor the ritual feast of Xocotl Huetzi from the wealth that they obtained from their trade expeditions.

Status was displayed by the location and type of house where a person lived. Ordinary people lived in houses made of reeds plastered with mud and roofed with thatch. People who were better off had houses of adobe brick with flat roofs. The wealthy had houses of stone masonry with flat roofs. They most likely made up the house complexes that were arranged around the inner court. The higher officials in Tenochtitlan lived in the great palace complexes that made up the city.

Adding even more complexity to Aztec social stratification was the . is a group of families related by either kinship or proximity. These groups consist of both elite members of Aztec society and commoners. Elites provided commoners with arable land and nonagricultural occupations, and commoners performed services for chiefs and gave tribute.

==History==
Tenochtitlan was the capital of the Mexican civilization of the Mexica people, founded in 1325. The state religion of the Mexica civilization awaited the fulfillment of an ancient prophecy: the wandering tribes would find the destined site for a great city whose location would be signaled by an eagle with a snake in its beak perched atop a cactus (&quot;Opuntia&quot;), which had grown from the heart of Copil.

The Mexica saw this vision on what was then a small swampy island in Lake , a vision that is now immortalized in Mexico&#x27;s coat of arms and on the Mexican flag. Not deterred by the unfavourable terrain, they set about building their city, using the system (misnamed as &quot;floating gardens&quot;) for agriculture and to dry and expand the island.

A thriving culture developed, and the Mexica civilization came to dominate other tribes around Mexico. The small natural island was perpetually enlarged as grew to become the largest and most powerful city in Mesoamerica. Commercial routes were developed that brought goods from places as far as the Gulf of Mexico, the Pacific Ocean and perhaps even the Inca Empire.

After a flood of Lake Texcoco, the city was rebuilt during the rule of , which was between 1486 and 1502, in a style that made it one of the grandest ever in Mesoamerica.

Hernan Cortés arrived in Tenochtitlan on 8 November 1519. Although there are no precise numbers, the city&#x27;s population has been estimated at between 200,000 and 400,000 inhabitants, placing Tenochtitlan among the largest cities in the world at that time. Compared to the cities of Europe, only Paris, Venice and Constantinople might have rivaled it. It was five times the size of the London of Henry VIII. In a letter to the Spanish king, Cortés wrote that was as large as Seville or Córdoba. Cortés&#x27; men were in awe at the sight of the splendid city and many wondered if they were dreaming.

Although some popular sources put the number as high as 350,000 the most common estimates of the population are of over 200,000 people. One of the few comprehensive academic surveys of Mesoamerican city and town sizes arrived at a population of 212,500 living on . It is also said that at one time, Moctezuma had rule over an empire of almost five million people in central and southern Mexico because he had extended his rule to surrounding territories to gain tribute and prisoners to sacrifice to the gods.

===Conquest===

When Cortés and his men invaded , Moctezuma II chose to welcome Cortés as an ambassador rather than risk a war which might quickly be joined by aggrieved indigenous people.

As Cortés approached , the celebrated Toxcatl. At this event the most prominent warriors of each would dance in front of a huge statue of . The Spanish leader, Pedro de Alvarado, who was left in charge, worried that the natives planned a surprise attack. He captured three natives and tortured them until they said that this was indeed planned to happen. During the festival, the Spaniards came heavily armed and closed off every exit from the courtyard so that no one would escape. This happened during their last days in Tenochtitlan.

Nobles lined each side of the city&#x27;s main causeway, which extended about a league (4.83 km). Walking down the center came Moctezuma II, with two lords at his side, one his brother, the ruler of . Cortés dismounted and was greeted by the ruler and his lords, but forbidden to touch him. Cortés gave him a necklace of crystals, placing it over his neck.
They were then brought to a large house that would serve as their home for their stay in the city. Once they were settled, Moctezuma himself sat down and spoke with Cortés. The great ruler declared that anything that they needed would be theirs to have. He was thrilled to have visitors of such stature. Although the Spaniards were seeking gold, Moctezuma expressed that he had very little of the sort, but all of it was to be given to Cortés if he desired it.

Soon after arriving in , Cortés came up against problems. At Vera Cruz, the officer left in charge received a letter from , the leader of Nueva Almería, asking to become a vassal of the Spaniards. He requested that officials be sent to him so that he could confirm his submission. To reach the province, the officers would have to travel through hostile land. The officer in charge of Vera Cruz decided to send four officers to meet with Qualpopoca.

When they arrived, they were captured and two were killed, the other two escaping through the woods. Upon their return to Vera Cruz, the officer in charge was infuriated, and led troops to storm Almería. Here they learned that Moctezuma was supposedly the one who ordered the officers executed. Back in , Cortés detained Moctezuma and questioned him. Though no serious conclusions were reached, this negatively affected the relationship between Moctezuma and the Spaniards.

Cortés subsequently besieged for over 90 days, causing a famine. Having gained control, he then directed the systematic destruction and leveling of the city; and began its rebuilding, despite opposition. The reconstruction involved the creation of a central area designated for Spanish use (the &quot;traza&quot;). The outer Indian section, now dubbed &quot;San Juan Tenochtitlan&quot;, continued to be governed by the previous indigenous elite and was divided into the same subdivisions as before.

The people of were soon exposed to diseases to which they had no immunity. Symptoms were often delayed for up to ten days, when the infection would spread throughout the body, causing sores, pain, and high fever. People were weak to the point that they could not move, nor obtain food and water. Burial of the dead became difficult to impossible, due to the pervasiveness of the people&#x27;s illness. The people of Tenochtitlan began to starve and weaken. The death toll rose steadily over the course of the next 60 days.

===Colonial era===
Cortés founded the Spanish capital of Mexico City on the ruins of Tenochtitlan. Despite the extensive damage to the built environment, the site retained symbolic power and legitimacy as the capital of the Aztec empire, which Cortés sought to appropriate. For a time this , the highest rank in the Spanish hierarchy of settlement designation, was called Mexico–Tenochtitlan. Charles Gibson devotes the final chapter of his classic work, &quot;The Aztecs Under Spanish Rule&quot;, to what he called &quot;The City&quot;, with later historians building on his work. The Spaniards established a or town council, which had jurisdiction over the Spanish residents. The Spanish established a Europeans-only zone in the center of the city, an area of 13 blocks in each direction of the central plaza, which was the . Although many native residents died during the siege of Tenochtitlan, the indigenous still had a strong presence in the city, and were settled in two main areas of the island, designated San Juan Tenochtitlan and Santiago Tlatelolco, each with a municipal council that functioned the entire colonial period. San Juan Tenochtitlan was a Spanish administrative creation, which amalgamated four indigenous sections, with each losing territory to the Spanish . The Spanish laid out the streets of the in a checker board pattern, with straight streets and plazas at intervals, whereas the indigenous portions of the city were irregular in layout and built of modest materials. In the colonial period both San Juan Tenochtitlan and Santiago Tlatelolco retained jurisdiction over settlements on the mainland that they could draw on for labor and tribute demanded by the Spanish, but increasingly those subordinate settlements () were able to gain their autonomy with their own rulers and separate relationship with the Spanish rulers. Concern about the health of the indigenous population in early post-conquest Mexico–Tenochtitlan led to the founding of a royal hospital for indigenous residents.

There are a number of colonial-era pictorial manuscripts dealing with Tenochtitlan–Tlatelolco, which shed light on litigation between Spaniards and indigenous over property. An account with information about the war of Tenochtitlan against its neighbor Tlatelolco in 1473 and the Spanish conquest in 1521 is the . Anthropologist Susan Kellogg has studied colonial-era inheritance patterns of Nahuas in Mexico City, using Nahuatl- and Spanish-language testaments. 
On the 13th of August 1521, after over two months of fighting,Spanish conquistador Hernán Cortés succeeded in bringing about the fall of Tenochtitlan, the capital of the Aztec empire, and consequently brought an end to the Aztec empire.

===Ruins===

Tenochtitlan&#x27;s main temple complex, the Templo Mayor, was dismantled and the central district of the Spanish colonial city was constructed on top of it. The great temple was destroyed by the Spanish during the construction of a cathedral. The location of the Templo Mayor was rediscovered in the early 20th century, but major excavations did not take place until 1978–1982, after utility workers came across a massive stone disc depicting the nude dismembered body of the moon goddess Coyolxauhqui. The disc is in diameter, and is held at the Templo Mayor Museum.

The ruins, constructed over seven periods, were built on top of each other. The resulting weight of the structures caused them to sink into the sediment of Lake Texcoco; the ruins now rest at an angle instead of horizontally.

Mexico City&#x27;s Zócalo, the Plaza de la Constitución, is located at the site of Tenochtitlan&#x27;s original central plaza and market, and many of the original &quot;calzadas&quot; still correspond to modern city streets. The Aztec calendar stone was located in the ruins. This stone is in diameter and weighs over . It was once located half-way up the great pyramid. This sculpture was carved around 1470 under the rule of King Axayacatl, the predecessor of Tizoc, and is said to tell the history of the Mexicas and to prophesy the future.

In August 1987, archaeologists discovered a mix of 1,789 human bones below street level in Mexico City. The burial dates back to the 1480s and lies at the foot of the main temple in the sacred ceremonial precinct of the Aztec capital. The bones are from children, teenagers and adults. A complete skeleton of a young woman was also found at the site.
==See also==
* List of megalithic sites
* List of Mesoamerican pyramids
* History of Mexico City
* Portrait of Tenochtitlan

== Notes ==
==References==

==Bibliography==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* Townsend, Camilla. Malintzin&#x27;s Choices: An Indian Woman in the Conquest of Mexico. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press, 2006. Print.

==Further reading==

*Calnek, Edward. &quot;Settlement Pattern and Chinampa Agriculture at Tenochtitlan.&quot; &quot;American Antiquity&quot; 37.1. (1973) 190–95.
*Calnek, Edward. &quot;El sistema de mercado en Tenochtitlan.&quot; In &quot;Economía política e ideología en el México prehispánico&quot;. Eds. Pedro Carrasco and Johanna Broda, pp. 97–114. Mexico City: Centro de Investigaciones Superiores del Instituto de Antropología e Historia, 1978.
*Calnek, Edward. &quot;Tenochtitlan in the Early Colonial Period.&quot; Acts of the XLII International Congress of Americanists 8, 1976 (1979) 35–40.
*Calnek, Edward. &quot;Tenochtitlan-Tlatelolco: the Natural History of a City.&quot; In &quot;El Urbanismo en Mesoamérica/Urbanism in Mesoamerica&quot;, vol. 1. edited by W.T. Sanders et al., 149–202. Mexico City: Instituto Nacional de Antropología e Historia; University Park: Pennsylvania State University 2003.
*Gibson, Charles. &quot;The Aztecs Under Spanish Rule&quot;. Stanford: Stanford University Press 1964. 
*Mundy, Barbara E. &quot;Mapping the Aztec Capital: the 1524 Nuremberg Map of Tenochtitlan, Its Sources and Meanings.&quot; &quot;Imago Mundi&quot; 50 (1998), 1–22.
*Mundy, Barbara E. &quot;Place-Names in Mexico-Tenochtitlan.&quot; &quot;Ethnohistory&quot; 61 (2) Spring 2014. 329–355.
*Mundy, Barbara E. &quot;The Death of Aztec Tenochtitlan, the Life of Mexico City&quot;. Austin: University of Texas Press 2015.
*Toussaint, Manuel, Federico Gómez de Orozco, and Justino Fernández, &quot;Planos de la Ciudad de México&quot;. XVI Congreso Internacional de Planificación y de la Habitación. Mexico City: Instituto de Investigaciones Estéticas de la Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México 1938.
*Townsend, Richard F. &quot;State and Cosmos in the Art of Tenochtitlan&quot;. Studies in Pre-Columbian Art and Archeology 20. Washington D.C., Dumbarton Oaks 1979.
==External links==
*A Portrait of Tenochtitlan, 1518 by Thomas Kole</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q13695" start="0" end="0" title="Tenochtitlan" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q13695" start="16" end="35" title="Tenochtitlan" label="Mexico-Tenochtitlan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2146288" start="76" end="106" title="historic center of Mexico City" label="historic center of Mexico City"/>
<link wikidata="Q13700" start="306" end="318" title="Lake Texcoco" label="Lake Texcoco"/>
<link wikidata="Q50647" start="326" end="342" title="Valley of Mexico" label="Valley of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q2608489" start="386" end="398" title="Aztec Empire" label="Aztec Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q593267" start="432" end="482" title="Fall of Tenochtitlan" label="captured by the Tlaxcaltec and the Spanish in 1521"/>
<link wikidata="Q133442" start="517" end="521" title="city-state" label="city"/>
<link wikidata="Q202390" start="529" end="542" title="pre-Columbian" label="pre-Columbian"/>
<link wikidata="Q828" start="543" end="551" title="Americas" label="Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952852" start="584" end="592" title="Municipalities of Mexico" label="cabecera"/>
<link wikidata="Q170603" start="606" end="630" title="Viceroyalty of New Spain" label="Viceroyalty of New Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q750176" start="784" end="800" title="Chinampa" label="floating gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q133442" start="850" end="860" title="city-state" label="city-state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063239" start="865" end="873" title="Polity" label="polities"/>
<link wikidata="Q13300" start="975" end="982" title="Nahuatl" label="Nahuatl"/>
<link wikidata="Q158991" start="1013" end="1025" title="opuntia" label="prickly pear"/>
<link wikidata="Q603756" start="1368" end="1374" title="Tenoch" label="Tenoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q13700" start="1460" end="1472" title="Lake Texcoco" label="Lake Texcoco"/>
<link wikidata="Q166735" start="1613" end="1618" title="swamp" label="swamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q12284" start="2054" end="2059" title="canal" label="canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q171529" start="2134" end="2139" title="canoe" label="canoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q194502" start="2215" end="2230" title="endorheic basin" label="endorheic basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q105533" start="2241" end="2249" title="brackish" label="brackish"/>
<link wikidata="Q13702" start="2271" end="2282" title="Moctezuma I" label="Moctezuma I"/>
<link wikidata="Q105190" start="2294" end="2299" title="levee" label="levee"/>
<link wikidata="Q124714" start="2425" end="2431" title="spring (hydrosphere)" label="spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q5073555" start="2534" end="2543" title="chapultepec aqueduct" label="aqueducts"/>
<link wikidata="Q60424" start="2577" end="2587" title="terracotta" label="terracotta"/>
<link wikidata="Q157500" start="2971" end="2980" title="Saponaria" label="Saponaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q161115" start="3055" end="3070" title="Agave americana" label="Agave americana"/>
<link wikidata="Q57036" start="3160" end="3165" title="sauna" label="sauna"/>
<link wikidata="Q2504089" start="3405" end="3413" title="calpulli" label="calpulli"/>
<link wikidata="Q315795" start="3670" end="3694" title="Bernal Díaz del Castillo" label="Bernal Díaz del Castillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q173242" start="4045" end="4052" title="woodcut" label="woodcut"/>
<link wikidata="Q2749" start="4067" end="4075" title="Augsburg" label="Augsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q7326" start="4247" end="4260" title="Hernán Cortés" label="Hernán Cortés"/>
<link wikidata="Q15695" start="4308" end="4317" title="Salamanca" label="Salamanca"/>
<link wikidata="Q379972" start="4358" end="4379" title="Bernardino de Sahagún" label="Bernardino de Sahagún"/>
<link wikidata="Q774021" start="4769" end="4781" title="Templo Mayor" label="Templo Mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q610098" start="4869" end="4878" title="Mesoamerican ballgame" label="ball game"/>
<link wikidata="Q141791" start="5486" end="5498" title="Moctezuma II" label="Moctezuma II"/>
<link wikidata="Q43501" start="5522" end="5525" title="zoo" label="zoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q48428" start="5536" end="5549" title="Bird of prey" label="birds of prey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113" start="5572" end="5576" title="bird" label="bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q10811" start="5579" end="5586" title="reptile" label="reptile"/>
<link wikidata="Q7377" start="5593" end="5599" title="mammal" label="mammal"/>
<link wikidata="Q167346" start="5680" end="5696" title="botanical garden" label="botanical garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q45782" start="5704" end="5712" title="aquarium" label="aquarium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018792" start="5877" end="5885" title="Oaxtepec" label="Oaxtepec"/>
<link wikidata="Q187588" start="6055" end="6067" title="social class" label="social class"/>
<link wikidata="Q2333279" start="6453" end="6482" title="Slavery in the Aztec Empire" label="slaves or indentured servants"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6704" end="6717" title="Aztec_religion#Xocotl Huetzi" label="Xocotl Huetzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3307681" start="7684" end="7690" title="Mexica" label="Mexica"/>
<link wikidata="Q158991" start="7976" end="7983" title="Opuntia" label="Opuntia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5787978" start="8026" end="8031" title="Copil (son of Malinalxochitl)" label="Copil"/>
<link wikidata="Q170867" start="8147" end="8173" title="Coat of arms of Mexico" label="Mexico&amp;#x27;s coat of arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q122462" start="8185" end="8197" title="Mexican flag" label="Mexican flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q13703" start="8597" end="8608" title="Mesoamerica" label="Mesoamerica"/>
<link wikidata="Q12630" start="8688" end="8702" title="Gulf of Mexico" label="Gulf of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q28573" start="8743" end="8754" title="Inca Empire" label="Inca Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q13700" start="8774" end="8786" title="Lake Texcoco" label="Lake Texcoco"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="9228" end="9233" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q641" start="9235" end="9241" title="Venice" label="Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="9246" end="9260" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="9318" end="9324" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q38370" start="9328" end="9338" title="Henry VIII of England" label="Henry VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q8717" start="9407" end="9414" title="Seville" label="Seville"/>
<link wikidata="Q5818" start="9418" end="9425" title="Córdoba, Andalusia" label="Córdoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q141791" start="10093" end="10105" title="Moctezuma II" label="Moctezuma II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2205262" start="10271" end="10278" title="Toxcatl" label="Toxcatl"/>
<link wikidata="Q210900" start="10393" end="10410" title="Pedro de Alvarado" label="Pedro de Alvarado"/>
<link wikidata="Q660818" start="10851" end="10857" title="League (unit)" label="league"/>
<link wikidata="Q60130" start="11651" end="11660" title="Veracruz" label="Vera Cruz"/>
<link wikidata="Q3846099" start="11728" end="11741" title="Nautla, Veracruz" label="Nueva Almería"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13051" end="13059" title="Columbian exchange#Diseases" label="diseases"/>
<link wikidata="Q5078025" start="13933" end="13947" title="Charles Gibson (historian)" label="Charles Gibson"/>
<link wikidata="Q13300" start="15981" end="15988" title="Nahuatl" label="Nahuatl"/>
<link wikidata="Q774021" start="16320" end="16332" title="Templo Mayor" label="Templo Mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q936324" start="16765" end="16777" title="Coyolxauhqui" label="Coyolxauhqui"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348507" start="17091" end="17097" title="Zócalo" label="Zócalo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348507" start="17103" end="17127" title="Plaza de la Constitución" label="Plaza de la Constitución"/>
<link wikidata="Q786806" start="17301" end="17321" title="Aztec calendar stone" label="Aztec calendar stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q351751" start="17504" end="17513" title="Axayacatl" label="Axayacatl"/>
<link wikidata="Q336816" start="17534" end="17539" title="Tizoc" label="Tizoc"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136873" start="17983" end="18007" title="List of megalithic sites" label="List of megalithic sites"/>
<link wikidata="Q3531569" start="18010" end="18039" title="List of Mesoamerican pyramids" label="List of Mesoamerican pyramids"/>
<link wikidata="Q2881158" start="18042" end="18064" title="History of Mexico City" label="History of Mexico City"/>
<link wikidata="Q124685571" start="18067" end="18091" title="Portrait of Tenochtitlan" label="Portrait of Tenochtitlan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5078025" start="19216" end="19231" title="Charles Gibson (historian)" label="Gibson, Charles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891751" start="19735" end="19752" title="Manuel Toussaint" label="Toussaint, Manuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290349" start="19784" end="19801" title="Justino Fernández" label="Justino Fernández"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="29989" wikidata="Q47158" url="?curid=29989" title="Triassic">
<text>The Triassic ( ; sometimes symbolized 🝈) is a geologic period and system which spans 50.5 million years from the end of the Permian Period 251.902 million years ago (Mya), to the beginning of the Jurassic Period 201.4 Mya. The Triassic is the first and shortest period of the Mesozoic Era and the seventh period of the Phanerozoic Eon. Both the start and end of the period are marked by major extinction events. The Triassic Period is subdivided into three epochs: Early Triassic, Middle Triassic and Late Triassic.

The Triassic began in the wake of the Permian–Triassic extinction event, which left the Earth&#x27;s biosphere impoverished; it was well into the middle of the Triassic before life recovered its former diversity. Three categories of organisms can be distinguished in the Triassic record: survivors from the extinction event, new groups that flourished briefly, and other new groups that went on to dominate the Mesozoic Era. 

Reptiles, especially archosaurs, were the chief terrestrial vertebrates during this time. A specialized group of archosaurs, called dinosaurs, first appeared in the Late Triassic but did not become dominant until the succeeding Jurassic Period. Archosaurs that became dominant in this period were primarily pseudosuchians, relatives and ancestors of modern crocodilians, while some archosaurs specialized in flight, the first time among vertebrates, becoming the pterosaurs. Therapsids, the dominant vertebrates of the preceding Permian period, saw a brief surge in diversification in the Triassic, with dicynodonts and cynodonts quickly becoming dominant, but they declined throughout the period with the majority becoming extinct by the end. However, the first stem-group mammals (mammaliamorphs), themselves a specialized subgroup of cynodonts, appeared during the Triassic and would survive the extinction event, allowing them to radiate during the Jurassic. Amphibians were primarily represented by the temnospondyls, giant aquatic predators that had survived the end-Permian extinction and saw a new burst of diversification in the Triassic, before going extinct by the end; however, early crown-group lissamphibians (including stem-group frogs, salamanders and caecilians) also became more common during the Triassic and survived the extinction event. The earliest known neopterygian fish, including early holosteans and teleosts, appeared near the beginning of the Triassic, and quickly diversified to become among the dominant groups of fish in both freshwater and marine habitats.

The vast supercontinent of Pangaea dominated the globe during the Triassic, but in the latest Triassic (Rhaetian) and Early Jurassic it began to gradually rift into two separate landmasses: Laurasia to the north and Gondwana to the south. The global climate during the Triassic was mostly hot and dry, with deserts spanning much of Pangaea&#x27;s interior. However, the climate shifted and became more humid as Pangaea began to drift apart. The end of the period was marked by yet another major mass extinction, the Triassic–Jurassic extinction event, that wiped out many groups, including most pseudosuchians, and allowed dinosaurs to assume dominance in the Jurassic.

==Etymology==
The Triassic was named in 1834 by Friedrich August von Alberti, after a succession of three distinct rock layers (Greek meaning &#x27;triad&#x27;) that are widespread in southern Germany: the lower Buntsandstein (colourful sandstone&quot;)&quot;, the middle Muschelkalk (shell-bearing limestone) and the upper Keuper (coloured clay).

==Dating and subdivisions==
On the geologic time scale, the Triassic is usually divided into Early, Middle, and Late Triassic Epochs, and the corresponding rocks are referred to as Lower, Middle, or Upper Triassic. The faunal stages from the youngest to oldest are:

==Paleogeography==

During the Triassic, almost all the Earth&#x27;s land mass was concentrated into a single supercontinent, Pangaea (). This supercontinent was more-or-less centered on the equator and extended between the poles, though it did drift northwards as the period progressed. Southern Pangea, also known as Gondwana, was made up by closely-appressed cratons corresponding to modern South America, Africa, Madagascar, India, Antarctica, and Australia. North Pangea, also known as Laurussia or Laurasia, corresponds to modern-day North America and the fragmented predecessors of Eurasia.

The western edge of Pangea lay at the margin of an enormous ocean, Panthalassa (), which roughly corresponds to the modern Pacific Ocean. Practically all deep-ocean crust present during the Triassic has been recycled through the subduction of oceanic plates, so very little is known about the open ocean from this time period. Most information on Panthalassan geology and marine life is derived from island arcs and rare seafloor sediments accreted onto surrounding land masses, such as present-day Japan and western North America.

The eastern edge of Pangea was encroached upon by a pair of extensive oceanic basins: The Neo-Tethys (or simply Tethys) and Paleo-Tethys Oceans. These extended from China to Iberia, hosting abundant marine life along their shallow tropical peripheries. They were divided from each other by a long string of microcontinents known as the Cimmerian terranes. Cimmerian crust had detached from Gondwana in the early Permian and drifted northwards during the Triassic, enlarging the Neo-Tethys Ocean which formed in their wake. At the same time, they forced the Paleo-Tethys Ocean to shrink as it was being subducted under Asia. By the end of the Triassic, the Paleo-Tethys Ocean occupied a small area and the Cimmerian terranes began to collide with southern Asia. This collision, known as the Cimmerian Orogeny, continued into the Jurassic and Cretaceous to produce a chain of mountain ranges stretching from Turkey to Malaysia.Pangaea was fractured by widespread faulting and rift basins during the Triassic—especially late in that period—but had not yet separated. The first nonmarine sediments in the rift that marks the initial break-up of Pangaea, which separated eastern North America from Morocco, are of Late Triassic age; in the United States, these thick sediments comprise the Newark Supergroup. Rift basins are also common in South America, Europe, and Africa. Terrestrial environments are particularly well-represented in the South Africa, Russia, central Europe, and the southwest United States. Terrestrial Triassic biostratigraphy is mostly based on terrestrial and freshwater tetrapods, as well as conchostracans (&quot;clam shrimps&quot;), a type of fast-breeding crustacean which lived in lakes and hypersaline environments.

Because a supercontinent has less shoreline compared to a series of smaller continents, Triassic marine deposits are relatively uncommon on a global scale. A major exception is in Western Europe, where the Triassic was first studied. The northeastern margin of Gondwana was a stable passive margin along the Neo-Tethys Ocean, and marine sediments have been preserved in parts of northern India and Arabia. In North America, marine deposits are limited to a few exposures in the west.

===Scandinavia===
During the Triassic peneplains are thought to have formed in what is now Norway and southern Sweden. Remnants of this peneplain can be traced as a tilted summit accordance in the Swedish West Coast. In northern Norway Triassic peneplains may have been buried in sediments to be then re-exposed as coastal plains called strandflats. Dating of illite clay from a strandflat of Bømlo, southern Norway, have shown that landscape there became weathered in Late Triassic times ( 210 million years ago) with the landscape likely also being shaped during that time.

=== Paleooceanography ===
Eustatic sea level in the Triassic was consistently low compared to the other geological periods. The beginning of the Triassic was around present sea level, rising to about above present-day sea level during the Early and Middle Triassic. Sea level rise accelerated in the Ladinian, culminating with a sea level up to above present-day levels during the Carnian. Sea level began to decline in the Norian, reaching a low of below present sea level during the mid-Rhaetian. Low global sea levels persisted into the earliest Jurassic. The long-term sea level trend is superimposed by 22 sea level drop events widespread in the geologic record, mostly of minor (less than ) and medium () magnitudes. A lack of evidence for Triassic continental ice sheets suggest that glacial eustasy is unlikely to be the cause of these changes.

==Climate==
The Triassic continental interior climate was generally hot and dry, so that typical deposits are red bed sandstones and evaporites. There is no evidence of glaciation at or near either pole; in fact, the polar regions were apparently moist and temperate, providing a climate suitable for forests and vertebrates, including reptiles. Pangaea&#x27;s large size limited the moderating effect of the global ocean; its continental climate was highly seasonal, with very hot summers and cold winters. The strong contrast between the Pangea supercontinent and the global ocean triggered intense cross-equatorial monsoons, sometimes referred to as the Pangean megamonsoons.

The Triassic may have mostly been a dry period, but evidence exists that it was punctuated by several episodes of increased rainfall in tropical and subtropical latitudes of the Tethys Sea and its surrounding land. Sediments and fossils suggestive of a more humid climate are known from the Anisian to Ladinian of the Tethysian domain, and from the Carnian and Rhaetian of a larger area that includes also the Boreal domain (e.g., Svalbard Islands), the North American continent, the South China block and Argentina. The best-studied of such episodes of humid climate, and probably the most intense and widespread, was the Carnian Pluvial Event. 

=== Early Triassic ===
The Early Triassic was the hottest portion of the entire Phanerozoic, seeing as it occurred during and immediately after the discharge of titanic volumes of greenhouse gases from the Siberian Traps. The Early Triassic began with the Permian-Triassic Thermal Maximum (PTTM) and was followed by the brief Dienerian Cooling (DC) from 251 to 249 Ma, which was in turn followed by the Latest Smithian Thermal Maximum (LSTT) around 249 to 248 Ma. During the Latest Olenekian Cooling (LOC), from 248 to 247 Ma, temperatures cooled by about 6 °C.

=== Middle Triassic ===
The Middle Triassic was cooler than the Early Triassic, with temperatures falling over most of the Anisian, with the exception of a warming spike in the latter portion of the stage. From 242 to 233 Ma, the Ladinian-Carnian Cooling (LCC) ensued. 

=== Late Triassic ===
At the beginning of the Carnian, global temperatures continued to be relatively cool. The eruption of the Wrangellia Large Igneous Province around 234 Ma caused abrupt global warming, terminating the cooling trend of the LCC. This warming was responsible for the Carnian Pluvial Event and resulted in an episode of widespread global humidity. The CPE ushered in the Mid-Carnian Warm Interval (MCWI), which lasted from 234 to 227 Ma. At the Carnian-Norian boundary occurred a positive δ13C excursion believed to signify an increase in organic carbon burial. From 227 to 217 Ma, there was a relatively cool period known as the Early Norian Cool Interval (ENCI), after which occurred the Mid-Norian Warm Interval (MNWI) from 217 to 209 Ma. The MNWI was briefly interrupted around 214 Ma by a cooling possibly related to the Manicouagan impact. Around 212 Ma, a 10 Myr eccentricity maximum caused a paludification of Pangaea and a reduction in the size of arid climatic zones. The Rhaetian Cool Interval (RCI) lasted from 209 to 201 Ma. At the terminus of the Triassic, there was an extreme warming event referred to as the End-Triassic Thermal Event (ETTE), which was responsible for the Triassic-Jurassic mass extinction. Bubbles of carbon dioxide in basaltic rocks dating back to the end of the Triassic indicate that volcanic activity from the Central Atlantic Magmatic Province helped trigger climate change in the ETTE.

== Flora ==
=== Land plants ===
During the Early Triassic, lycophytes, particularly those of the order Isoetales (which contains living quillworts), rose to prominence due to the environmental instability following the Permian-Triassic extinction, with one particularly notable example being the genus &quot;Pleuromeia,&quot; which grew in columnar like fashion, sometimes reaching a height of . The relevance of lycophytes declined from the Middle Triassic onwards, following the return of more stable environmental conditions.

While having first appeared during the Permian, the extinct seed plant group Bennettitales first became a prominent element in global floras during the Late Triassic, a position they would hold for much of the Mesozoic. In the Southern Hemisphere landmasses of Gondwana, the tree &quot;Dicroidium&quot;, an extinct &quot;seed fern&quot; belong to the order Corystospermales was a dominant element in forest habitats across the region during the Middle-Late Triassic. During the Late Triassic, the Ginkgoales (which today are represented by only a single species, &quot;Ginkgo biloba&quot;) underwent considerable diversification. Conifers were abundant during the Triassic, and included the Voltziales (which contains various lineages, probably including those ancestral to modern conifers), as well as the extinct family Cheirolepidiaceae, which first appeared in the Late Triassic, and would be prominent throughout most of the rest of the Mesozoic.

==== Coal ====
No known coal deposits date from the start of the Triassic Period. This is known as the Early Triassic &quot;coal gap&quot; and can be seen as part of the Permian–Triassic extinction event. Possible explanations for the coal gap include sharp drops in sea level at the time of the Permo-Triassic boundary; acid rain from the Siberian Traps eruptions or from an impact event that overwhelmed acidic swamps; climate shift to a greenhouse climate that was too hot and dry for peat accumulation; evolution of fungi or herbivores that were more destructive of wetlands; the extinction of all plants adapted to peat swamps, with a hiatus of several million years before new plant species evolved that were adapted to peat swamps; or soil anoxia as oxygen levels plummeted.

=== Phytoplankton ===
Before the Permian extinction, Archaeplastida (red and green algae) had been the major marine phytoplanktons since about 659–645 million years ago, when they replaced marine planktonic cyanobacteria, which first appeared about 800 million years ago, as the dominant phytoplankton in the oceans. In the Triassic, secondary endosymbiotic algae became the most important plankton.

== Fauna ==
=== Marine invertebrates ===
In marine environments, new modern types of corals appeared in the Early Triassic, forming small patches of reefs of modest extent compared to the great reef systems of Devonian or modern times. At the end of the Carnian, a reef crisis occurred in South China. Serpulids appeared in the Middle Triassic. Microconchids were abundant. The shelled cephalopods called ammonites recovered, diversifying from a single line that survived the Permian extinction. Bivalves began to rapidly diversify during the Middle Triassic, becoming highly abundant in the oceans.

=== Insects ===

Aquatic insects rapidly diversified during the Middle Triassic, with this time interval representing a crucial diversification for Holometabola, the clade containing the majority of modern insect species.
=== Fish ===

In the wake of the Permian-Triassic mass extinction event, the fish fauna was remarkably uniform, with many families and genera exhibiting a cosmopolitan distribution. Coelacanths show their highest post-Devonian diversity in the Early Triassic. Ray-finned fishes (actinopterygians) went through a remarkable diversification in the beginning of the Triassic, leading to peak diversity during the Middle Triassic; however, the pattern of this diversification is still not well understood due to a taphonomic megabias. The first stem-group teleosts appeared during the Triassic (teleosts are by far the most diverse group of fish today). Predatory actinopterygians such as saurichthyids and birgeriids, some of which grew over in length, appeared in the Early Triassic and became widespread and successful during the period as a whole. Lakes and rivers were populated by lungfish (Dipnoi), such as &quot;Ceratodus&quot;, which are mainly known from the dental plates, abundant in the fossils record. Hybodonts, a group of shark-like cartilaginous fish, were dominant in both freshwater and marine environments throughout the Triassic. Last survivors of the mainly Palaeozoic Eugeneodontida are known from the Early Triassic.

=== Amphibians ===

Temnospondyl amphibians were among those groups that survived the Permian–Triassic extinction. Once abundant in both terrestrial and aquatic environments, the terrestrial species had mostly died out during the extinction event. The Triassic survivors were aquatic or semi-aquatic, and were represented by &quot;Tupilakosaurus&quot;, &quot;Thabanchuia&quot;, Branchiosauridae and &quot;Micropholis&quot;, all of which died out in Early Triassic, and the successful Stereospondyli, with survivors into the Cretaceous Period. The largest Triassic stereospondyls, such as &quot;Mastodonsaurus,&quot; were up to in length. Some lineages (e.g. trematosaurs) flourished briefly in the Early Triassic, while others (e.g. capitosaurs) remained successful throughout the whole period, or only came to prominence in the Late Triassic (e.g. &quot;Plagiosaurus&quot;, metoposaurs).

The first Lissamphibians (modern amphibians) appear in the Triassic, with the progenitors of the first frogs already present by the Early Triassic. However, the group as a whole did not become common until the Jurassic, when the temnospondyls had become very rare.

Most of the Reptiliomorpha, stem-amniotes that gave rise to the amniotes, disappeared in the Triassic, but two water-dwelling groups survived: Embolomeri that only survived into the early part of the period, and the Chroniosuchia, which survived until the end of the Triassic.

=== Reptiles ===
==== Archosauromorphs ====
The Permian–Triassic extinction devastated terrestrial life. Biodiversity rebounded as the surviving species repopulated empty terrain, but these were short-lived. Diverse communities with complex food-web structures took 30 million years to reestablish. Archosauromorph reptiles, which had already appeared and diversified to an extent in the Permian Period, exploded in diversity as an adaptive radiation in response to the Permian-Triassic mass extinction. By the Early Triassic, several major archosauromorph groups had appeared. Long-necked, lizard-like early archosauromorphs were known as protorosaurs, which is likely a paraphyletic group rather than a true clade. Tanystropheids were a family of protorosaurs which elevated their neck size to extremes, with the largest genus &quot;Tanystropheus&quot; having a neck longer than its body. The protorosaur family Sharovipterygidae used their elongated hindlimbs for gliding. Other archosauromorphs, such as rhynchosaurs and allokotosaurs, were mostly stocky-bodied herbivores with specialized jaw structures.

Rhynchosaurs, barrel-gutted herbivores, thrived for only a short period of time, becoming extinct about 220 million years ago. They were exceptionally abundant in the middle of the Triassic, as the primary large herbivores in many Carnian-age ecosystems. They sheared plants with premaxillary beaks and plates along the upper jaw with multiple rows of teeth. Allokotosaurs were iguana-like reptiles, including &quot;Trilophosaurus&quot; (a common Late Triassic reptile with three-crowned teeth), &quot;Teraterpeton&quot; (which had a long beak-like snout), and &quot;Shringasaurus&quot; (a horned herbivore which reached a body length of ).

One group of archosauromorphs, the archosauriforms, were distinguished by their active predatory lifestyle, with serrated teeth and upright limb postures. Archosauriforms were diverse in the Triassic, including various terrestrial and semiaquatic predators of all shapes and sizes. The large-headed and robust erythrosuchids were among the dominant carnivores in the early Triassic. Phytosaurs were a particularly common group which prospered during the Late Triassic. These long-snouted and semiaquatic predators resemble living crocodiles and probably had a similar lifestyle, hunting for fish and small reptiles around the water&#x27;s edge. However, this resemblance is only superficial and is a prime-case of convergent evolution.

True archosaurs appeared in the early Triassic, splitting into two branches: Avemetatarsalia (the ancestors to birds) and Pseudosuchia (the ancestors to crocodilians). Avemetatarsalians were a minor component of their ecosystems, but eventually produced the earliest pterosaurs and dinosaurs in the Late Triassic. Early long-tailed pterosaurs appeared in the Norian and quickly spread worldwide. Triassic dinosaurs evolved in the Carnian and include early sauropodomorphs and theropods. Most Triassic dinosaurs were small predators and only a few were common, such as &quot;Coelophysis&quot;, which was long. Triassic sauropodomorphs primarily inhabited cooler regions of the world.

The large predator &quot;Smok&quot; was most likely also an archosaur, but it is uncertain if it was a primitive dinosaur or a pseudosuchian.

Pseudosuchians were far more ecologically dominant in the Triassic, including large herbivores (such as aetosaurs), large carnivores (&quot;rauisuchians&quot;), and the first crocodylomorphs (&quot;sphenosuchians&quot;). Aetosaurs were heavily-armored reptiles that were common during the last 30 million years of the Late Triassic until they died out at the Triassic-Jurassic extinction. Most aetosaurs were herbivorous and fed on low-growing plants, but some may have eaten meat. &quot;rauisuchians&quot; (formally known as paracrocodylomorphs) were the keystone predators of most Triassic terrestrial ecosystems. Over 25 species have been found, including giant quadrupedal hunters, sleek bipedal omnivores, and lumbering beasts with deep sails on their backs. They probably occupied the large-predator niche later filled by theropods. &quot;Rauisuchians&quot; were ancestral to small, lightly-built crocodylomorphs, the only pseudosuchians which survived into the Jurassic.

==== Marine reptiles ====

There were many types of marine reptiles. These included the Sauropterygia, which featured pachypleurosaurs and nothosaurs (both common during the Middle Triassic, especially in the Tethys region), placodonts, the earliest known herbivorous marine reptile &quot;Atopodentatus&quot;, and the first plesiosaurs. The first of the lizard-like Thalattosauria (&quot;Askeptosaurus&quot;) and the highly successful ichthyopterygians, which appeared in Early Triassic seas, soon diversified. By the Middle Triassic, some ichthyopterygians were achieving very large body masses.

==== Other reptiles ====
Among other reptiles, the earliest turtles, like &quot;Proganochelys&quot; and &quot;Proterochersis&quot;, appeared during the Norian Age (Stage) of the Late Triassic Period. The Lepidosauromorpha, specifically the Sphenodontia, are first found in the fossil record of the earlier Carnian Age, though the earliest lepidosauromorphs likely occurred in the Permian. The Procolophonidae, the last surviving parareptiles, were an important group of small lizard-like herbivores. The drepanosaurs were a clade of unusual, chameleon-like arboreal reptiles with birdlike heads and specialised claws.

=== Synapsids ===
Three therapsid groups survived into the Triassic: dicynodonts, therocephalians, and cynodonts. The cynodont &quot;Cynognathus&quot; was a characteristic top predator in the Olenekian and Anisian of Gondwana. Both kannemeyeriiform dicynodonts and gomphodont cynodonts remained important herbivores during much of the period. Therocephalians included both large predators (&quot;Moschorhinus&quot;) and herbivorous forms (bauriids) until their extinction midway through the period. Ecteniniid cynodonts played a role as large-sized, cursorial predators in the Late Triassic. During the Carnian (early part of the Late Triassic), some advanced cynodonts gave rise to the first mammals.

During the Triassic, archosaurs displaced therapsids as the largest and most ecologically prolific terrestrial amniotes. This &quot;Triassic Takeover&quot; may have contributed to the evolution of mammals by forcing the surviving therapsids and their mammaliaform successors to live as small, mainly nocturnal insectivores. Nocturnal life may have forced the mammaliaforms to develop fur and a higher metabolic rate.


==Lagerstätten==
Two Early Triassic lagerstätten (high-quality fossil beds), the Dienerian aged Guiyang biota and the earliest Spathian aged Paris biota stand out due to their exceptional preservation and diversity. They represent the earliest lagerstätten of the Mesozoic era and provide insight into the biotic recovery from the Permian-Triassic mass extinction event.

The Monte San Giorgio lagerstätte, now in the Lake Lugano region of northern Italy and southern Switzerland, was in Middle Triassic times a lagoon behind reefs with an anoxic bottom layer, so there were no scavengers and little turbulence to disturb fossilization, a situation that can be compared to the better-known Jurassic Solnhofen Limestone lagerstätte. The remains of fish and various marine reptiles (including the common pachypleurosaur &quot;Neusticosaurus&quot;, and the bizarre long-necked archosauromorph &quot;Tanystropheus&quot;), along with some terrestrial forms like &quot;Ticinosuchus&quot; and &quot;Macrocnemus&quot;, have been recovered from this locality. All these fossils date from the Anisian and Ladinian ages (about 242 Ma ago).

==Triassic–Jurassic extinction event==
The Triassic Period ended with a mass extinction, which was particularly severe in the oceans; the conodonts disappeared, as did all the marine reptiles except ichthyosaurs and plesiosaurs. Invertebrates like brachiopods and molluscs (such as gastropods) were severely affected. In the oceans, 22% of marine families and possibly about half of marine genera went missing.

Though the end-Triassic extinction event was not equally devastating in all terrestrial ecosystems, several important clades of crurotarsans (large archosaurian reptiles previously grouped together as the thecodonts) disappeared, as did most of the large labyrinthodont amphibians, groups of small reptiles, and most synapsids. Some of the early, primitive dinosaurs also became extinct, but more adaptive ones survived to evolve into the Jurassic. Surviving plants that went on to dominate the Mesozoic world included modern conifers and cycadeoids.

The cause of the Late Triassic extinction is uncertain. It was accompanied by huge volcanic eruptions that occurred as the supercontinent Pangaea began to break apart about 202 to 191 million years ago (40Ar/39Ar dates), forming the Central Atlantic Magmatic Province (CAMP), one of the largest known inland volcanic events since the planet had first cooled and stabilized. Other possible but less likely causes for the extinction events include global cooling or even a bolide impact, for which an impact crater containing Manicouagan Reservoir in Quebec, Canada, has been singled out. However, the Manicouagan impact melt has been dated to 214±1 Mya. The date of the Triassic-Jurassic boundary has also been more accurately fixed recently, at Mya. Both dates are gaining accuracy by using more accurate forms of radiometric dating, in particular the decay of uranium to lead in zircons formed at time of the impact. So, the evidence suggests the Manicouagan impact preceded the end of the Triassic by approximately 10±2 Ma. It could not therefore be the immediate cause of the observed mass extinction.

The number of Late Triassic extinctions is disputed. Some studies suggest that there are at least two periods of extinction towards the end of the Triassic, separated by 12 to 17 million years. But arguing against this is a recent study of North American faunas. In the Petrified Forest of northeast Arizona there is a unique sequence of late Carnian-early Norian terrestrial sediments. An analysis in 2002 found no significant change in the paleoenvironment. Phytosaurs, the most common fossils there, experienced a change-over only at the genus level, and the number of species remained the same. Some aetosaurs, the next most common tetrapods, and early dinosaurs, passed through unchanged. However, both phytosaurs and aetosaurs were among the groups of archosaur reptiles completely wiped out by the end-Triassic extinction event.

It seems likely then that there was some sort of end-Carnian extinction, when several herbivorous archosauromorph groups died out, while the large herbivorous therapsids—the kannemeyeriid dicynodonts and the traversodont cynodonts—were much reduced in the northern half of Pangaea (Laurasia).

These extinctions within the Triassic and at its end allowed the dinosaurs to expand into many niches that had become unoccupied. Dinosaurs became increasingly dominant, abundant and diverse, and remained that way for the next 150 million years. The true &quot;Age of Dinosaurs&quot; is during the following Jurassic and Cretaceous periods, rather than the Triassic.

==See also==

*Geologic time scale
*List of fossil sites &quot;(with link directory)&quot;
* Triassic land vertebrate faunachrons
*Phylloceratina
*Dinosaurs

==Notes==
==References==
*Emiliani, Cesare. (1992). &quot;Planet Earth: Cosmology, Geology, &amp; the Evolution of Life &amp; the Environment&quot;. Cambridge University Press. (Paperback Edition )
*Ogg, Jim; June, 2004, &quot;Overview of Global Boundary Stratotype Sections and Points (GSSP&#x27;s)&quot; Stratigraphy.org, Accessed April 30, 2006
*Stanley, Steven M. &quot;Earth System History.&quot; New York: W.H. Freeman and Company, 1999. 
*Sues, Hans-Dieter &amp; Fraser, Nicholas C. &quot;Triassic Life on Land: The Great Transition&quot; New York: Columbia University Press, 2010. Series: Critical Moments and Perspectives in Earth History and Paleobiology. 
*van Andel, Tjeerd, (1985) 1994, &quot;New Views on an Old Planet: A History of Global Change&quot;, Cambridge University Press

==External links==

*Overall introduction
*&#x27;The Triassic world&#x27;
*Douglas Henderson&#x27;s illustrations of Triassic animals
*Paleofiles page on the Triassic extinctions
*Examples of Triassic Fossils
*Triassic (chronostratigraphy scale)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q47158" start="4" end="12" title="Triassic" label="Triassic"/>
<link wikidata="Q47158" start="38" end="39" title="Triassic" label="🝈"/>
<link wikidata="Q43521" start="46" end="61" title="geologic period" label="geologic period"/>
<link wikidata="Q403523" start="66" end="72" title="system (stratigraphy)" label="system"/>
<link wikidata="Q76402" start="124" end="131" title="Permian" label="Permian"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="166" end="169" title="Year#Abbreviations yr and ya" label="Mya"/>
<link wikidata="Q45805" start="196" end="204" title="Jurassic" label="Jurassic"/>
<link wikidata="Q83222" start="276" end="288" title="Mesozoic" label="Mesozoic Era"/>
<link wikidata="Q101313" start="319" end="334" title="Phanerozoic" label="Phanerozoic Eon"/>
<link wikidata="Q55814" start="393" end="409" title="extinction event" label="extinction event"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075885" start="465" end="479" title="Early Triassic" label="Early Triassic"/>
<link wikidata="Q929395" start="481" end="496" title="Middle Triassic" label="Middle Triassic"/>
<link wikidata="Q917293" start="501" end="514" title="Late Triassic" label="Late Triassic"/>
<link wikidata="Q141118" start="555" end="588" title="Permian–Triassic extinction event" label="Permian–Triassic extinction event"/>
<link wikidata="Q83222" start="928" end="936" title="Mesozoic" label="Mesozoic"/>
<link wikidata="Q10811" start="944" end="952" title="Reptiles" label="Reptiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q130910" start="965" end="974" title="archosaur" label="archosaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q430" start="1076" end="1084" title="dinosaur" label="dinosaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q2742285" start="1251" end="1263" title="pseudosuchia" label="pseudosuchia"/>
<link wikidata="Q25363" start="1301" end="1313" title="crocodilians" label="crocodilians"/>
<link wikidata="Q179204" start="1407" end="1417" title="pterosaurs" label="pterosaurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q322241" start="1419" end="1429" title="Therapsids" label="Therapsids"/>
<link wikidata="Q131682" start="1548" end="1559" title="Dicynodontia" label="dicynodonts"/>
<link wikidata="Q131801" start="1564" end="1573" title="Cynodontia" label="cynodonts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7377" start="1718" end="1724" title="mammal" label="mammal"/>
<link wikidata="Q28746016" start="1727" end="1741" title="Mammaliamorpha" label="mammaliamorphs"/>
<link wikidata="Q10908" start="1907" end="1917" title="Amphibian" label="Amphibians"/>
<link wikidata="Q131447" start="1952" end="1965" title="Temnospondyli" label="temnospondyls"/>
<link wikidata="Q134861" start="2152" end="2166" title="Lissamphibia" label="lissamphibians"/>
<link wikidata="Q53636" start="2189" end="2194" title="Frog" label="frogs"/>
<link wikidata="Q53663" start="2196" end="2207" title="Salamander" label="salamanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q4758" start="2212" end="2222" title="Caecilian" label="caecilians"/>
<link wikidata="Q740005" start="2322" end="2334" title="Neopterygii" label="neopterygian"/>
<link wikidata="Q846164" start="2357" end="2367" title="Holostei" label="holosteans"/>
<link wikidata="Q204861" start="2372" end="2380" title="Teleost" label="teleosts"/>
<link wikidata="Q55833" start="2545" end="2559" title="supercontinent" label="supercontinent"/>
<link wikidata="Q4398" start="2563" end="2570" title="Pangaea" label="Pangaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q530828" start="2640" end="2648" title="Rhaetian" label="Rhaetian"/>
<link wikidata="Q132033" start="2726" end="2734" title="Laurasia" label="Laurasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q80583" start="2752" end="2760" title="Gondwana" label="Gondwana"/>
<link wikidata="Q835034" start="3052" end="3086" title="Triassic–Jurassic extinction event" label="Triassic–Jurassic extinction event"/>
<link wikidata="Q62690" start="3255" end="3283" title="Friedrich August von Alberti" label="Friedrich August von Alberti"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="3400" end="3407" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q4875445" start="3419" end="3432" title="Buntsandstein" label="Buntsandstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q13085" start="3444" end="3453" title="sandstone" label="sandstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543962" start="3479" end="3490" title="Muschelkalk" label="Muschelkalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q23757" start="3506" end="3515" title="limestone" label="limestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q8085899" start="3531" end="3537" title="Keuper" label="Keuper"/>
<link wikidata="Q42302" start="3548" end="3552" title="clay" label="clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q43521" start="3591" end="3610" title="geologic time scale" label="geologic time scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075885" start="3649" end="3654" title="Early Triassic" label="Early"/>
<link wikidata="Q929395" start="3656" end="3662" title="Middle Triassic" label="Middle"/>
<link wikidata="Q917293" start="3668" end="3681" title="Late Triassic" label="Late Triassic"/>
<link wikidata="Q43521" start="3682" end="3687" title="epoch (geology)" label="Epoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123245" start="3775" end="3788" title="faunal stages" label="faunal stages"/>
<link wikidata="Q55833" start="3933" end="3947" title="supercontinent" label="supercontinent"/>
<link wikidata="Q4398" start="3949" end="3956" title="Pangaea" label="Pangaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q80583" start="4142" end="4150" title="Gondwana" label="Gondwana"/>
<link wikidata="Q18" start="4217" end="4230" title="South America" label="South America"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="4232" end="4238" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1019" start="4240" end="4250" title="Madagascar" label="Madagascar"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="4252" end="4257" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q51" start="4259" end="4269" title="Antarctica" label="Antarctica"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="4275" end="4284" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q132033" start="4327" end="4335" title="Laurasia" label="Laurasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="4363" end="4376" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q5401" start="4412" end="4419" title="Eurasia" label="Eurasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q208378" start="4489" end="4500" title="Panthalassa" label="Panthalassa"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="4545" end="4558" title="Pacific Ocean" label="Pacific Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q176318" start="4651" end="4661" title="subduction" label="subduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515058" start="4822" end="4832" title="island arc" label="island arc"/>
<link wikidata="Q2553430" start="4862" end="4870" title="Accretion (geology)" label="accreted"/>
<link wikidata="Q208136" start="5045" end="5055" title="Neotethys" label="Neo-Tethys"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432114" start="5079" end="5097" title="Paleo-Tethys Ocean" label="Paleo-Tethys Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q262025" start="5291" end="5309" title="Cimmerian terranes" label="Cimmerian terranes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741655" start="5745" end="5762" title="Cimmerian Orogeny" label="Cimmerian Orogeny"/>
<link wikidata="Q44626" start="5796" end="5806" title="Cretaceous" label="Cretaceous"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="5861" end="5867" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q833" start="5871" end="5879" title="Malaysia" label="Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q473935" start="6056" end="6060" title="rift" label="rift"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028" start="6148" end="6155" title="Morocco" label="Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="6190" end="6203" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q17109710" start="6240" end="6257" title="Newark Supergroup" label="Newark Supergroup"/>
<link wikidata="Q864826" start="6483" end="6498" title="biostratigraphy" label="biostratigraphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q22111101" start="6567" end="6581" title="conchostracans" label="conchostracans"/>
<link wikidata="Q27496" start="6877" end="6891" title="Western Europe" label="Western Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1918464" start="6980" end="6994" title="passive margin" label="passive margin"/>
<link wikidata="Q31945" start="7095" end="7101" title="Arabian Peninsula" label="Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="7106" end="7119" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q163967" start="7220" end="7229" title="peneplain" label="peneplain"/>
<link wikidata="Q23583199" start="7354" end="7371" title="summit accordance" label="summit accordance"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7379" end="7397" title="Swedish West Coast" label="Swedish West Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q3061933" start="7483" end="7493" title="exhumation (geology)" label="re-exposed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336535" start="7519" end="7529" title="strandflat" label="strandflat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145804" start="7542" end="7553" title="illite" label="illite clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q113552" start="7575" end="7580" title="Bømlo" label="Bømlo"/>
<link wikidata="Q55643016" start="7785" end="7803" title="Eustatic sea level" label="Eustatic sea level"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065586" start="8723" end="8730" title="red beds" label="red bed"/>
<link wikidata="Q13085" start="8731" end="8740" title="sandstone" label="sandstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q491689" start="8746" end="8755" title="evaporite" label="evaporite"/>
<link wikidata="Q35666" start="8782" end="8792" title="glacier" label="glaciation"/>
<link wikidata="Q167466" start="8870" end="8879" title="temperate" label="temperate"/>
<link wikidata="Q185005" start="9040" end="9059" title="continental climate" label="continental climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q42967" start="9231" end="9239" title="monsoons" label="monsoons"/>
<link wikidata="Q17165056" start="9270" end="9289" title="Pangean megamonsoon" label="Pangean megamonsoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q25231" start="9724" end="9732" title="Svalbard" label="Svalbard"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="9747" end="9760" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="9783" end="9788" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q414" start="9799" end="9808" title="Argentina" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q5044049" start="9916" end="9937" title="Carnian Pluvial Event" label="Carnian Pluvial Event"/>
<link wikidata="Q3278929" start="11281" end="11285" title="Δ13C" label="δ13C"/>
<link wikidata="Q756106" start="11618" end="11636" title="Manicouagan Impact Crater" label="Manicouagan impact"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997" start="12028" end="12042" title="carbon dioxide" label="carbon dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q215370" start="12279" end="12289" title="Lycophyte" label="lycophytes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7170041" start="12323" end="12332" title="Isoetales" label="Isoetales"/>
<link wikidata="Q877973" start="12356" end="12366" title="Quillwort" label="quillworts"/>
<link wikidata="Q37092402" start="12528" end="12538" title="Pleuromeia" label="Pleuromeia"/>
<link wikidata="Q132823" start="12827" end="12840" title="Bennettitales" label="Bennettitales"/>
<link wikidata="Q5273916" start="13036" end="13046" title="Dicroidium" label="Dicroidium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130372" start="13071" end="13080" title="seed fern" label="seed fern"/>
<link wikidata="Q21588008" start="13107" end="13123" title="Corystospermales" label="Corystospermales"/>
<link wikidata="Q835097" start="13247" end="13257" title="Ginkgoales" label="Ginkgoales"/>
<link wikidata="Q43284" start="13319" end="13332" title="Ginkgo biloba" label="Ginkgo biloba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136812" start="13441" end="13451" title="Voltziales" label="Voltziales"/>
<link wikidata="Q670130" start="13572" end="13589" title="Cheirolepidiaceae" label="Cheirolepidiaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q24489" start="13727" end="13731" title="coal" label="coal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075885" start="13806" end="13820" title="Early Triassic" label="Early Triassic"/>
<link wikidata="Q141118" start="13873" end="13906" title="Permian–Triassic extinction event" label="Permian–Triassic extinction event"/>
<link wikidata="Q879246" start="14539" end="14553" title="Archaeplastida" label="Archaeplastida"/>
<link wikidata="Q184755" start="14602" end="14615" title="phytoplankton" label="phytoplankton"/>
<link wikidata="Q93315" start="14693" end="14706" title="cyanobacteria" label="cyanobacteria"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14820" end="14843" title="Symbiogenesis#Secondary endosymbiosis" label="secondary endosymbiotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9430" start="14931" end="14950" title="Ocean" label="marine environments"/>
<link wikidata="Q171446" start="14972" end="14977" title="coral" label="coral"/>
<link wikidata="Q184358" start="15036" end="15041" title="reefs" label="reefs"/>
<link wikidata="Q65955" start="15097" end="15105" title="Devonian" label="Devonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1213001" start="15189" end="15198" title="Serpulidae" label="Serpulids"/>
<link wikidata="Q6839384" start="15232" end="15245" title="Microconchids" label="Microconchids"/>
<link wikidata="Q128257" start="15273" end="15283" title="cephalopod" label="cephalopod"/>
<link wikidata="Q228002" start="15292" end="15300" title="ammonite" label="ammonite"/>
<link wikidata="Q304358" start="15636" end="15648" title="Holometabola" label="Holometabola"/>
<link wikidata="Q141118" start="15743" end="15781" title="end-Permian mass extinction" label="Permian-Triassic mass extinction event"/>
<link wikidata="Q152" start="15787" end="15791" title="fish" label="fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q35409" start="15832" end="15840" title="family (biology)" label="families"/>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="15845" end="15851" title="genera" label="genera"/>
<link wikidata="Q215402" start="15865" end="15890" title="cosmopolitan distribution" label="cosmopolitan distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q59166" start="15892" end="15902" title="Coelacanth" label="Coelacanth"/>
<link wikidata="Q65955" start="15928" end="15936" title="Devonian" label="Devonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075885" start="15954" end="15968" title="Early Triassic" label="Early Triassic"/>
<link wikidata="Q127282" start="15970" end="15987" title="Actinopterygians" label="Ray-finned fishes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6808140" start="16220" end="16239" title="megabias" label="taphonomic megabias"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462809" start="16251" end="16261" title="stem-group" label="stem-group"/>
<link wikidata="Q204861" start="16262" end="16269" title="teleost" label="teleost"/>
<link wikidata="Q2267091" start="16395" end="16408" title="Saurichthys" label="saurichthyids"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027507" start="16413" end="16423" title="Birgeria" label="birgeriids"/>
<link wikidata="Q168422" start="16593" end="16601" title="lungfish" label="lungfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027599" start="16626" end="16635" title="Ceratodus (genus)" label="Ceratodus"/>
<link wikidata="Q139011" start="16722" end="16731" title="Hybodonts" label="Hybodonts"/>
<link wikidata="Q25371" start="16755" end="16773" title="cartilaginous fish" label="cartilaginous fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q75507" start="16886" end="16896" title="Palaeozoic" label="Palaeozoic"/>
<link wikidata="Q25803969" start="16897" end="16911" title="Eugeneodontida" label="Eugeneodontida"/>
<link wikidata="Q131447" start="16968" end="16980" title="Temnospondyli" label="Temnospondyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q10908" start="16981" end="16990" title="amphibian" label="amphibian"/>
<link wikidata="Q15122610" start="17279" end="17293" title="Tupilakosaurus" label="Tupilakosaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7708833" start="17307" end="17318" title="Thabanchuia" label="Thabanchuia"/>
<link wikidata="Q897687" start="17326" end="17342" title="Branchiosauridae" label="Branchiosauridae"/>
<link wikidata="Q6839869" start="17353" end="17364" title="Micropholis (amphibian)" label="Micropholis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3495411" start="17432" end="17446" title="Stereospondyli" label="Stereospondyli"/>
<link wikidata="Q134300" start="17542" end="17556" title="Mastodonsaurus" label="Mastodonsaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q145395" start="17606" end="17617" title="trematosaur" label="trematosaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q5035979" start="17681" end="17691" title="capitosaur" label="capitosaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q594924" start="17803" end="17815" title="Plagiosaurus" label="Plagiosaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6824275" start="17823" end="17833" title="metoposaur" label="metoposaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q134861" start="17848" end="17860" title="Lissamphibia" label="Lissamphibia"/>
<link wikidata="Q53636" start="17941" end="17945" title="frog" label="frog"/>
<link wikidata="Q45805" start="18048" end="18056" title="Jurassic" label="Jurassic"/>
<link wikidata="Q134683" start="18116" end="18130" title="Reptiliomorpha" label="Reptiliomorpha"/>
<link wikidata="Q136529" start="18247" end="18257" title="Embolomeri" label="Embolomeri"/>
<link wikidata="Q677349" start="18320" end="18333" title="Chroniosuchia" label="Chroniosuchia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7196847" start="18517" end="18534" title="pioneer organisms" label="surviving species"/>
<link wikidata="Q1775153" start="18623" end="18631" title="food-web" label="food-web"/>
<link wikidata="Q134676" start="18681" end="18696" title="Archosauromorpha" label="Archosauromorph"/>
<link wikidata="Q216818" start="18814" end="18832" title="adaptive radiation" label="adaptive radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q133072" start="19022" end="19034" title="Protorosauria" label="protorosaurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q6138746" start="19099" end="19113" title="Tanystropheidae" label="Tanystropheids"/>
<link wikidata="Q131782" start="19217" end="19230" title="Tanystropheus" label="Tanystropheus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6126907" start="19296" end="19313" title="Sharovipterygidae" label="Sharovipterygidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q131768" start="19390" end="19401" title="rhynchosaur" label="rhynchosaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q25095775" start="19407" end="19420" title="Allokotosauria" label="allokotosaurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q15041841" start="19909" end="19923" title="Trilophosaurus" label="Trilophosaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7701615" start="19995" end="20007" title="Teraterpeton" label="Teraterpeton"/>
<link wikidata="Q37740786" start="20060" end="20073" title="Shringasaurus" label="Shringasaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q282487" start="20170" end="20185" title="Archosauriformes" label="archosauriforms"/>
<link wikidata="Q133077" start="20445" end="20459" title="Erythrosuchidae" label="erythrosuchids"/>
<link wikidata="Q15632233" start="20518" end="20528" title="Phytosaurs" label="Phytosaurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q130910" start="20877" end="20886" title="archosaur" label="archosaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q133187" start="20949" end="20964" title="Avemetatarsalia" label="Avemetatarsalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2742285" start="20994" end="21006" title="Pseudosuchia" label="Pseudosuchia"/>
<link wikidata="Q179204" start="21139" end="21148" title="pterosaur" label="pterosaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q430" start="21154" end="21162" title="dinosaur" label="dinosaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q309392" start="21446" end="21457" title="Coelophysis" label="Coelophysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q133012" start="21490" end="21505" title="Sauropodomorpha" label="sauropodomorphs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3486846" start="21581" end="21585" title="Smok (archosaur)" label="Smok"/>
<link wikidata="Q131967" start="21803" end="21811" title="aetosaur" label="aetosaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069200" start="21839" end="21849" title="rauisuchia" label="rauisuchia"/>
<link wikidata="Q131863" start="21874" end="21889" title="crocodylomorphs" label="crocodylomorphs"/>
<link wikidata="Q132746" start="21897" end="21909" title="sphenosuchia" label="sphenosuchia"/>
<link wikidata="Q131967" start="21920" end="21929" title="Aetosaurs" label="Aetosaurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069200" start="22187" end="22197" title="rauisuchia" label="rauisuchia"/>
<link wikidata="Q10748156" start="22225" end="22244" title="Paracrocodylomorpha" label="paracrocodylomorphs"/>
<link wikidata="Q132819" start="22766" end="22779" title="Sauropterygia" label="Sauropterygia"/>
<link wikidata="Q134749" start="22796" end="22811" title="pachypleurosaur" label="pachypleurosaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569989" start="22817" end="22826" title="nothosaur" label="nothosaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q208136" start="22887" end="22893" title="Tethys Ocean" label="Tethys"/>
<link wikidata="Q132828" start="22903" end="22912" title="placodont" label="placodont"/>
<link wikidata="Q15642618" start="22967" end="22980" title="Atopodentatus" label="Atopodentatus"/>
<link wikidata="Q269195" start="23002" end="23012" title="plesiosaur" label="plesiosaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123322" start="23044" end="23058" title="Thalattosauria" label="Thalattosauria"/>
<link wikidata="Q602583" start="23066" end="23079" title="Askeptosaurus" label="Askeptosaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2583869" start="23113" end="23129" title="Ichthyopterygia" label="ichthyopterygian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075885" start="23150" end="23164" title="Early Triassic" label="Early Triassic"/>
<link wikidata="Q223044" start="23336" end="23342" title="turtle" label="turtle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193456" start="23356" end="23369" title="Proganochelys" label="Proganochelys"/>
<link wikidata="Q3407967" start="23386" end="23400" title="Proterochersis" label="Proterochersis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1080207" start="23428" end="23434" title="Norian" label="Norian"/>
<link wikidata="Q134665" start="23480" end="23497" title="Lepidosauromorpha" label="Lepidosauromorpha"/>
<link wikidata="Q15099738" start="23516" end="23528" title="Sphenodontia" label="Sphenodontia"/>
<link wikidata="Q133347" start="23669" end="23684" title="Procolophonidae" label="Procolophonidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1719140" start="23705" end="23717" title="Parareptilia" label="parareptiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q3494615" start="23780" end="23791" title="drepanosaur" label="drepanosaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q322241" start="23919" end="23928" title="therapsid" label="therapsid"/>
<link wikidata="Q131682" start="23964" end="23974" title="dicynodont" label="dicynodont"/>
<link wikidata="Q131804" start="23977" end="23990" title="therocephalia" label="therocephalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q131801" start="23998" end="24006" title="cynodont" label="cynodont"/>
<link wikidata="Q310938" start="24028" end="24039" title="Cynognathus" label="Cynognathus"/>
<link wikidata="Q914322" start="24087" end="24096" title="Olenekian" label="Olenekian"/>
<link wikidata="Q549024" start="24101" end="24108" title="Anisian" label="Anisian"/>
<link wikidata="Q80583" start="24112" end="24120" title="Gondwana" label="Gondwana"/>
<link wikidata="Q6364036" start="24127" end="24143" title="Kannemeyeriiformes" label="kannemeyeriiform"/>
<link wikidata="Q5581262" start="24160" end="24170" title="Gomphodontia" label="gomphodont"/>
<link wikidata="Q59099" start="24200" end="24209" title="herbivore" label="herbivore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093062" start="24291" end="24303" title="Moschorhinus" label="Moschorhinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4873580" start="24334" end="24342" title="Bauriidae" label="bauriids"/>
<link wikidata="Q14780744" start="24394" end="24404" title="Ecteniniidae" label="Ecteniniid"/>
<link wikidata="Q911899" start="24498" end="24505" title="Carnian" label="Carnian"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24582" end="24595" title="Evolution of mammals#From cynodonts to crown mammals" label="first mammals"/>
<link wikidata="Q785301" start="24782" end="24802" title="evolution of mammals" label="evolution of mammals"/>
<link wikidata="Q2082668" start="24849" end="24861" title="Mammaliaformes" label="mammaliaform"/>
<link wikidata="Q677088" start="24908" end="24919" title="insectivore" label="insectivore"/>
<link wikidata="Q24963002" start="24922" end="24936" title="Nocturnal bottleneck" label="Nocturnal life"/>
<link wikidata="Q623293" start="24999" end="25013" title="Basal metabolic rate" label="metabolic rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075885" start="25038" end="25052" title="Early Triassic" label="Early Triassic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2122699" start="25053" end="25065" title="lagerstätten" label="lagerstätten"/>
<link wikidata="Q855153" start="25098" end="25107" title="Dienerian" label="Dienerian"/>
<link wikidata="Q117039288" start="25113" end="25126" title="Guiyang biota" label="Guiyang biota"/>
<link wikidata="Q914322" start="25144" end="25152" title="Spathian" label="Spathian"/>
<link wikidata="Q123244056" start="25158" end="25169" title="Paris biota" label="Paris biota"/>
<link wikidata="Q47041" start="25222" end="25231" title="biodiversity" label="diversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q141118" start="25348" end="25380" title="Permian-Triassic mass extinction" label="Permian-Triassic mass extinction"/>
<link wikidata="Q16648" start="25393" end="25410" title="Monte San Giorgio" label="Monte San Giorgio"/>
<link wikidata="Q14418" start="25435" end="25446" title="Lake Lugano" label="Lake Lugano"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="25466" end="25471" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="25485" end="25496" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q929395" start="25505" end="25520" title="Middle Triassic" label="Middle Triassic"/>
<link wikidata="Q187223" start="25529" end="25535" title="lagoon" label="lagoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q568324" start="25557" end="25563" title="anoxic waters" label="anoxic"/>
<link wikidata="Q388368" start="25716" end="25735" title="Solnhofen Limestone" label="Solnhofen Limestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2122699" start="25736" end="25747" title="lagerstätte" label="lagerstätte"/>
<link wikidata="Q134749" start="25819" end="25834" title="pachypleurosaur" label="pachypleurosaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186209" start="25841" end="25855" title="Neusticosaurus" label="Neusticosaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q134676" start="25891" end="25906" title="archosauromorph" label="archosauromorph"/>
<link wikidata="Q131782" start="25913" end="25926" title="Tanystropheus" label="Tanystropheus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1878170" start="25980" end="25992" title="Ticinosuchus" label="Ticinosuchus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1525485" start="26009" end="26020" title="Macrocnemus" label="Macrocnemus"/>
<link wikidata="Q549024" start="26100" end="26107" title="Anisian" label="Anisian"/>
<link wikidata="Q726791" start="26112" end="26120" title="Ladinian" label="Ladinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q43521" start="26121" end="26125" title="age (geology)" label="ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q577" start="26137" end="26139" title="megaannum" label="Ma"/>
<link wikidata="Q586245" start="26285" end="26293" title="conodont" label="conodont"/>
<link wikidata="Q194515" start="26346" end="26357" title="ichthyosaur" label="ichthyosaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q269195" start="26363" end="26373" title="plesiosaur" label="plesiosaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q178272" start="26395" end="26405" title="brachiopod" label="brachiopod"/>
<link wikidata="Q25326" start="26411" end="26418" title="mollusc" label="mollusc"/>
<link wikidata="Q4867740" start="26429" end="26438" title="gastropod" label="gastropod"/>
<link wikidata="Q131341" start="26687" end="26699" title="Crurotarsi" label="crurotarsans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423451" start="26764" end="26773" title="Thecodontia" label="thecodont"/>
<link wikidata="Q8072" start="27194" end="27202" title="volcano" label="volcanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3408476" start="27344" end="27378" title="Central Atlantic Magmatic Province" label="Central Atlantic Magmatic Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q317167" start="27582" end="27588" title="bolide" label="bolide"/>
<link wikidata="Q756106" start="27635" end="27656" title="Manicouagan Reservoir" label="Manicouagan Reservoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="27660" end="27666" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="27668" end="27674" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q305949" start="28487" end="28503" title="Petrified Forest National Park" label="Petrified Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q15632233" start="28677" end="28686" title="Phytosaur" label="Phytosaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q131967" start="28821" end="28829" title="aetosaur" label="aetosaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q322241" start="29213" end="29222" title="therapsid" label="therapsid"/>
<link wikidata="Q6364036" start="29228" end="29241" title="Kannemeyeriidae" label="kannemeyeriid"/>
<link wikidata="Q972010" start="29262" end="29274" title="Traversodontidae" label="traversodont"/>
<link wikidata="Q132033" start="29336" end="29344" title="Laurasia" label="Laurasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q43521" start="29731" end="29750" title="Geologic time scale" label="Geologic time scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1828615" start="29752" end="29772" title="List of fossil sites" label="List of fossil sites"/>
<link wikidata="Q115519766" start="29809" end="29845" title="Triassic land vertebrate faunachrons" label="Triassic land vertebrate faunachrons"/>
<link wikidata="Q3901733" start="29847" end="29861" title="Phylloceratina" label="Phylloceratina"/>
<link wikidata="Q430" start="29863" end="29871" title="Dinosaur" label="Dinosaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q2583811" start="29900" end="29916" title="Cesare Emiliani" label="Emiliani, Cesare"/>
<link wikidata="Q912887" start="30642" end="30668" title="Cambridge University Press" label="Cambridge University Press"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="29990" wikidata="Q7809814" url="?curid=29990" title="Titanic Thompson">
<text>Alvin Clarence Thomas (November 30, 1893 – May 19, 1974) was an American gambler, golfer, and hustler, who killed five men but was never charged with a crime, better known as Titanic Thompson.

Thompson traveled the country wagering at cards, dice games, golf, shooting, billiards, horseshoes and proposition bets of his own devising. As an ambidextrous golfer, card player, marksman and pool shark, his skills and reputation were compared to &quot;Merlin himself&quot;. Writer Damon Runyon allegedly based the character Sky Masterson, the gambler-hero of &quot;The Idyll of Miss Sarah Brown&quot; (on which the musical &quot;Guys and Dolls&quot; is based), on Thompson. In 1928, Thompson was involved in a high-stakes poker game that led to the shooting death of New York City crime boss Arnold Rothstein, then called the &quot;crime of the century&quot;. The following year he testified in the trial of George McManus, who was charged with Rothstein&#x27;s murder, but later acquitted.

==Early life==
Thomas was born in Monett, Missouri, but was raised mainly on a farm 50 miles to the south, near Rogers, Arkansas, in the Ozark Mountains. His mother remarried following desertion by Thomas&#x27; father, who was himself a gambler. Thomas began conducting his nomadic, lucrative career of hustling in the rural south-central United States &quot;circa&quot; 1908, leaving home at age 16 with less than one dollar in his pocket. Unable to read or write effectively, he had attended school only sporadically, and felt unwelcome in the home of his stepfather. Thomas spent most of his youth developing skills he would use later, such as shooting and understanding odds at card games through marathon dealing of hands.

== Trapshooting career ==
As a young boy, Thomas was known by his Uncles for his precise shooting. Allegedly, they had seen him down birds with a shot between the eyes from fifty yards away. These skills would land him work with Captain Adam Henry Bogardus in his &quot;Miracle Medicine Show&quot;. During the show, Thomas would entertain onlookers by shooting pie tins, cabbages, and by tricking viewers into thinking he shot a silver dollar out of the air. In 1951, many years after his &quot;Miracle Medicine Show&quot; days, Thomas showed off his still-sharp shooting skills by winning the Arizona State Trapshooting Championship four years in a row from 1951-1954.

==Military service==
Thomas was drafted in early 1918, several months after the United States entered World War I. Following basic training, where he excelled, he was promoted to the rank of sergeant. Thomas remained stateside, trained younger draftees, and did not see overseas service or combat before the war ended in November 1918, when he was discharged. Thomas also taught gambling skills to many of his trainees, and then proceeded to win substantial money from them. He ended the war with more than $50,000 in cash, and used much of this money to buy his mother a house in Monett, Missouri, his birthplace.

==Gambling style and favorite bets==
Later, when Thompson had honed his skills, he became a &quot;road gambler&quot;, a traveling hustler who became an underground legend by winning at all manner of propositions, many of them tricky if not outright fraudulent. Among his favorites were: betting he could throw a walnut over a building (he had weighted the hollowed shell with lead beforehand), throwing a large room key into its lock, and moving a road mileage sign before betting that the listed distance to the town was in error. Thompson once bet that he could drive a golf ball 500 yards, using a hickory-shafted club, at a time when an expert player&#x27;s drive was just over 200 yards. He won by waiting until winter and driving the ball onto a frozen lake, where it bounced past the required distance on the ice.

Thompson&#x27;s partners in &quot;the hustling game&quot; included pool player Minnesota Fats, who considered Titanic a genius, &quot;the greatest action man of all time&quot;.

Thompson&#x27;s one weakness, as he admitted, was betting on horse racing, where he lost millions of dollars during his life in failed bets.

==Expert golfer==
Gifted with extraordinary eyesight and hand–eye coordination, he was a skilled athlete, crack shot and a golfer good enough to turn professional. Raised in a poor environment far from exclusive golf courses, Thomas did not take up golf seriously until he was in his early thirties, but he improved very quickly during an extended stint in San Francisco, where he took lessons from club professionals and honed his skills. From then on he played several times per week for the next 20 years. In an era when the top pro golfers would be fortunate to make $30,000 a year, Thomas (who, after a misprint in a New York newspaper, let people think his name was Thompson) could make that much in a week hustling rich country club players. Asked whether he would ever turn professional, he replied, &quot;I could not afford the cut in pay&quot;. Hall of Fame golfer Ben Hogan, who traveled with him in the early 1930s for money games, later called Titanic the best shotmaker he ever saw. &quot;He can play right- or left-handed, you can&#x27;t beat him&quot;, said Hogan. One hustle of his was to beat a golfer playing right-handed, and then offer double or nothing to play the course again left-handed as an apparent concession. One thing his opponent usually did not know was that Thomas was naturally left-handed. Thomas&#x27; genius was in figuring out the odds on almost any proposition and heavily betting that way. He also had to perform under pressure, and most often did.

As he aged, Thompson liked to pick promising young players as his golf partners. Several of these who went on to later PGA Tour stardom included young and unknown Ben Hogan, Ky Laffoon, Herman Keiser and Lee Elder. Other well-known golfers who left behind first-hand documented accounts of their dealings and matches with Thompson included Harvey Penick, Paul Runyan, Byron Nelson and Sam Snead, all of whom were inducted into the World Golf Hall of Fame.

==Marriages and family==
Married five times, Thompson fathered three children, all boys, with three different wives. He was also romantically linked with many women. Among his alleged trysts were actresses Myrna Loy and Jean Harlow. He typically married a young woman, lived with her for a few months, then returned to his road hustling, while leaving comfortable housing and financial support for his newly divorced wife.

==Killings==
Thompson killed five men. The first was in 1910, in rural Arkansas, when a man named Jim Johnson accused him of cheating at dice and threw him off the boat on which they were traveling (and which Thompson had recently won when gambling with its previous owner, a friend of Johnson&#x27;s). When Thompson climbed back on board, Johnson drew a knife and threatened Thompson&#x27;s girlfriend, who was also on board. Thompson seized a hammer and struck Johnson several times on the head before throwing him overboard. The unconscious Johnson drowned. Thompson showed no remorse, stating it was Johnson&#x27;s fault for not being able to swim. The sheriff gave Thompson the choice of standing trial, or handing over the deed to the boat and leaving town; he chose the latter.

The other four men Thompson killed were shot in self-defense when they tried to rob him of gambling winnings. Two were killed in one incident in St. Louis in 1919 (the local police chief thanked him for killing two wanted bank robbers). The third came in St. Joseph, where Thompson and his hired bodyguard between them shot two men attempting to rob a poker game (again, the victims were known criminals and no charges were pressed). Thompson&#x27;s last killing came near a country club in Texas in 1932 when he shot a masked figure who was holding him at gunpoint. This turned out to be sixteen-year-old Jimmy Frederick, who had caddied for Thompson earlier that day in a winning match. The dying Frederick confirmed to witnesses that he had been trying to rob Thompson.

==Arnold Rothstein case==
On November 4, 1928, Arnold Rothstein was murdered, allegedly because he refused to pay his debts from a poker game, held the previous month, which he believed to have been fixed. This game had been organized by George McManus, who stood trial for the murder the next year, in a proceeding heavily covered by the media. McManus was eventually acquitted due to lack of evidence, and no one else was ever tried for Rothstein&#x27;s death. Thompson had been present at the game, and an active participant in it; and it was he who, in association with one Nate Raymond, allegedly fixed the game, leaving Rothstein with total debts estimated at $500,000. Thompson, who was not present at the shooting, gave evidence at McManus&#x27;s trial, without revealing his own role in the poker game. Rothstein had stood to recoup his losses by successful heavy bets on the 1928 elections of Herbert Hoover (new president) and Franklin Delano Roosevelt (new governor of New York), which did take place, shortly after Rothstein&#x27;s death. Thompson later told close friends that he knew the real killer had been Rothstein&#x27;s bodyguard.

==Origin of the nickname==
In his own story, published in &quot;Sports Illustrated&quot; in 1972, Alvin Thomas, listed as a co-author, said:

Minnesota Fats, real name Rudolf Wanderone, said in an interview with the &quot;Los Angeles Times&quot; that &quot;Titanic got his nickname when he went down with the Titanic in 1912. He put on ladies&#x27; clothes to save himself. Got off the boat first.&quot;

==Trevino vs. Floyd match==
In the 1960s, Thompson settled in Dallas and, although approaching 70 years of age, kept up a good standard of golf, and frequently hustled games at Tenison Park, a municipal golf course, and at posh Glen Lakes Country Club. Mid-decade, Thompson sponsored a young Raymond Floyd, then early in his PGA Tour career but already a winner, in a big-money stakes match against Lee Trevino, then an unknown assistant pro, in El Paso, at Trevino&#x27;s home course. After three days of play, honors and bets were equal, with both players well under par each round. Trevino gained confidence from the match, and within a few years became a Tour star himself, while Floyd&#x27;s career also ascended.

==Later years==
Thompson participated in the first World Series of Poker in Las Vegas, Nevada, in 1970. He lived out his final years in a nursing home near Dallas. Thompson had made gambling trips with eldest son Tommy for many years, but after his father died, Tommy, who also had become a skilled, successful gambler, gave up gambling for a church ministry and later counseled prisoners, preaching to convince others to stay away from gambling.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7809814" start="0" end="21" title="Titanic Thompson" label="Alvin Clarence Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q11416" start="73" end="80" title="gambler" label="gambler"/>
<link wikidata="Q5377" start="82" end="86" title="golf" label="golf"/>
<link wikidata="Q7023752" start="94" end="101" title="Con man" label="hustler"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809814" start="175" end="191" title="Titanic Thompson" label="Titanic Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3341285" start="271" end="280" title="billiards" label="billiards"/>
<link wikidata="Q2746282" start="282" end="292" title="Horseshoes (game)" label="horseshoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7250414" start="297" end="312" title="proposition bet" label="proposition bet"/>
<link wikidata="Q457332" start="341" end="353" title="ambidextrous" label="ambidextrous"/>
<link wikidata="Q188044" start="449" end="455" title="Merlin" label="Merlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q714880" start="478" end="490" title="Damon Runyon" label="Damon Runyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7741385" start="562" end="591" title="The Idyll of Miss Sarah Brown" label="The Idyll of Miss Sarah Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q796988" start="626" end="640" title="Guys and Dolls" label="Guys and Dolls"/>
<link wikidata="Q80131" start="719" end="724" title="poker" label="poker"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="764" end="777" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q696052" start="789" end="805" title="Arnold Rothstein" label="Arnold Rothstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q968021" start="1023" end="1039" title="Monett, Missouri" label="Monett, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q79497" start="1101" end="1117" title="Rogers, Arkansas" label="Rogers, Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321468" start="1126" end="1141" title="Ozark Mountains" label="Ozark Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q3489425" start="2326" end="2338" title="Trapshooting" label="Trapshooting"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="2491" end="2502" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q157696" start="2580" end="2588" title="sergeant" label="sergeant"/>
<link wikidata="Q7377353" start="3906" end="3920" title="Rudolf Wanderone" label="Minnesota Fats"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="4504" end="4517" title="San Francisco" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q365626" start="5022" end="5031" title="Ben Hogan" label="Ben Hogan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2421902" start="5275" end="5287" title="right-handed" label="right-handed"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300078" start="5304" end="5321" title="double or nothing" label="double or nothing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2421902" start="5347" end="5358" title="left-handed" label="left-handed"/>
<link wikidata="Q7250414" start="5536" end="5547" title="proposition bet" label="proposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q910409" start="5757" end="5765" title="PGA Tour" label="PGA Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q6450599" start="5812" end="5822" title="Ky Laffoon" label="Ky Laffoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5739933" start="5824" end="5837" title="Herman Keiser" label="Herman Keiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q6513528" start="5842" end="5851" title="Lee Elder" label="Lee Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587921" start="5978" end="5991" title="Harvey Penick" label="Harvey Penick"/>
<link wikidata="Q6083829" start="5993" end="6004" title="Paul Runyan" label="Paul Runyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q725776" start="6006" end="6018" title="Byron Nelson" label="Byron Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q945056" start="6023" end="6032" title="Sam Snead" label="Sam Snead"/>
<link wikidata="Q258851" start="6069" end="6092" title="World Golf Hall of Fame" label="World Golf Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q105941" start="6301" end="6310" title="Myrna Loy" label="Myrna Loy"/>
<link wikidata="Q105719" start="6315" end="6326" title="Jean Harlow" label="Jean Harlow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1612" start="6590" end="6598" title="Arkansas" label="Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q578478" start="7176" end="7183" title="sheriff" label="sheriff"/>
<link wikidata="Q38022" start="7450" end="7459" title="St. Louis" label="St. Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q745120" start="7560" end="7570" title="St. Joseph, Missouri" label="St. Joseph"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="7796" end="7801" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q696052" start="8126" end="8142" title="Arnold Rothstein" label="Arnold Rothstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q35236" start="8982" end="8996" title="Herbert Hoover" label="Herbert Hoover"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="9017" end="9042" title="Franklin Delano Roosevelt" label="Franklin Delano Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q275837" start="9296" end="9314" title="Sports Illustrated" label="Sports Illustrated"/>
<link wikidata="Q7377353" start="9400" end="9416" title="Rudolf Wanderone" label="Rudolf Wanderone"/>
<link wikidata="Q16557" start="9699" end="9705" title="Dallas" label="Dallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1388888" start="9929" end="9942" title="Raymond Floyd" label="Raymond Floyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q910409" start="9962" end="9970" title="PGA Tour" label="PGA Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q950128" start="10036" end="10047" title="Lee Trevino" label="Lee Trevino"/>
<link wikidata="Q16562" start="10083" end="10090" title="El Paso" label="El Paso"/>
<link wikidata="Q819961" start="10408" end="10429" title="World Series of Poker" label="World Series of Poker"/>
<link wikidata="Q23768" start="10433" end="10450" title="Las Vegas, Nevada" label="Las Vegas, Nevada"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="29991" wikidata="Q353231" url="?curid=29991" title="The Shockwave Rider">
<text>The Shockwave Rider is a science fiction novel by John Brunner, originally published in 1975. It is notable for its hero&#x27;s use of computer hacking skills to escape pursuit in a dystopian future, and for the coining of the word &quot;worm&quot; to describe a program that propagates itself through a computer network. It also introduces the concept of a &quot;Delphi pool&quot;, perhaps derived from the RAND Corporation&#x27;s Delphi method – a prediction market on world events which bears close resemblance to DARPA&#x27;s controversial and cancelled Policy Analysis Market.

==Origin of the title==
The title derives from the futurist work &quot;Future Shock&quot; by Alvin Toffler. The hero is a survivor in a hypothetical world of quickly changing identities, fashions, and lifestyles, where individuals are still controlled and oppressed by a powerful and secretive state apparatus. His highly developed computer skills enable him to use any public telephone to punch in a new identity, thus reinventing himself, within hours. As a fugitive, he must do this from time to time to avoid capture. The title is also a metaphor for survival in an uncertain world.

==Plot introduction==
The novel shows a dystopian early 21st-century America dominated by computer networks. The hero, Nick Haflinger, is a runaway from Tarnover, a government program intended to find, educate and indoctrinate highly gifted children to further the interests of the state in a future where quantitative analysis backed by the tacit threat of coercion has replaced overt military and economic power as the deciding factor in international competition. In parallel with this, the government has become a oligarchy that is effectively an offshoot of organised crime.

Nick&#x27;s talent extends to programming the network using only a touch-tone telephone. One of his handlers at Tarnover explains that this is like a classical pianist being able to play entire sonatas and concertos from memory. However, Nick also has some personality flaws, amounting almost to a deathwish. These become manifest in exhibitions of his abilities, revealing his identity to his pursuers.

The background to the story includes a massive earthquake laying waste to the San Francisco Bay Area in California. Millions die and millions more are left to live on government handouts. The subsequent economic depression, coupled with the rootlessness enabled by access to online data and strong social pressure to be flexible (the results of corporations wanting highly mobile workforces without strong local ties), results in a fragmentation of society along religious, ethnic, and a variety of class markers, what Toffler called &quot;subcults&quot;, including what would in 2010 be described as gangs. The equitable distribution of data access and data privacy is a prominent theme in the book; characters who have access to information which is nominally secret enjoy demonstrable economic advantages over others lacking access to such data. In the novel, data privacy is reserved for corporations and powerful individuals, who may then conceal wrongdoing; by contrast, normal citizens do not enjoy significant privacy.

The world described in the book is dystopian, with laissez-faire economics portrayed as leading to disaster as greed trumps long-term planning. The educational system is dysfunctional, with teachers unable to perform their jobs due to strictures. The only functional educational system seen in the book is portrayed as an enclave, the tightly controlled Tarnover school. Communities are either walled enclaves of privilege or largely lawless areas entirely lacking protection from corrupt civil authorities. Infrastructure has been allowed to crumble, and characters who reside within &quot;paid avoidance zones&quot; receive compensation from the government in lieu of actual services.

==Plot summary==
The novel is set in the weeks following Nick&#x27;s recapture after several years on the run, alternating between moral arguments with his interrogator, who is trying to discover why the program&#x27;s star pupil had absconded, and flashbacks of his career. The interrogator is Paul Freeman, a graduate of another secret installation known as Electric Skillet, which focuses on weapons and defence strategy.

Although he had initially felt at home at Tarnover, Nick eventually becomes aware of experiments in genetic engineering being performed there. These produce monstrous deformed children who are disposed of when they are no longer needed for study. At this point Nick becomes determined to escape. He studies data processing, steals a personal ID code intended for privileged individuals who wish to live their lives without surveillance, and goes on the run. He uses the stolen 4GH computer access code to cover his data trails and create new identities for himself, easily adopting entire new personas. One is the pastor of a popular church, another is a successful computer consultant.

In this last role, calling himself Sandy Locke, he becomes the lover of Ina Grierson, a top executive at Ground to Space Industries, a powerful &quot;hypercorp&quot; known to all as G2S. Intending to use the computer facilities at G2S to ensure that his stolen code is still valid, he signs on as a &quot;systems rationalizer&quot; with the company. This brings him into contact with Ina&#x27;s daughter, Kate, who attracts him despite her plain appearance and simple lifestyle. At the age of 22, Nick&#x27;s age when he left Tarnover, Kate is a perpetual student at the University of Missouri–Kansas City. She is perceptive enough to penetrate Nick&#x27;s adopted persona, deeply disturbing him even though she fascinates him. He visits her at home, helping her to clean out some of her possessions, and meeting her tame cougar, Bagheera – the product of her late father&#x27;s genetic research into intelligence. He died shortly after abandoning the research because the government was using it to produce animals for military uses.

The 21st-century lifestyle produces a symptom called &quot;overload&quot; in many people, and most, including Nick, take tranquilizers to some degree. However Nick collapses completely when told that a representative from Tarnover is coming to his promotional interview at G2S. He returns to Kate and confesses that he is not what he seems, asking for her help. She conducts him to one of the &quot;paid avoidance areas&quot; in California, where people are paid to do without the full panoply of modern technology, as an alternative to spending billions to rebuild infrastructure after the earthquake. After Nick risks exposure yet again in one of these places, they move to the least known one, a town called Precipice.

Precipice turns out to be a Utopian community of a few thousand people. The nearest comparison would be an agrarian, cottage industry community designed by William Morris. Precipice is also the home of Hearing Aid, an anonymous telephone confession service accessible to anyone in the country. Hearing Aid is also known as the &quot;Ten Nines&quot;, after the phone number used to call it: 999-999-9999. People call the service, a human operator answers, and they simply talk while the operator listens. Some rant, others seek sympathy, still others commit suicide while on the phone. Hearing Aid&#x27;s promise is that nobody else, not even the government, will hear the call. The only response Hearing Aid gives to a caller is &quot;Only I heard that, I hope it helped.&quot;

Nick and Kate settle into the community. The inhabitants include intelligent dogs that escaped from the projects that Kate&#x27;s father worked on. These act as companions, guards, nannies, and even lie detectors, using their sense of smell. Nick rewrites the &quot;computer tapeworm&quot; that prevents the calls to Hearing Aid being monitored. While at G2S he became aware of massive backups of data being performed, clearly in anticipation of a major network outage. The Hearing Aid worm is designed to scramble network traffic if attacked, but Nick realises that it could be destroyed if the authorities were prepared for the effects and ready to recover from them. His new worm, which he calls a &quot;phage&quot;, cannot be removed without dismantling the entire network.

Possibly encouraged by the government, local gangs and tribes raid Precipice, burning down Nick and Kate&#x27;s house before being overwhelmed by the dogs. Nick, suffering another overload, blames Kate for the incident, since she, following Hearing Aid policy, cut off a call from someone attempting to warn Precipice. He hits her, and then, filled with remorse, leaves the town. He finally reveals his location to the authorities when, encountering one of the &quot;Roman circus&quot; operations which broadcast live fights and other bloody exhibitions to the country, he responds to an &quot;all comers&quot; challenge by the father of the leader of one of the gangs, and cripples him in front of a nationwide audience.

At Tarnover, Paul Freeman takes charge of the interrogation. He was the representative whom Nick, as Sandy Locke, was supposed to meet at G2S. Freeman, a tall gaunt African-American, gradually comes to realise that he has more sympathy with Nick&#x27;s views than his employer&#x27;s, and eventually absconds himself, giving Nick computer access so that Nick can make his own escape. The precipitating event in this case is Kate&#x27;s abduction by government agents, who bring her to Tarnover for further questioning and to threaten Nick.

With the code he gets from Freeman, he sets up an identity as an Army major, with Kate as his prisoner. Once clear of Tarnover, they disappear together. This time around, Nick has another plan, and rather than running and hiding, he and Kate spend a number of months travelling the country, aided by an &quot;invisible college&quot; of academics who are allies or former residents of Precipice. He creates a new &quot;worm&quot; which is designed to destroy all secrecy. (Brunner invented the term &quot;worm&quot; for this program, as a self-replicating program that propagates across a computer network – the word was later adopted by computer researchers as the name for this type of program.)

The worm is eventually activated, and the details of all the government&#x27;s dark secrets (clandestine genetic experimentation that produces crippled children, bribes and kickbacks from corporations, concealed crimes of high public officials) now become accessible from anywhere on the network – in fact, those most affected by a particular crime of a government official are emailed the full details. In place of the old system, Nick has designed the worm to enforce a kind of utilitarian socialism, with people&#x27;s worth being defined by their roles in society, not their connections in high places. In effect, the network becomes the entire government and financial system, policing income for illegal money, freezing the accounts of criminals, while making sure money (or credit) flows to places where people are in need. This will only happen fully if the results of a plebiscite, again conducted over the network, allow it.

In a final atavistic attempt at revenge, the government orders a nuclear strike by a single aircraft from a local Air Force base. Warned by Hearing Aid, Nick is able to penetrate the military computers and manufacture a counter-order to stop the plane just before it reaches the town. The book ends optimistically, with there being no more privileged hiding of information, no more secret conspiracies of the rich and powerful.

==Characters ==
*Nick Haflinger is a wanderer, a man without a place to call his own, or a people he can identify with. His parents ceased to care for him at an early age, and he became a &quot;rent-a-kid&quot;, living with a succession of mobile couples who had no time to settle down and start families of their own. Only when he was noticed by a schoolteacher, and subsequently recruited for Tarnover, did he find a group of people with whom he could identify.
*Kate Lilleberg is the daughter of a high-powered executive mother and a genius scientist father. She seems content to be a perpetual student, however, until she meets Nick, seeing in him a real person under the false &quot;persona&quot;. Unlike her friends, she is capable of deep commitment, as exemplified by her fulfilling her promise to her dead father, and caring for the cougar, Bagheera, bred by her father for his researches. Her chosen life has one feature her mother cannot appreciate: it allows her to remain in one place.
*Paul T. Freeman has spent his 39 years studying, learning, and believing in the objectives of Tarnover and Electric Skillet. Nick&#x27;s plan is to lead him to areas where his high intelligence will question his perceptions and beliefs, resulting in the inevitable turning away from the power elite he serves.
*Ralph C. Hartz is the deputy director of the Bureau of Data Processing, and the man to whom Paul Freeman reports his progress on interrogating Nick. However he himself serves entrenched interests in Washington D.C. When Nick, with Paul&#x27;s help, escapes with even more powerful codes than before, he is ruthlessly cast aside, not least because his superiors refuse to accept that the new codes must be disabled so soon after replacing the old ones.
*Ina Grierson, Kate&#x27;s mother, lives in world of personal power but is as prone to paranoia as the lowest of her underlings. Good looking at the age of forty-something, she clings to her youthfulness, partly by taking younger lovers. The stress of living in a connected world is partly defused by luxury vacations, on one of which she meets &quot;Sandy Locke&quot;. Later, after Kate is abducted she is jolted out of her complacency, and with the aid of software written by &quot;Sandy&quot; she is able to penetrate the government smokescreen.

==Reception==
Spider Robinson gave the novel a mixed review, saying that while &quot;the book reads well ..., [i]ndividual sections are often brilliant, [and] the message is incisive and timely&quot;, that &quot;as a story it limps&quot; and that many characters, including the main antagonists, &quot;are cut from cardboard&quot;. &quot;The New York Times&quot; reviewer Gerald Jonas was even more critical, saying that while Brunner was attempting to write &quot;slice-of-life&quot; fiction about a future society, the result of his arbitrary choices about social details is that &quot;the entire fictional edifice collapses like a house of cards.&quot;

==Themes==
The novel was written shortly after two pivotal events of the 1970s, the resignation of Richard Nixon and the overthrow of the Chilean President Salvador Allende, which are cited in the novel as examples, in Nixon&#x27;s case, of a failed attempt by organised crime to suborn the Presidency, and in the second, of the consequences of working against multinational commercial interests.

Most of the characters live with the feeling that their lives could be turned upside down in an instant because of someone breaking into the data held on the network. They also believe that the network knows more about them than they do about themselves. This is an extension of the sense of paranoia felt by many people in the 1970s, believing themselves to be powerless in the face of political and economic forces over which they had no control.

Perception is a recurrent theme in the novel. In particular, Brunner is concerned with perceptual patterns and how they can both help and mislead. Nick projects patterns of behaviour to assume his personas, but Kate has &quot;natural wisdom&quot; which means that she ignores surface patterns to perceive the truth beneath. When they arrive in Precipice, the couple have to abandon their normal &quot;urban pattern&quot; to see the ways in which the town&#x27;s unique design merges public and private space, along with natural and artificial structures.

The theme of patterns in perception runs through the entire novel. Future shock arises when reality and change disrupt patterns. People respond by falling into strong patterns within human nature, particularly tribalism.

Others try to convince themselves that all change is good, adopting the &quot;plug-in&quot; lifestyle where they feel able to relocate to another city and insert themselves into a new social niche with a minimum of inconvenience. Their mobility is, however, a reflection of the failure of the lifestyle to satisfy them, resulting in more moves.

In this world of confusion are also companies specialising in psychological intervention. One such is Anti-Trauma Inc. which is hired to &quot;normalise&quot; children in a process akin to deprogramming, the (often violent) attempt to force people to renounce their association with groups perceived as cults. Anti-Trauma does significant harm to its charges, although as so often happens in Brunner&#x27;s interconnected society, it also spends much money and time covering up its failures.

===The worm===
Brunner&#x27;s concept of the computer worm was inspired by analogy with the tapeworm, a digestive parasite. A biological tapeworm consists of a head attached to a long train of reproductive segments, each of which can produce more worms when detached. Brunner&#x27;s &quot;data-net tapeworm&quot; consists of a head followed by other segments, each being some kind of code which has effects on databases and other systems. Several are unleashed in the book. Besides the two Hearing Aid tapeworms, and Nick&#x27;s ultimate tapeworm, there is a &quot;denunciation tapeworm&quot; created as revenge by a representative of Anti-Trauma Inc. whom Nick insults and curses. At the time, Nick was playing the role of a priest in a revivalist church. The worm&#x27;s intent was to destroy the church by cancelling all its utility services. Nick in turn sends another worm into the network to destroy that one.

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q378807" start="50" end="62" title="John Brunner (novelist)" label="John Brunner"/>
<link wikidata="Q180774" start="182" end="190" title="dystopia" label="dystopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q344" start="192" end="198" title="future" label="future"/>
<link wikidata="Q180712" start="238" end="242" title="computer worm" label="worm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1301371" start="304" end="320" title="computer network" label="computer network"/>
<link wikidata="Q861141" start="408" end="424" title="RAND Corporation" label="RAND Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q841602" start="432" end="445" title="Delphi method" label="Delphi method"/>
<link wikidata="Q282283" start="450" end="467" title="prediction market" label="prediction market"/>
<link wikidata="Q207361" start="517" end="522" title="DARPA" label="DARPA"/>
<link wikidata="Q3289870" start="558" end="580" title="Policy Analysis Market" label="Policy Analysis Market"/>
<link wikidata="Q846430" start="634" end="642" title="futurist" label="futurist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916554" start="654" end="666" title="Future Shock" label="Future Shock"/>
<link wikidata="Q297425" start="676" end="689" title="Alvin Toffler" label="Alvin Toffler"/>
<link wikidata="Q180774" start="1211" end="1219" title="dystopia" label="dystopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q79751" start="1689" end="1698" title="oligarchy" label="oligarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q46952" start="1734" end="1749" title="organised crime" label="organised crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q941685" start="1819" end="1829" title="Dual-tone multi-frequency" label="touch-tone"/>
<link wikidata="Q131269" start="1946" end="1952" title="sonata" label="sonata"/>
<link wikidata="Q10737" start="2050" end="2059" title="Suicide" label="deathwish"/>
<link wikidata="Q213205" start="2235" end="2257" title="San Francisco Bay Area" label="San Francisco Bay Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q264965" start="2697" end="2704" title="Subculture" label="subcult"/>
<link wikidata="Q275186" start="2758" end="2762" title="gang" label="gang"/>
<link wikidata="Q456632" start="3020" end="3032" title="data privacy" label="data privacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q167037" start="3049" end="3061" title="Corporation" label="corporations"/>
<link wikidata="Q171990" start="3236" end="3249" title="laissez-faire" label="laissez-faire"/>
<link wikidata="Q159236" start="4399" end="4418" title="genetic engineering" label="genetic engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q287505" start="5533" end="5550" title="perpetual student" label="perpetual student"/>
<link wikidata="Q940690" start="5558" end="5592" title="University of Missouri–Kansas City" label="University of Missouri–Kansas City"/>
<link wikidata="Q35255" start="5809" end="5815" title="cougar" label="cougar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130191" start="6082" end="6090" title="information overload" label="overload"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543799" start="6863" end="6879" title="cottage industry" label="cottage industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q182589" start="6902" end="6916" title="William Morris" label="William Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q482999" start="8771" end="8783" title="Gladiator" label="Roman circus"/>
<link wikidata="Q180712" start="10184" end="10201" title="Computer worm" label="was later adopted"/>
<link wikidata="Q43109" start="11145" end="11155" title="plebiscite" label="plebiscite"/>
<link wikidata="Q201424" start="11267" end="11281" title="Nuclear warfare" label="nuclear strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q1443070" start="13958" end="13973" title="Spider Robinson" label="Spider Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="14282" end="14300" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q9588" start="14700" end="14713" title="Richard Nixon" label="Richard Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q440" start="14757" end="14773" title="Salvador Allende" label="Salvador Allende"/>
<link wikidata="Q46952" start="14862" end="14877" title="organised crime" label="organised crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q2996418" start="16762" end="16775" title="deprogramming" label="deprogramming"/>
<link wikidata="Q11038979" start="16876" end="16880" title="cult" label="cult"/>
<link wikidata="Q180712" start="17111" end="17124" title="computer worm" label="computer worm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280912" start="17158" end="17166" title="tapeworm" label="tapeworm"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="29992" wikidata="Q256" url="?curid=29992" title="Turkish language">
<text>Turkish ( , ; also known as &#x27;Turkish of Turkey&#x27;) is the most widely spoken of the Turkic languages, with around 90 million speakers. It is the national language of Turkey and one of two official languages of Cyprus. Significant smaller groups of Turkish speakers also exist in Germany, Austria, Bulgaria, North Macedonia, Greece, other parts of Europe, the South Caucasus, and some parts of Central Asia, Iraq, and Syria. Turkish is the 18th most spoken language in the world.

To the west, the influence of Ottoman Turkish—the variety of the Turkish language that was used as the administrative and literary language of the Ottoman Empire—spread as the Ottoman Empire expanded. In 1928, as one of Atatürk&#x27;s reforms in the early years of the Republic of Turkey, the Perso-Arabic script-based Ottoman Turkish alphabet was replaced with the Latin script-based Turkish alphabet.

Some distinctive characteristics of the Turkish language are vowel harmony and extensive agglutination. The basic word order of Turkish is subject–object–verb. Turkish has no noun classes or grammatical gender. The language makes usage of honorifics and has a strong T–V distinction which distinguishes varying levels of politeness, social distance, age, courtesy or familiarity toward the addressee. The plural second-person pronoun and verb forms are used referring to a single person out of respect.

== Classification ==
Turkish is a member of the Oghuz group of the Turkic family. Other members include Azerbaijani, spoken in Azerbaijan and north-west Iran, Gagauz of Gagauzia, Qashqai of south Iran and the Turkmen of Turkmenistan.

Historically the Turkic family was seen as a branch of the larger Altaic family, including Japanese, Korean, Mongolian and Tungusic, with various other language families proposed for inclusion by linguists.

Altaic theory has fallen out of favour since the 1960s, and a majority of linguists now consider Turkic languages to be unrelated to any other language family, though the Altaic hypothesis still has a small degree of support from individual linguists. The nineteenth-century Ural-Altaic theory, which grouped Turkish with Finnish, Hungarian and Altaic languages, is considered even less plausible in light of Altaic&#x27;s rejection. The theory was based mostly on the fact these languages share three features: agglutination, vowel harmony and lack of grammatical gender.

== History ==
The earliest known Old Turkic inscriptions are the three monumental Orkhon inscriptions found in modern Mongolia. Erected in honour of the prince Kul Tigin and his brother Emperor Bilge Khagan, these date back to the Second Turkic Khaganate (dated 682–744 CE). After the discovery and excavation of these monuments and associated stone slabs by Russian archaeologists in the wider area surrounding the Orkhon Valley between 1889 and 1893, it became established that the language on the inscriptions was the Old Turkic language written using the Old Turkic alphabet, which has also been referred to as &quot;Turkic runes&quot; or &quot;runiform&quot; due to a superficial similarity to the Germanic runic alphabets.

With the Turkic expansion during Early Middle Ages (–11th centuries), peoples speaking Turkic languages spread across Central Asia, covering a vast geographical region stretching from Siberia all the way to Europe and the Mediterranean. The Seljuqs of the Oghuz Turks, in particular, brought their language, Oghuz—the direct ancestor of today&#x27;s Turkish language—into Anatolia during the 11th century. Also during the 11th century, an early linguist of the Turkic languages, Mahmud al-Kashgari from the Kara-Khanid Khanate, published the first comprehensive Turkic language dictionary and map of the geographical distribution of Turkic speakers in the &quot;Dīwān Lughāt al-Turk&quot; ().

===Ottoman Turkish===

Following the adoption of Islam around the year 950 by the Kara-Khanid Khanate and the Seljuq Turks, who are both regarded as the ethnic and cultural ancestors of the Ottomans, the administrative language of these states acquired a large collection of loanwords from Arabic and Persian. Turkish literature during the Ottoman period, particularly Divan poetry, was heavily influenced by Persian, including the adoption of poetic meters and a great quantity of imported words. The literary and official language during the Ottoman Empire period (–1922) is termed Ottoman Turkish, which was a mixture of Turkish, Persian, and Arabic that differed considerably and was largely unintelligible to the period&#x27;s everyday Turkish. The everyday Turkish, known as &quot;kaba Türkçe&quot; or &quot;vulgar Turkish&quot;, spoken by the less-educated lower and also rural members of society, contained a higher percentage of native vocabulary and served as basis for the modern Turkish language.

While visiting the region between Adıyaman and Adana, Evliya Çelebi recorded the &quot;Turkman language&quot; and compared it with his own Turkish:
=== Language reform and modern Turkish ===

After the foundation of the modern state of Turkey and the script reform, the Turkish Language Association (TDK) was established in 1932 under the patronage of Mustafa Kemal Atatürk, with the aim of conducting research on Turkish. One of the tasks of the newly established association was to initiate a language reform to replace loanwords of Arabic and Persian origin with Turkish equivalents. By banning the usage of imported words in the press, the association succeeded in removing several hundred foreign words from the language. While most of the words introduced to the language by the TDK were newly derived from Turkic roots, it also opted for reviving Old Turkish words which had not been used for centuries. In 1935, the TDK published a bilingual Ottoman-Turkish/Pure Turkish dictionary that documents the results of the language reform.

Owing to this sudden change in the language, older and younger people in Turkey started to differ in their vocabularies. While the generations born before the 1940s tend to use the older terms of Arabic or Persian origin, the younger generations favor new expressions. It is considered particularly ironic that Atatürk himself, in his lengthy speech to the new Parliament in 1927, used the formal style of Ottoman Turkish that had been common at the time amongst statesmen and the educated strata of society in the setting of formal speeches and documents. After the language reform, the Turkish education system discontinued the teaching of literary form of Ottoman Turkish and the speaking and writing ability of society atrophied to the point that, in later years, Turkish society would perceive the speech to be so alien to listeners that it had to be &quot;translated&quot; three times into modern Turkish: first in 1963, again in 1986, and most recently in 1995.

The past few decades have seen the continuing work of the TDK to coin new Turkish words to express new concepts and technologies as they enter the language, mostly from English. Many of these new words, particularly information technology terms, have received widespread acceptance. However, the TDK is occasionally criticized for coining words which sound contrived and artificial. Some earlier changes—such as &#x27; to replace &#x27;, &quot;political party&quot;—also failed to meet with popular approval (&#x27; has been replaced by the French loanword &#x27;). Some words restored from Old Turkic have taken on specialized meanings; for example &quot;&quot; (originally meaning &quot;book&quot;) is now used to mean &quot;script&quot; in computer science.

Some examples of modern Turkish words and the old loanwords are:


== Geographic distribution ==
Turkish is natively spoken by the Turkish people in Turkey and by the Turkish diaspora in some 30 other countries. The Turkish language is mutually intelligible with Azerbaijani. In particular, Turkish-speaking minorities exist in countries that formerly (in whole or part) belonged to the Ottoman Empire, such as Iraq, Bulgaria, Cyprus, Greece (primarily in Western Thrace), the Republic of North Macedonia, Romania, and Serbia. More than two million Turkish speakers live in Germany; and there are significant Turkish-speaking communities in the United States, France, the Netherlands, Austria, Belgium, Switzerland, and the United Kingdom. Due to the cultural assimilation of Turkish immigrants in host countries, not all ethnic members of the diaspora speak the language with native fluency.

In 2005, 93% of the population of Turkey were native speakers of Turkish, about 67 million at the time, with Kurdish languages making up most of the remainder.

Azerbaijani language, official in Azerbaijan, is mutually intelligible with Turkish and speakers of both languages can understand them without noticeable difficulty, especially when discussion comes on ordinary, daily language. Turkey has very good relations with Azerbaijan, with a multitude of Turkish companies and authorities investing there, while the influence of Turkey in the country is very high. The rising presence of this very similar language in Azerbaijan and the fact that many children use Turkish words instead of Azerbaijani words due to satellite TV has caused concern that the distinctive features of the language will be eroded. Many bookstores sell books in Turkish language along Azerbaijani language ones, with Agalar Mahmadov, a leading intellectual, voicing his concern that Turkish language has &quot;already started to take over the national and natural dialects of Azerbaijan&quot;. However, the presence of Turkish as foreign language is not as high as Russian. In Uzbekistan, the second most populated Turkic country, a new TV channel &quot;Foreign Languages TV&quot; was established in 2022. This channel has been broadcasting Turkish lessons along with English, French, German and Russian lessons.

=== Official status ===
Turkish is the official language of Turkey and is one of the official languages of Cyprus. Turkish has official status in 38 municipalities in Kosovo, including Mamusha, two in the Republic of North Macedonia and two in Iraq. Cyprus has requested the European Union to add Turkish as an official language, as it is one of the two official languages of the country.

In Turkey, the regulatory body for Turkish is the Turkish Language Association (&quot;Türk Dil Kurumu&quot; or TDK), which was founded in 1932 under the name &quot;Türk Dili Tetkik Cemiyeti&quot; (&quot;Society for Research on the Turkish Language&quot;). The Turkish Language Association was influenced by the ideology of linguistic purism: indeed one of its primary tasks was the replacement of loanwords and of foreign grammatical constructions with equivalents of Turkish origin. These changes, together with the adoption of the new Turkish alphabet in 1928, shaped the modern Turkish language spoken today. The TDK became an independent body in 1951, with the lifting of the requirement that it should be presided over by the Minister of Education. This status continued until August 1983, when it was again made into a governmental body in the constitution of 1982, following the military coup d&#x27;état of 1980.

== Dialects ==

Modern standard Turkish is based on the dialect of Istanbul. This Istanbul Turkish (&quot;İstanbul Türkçesi&quot;) constitutes the model of written and spoken Turkish, as recommended by Ziya Gökalp, Ömer Seyfettin and others.

Dialectal variation persists, in spite of the levelling influence of the standard used in mass media and in the Turkish education system since the 1930s. Academic researchers from Turkey often refer to Turkish dialects as &quot;ağız&quot; or &quot;şive&quot;, leading to an ambiguity with the linguistic concept of accent, which is also covered with these words. Several universities, as well as a dedicated work-group of the Turkish Language Association, carry out projects investigating Turkish dialects. work continued on the compilation and publication of their research as a comprehensive dialect-atlas of the Turkish language. Although the Ottoman alphabet, being slightly more phonetically ambiguous than the Latin script, encoded for many of the dialectal variations between Turkish dialects, the modern Latin script fails to do this. Examples of this are the presence of the nasal velar sound [ŋ] in certain eastern dialects of Turkish which was represented by the Ottoman letter /ڭ/ but that was merged into /n/ in the Latin script. Additionally are letters such as /خ/, /ق/, /غ/ which make the sounds [ɣ], [q], and [x], respectively in certain eastern dialects but that are merged into [g], [k], and [h] in western dialects and are therefore defectively represented in the Latin alphabet for speakers of eastern dialects.
Some immigrants to Turkey from Rumelia speak Rumelian Turkish, which includes the distinct dialects of Ludogorie, Dinler, and Adakale, which show the influence of the theorized Balkan sprachbund. &quot;Kıbrıs Türkçesi&quot; is the name for Cypriot Turkish and is spoken by the Turkish Cypriots. &quot;Edirne&quot; is the dialect of Edirne. &quot;Ege&quot; is spoken in the Aegean region, with its usage extending to Antalya. The nomadic Yörüks of the Mediterranean Region of Turkey also have their own dialect of Turkish. This group is not to be confused with the Yuruk nomads of Macedonia, Greece, and European Turkey, who speak Balkan Gagauz Turkish.

The Meskhetian Turks who live in Kazakhstan, Azerbaijan and Russia as well as in several Central Asian countries, also speak an Eastern Anatolian dialect of Turkish, originating in the areas of Kars, Ardahan, and Artvin and sharing similarities with Azerbaijani, the language of Azerbaijan.

The Central Anatolia Region speaks &quot;Orta Anadolu&quot;. &quot;Karadeniz&quot;, spoken in the Eastern Black Sea Region and represented primarily by the Trabzon dialect, exhibits substratum influence from Greek in phonology and syntax; it is also known as &quot;Laz dialect&quot; (not to be confused with the Laz language). &quot;Kastamonu&quot; is spoken in Kastamonu and its surrounding areas. Karamanli Turkish is spoken in Greece, where it is called . It is the literary standard for the Karamanlides.

== Phonology ==

=== Consonants ===
At least one source claims Turkish consonants are laryngeally-specified three-way fortis-lenis (aspirated/neutral/voiced) like Armenian, although only syllable-finally.

The phoneme that is usually referred to as &quot;yumuşak g&quot; (&quot;soft g&quot;), written in Turkish orthography, represents a vowel sequence or a rather weak bilabial approximant between rounded vowels, a weak palatal approximant between unrounded front vowels, and a vowel sequence elsewhere. It never occurs at the beginning of a word or a syllable, but always follows a vowel. When word-final or preceding another consonant, it lengthens the preceding vowel.

In native Turkic words, the sounds , , and are mainly in complementary distribution with , , and ; the former set occurs adjacent to front vowels and the latter adjacent to back vowels. The distribution of these phonemes is often unpredictable, however, in foreign borrowings and proper nouns. In such words, , , and often occur with back vowels: some examples are given below. However, there are minimal pairs that distinguish between these sounds, such as kar [kɑɾ] &quot;snow&quot; vs kâr [cɑɾ] &quot;profit&quot;.

==== Consonant devoicing ====

Turkish orthography reflects final-obstruent devoicing, a form of consonant mutation whereby a voiced obstruent, such as , is devoiced to at the end of a word or before a consonant, but retains its voicing before a vowel. In loan words, the voiced equivalent of /k/ is /g/; in native words, it is /ğ/.

This is analogous to languages such as German and Russian, but in the case of Turkish it only applies, as the above examples demonstrate, to stops and affricates, not to fricatives. The spelling is usually made to match the sound. However, in a few cases, such as &quot;ad&quot; &#x27;name&#x27; (dative &quot;ada&quot;), the underlying form is retained in the spelling (cf. &quot;at&quot; &#x27;horse&#x27;, dative &quot;ata&quot;). Other exceptions are &quot;od&quot; &#x27;fire&#x27; vs. &quot;ot&quot; &#x27;herb&#x27;, &quot;sac&quot; &#x27;sheet metal&#x27;, &quot;saç&quot; &#x27;hair&#x27;. Most loanwords, such as &quot;kitap&quot; above, are spelled as pronounced, but a few such as &quot;hac&quot; &#x27;hajj&#x27;, &quot;şad&quot; &#x27;happy&#x27;, and &quot;yad&quot; &#x27;strange&#x27; or &#x27;stranger&#x27; also show their underlying forms.

Native nouns of two or more syllables that end in /k/ in dictionary form are nearly all /ğ/ in underlying form. However, most verbs and monosyllabic nouns are underlyingly /k/.

=== Vowels ===

The vowels of the Turkish language are, in their alphabetical order, , , , , , , , . The Turkish vowel system can be considered as being three-dimensional, where vowels are characterised by how and where they are articulated focusing on three key features: front and back, rounded and unrounded and vowel height. Vowels are classified [±back], [±round] and [±high].

The only diphthongs in the language are found in loanwords and may be categorised as falling diphthongs usually analyzed as a sequence of /j/ and a vowel.

==== Vowel harmony ====


The principle of vowel harmony, which permeates Turkish word-formation and suffixation, is due to the natural human tendency towards economy of muscular effort. This principle is expressed in Turkish through three rules:

# If the first vowel of a word is a back vowel, any subsequent vowel is also a back vowel; if the first is a front vowel, any subsequent vowel is also a front vowel.
# If the first vowel is unrounded, so too are subsequent vowels.
# If the first vowel is rounded, subsequent vowels are either rounded and close or unrounded and open.

The second and third rules minimize muscular effort during speech. More specifically, they are related to the phenomenon of labial assimilation: if the lips are rounded (a process that requires muscular effort) for the first vowel they may stay rounded for subsequent vowels. If they are unrounded for the first vowel, the speaker does not make the additional muscular effort to round them subsequently.

Grammatical affixes have &quot;a chameleon-like quality&quot;, and obey one of the following patterns of vowel harmony:
* twofold (&quot;-e/-a&quot;): In his more recent works Lewis prefers to omit the superscripts, on the grounds that &quot;there is no need for this once the principle has been grasped&quot; (Lewis [2001]). the locative case suffix, for example, is &quot;-de&quot; after front vowels and &quot;-da&quot; after back vowels. The notation &quot;-de&quot;² is a convenient shorthand for this pattern.
* fourfold (&quot;-i/-ı/-ü/-u&quot;): the genitive case suffix, for example, is &quot;-in&quot; or &quot;-ın&quot; after unrounded vowels (front or back respectively); and &quot;-ün&quot; or &quot;-un&quot; after the corresponding rounded vowels. In this case, the shorthand notation &quot;-in&quot;4 is used.

Practically, the twofold pattern (also referred to as the e-type vowel harmony) means that in the environment where the vowel in the word stem is formed in the front of the mouth, the suffix will take the e-form, while if it is formed in the back it will take the a-form. The fourfold pattern (also called the i-type) accounts for rounding as well as for front/back. The following examples, based on the copula &quot;-dir&quot;4 (&quot;[it] is&quot;), illustrate the principles of i-type vowel harmony in practice: &quot;Türkiye&#x27;dir (&quot;it is Turkey&quot;), &quot;kapıdır (&quot;it is the door&quot;), but &quot;gündür (&quot;it is the day&quot;), &quot;paltodur (&quot;it is the coat&quot;).

===== Exceptions to vowel harmony =====
These are four word-classes that are exceptions to the rules of vowel harmony:

# Native, non-compound words, e.g. &#x27; &quot;also&quot;, &#x27; &quot;light brown&quot;, &#x27; &quot;apple&quot;, &#x27; &quot;which&quot;, &#x27; &quot;where&quot;, &#x27; &quot;to believe&quot;, &#x27; &quot;sibling&quot;, &#x27; &quot;fat&quot;, &quot;&quot; &quot;mother&quot;
# Native compound words, e.g. &#x27; &quot;today&quot;, &#x27; &quot;gossip&quot;, &quot;&quot; &quot;come on&quot;
# Foreign words, e.g. &#x27; (&lt; Farsi &#x27; &quot;command&quot;), &#x27; (&lt; French &#x27; &quot;microbe&quot;), &#x27; (&lt; Greek &#x27; &quot;bishop&quot;)
# Invariable suffixes: –daş (denoting common attachment to the concept expressed by the noun), –yor (denoting the present tense in the third person), –ane (turning adjectives or nouns into adverbs), –ken (meaning &quot;while being&quot;), –leyin (meaning &quot;in/at/during&quot;), (weakening an adjective of color or taste in a way similar to the English suffix –ish as in blueish), –ki (making a pronoun or adjective out of an adverb or a noun in the locative case), –gil (meaning &quot;the house or family of&quot;), –gen (referring to the name of plane figures)
The road sign in the photograph above illustrates several of these features:
* a native compound which does not obey vowel harmony: &quot;Orta+köy&quot; (&quot;middle village&quot;—a place name)
* a loanword also violating vowel harmony: &quot;viyadük&quot; (&lt; French &quot;viaduc&quot; &quot;viaduct&quot;)
* the possessive suffix&quot;-i&quot;4 harmonizing with the final vowel (and softening the &quot;k&quot; by consonant alternation): &quot;viyadüğü&quot;

The rules of vowel harmony may vary by regional dialect. The dialect of Turkish spoken in the Trabzon region of northeastern Turkey follows the reduced vowel harmony of Old Anatolian Turkish, with the additional complication of two missing vowels (ü and ı), thus there is no palatal harmony. It is likely that &quot;elün&quot; meant &quot;your hand&quot; in Old Anatolian. While the 2nd person singular possessive would vary between back and front vowel, -ün or -un, as in &quot;elün&quot; for &quot;your hand&quot; and &quot;kitabun&quot; for &quot;your book&quot;, the lack of ü vowel in the Trabzon dialect means -un would be used in both of these cases — &quot;elun&quot; and &quot;kitabun&quot;.
== Word-accent ==
With the exceptions stated below, Turkish words are oxytone (accented on the last syllable).

=== Exceptions to word-accent rules ===
# Place-names are not oxytone: &#x27; (Anatolia), &#x27;. Most place names are accented on their first syllable as in &quot;.&quot; This holds true when place names are spelled the same way as common nouns, which are oxytone: &#x27; (maize), &#x27; (Egypt), &#x27; (vinegar-seller), &#x27; (district in Istanbul), &#x27; (doll, baby), &#x27; (district in Istanbul), &#x27; (army), &#x27; (a Turkish city on the Black Sea).
#Foreign nouns usually retain their original accentuation, e.g., &#x27; (&lt; Italian &quot;restaurant&quot;), &#x27; (&lt; Italian &quot;newspaper&quot;)
# Some words about family members and living creatures have irregular accentuation: &#x27; (mother), &#x27; (husband&#x27;s sister), &#x27; (grasshopper), &#x27; (ant), &quot;&quot; (skunk)
#Adverbs are usually accented on the first syllable, e.g., &#x27; (now), &#x27; (after), &#x27; (suddenly), &#x27; (really), (but &#x27; (from reality)), &#x27; (during winter)
#Compound words are accented on the end of the first element, e.g., &#x27; (stark naked), &#x27; (minister), &quot; (prime minister)
# Diminutives constructed by suffix –cik are accented on the first syllable, e.g., &quot; (very tiny)
# Words with enclitic suffixes, &quot;–le&quot; (meaning &quot;with&quot;), &quot;–ken&quot; (meaning &quot;while&quot;), &quot;–ce&quot; (creating an adverb), &quot;–leyin&quot; (meaning &quot;in&quot; or &quot;during&quot;), &quot;–me&quot; (negating the verbal stem), &quot;–yor&quot; (denoting the present tense)

* Enclitic words, which shift the accentuation to the previous syllable, e.g., &quot;ol-&quot; (meaning to be), &quot;mi&quot; (denoting a question), &quot;gibi&quot; (meaning similar to), &quot;için&quot; (for), &quot;ki&quot; (that), &quot;de&quot; (too)

== Syntax ==
=== Sentence groups ===
Turkish has two groups of sentences: verbal and nominal sentences. In the case of a verbal sentence, the predicate is a finite verb, while the predicate in nominal sentence will have either no overt verb or a verb in the form of the copula or (variants of &quot;be&quot;). Examples of both are given below:

==== Negation ====
The two groups of sentences have different ways of forming negation. A nominal sentence can be negated with the addition of the word . For example, the sentence above would become (&#x27;Necla is not a teacher&#x27;). However, the verbal sentence requires the addition of a negative suffix to the verb (the suffix comes after the stem but before the tense): (&#x27;Necla did not go to school&#x27;).

==== Yes/no questions ====
In the case of a verbal sentence, an interrogative clitic is added after the verb and stands alone, for example (&#x27;Did Necla go to school?&#x27;). In the case of a nominal sentence, then comes after the predicate but before the personal ending, so for example ? (&#x27;Necla, are you [formal, plural] a teacher?&#x27;).

===Word order===
Word order in simple Turkish sentences is generally subject–object–verb, as in Korean and Latin, but unlike English, for verbal sentences and subject-predicate for nominal sentences. However, as Turkish possesses a case-marking system, and most grammatical relations are shown using morphological markers, often the SOV structure has diminished relevance and may vary. The SOV structure may thus be considered a &quot;pragmatic word order&quot; of language, one that does not rely on word order for grammatical purposes.

==== Immediately preverbal ====

Consider the following simple sentence which demonstrates that the focus in Turkish is on the element that immediately precedes the verb:
==== Postpredicate ====

The postpredicate position signifies what is referred to as background information in Turkish — information that is assumed to be known to both the speaker and the listener, or information that is included in the context. Consider the following examples:
==== Topic ====

There has been some debate among linguists whether Turkish is a subject-prominent (like English) or topic-prominent (like Japanese and Korean) language, with recent scholarship implying that it is indeed both subject and topic-prominent. This has direct implications for word order as it is possible for the subject to be included in the verb-phrase in Turkish. There can be S/O inversion in sentences where the topic is of greater importance than the subject.

== Grammar ==
Turkish is an agglutinative language and frequently uses affixes, and specifically suffixes, or endings. One word can have many affixes and these can also be used to create new words, such as creating a verb from a noun, or a noun from a verbal root (see the section on Word formation). Most affixes indicate the grammatical function of the word.
The only native prefixes are alliterative intensifying syllables used with adjectives or adverbs: for example sımsıcak&quot; (&quot;boiling hot&quot; &lt; &quot;sıcak&quot;) and masmavi&quot; (&quot;bright blue&quot; &lt; &quot;mavi&quot;).

The extensive use of affixes can give rise to long words, e.g. &quot;Çekoslovakyalılaştıramadıklarımızdanmışsınızcasına&quot;, meaning &quot;In the manner of you being one of those that we apparently couldn&#x27;t manage to convert to Czechoslovakian&quot;. While this case is contrived, long words frequently occur in normal Turkish, as in this heading of a newspaper obituary column: &quot;Bayramlaşamadıklarımız&quot; (Bayram [festival]-Recipr-Impot-Partic-Plur-PossPl1; &quot;Those of our number with whom we cannot exchange the season&#x27;s greetings&quot;). Another example can be seen in the final word of this heading of the online Turkish Spelling Guide (&quot;İmlâ Kılavuzu&quot;): &quot;Dilde birlik, ulusal birliğin vazgeçilemezlerindendir&quot; (&quot;Unity in language is among the indispensables [dispense-Pass-Impot-Plur-PossS3-Abl-Copula] of national unity ~ Linguistic unity is a &quot;sine qua non&quot; of national unity&quot;).

=== Nouns ===

==== Gender ====
Turkish does not have grammatical gender and the sex of persons do not affect the forms of words. The third-person pronoun &quot;&quot; may refer to &quot;he&quot;, &quot;she&quot; or &quot;it.&quot; Despite this lack, Turkish still has ways of indicating gender in nouns:

# Most domestic animals have male and female forms, e.g., &#x27; (stallion), &#x27; (mare), &#x27; (bull), &#x27; (cow). 
# For other animals, the sex may be indicated by adding the word &#x27; (male) or &#x27; (female) before the corresponding noun, e.g., &quot; (female cat).
# For people, the female sex may be indicated by adding the word &#x27; (girl) or &#x27; (woman), e.g., &#x27; (heroine) instead of &#x27; (hero).
# Some foreign words of French or Arabic origin already have separate female forms, e.g., &quot; (actress).
# The Serbo-Croat feminine suffix –ica is used in three borrowings: &#x27; (queen), &#x27; (empress) and &#x27; (tsarina). This suffix was used in the neologism &#x27; (&lt; Old Turkic &quot;&quot; &quot;god&quot;).

==== Case ====

There is no definite article in Turkish, but definiteness of the object is implied when the accusative ending is used (see below). Turkish nouns decline by taking case endings. There are six noun cases in Turkish, with all the endings following vowel harmony (shown in the table using the shorthand superscript notation). Since the postposition often gets suffixed onto the noun, some analyze it as an instrumental case, although in formal speech it takes the genitive with personal pronouns, singular demonstratives, and interrogative . The plural marker ² immediately follows the noun before any case or other affixes (e.g. &quot;of the villages&quot;).

The accusative case marker is used only for definite objects; compare &quot;we saw a tree&quot; with &quot;we saw the tree&quot;. The plural marker ² is generally not used when a class or category is meant: can equally well mean &quot;we saw trees [as we walked through the forest]&quot;—as opposed to &quot;we saw the trees [in question]&quot;.

The declension of illustrates two important features of Turkish phonology: consonant assimilation in suffixes () and voicing of final consonants before vowels ().

Additionally, nouns can take suffixes that assign person: for example 4, &quot;our&quot;. With the addition of the copula (for example 4, &quot;I am&quot;) complete sentences can be formed. The interrogative particle 4 immediately follows the word being questioned, and also follows vowel harmony: &quot;[going] to the village?&quot;, &quot;[is it a] tree?&quot;.

=== Personal pronouns ===

The Turkish personal pronouns in the nominative case are (1s), (2s), (3s), (1pl), (2pl, or 2h), and (3pl). They are declined regularly with some exceptions: (1s gen.); (1pl gen.); (1s dat.); (2s dat.); and the oblique forms of use the root . As mentioned before, all demonstrative singular and personal pronouns take the genitive when is affixed onto it: (1s ins.), (1pl ins.); but (3s ins.), (3pl ins.). All other pronouns (reflexive and so on) are declined regularly.

==== Noun phrases (&quot;tamlama&quot;) ====

Two nouns, or groups of nouns, may be joined in either of two ways:

* definite (possessive) compound (&quot;belirtili tamlama&quot;). E.g. &quot;Türkiye&#x27;nin sesi&quot; &quot;the voice of Turkey (radio station)&quot;: the voice belonging to Turkey. Here the relationship is shown by the genitive ending &quot;-in&quot;4 added to the first noun; the second noun has the third-person suffix of possession 4.
* indefinite (qualifying) compound (&quot;belirtisiz tamlama&quot;). E.g. &quot;Türkiye Cumhuriyeti&quot; &quot;Turkey-Republic = the Republic of Turkey&quot;: not the republic belonging to Turkey, but the Republic that is Turkey. Here the first noun has no ending; but the second noun has the ending 4—the same as in definite compounds.

The following table illustrates these principles. In some cases, the constituents of the compounds are themselves compounds; for clarity these subsidiary compounds are marked with [square brackets]. The suffixes involved in the linking are underlined. If the second noun group already had a possessive suffix (because it is a compound by itself), no further suffix is added.

As the last example shows, the qualifying expression may be a substantival sentence rather than a noun or noun group.

There is a third way of linking the nouns where both nouns take no suffixes (&quot;takısız tamlama&quot;). However, in this case the first noun acts as an adjective, e.g. &quot;Demir kapı&quot; (iron gate), &quot;elma yanak&quot; (&quot;apple cheek&quot;, i.e. red cheek), &quot;kömür göz&quot; (&quot;coal eye&quot;, i.e. black eye) :

=== Adjectives ===
Turkish adjectives are not declined. However most adjectives can also be used as nouns, in which case they are declined: e.g. (&quot;beautiful&quot;) → (&quot;(the) beautiful ones / people&quot;). Used attributively, adjectives precede the nouns they modify. The adjectives (&quot;existent&quot;) and (&quot;non-existent&quot;) are used in many cases where English would use &quot;there is&quot; or &quot;have&quot;, &quot;e.g.&quot; (&quot;there is no milk&quot;, &quot;lit.&quot; &quot;(the) milk (is) non-existent&quot;); the construction &quot;&quot;noun 1&quot;-GEN &quot;noun 2&quot;-POSS &quot; can be translated &quot;&quot;noun 1&quot; has/doesn&#x27;t have &quot;noun 2&quot;&quot;; &quot;the emperor has no clothes&quot; (&quot;(the) emperor-&quot;of&quot; clothes-&quot;his&quot; non-existent&quot;); (&quot;my cat had no shoes&quot;, &quot;lit.&quot; &quot;cat-&quot;my&quot;-&quot;of&quot; shoe-&quot;plur.&quot;-&quot;its&quot; non-existent-&quot;past tense&quot;&quot;).

=== Verbs ===

Turkish verbs indicate person. They can be made negative, potential (&quot;can&quot;), or non-potential (&quot;cannot&quot;). Furthermore, Turkish verbs show tense (present, past, future, and aorist), mood (conditional, imperative, inferential, necessitative, and optative), and aspect. The inferential suffix &quot;-miş4&quot; is also glossed as a direct evidential or a mirative. Negation is expressed by the suffix &quot;-me²-&quot; immediately following the stem.

=== Verb tenses ===
(For the sake of simplicity the term &quot;tense&quot; is used here throughout, although for some forms &quot;aspect&quot; or &quot;mood&quot; might be more appropriate.) There are nine simple and 20 compound tenses in Turkish. The nine simple tenses are: simple past (), inferential past (), present continuous, simple present (aorist), future, optative, subjunctive, necessitative (&quot;must&quot;) and imperative. There are three groups of compound forms. Story () is the witnessed past of the above forms (except command), referral () is the unwitnessed past of the above forms (except simple past and command), conditional () is the conditional form of the first five basic tenses. In the example below, the second person singular of the verb (&quot;go&quot;), stem , is shown.
There are also so-called combined verbs, which are created by suffixing certain verb stems (like or ) to the original stem of a verb. is the suffix for the sufficiency mood. It is the equivalent of the English auxiliary verbs &quot;able to&quot;, &quot;can&quot; or &quot;may&quot;. is the suffix for the swiftness mood, for the perpetuity mood and for the approach (&quot;almost&quot;) mood. Thus, while means &quot;you went&quot;, means &quot;you could go&quot; and means &quot;you went swiftly&quot;. The tenses of the combined verbs are formed the same way as for simple verbs.

==== Attributive verbs (participles) ====

Turkish verbs have attributive forms, including present, similar to the English present participle (with the ending 2); future (2); indirect/inferential past (4); and aorist (2 or 4).

The most important function of some of these attributive verbs is to form modifying phrases equivalent to the relative clauses found in most European languages. The subject of the verb in an 2 form is (possibly implicitly) in the third person (he/she/it/they); this form, when used in a modifying phrase, does not change according to number. The other attributive forms used in these constructions are the future (2) and an older form (4), which covers both present and past meanings. These two forms take &quot;personal endings&quot;, which have the same form as the possessive suffixes but indicate the person and possibly number of the subject of the attributive verb; for example, &quot;yediğim means &quot;what I eat&quot;, &quot;yediğin means &quot;what you eat&quot;, and so on. The use of these &quot;personal or relative participles&quot; is illustrated in the following table, in which the examples are presented according to the grammatical case which would be seen in the equivalent English relative clause.

== Vocabulary ==
Latest 2011 edition of &quot;Güncel Türkçe Sözlük&quot; (&quot;Current Turkish Dictionary&quot;), the official dictionary of the Turkish language published by Turkish Language Association, contains 117,000 vocabularies and 93,000 articles.

=== Word formation ===
Turkish extensively uses agglutination to form new words from nouns and verbal stems. The majority of Turkish words originate from the application of derivative suffixes to a relatively small set of core vocabulary.

Turkish obeys certain principles when it comes to suffixation. Most suffixes in Turkish will have more than one form, depending on the vowels and consonants in the root- vowel harmony rules will apply; consonant-initial suffixes will follow the voiced/ voiceless character of the consonant in the final unit of the root; and in the case of vowel-initial suffixes an additional consonant may be inserted if the root ends in a vowel, or the suffix may lose its initial vowel. There is also a prescribed order of affixation of suffixes- as a rule of thumb, derivative suffixes precede inflectional suffixes which are followed by clitics, as can be seen in the example set of words derived from a substantive root below:
Another example, starting from a verbal root:

New words are also frequently formed by compounding two existing words into a new one, as in German. Compounds can be of two types- bare and . The bare compounds, both nouns and adjectives are effectively two words juxtaposed without the addition of suffixes for example the word for girlfriend () or black pepper (). A few examples of compound words are given below:
However, the majority of compound words in Turkish are compounds, which means that the second word will be marked by the 3rd person possessive suffix. A few such examples are given in the table below (note vowel harmony):
== Writing system ==

Turkish is written using a version of Latin script introduced in 1928 by Atatürk to replace the Ottoman Turkish alphabet, a version of Perso-Arabic script. The Ottoman alphabet marked only three different vowels—long &quot;ā, ū&quot; and &quot;ī&quot;—and included several redundant consonants, such as variants of &quot;z&quot; (which were distinguished in Arabic but not in Turkish). The omission of short vowels in the Arabic script was claimed to make it particularly unsuitable for Turkish, which has eight vowels.

The reform of the script was an important step in the cultural reforms of the period. The task of preparing the new alphabet and selecting the necessary modifications for sounds specific to Turkish was entrusted to a Language Commission composed of prominent linguists, academics, and writers. The introduction of the new Turkish alphabet was supported by public education centers opened throughout the country, cooperation with publishing companies, and encouragement by Atatürk himself, who toured the country teaching the new letters to the public. As a result, there was a dramatic increase in literacy from its original, pre-modern levels.

The Latin alphabet was applied to the Turkish language for educational purposes even before the 20th-century reform. Instances include a 1635 Latin-Albanian dictionary by Frang Bardhi, who also incorporated several sayings in the Turkish language, as an appendix to his work (e.g. &quot;alma agatsdan irak duschamas&quot;—&quot;An apple does not fall far from its tree&quot;).

Turkish now has an alphabet suited to the sounds of the language: the spelling is largely phonemic, with one letter corresponding to each phoneme. Most of the letters are used approximately as in English, the main exceptions being , which denotes ( being used for the found in Persian and European loans); and the undotted , representing . As in German, and represent and . The letter , in principle, denotes but has the property of lengthening the preceding vowel and assimilating any subsequent vowel. The letters and represent and , respectively. A circumflex is written over back vowels following and when these consonants represent and —almost exclusively in Arabic and Persian loans.

The Turkish alphabet consists of 29 letters (q, w, x omitted and ç, ş, ğ, ı, ö, ü added); the complete list is:
:&quot;a, b, c, ç, d, e, f, g, ğ, h, ı, i, j, k, l, m, n, o, ö, p, r, s, ş, t, u, ü, v, y&quot;, and &quot;z&quot; (Capital of &quot;i&quot; is &quot;İ&quot; and lowercase &quot;I&quot; is &quot;ı&quot;.)

The specifically Turkish letters and spellings described above are illustrated in this table:

== Sample ==
&quot;Dostlar Beni Hatırlasın&quot; by Âşık Veysel Şatıroğlu (1894–1973), an ashik and highly regarded poet in the Turkish folk literature tradition.


* Article 1 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights in Turkish:

Article 1 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights in English:

== Turkish computer keyboard ==

Turkish language uses two standardised keyboard layouts, known as Turkish Q (QWERTY) and Turkish F, with Turkish Q being the most common.

== See also ==

* Sun Language Theory
* Turkish name
* Turkish Sign Language
* List of English words of Turkic origin
* Languages used on the Internet
* Turkish bird language
* Öztürkçe

==Notes==
== References ==
===Sources===
* 
* 
On-line sources
* 
* 
* 

== Further reading ==
* 
*Rezvani, B. &quot;Türkçe Mi: Türkçe’deki İrani (Farsca, Dimilce, Kurmançca) Orijinli kelimeler Sözlüğü.[Turkish title (roughly translated): Is this Turkish? An etymological dictionary of originally Iranic (Persian, Zazaki, and Kurmanji Kurdish) words].&quot; (2006).

== External links ==
* Swadesh list of Turkish basic vocabulary words (from Wiktionary&#x27;s Swadesh-list appendix)
* Turkish Language: Resources – University of Michigan</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q256" start="0" end="7" title="Turkish language" label="Turkish"/>
<link wikidata="Q34090" start="92" end="108" title="Turkic languages" label="Turkic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="174" end="180" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q229" start="218" end="224" title="Cyprus" label="Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="287" end="294" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="296" end="303" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q219" start="305" end="313" title="Bulgaria" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q221" start="315" end="330" title="North Macedonia" label="North Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="332" end="338" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="355" end="361" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q200173" start="367" end="381" title="South Caucasus" label="South Caucasus"/>
<link wikidata="Q27275" start="401" end="413" title="Central Asia" label="Central Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165171" start="415" end="419" title="Iraqi Turkmen" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290529" start="425" end="430" title="Syrian Turkmen" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394450" start="447" end="472" title="List of languages by total number of speakers" label="18th most spoken language"/>
<link wikidata="Q36730" start="518" end="533" title="Ottoman Turkish language" label="Ottoman Turkish"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="635" end="649" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q780048" start="708" end="730" title="Atatürk&amp;#x27;s reforms" label="Atatürk&amp;#x27;s reforms"/>
<link wikidata="Q744068" start="781" end="800" title="Persian alphabet" label="Perso-Arabic script"/>
<link wikidata="Q1992372" start="807" end="831" title="Ottoman Turkish alphabet" label="Ottoman Turkish alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q8229" start="854" end="866" title="Latin script" label="Latin script"/>
<link wikidata="Q637405" start="873" end="889" title="Turkish alphabet" label="Turkish alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q147137" start="953" end="966" title="vowel harmony" label="vowel harmony"/>
<link wikidata="Q393272" start="981" end="994" title="agglutination" label="agglutination"/>
<link wikidata="Q539808" start="1031" end="1050" title="subject–object–verb" label="subject–object–verb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1598075" start="1067" end="1077" title="noun class" label="noun class"/>
<link wikidata="Q162378" start="1083" end="1101" title="grammatical gender" label="grammatical gender"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326966" start="1131" end="1140" title="honorific" label="honorific"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124935" start="1159" end="1174" title="T–V distinction" label="T–V distinction"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142613" start="1225" end="1240" title="social distance" label="social distance"/>
<link wikidata="Q494600" start="1444" end="1449" title="Oghuz languages" label="Oghuz"/>
<link wikidata="Q34090" start="1463" end="1469" title="Turkic languages" label="Turkic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9292" start="1500" end="1511" title="Azerbaijani language" label="Azerbaijani"/>
<link wikidata="Q227" start="1523" end="1533" title="Azerbaijan" label="Azerbaijan"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="1549" end="1553" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q33457" start="1555" end="1561" title="Gagauz language" label="Gagauz"/>
<link wikidata="Q164819" start="1565" end="1573" title="Gagauzia" label="Gagauzia"/>
<link wikidata="Q13192" start="1575" end="1582" title="Qashqai language" label="Qashqai"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="1592" end="1596" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q9267" start="1605" end="1612" title="Turkmen language" label="Turkmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q874" start="1616" end="1628" title="Turkmenistan" label="Turkmenistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q34090" start="1648" end="1654" title="Turkic languages" label="Turkic"/>
<link wikidata="Q37845" start="1697" end="1703" title="Altaic languages" label="Altaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5287" start="1722" end="1730" title="Japanese language" label="Japanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q9176" start="1732" end="1738" title="Korean language" label="Korean"/>
<link wikidata="Q9246" start="1740" end="1749" title="Mongolian language" label="Mongolian"/>
<link wikidata="Q34230" start="1754" end="1762" title="Tungusic languages" label="Tungusic"/>
<link wikidata="Q728651" start="2114" end="2125" title="Ural-Altaic" label="Ural-Altaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412" start="2161" end="2168" title="Finnish language" label="Finnish"/>
<link wikidata="Q9067" start="2170" end="2179" title="Hungarian language" label="Hungarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q37845" start="2184" end="2190" title="Altaic languages" label="Altaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q393272" start="2351" end="2364" title="agglutination" label="agglutination"/>
<link wikidata="Q147137" start="2366" end="2379" title="vowel harmony" label="vowel harmony"/>
<link wikidata="Q34988" start="2446" end="2469" title="Old Turkic language" label="Old Turkic inscriptions"/>
<link wikidata="Q334704" start="2495" end="2514" title="Orkhon inscriptions" label="Orkhon inscriptions"/>
<link wikidata="Q711" start="2531" end="2539" title="Mongolia" label="Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1445454" start="2573" end="2582" title="Kul Tigin" label="Kul Tigin"/>
<link wikidata="Q381125" start="2607" end="2619" title="Bilge Khagan" label="Bilge Khagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4833446" start="2644" end="2667" title="Second Turkic Khaganate" label="Second Turkic Khaganate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1453235" start="2829" end="2842" title="Orkhon Valley" label="Orkhon Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q34988" start="2934" end="2953" title="Old Turkic language" label="Old Turkic language"/>
<link wikidata="Q5058305" start="2972" end="2991" title="Old Turkic alphabet" label="Old Turkic alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q21200" start="3116" end="3124" title="Germanic languages" label="Germanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q82996" start="3125" end="3139" title="runic alphabet" label="runic alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q83328" start="3152" end="3168" title="Turkic expansion" label="Turkic expansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q27275" start="3261" end="3273" title="Central Asia" label="Central Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5428" start="3327" end="3334" title="Siberia" label="Siberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="3350" end="3356" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="3365" end="3378" title="Mediterranean Sea" label="Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q3708255" start="3384" end="3391" title="Seljuq dynasty" label="Seljuqs"/>
<link wikidata="Q494462" start="3399" end="3410" title="Oghuz Turks" label="Oghuz Turks"/>
<link wikidata="Q494600" start="3451" end="3456" title="Oghuz languages" label="Oghuz"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="3515" end="3523" title="Anatolia" label="Anatolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q563564" start="3622" end="3640" title="Mahmud al-Kashgari" label="Mahmud al-Kashgari"/>
<link wikidata="Q494354" start="3650" end="3669" title="Kara-Khanid Khanate" label="Kara-Khanid Khanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q737625" start="3805" end="3825" title="Dīwān Lughāt al-Turk" label="Dīwān Lughāt al-Turk"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="3886" end="3891" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q494354" start="3919" end="3938" title="Kara-Khanid Khanate" label="Kara-Khanid Khanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3708255" start="3947" end="3959" title="Seljuq dynasty" label="Seljuq Turks"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="4027" end="4035" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottomans"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="4127" end="4133" title="Arabic" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9168" start="4138" end="4145" title="Persian language" label="Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328366" start="4147" end="4165" title="Turkish literature" label="Turkish literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q252120" start="4206" end="4218" title="Ottoman poetry" label="Divan poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="4381" end="4395" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q36730" start="4421" end="4436" title="Ottoman Turkish language" label="Ottoman Turkish"/>
<link wikidata="Q168197" start="4881" end="4889" title="Adıyaman" label="Adıyaman"/>
<link wikidata="Q38545" start="4894" end="4899" title="Adana" label="Adana"/>
<link wikidata="Q202308" start="4901" end="4914" title="Evliya Çelebi" label="Evliya Çelebi"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="5083" end="5089" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5098" end="5111" title="#Writing system" label="script reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569712" start="5117" end="5145" title="Turkish Language Association" label="Turkish Language Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152" start="5199" end="5220" title="Mustafa Kemal Atatürk" label="Mustafa Kemal Atatürk"/>
<link wikidata="Q662175" start="5342" end="5357" title="language reform" label="language reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q103808" start="5369" end="5377" title="loanword" label="loanword"/>
<link wikidata="Q36730" start="5797" end="5812" title="Ottoman Turkish" label="Ottoman-Turkish"/>
<link wikidata="Q2005693" start="6220" end="6238" title="Nutuk" label="his lengthy speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q274918" start="6250" end="6260" title="Grand National Assembly of Turkey" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q187432" start="7586" end="7592" title="scripting language" label="script"/>
<link wikidata="Q21198" start="7602" end="7618" title="computer science" label="computer science"/>
<link wikidata="Q84072" start="7752" end="7766" title="Turkish people" label="Turkish people"/>
<link wikidata="Q1796235" start="7788" end="7804" title="Turkish diaspora" label="Turkish diaspora"/>
<link wikidata="Q9292" start="7884" end="7895" title="Azerbaijani language" label="Azerbaijani"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="8008" end="8022" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q229" start="8048" end="8054" title="Cyprus" label="Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192701" start="8077" end="8091" title="Western Thrace" label="Western Thrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q221" start="8098" end="8125" title="Republic of North Macedonia" label="Republic of North Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q193579" start="8372" end="8393" title="cultural assimilation" label="cultural assimilation"/>
<link wikidata="Q36368" start="8624" end="8641" title="Kurdish languages" label="Kurdish languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q9292" start="8676" end="8696" title="Azerbaijani language" label="Azerbaijani language"/>
<link wikidata="Q829257" start="8725" end="8746" title="mutually intelligible" label="mutually intelligible"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="9968" end="9974" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q229" start="10015" end="10021" title="Cyprus" label="Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246" start="10075" end="10081" title="Kosovo" label="Kosovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q221" start="10113" end="10140" title="Republic of North Macedonia" label="Republic of North Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="10152" end="10156" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q229" start="10158" end="10164" title="Cyprus" label="Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="10183" end="10197" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569712" start="10348" end="10376" title="Turkish Language Association" label="Turkish Language Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q192227" start="10621" end="10638" title="linguistic purism" label="linguistic purism"/>
<link wikidata="Q637405" start="10835" end="10851" title="Turkish alphabet" label="Turkish alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10872" end="10895" title="#Language reform and modern Turkish" label="modern Turkish language"/>
<link wikidata="Q646519" start="11148" end="11168" title="Constitution of Turkey" label="constitution of 1982"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758028" start="11193" end="11217" title="1980 Turkish coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="coup d&amp;#x27;état of 1980"/>
<link wikidata="Q406" start="11287" end="11295" title="Istanbul" label="Istanbul"/>
<link wikidata="Q83275" start="11422" end="11433" title="Ziya Gökalp" label="Ziya Gökalp"/>
<link wikidata="Q297504" start="11435" end="11449" title="Ömer Seyfettin" label="Ömer Seyfettin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2370465" start="11509" end="11528" title="dialect levelling" label="levelling influence"/>
<link wikidata="Q898130" start="11575" end="11599" title="education in Turkey" label="Turkish education system"/>
<link wikidata="Q16001535" start="11778" end="11784" title="accent (sociolinguistics)" label="accent"/>
<link wikidata="Q170584" start="11929" end="11936" title="project" label="project"/>
<link wikidata="Q162827" start="12065" end="12070" title="atlas" label="atlas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6005177" start="12801" end="12821" title="immigration to Turkey" label="immigrants to Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q184002" start="12827" end="12834" title="Rumelia" label="Rumelia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2360396" start="12841" end="12857" title="Rumelian Turkish" label="Rumelian Turkish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1873971" start="12899" end="12908" title="Ludogorie" label="Ludogorie"/>
<link wikidata="Q637288" start="12973" end="12990" title="Balkan sprachbund" label="Balkan sprachbund"/>
<link wikidata="Q7917392" start="13036" end="13051" title="Cypriot Turkish" label="Cypriot Turkish"/>
<link wikidata="Q245807" start="13073" end="13089" title="Turkish Cypriots" label="Turkish Cypriots"/>
<link wikidata="Q43387" start="13128" end="13134" title="Edirne" label="Edirne"/>
<link wikidata="Q34575" start="13169" end="13175" title="Aegean Sea" label="Aegean"/>
<link wikidata="Q6487" start="13212" end="13219" title="Antalya" label="Antalya"/>
<link wikidata="Q170056" start="13233" end="13239" title="Yörüks" label="Yörüks"/>
<link wikidata="Q155552" start="13247" end="13267" title="Mediterranean Region, Turkey" label="Mediterranean Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q2360396" start="13426" end="13447" title="Balkan Gagauz Turkish" label="Balkan Gagauz Turkish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055319" start="13454" end="13470" title="Meskhetian Turks" label="Meskhetian Turks"/>
<link wikidata="Q9292" start="13700" end="13711" title="Azerbaijani language" label="Azerbaijani"/>
<link wikidata="Q155526" start="13746" end="13769" title="Central Anatolia Region" label="Central Anatolia Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q155533" start="13848" end="13864" title="Black Sea Region" label="Black Sea Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q45301" start="13898" end="13905" title="Trabzon" label="Trabzon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13924" end="13934" title="stratum (linguistics)#Substratum" label="substratum"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="13950" end="13955" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q40998" start="13959" end="13968" title="phonology" label="phonology"/>
<link wikidata="Q37437" start="13973" end="13979" title="syntax" label="syntax"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160372" start="14054" end="14066" title="Laz language" label="Laz language"/>
<link wikidata="Q155915" start="14104" end="14113" title="Kastamonu" label="Kastamonu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3562711" start="14141" end="14158" title="Karamanli Turkish" label="Karamanli Turkish"/>
<link wikidata="Q252692" start="14237" end="14249" title="Karamanlides" label="Karamanlides"/>
<link wikidata="Q43091" start="14564" end="14575" title="orthography" label="orthography"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321675" start="14984" end="15010" title="complementary distribution" label="complementary distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q8183" start="15139" end="15146" title="phoneme" label="phoneme"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15279" end="15287" title="#Writing system" label="examples"/>
<link wikidata="Q815955" start="15324" end="15336" title="minimal pair" label="minimal pair"/>
<link wikidata="Q779384" start="15506" end="15531" title="final-obstruent devoicing" label="final-obstruent devoicing"/>
<link wikidata="Q557863" start="15543" end="15561" title="consonant mutation" label="consonant mutation"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="15819" end="15825" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737" start="15830" end="15837" title="Russian language" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17092" end="17106" title="Vowel#Backness" label="front and back"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425556" start="17108" end="17129" title="Roundedness" label="rounded and unrounded"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17134" end="17146" title="Vowel#Height" label="vowel height"/>
<link wikidata="Q102532" start="17211" end="17220" title="diphthong" label="diphthong"/>
<link wikidata="Q103808" start="17251" end="17259" title="loanword" label="loanword"/>
<link wikidata="Q62155" start="18358" end="18363" title="affix" label="affix"/>
<link wikidata="Q202142" start="18676" end="18689" title="locative case" label="locative case"/>
<link wikidata="Q146233" start="18904" end="18917" title="genitive case" label="genitive case"/>
<link wikidata="Q6093749" start="19577" end="19583" title="Turkish copula" label="copula"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21131" end="21158" title="#Phonology" label="road sign in the photograph"/>
<link wikidata="Q438358" start="21556" end="21567" title="alternation (linguistics)" label="alternation"/>
<link wikidata="Q45301" start="21686" end="21693" title="Trabzon" label="Trabzon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7083390" start="21761" end="21782" title="Old Anatolian Turkish" label="Old Anatolian Turkish"/>
<link wikidata="Q55628433" start="21867" end="21882" title="palatal harmony" label="palatal harmony"/>
<link wikidata="Q207509" start="24471" end="24477" title="Copula (linguistics)" label="copula"/>
<link wikidata="Q539808" start="25387" end="25406" title="subject–object–verb" label="subject–object–verb"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="25425" end="25430" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q846615" start="26425" end="26440" title="Topic-prominent language" label="topic-prominent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778442" start="26663" end="26674" title="Verb phrase" label="verb-phrase"/>
<link wikidata="Q171263" start="26815" end="26837" title="agglutinative language" label="agglutinative language"/>
<link wikidata="Q62155" start="26858" end="26863" title="affix" label="affix"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27071" end="27085" title="#Word formation" label="Word formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q484495" start="27177" end="27189" title="alliteration" label="alliterative"/>
<link wikidata="Q316560" start="28295" end="28307" title="sine qua non" label="sine qua non"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="29096" end="29102" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="29106" end="29112" title="Arabic language" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9301" start="29186" end="29197" title="Serbo-Croatian" label="Serbo-Croat"/>
<link wikidata="Q103184" start="29425" end="29441" title="definite article" label="definite article"/>
<link wikidata="Q188078" start="29604" end="29614" title="Declension" label="noun cases"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29712" end="29732" title="#Vowel harmony" label="superscript notation"/>
<link wikidata="Q192997" start="29815" end="29832" title="instrumental case" label="instrumental case"/>
<link wikidata="Q146786" start="29955" end="29961" title="plural" label="plural"/>
<link wikidata="Q148877" start="30502" end="30514" title="assimilation (linguistics)" label="assimilation"/>
<link wikidata="Q102047" start="30518" end="30524" title="suffix" label="suffix"/>
<link wikidata="Q494510" start="30534" end="30541" title="voice (phonetics)" label="voicing"/>
<link wikidata="Q690940" start="30631" end="30637" title="grammatical person" label="person"/>
<link wikidata="Q6093749" start="30696" end="30702" title="Turkish copula" label="copula"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304610" start="30775" end="30788" title="interrogative word" label="interrogative"/>
<link wikidata="Q468801" start="30985" end="31001" title="personal pronoun" label="personal pronoun"/>
<link wikidata="Q188078" start="33118" end="33126" title="declension" label="declined"/>
<link wikidata="Q468777" start="33399" end="33411" title="non-existent" label="non-existent"/>
<link wikidata="Q690940" start="34117" end="34123" title="Grammatical person" label="person"/>
<link wikidata="Q177691" start="34252" end="34257" title="Grammatical tense" label="tense"/>
<link wikidata="Q192613" start="34259" end="34266" title="Present tense" label="present"/>
<link wikidata="Q1994301" start="34268" end="34272" title="Past tense" label="past"/>
<link wikidata="Q501405" start="34274" end="34280" title="Future tense" label="future"/>
<link wikidata="Q216497" start="34286" end="34292" title="aorist" label="aorist"/>
<link wikidata="Q184932" start="34295" end="34299" title="Grammatical mood" label="mood"/>
<link wikidata="Q625581" start="34301" end="34312" title="Conditional mood" label="conditional"/>
<link wikidata="Q22716" start="34314" end="34324" title="Imperative mood" label="imperative"/>
<link wikidata="Q3332616" start="34326" end="34337" title="Inferential mood" label="inferential"/>
<link wikidata="Q6985419" start="34339" end="34352" title="Necessitative mood" label="necessitative"/>
<link wikidata="Q527205" start="34358" end="34366" title="Optative mood" label="optative"/>
<link wikidata="Q208084" start="34373" end="34379" title="Grammatical aspect" label="aspect"/>
<link wikidata="Q12223979" start="34443" end="34460" title="Evidentiality" label="direct evidential"/>
<link wikidata="Q4356464" start="34466" end="34474" title="Mirativity" label="mirative"/>
<link wikidata="Q102047" start="34505" end="34511" title="suffix" label="suffix"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="34912" end="34918" title="Aorist#Turkish" label="aorist"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="34939" end="34950" title="Subjunctive mood#Turkish" label="subjunctive"/>
<link wikidata="Q2361676" start="36012" end="36029" title="Attributive verb" label="attributive forms"/>
<link wikidata="Q814722" start="36073" end="36091" title="present participle" label="present participle"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36160" end="36166" title="Aorist#Turkish" label="aorist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402059" start="36288" end="36303" title="relative clause" label="relative clause"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36746" end="36763" title="Possessive affix#Turkish" label="possessive suffix"/>
<link wikidata="Q393272" start="37505" end="37518" title="agglutination" label="agglutination"/>
<link wikidata="Q327358" start="37522" end="37536" title="Word formation" label="form new words"/>
<link wikidata="Q213458" start="38323" end="38329" title="clitic" label="clitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q245423" start="38501" end="38512" title="Compound (linguistics)" label="compounding"/>
<link wikidata="Q147137" start="39035" end="39048" title="vowel harmony" label="vowel harmony"/>
<link wikidata="Q637405" start="39098" end="39107" title="Turkish alphabet" label="a version"/>
<link wikidata="Q8229" start="39111" end="39123" title="Latin script" label="Latin script"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152" start="39146" end="39153" title="Mustafa Kemal Atatürk" label="Atatürk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1992372" start="39169" end="39193" title="Ottoman Turkish alphabet" label="Ottoman Turkish alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q744068" start="39208" end="39227" title="Perso-Arabic script" label="Perso-Arabic script"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="39579" end="39591" title="#Vowel harmony" label="eight vowels"/>
<link wikidata="Q780048" start="39648" end="39664" title="Atatürk&amp;#x27;s reforms" label="cultural reforms"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="39811" end="39830" title="Turkish alphabet#Modern Turkish alphabet" label="Language Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q443861" start="40411" end="40423" title="Frang Bardhi" label="Frang Bardhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033526" start="40708" end="40716" title="Phonemic spelling" label="phonemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q8183" start="40756" end="40763" title="phoneme" label="phoneme"/>
<link wikidata="Q11175" start="41170" end="41180" title="circumflex" label="circumflex"/>
<link wikidata="Q853589" start="41197" end="41207" title="back vowel" label="back vowel"/>
<link wikidata="Q103808" start="41301" end="41306" title="loanword" label="loans"/>
<link wikidata="Q252734" start="41774" end="41795" title="Âşık Veysel Şatıroğlu" label="Âşık Veysel Şatıroğlu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7097633" start="41812" end="41817" title="ashik" label="ashik"/>
<link wikidata="Q7855348" start="41850" end="41873" title="Turkish folk literature" label="Turkish folk literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q7813" start="41906" end="41943" title="Universal Declaration of Human Rights" label="Universal Declaration of Human Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q725744" start="42097" end="42112" title="keyboard layout" label="keyboard layout"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193977" start="42215" end="42234" title="Sun Language Theory" label="Sun Language Theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052595" start="42237" end="42249" title="Turkish name" label="Turkish name"/>
<link wikidata="Q36885" start="42252" end="42273" title="Turkish Sign Language" label="Turkish Sign Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q6570211" start="42276" end="42314" title="List of English words of Turkic origin" label="List of English words of Turkic origin"/>
<link wikidata="Q33611" start="42317" end="42347" title="Languages used on the Internet" label="Languages used on the Internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q64210939" start="42350" end="42371" title="Turkish bird language" label="Turkish bird language"/>
<link wikidata="Q3458382" start="42374" end="42382" title="Öztürkçe" label="Öztürkçe"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="29993" wikidata="Q399513" url="?curid=29993" title="The Thin Blue Line (disambiguation)">
<text>The [[thin blue line]] is a colloquial term for police forces.

The Thin Blue Line or Thin Blue Line may also refer to:

==Films==
* &quot;The Thin Blue Line&quot; (1966 film), a documentary film by William Friedkin about the police and the problems they encounter
* &quot;The Thin Blue Line&quot; (1988 film), a documentary film by Errol Morris concerning the murder of a police officer

==TV series==
* &quot;The Thin Blue Line&quot; (American TV series), a 1952 American panel show produced by LAPD Chief William H. Parker
* &quot;The Thin Blue Line&quot; (British TV series), a 1995–1996 British sitcom set in a police station
* &quot;Thin Blue Line&quot; (Swedish TV series), a 2021 Swedish police drama series set in Malmö

==Other uses==
* Thin Blue Line, a 2009 NASA side-view photograph of Earth&#x27;s atmosphere

==See also==
* Blue Line (disambiguation)
* Long Blue Line (disambiguation)
* The Thin Red Line (disambiguation)
* Thin Blue Line Act, or H.R. 115, a U.S. law passed in January 2017
* Thin Blue Line flag, a symbol used by Blue Lives Matter and far-right movements</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q399513" start="4" end="22" title="The Thin Blue Line (disambiguation)" label="[[thin blue line]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q399513" start="64" end="82" title="The Thin Blue Line (disambiguation)" label="The Thin Blue Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q399513" start="86" end="100" title="The Thin Blue Line (disambiguation)" label="Thin Blue Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q17029396" start="133" end="175" title="The Thin Blue Line (1966 film)" label="&amp;quot;The Thin Blue Line&amp;quot; (1966 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q162997" start="267" end="309" title="The Thin Blue Line (1988 film)" label="&amp;quot;The Thin Blue Line&amp;quot; (1988 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q96409655" start="405" end="456" title="The Thin Blue Line (American TV series)" label="&amp;quot;The Thin Blue Line&amp;quot; (American TV series)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1816205" start="528" end="578" title="The Thin Blue Line (British TV series)" label="&amp;quot;The Thin Blue Line&amp;quot; (British TV series)"/>
<link wikidata="Q104808770" start="633" end="679" title="Thin Blue Line (Swedish TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Thin Blue Line&amp;quot; (Swedish TV series)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="747" end="761" title="Overview effect#ThinBlueLine" label="Thin Blue Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q162807" start="839" end="865" title="Blue Line (disambiguation)" label="Blue Line (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q55692766" start="868" end="899" title="Long Blue Line (disambiguation)" label="Long Blue Line (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16615242" start="902" end="936" title="The Thin Red Line (disambiguation)" label="The Thin Red Line (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q29096884" start="939" end="957" title="Thin Blue Line Act" label="Thin Blue Line Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q7768695" start="1008" end="1027" title="Thin Blue Line flag" label="Thin Blue Line flag"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="29999" wikidata="Q470937" url="?curid=29999" title="The Shining (novel)">
<text>The Shining is a 1977 horror novel by American author Stephen King. It is King&#x27;s third published novel and first hardcover bestseller; its success firmly established King as a preeminent author in the horror genre. The setting and characters are influenced by King&#x27;s personal experiences, including both his visit to The Stanley Hotel in 1974 and his struggle with alcoholism. The novel was adapted into a 1980 film and a 1997 miniseries. The book was followed by a sequel, &quot;Doctor Sleep&quot;, published in 2013, which in turn was adapted into a 2019 film &quot;Doctor Sleep&quot;.

&quot;The Shining&quot; centers on Jack Torrance, a struggling writer and recovering alcoholic who accepts a position as the off-season caretaker of the historic Overlook Hotel in the Colorado Rockies. His family accompanies him on this job, including his young son, Danny, who possesses &quot;the shining&quot;, an array of psychic abilities that allow the child to glimpse the hotel&#x27;s horrific true nature. Soon, after a winter storm leaves the family snowbound, the supernatural forces inhabiting the hotel influence Jack&#x27;s sanity, leaving his wife Wendy and son in grave danger.

== Plot ==
Jack Torrance, an aspiring writer, is hired as the winter caretaker at the Overlook Hotel, an isolated resort hotel in the Colorado Rockies. Jack is a recovering alcoholic with anger issues which previously caused him to accidentally break his son Danny&#x27;s arm and lose a teaching job after assaulting a student. Jack hopes that the hotel&#x27;s seclusion will help him reconnect with Danny as well as his wife, Wendy, and give him the motivation needed to work on a play.

Unknown to his parents, Danny possesses psychic abilities referred to as &quot;shining&quot;, which include reading minds, premonitions and clairvoyance. While moving into the hotel on closing day, the Torrances meet the chef, Dick Hallorann, who possesses similar abilities to Danny&#x27;s and forms a connection with him.

As the Torrances settle in alone at the Overlook, Danny sees ghosts and frightening visions. Danny does not tell either of his parents about his visions because he senses that the caretaking job is important to his father and dissuades Wendy from leaving Jack at the Overlook by himself. However, Danny soon realizes that his presence in the hotel makes the supernatural activity more powerful, turning echoes of past tragedies from the hotel&#x27;s history into dangerous threats. Apparitions take solid form and the garden&#x27;s topiary animals come to life. The winter snowfall leaves the Torrances cut off from the outside world.

The Overlook has difficulty possessing Danny, so it turns its attention to Jack by frustrating his desire to work and by enticing him with the dark history of the hotel through a scrapbook in the basement. Jack starts to develop cabin fever and becomes increasingly unstable, destroying a two-way radio and sabotaging a snowmobile, the family&#x27;s only means of escape. After a fight with Wendy, Jack sees the hotel&#x27;s bar fully stocked with liquor despite being previously empty and finds himself attending a party of ghosts. As he gets drunk, the hotel uses the ghost of Delbert Grady, a previous caretaker who murdered his family, to urge Jack to do the same to Danny and Wendy. He initially resists but ultimately succumbs to his dark side and the hotel.

Wendy and Danny get the better of Jack after he attacks Wendy, locking him inside the pantry, but Grady&#x27;s ghost releases him after he makes Jack promise to bring him Danny and kill Wendy. Jack attacks Wendy with one of the hotel&#x27;s roque mallets, seriously injuring her, but she escapes to the caretaker&#x27;s suite and locks herself in the bathroom. Jack attempts to break the door with the mallet, but Wendy slashes his hand with a razor blade to deter him. Meanwhile, Hallorann, having received a psychic distress call from Danny while working at a winter resort in Florida, rushes back to the Overlook, only to be attacked by the topiary animals and severely injured by Jack.

As Jack pursues Danny through the hotel and corners him on the top floor, he briefly gains control of himself and implores Danny to flee. The hotel quickly retakes control of Jack, making him violently batter his own face and skull into ruin with the mallet, leaving his body under the hotel&#x27;s control. Remembering that Jack has neglected to relieve the pressure on the hotel&#x27;s unstable boiler, Danny informs the hotel that it is about to explode. As Danny, Wendy, and Hallorann flee, the hotel-creature rushes to the basement in an attempt to vent the pressure, but it is too late. The boiler explodes, killing Jack and destroying the Overlook. Fighting off a last attempt by the hotel to possess him, Hallorann guides Danny and Wendy to safety.

The book&#x27;s epilogue is set during the next summer. Hallorann, who has taken a chef&#x27;s job at a resort in Maine, comforts Danny over the loss of his father as Wendy recuperates from the injuries Jack inflicted on her.

==Background==
After writing &quot;Carrie&quot; and &quot;&#x27;Salem&#x27;s Lot&quot;, which are both set in small towns in King&#x27;s native Maine, King was looking for a change of pace for his next book: &quot;I wanted to spend a year away from Maine so that my next novel would have a different sort of background&quot;. King opened an atlas of the United States on his kitchen table and randomly pointed to a location, which turned out to be Boulder, Colorado.

On October 30, 1974, King and his wife Tabitha checked into The Stanley Hotel in nearby Estes Park, Colorado. They were the only two guests in the hotel that night: &quot;When we arrived, they were just getting ready to close for the season, and we found ourselves the only guests in the place — with all those long, empty corridors&quot;.

Ten years earlier, King had read Ray Bradbury&#x27;s 1950 short story &quot;The Veldt&quot; and was inspired to write a story about a person whose dreams would become real. In 1972, King started a novel entitled &quot;Darkshine&quot;, which was to be about a psychic boy in a psychic amusement park, but the idea never came to fruition and he abandoned the book. During the night at the Stanley, this story came back to him.

King and his wife had dinner that evening in the grand dining room, totally alone. They were offered one choice for dinner, the only meal still available. Taped orchestral music played in the room and theirs was the only table set for dining: &quot;Except for our table all the chairs were up on the tables. So the music is echoing down the hall, and, I mean, it was like God had put me there to hear that and see those things. And by the time I went to bed that night, I had the whole book in my mind&quot;. After dinner, his wife decided to turn in, but King took a walk around the empty hotel. He ended up in the bar and was served drinks by a bartender named Grady.

In King&#x27;s words: &quot;That night I dreamed of my three-year-old son running through the corridors, looking back over his shoulder, eyes wide, screaming. He was being chased by a fire-hose. I woke up with a tremendous jerk, sweating all over, within an inch of falling out of bed. I got up, lit a cigarette, sat in a chair looking out the window at the Rockies, and by the time the cigarette was done, I had the bones of the book firmly set in my mind&quot;.
&quot;The Shining&quot; was also heavily influenced by Shirley Jackson&#x27;s 1959 novel &quot;The Haunting of Hill House&quot;, Edgar Allan Poe&#x27;s short stories &quot;The Fall of the House of Usher&quot; (1839) and &quot;The Masque of the Red Death&quot; (1842), and Robert Marasco&#x27;s 1973 novel &quot;Burnt Offerings&quot;. The story has often been compared to Guy de Maupassant&#x27;s story &quot;The Inn&quot;.

Before writing &quot;The Shining&quot;, King had written the novel &quot;Roadwork&quot; and the novella &quot;The Body&quot;. The first draft of &quot;The Shining&quot; took less than four months to complete and he was able to publish it before the others. The title was inspired by the 1970 John Lennon song &quot;Instant Karma!&quot;, which contained the line &quot;We all shine on&quot;. Bill Thompson, King&#x27;s editor at Doubleday Publishing, tried to talk him out of &quot;The Shining&quot; because he thought that after writing &quot;Carrie&quot; and &quot;″Salem&#x27;s Lot&quot; he would get &quot;typed&quot; as a horror writer. King considered that a compliment.

==Deleted prologue and epilogue==
&quot;The Shining&quot; originally included a prologue titled &quot;Before the Play&quot; that chronicled earlier events in the Overlook&#x27;s history, as well as an epilogue titled &quot;After the Play&quot;. Neither remained part of the published novel. The prologue was later published in &quot;Whispers&quot; magazine in August 1982, and an abridged version appeared in the April 26–May 2, 1997 issue of &quot;TV Guide&quot; to promote the then-upcoming miniseries of &quot;The Shining&quot;. The epilogue was thought to have been lost but was re-discovered in 2016 as part of an early manuscript version of the novel. Both &quot;Before the Play&quot; and &quot;After the Play&quot; were published as part of the Deluxe Special Edition of &quot;The Shining&quot; by Cemetery Dance Publications in early 2017.

==Sequel==
In November 2009, during a reading at the Canon Theatre in Toronto, King described to the audience an idea for a sequel to &quot;The Shining&quot;. The idea was prompted by the occasional person asking, &quot;Whatever happened to Danny?&quot; The story would follow Danny Torrance, now in his 40s, living in New Hampshire, where he works as an orderly at a hospice, where he uses his powers to support terminally ill patients at their death. Later, on December 1, King posted a poll on his official website, asking visitors to vote for which book he should write next, &quot;Doctor Sleep&quot; or the next &quot;Dark Tower&quot; novel:

Voting ended on December 31, and it was revealed that &quot;Doctor Sleep&quot; received 5,861 votes, while &quot;The Wind Through the Keyhole&quot; received 5,812. In &quot;Doctor Sleep&quot;, published in September 2013, the plot includes a traveling group of psychic vampires called the True Knot.

== Adaptations ==
The novel was adapted into a 1980 feature film of the same name directed by Stanley Kubrick and co-written with Diane Johnson. King himself wrote a screenplay, which was initially very faithful to the novel but rejected by Kubrick. Although King himself remains disappointed with the adaptation, having criticized its handling of the book&#x27;s major themes and of Wendy&#x27;s character, it is regarded as one of the greatest horror films ever made. King&#x27;s disdain of the film has not lessened in recent years, with his 2018 novel &quot;The Outsider&quot; even including a jab about how poorly done Kubrick&#x27;s interpretation of the film is. The film adaptation of &quot;Doctor Sleep&quot;, released in 2019, was written and directed by Mike Flanagan and served as a direct sequel to the Kubrick film, but it also heavily utilizes and adapts elements of &quot;The Shining&quot; novel, including Jack&#x27;s original story being incorporated into the adult Danny&#x27;s arc, the effects of alcoholism, and the story&#x27;s conclusion being used for the film&#x27;s climax, which ultimately led to it earning King&#x27;s approval.

The novel was also later adapted into a television miniseries, which premiered in 1997 on ABC. King wrote and closely monitored the making of the series to ensure that it followed the novel&#x27;s narrative. The miniseries garnered popular and critical acclaim, but in recent years has been received less fondly by critics compared to Kubrick&#x27;s film. The novel was adapted into an opera of the same name in 2016. It is also being adapted into a stage play directed by Ivo van Hove and written by Simon Stephens. Ben Stiller is reportedly in talks to play Jack Torrance in a stage adaptation. A spin-off series titled &quot;Overlook&quot; is in development by J. J. Abrams and his production company Bad Robot. It was to air on HBO Max and explore the tales of the Overlook Hotel. However, by August 2021, the show did not move forward at HBO Max and was shopped to other outlets before Netflix picked it up the following year.

==See also==
* Haunted house
* &quot;1408&quot; – Stephen King&#x27;s 1999 short story about the haunted hotel room

==References==
==External links==
*Bookpoi - How to identify first edition copies of &quot;The Shining&quot; by Stephen King.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q16575965" start="22" end="34" title="horror fiction" label="horror novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q39829" start="54" end="66" title="Stephen King" label="Stephen King"/>
<link wikidata="Q7766239" start="327" end="344" title="The Stanley Hotel" label="The Stanley Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q15326" start="375" end="385" title="alcoholism" label="alcoholism"/>
<link wikidata="Q186341" start="416" end="425" title="The Shining (film)" label="1980 film"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811161" start="432" end="447" title="The Shining (miniseries)" label="1997 miniseries"/>
<link wikidata="Q3657739" start="490" end="502" title="Doctor Sleep (novel)" label="Doctor Sleep"/>
<link wikidata="Q56881169" start="578" end="590" title="Doctor Sleep (2019 film)" label="Doctor Sleep"/>
<link wikidata="Q2601499" start="634" end="647" title="Jack Torrance" label="Jack Torrance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7570444" start="783" end="799" title="Southern Rocky Mountains" label="Colorado Rockies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3701747" start="866" end="871" title="Danny Torrance" label="Danny"/>
<link wikidata="Q18747321" start="1161" end="1166" title="Wendy Torrance" label="Wendy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2917466" start="1722" end="1729" title="psychic" label="psychic"/>
<link wikidata="Q170612" start="1790" end="1803" title="telepathy" label="reading minds"/>
<link wikidata="Q520667" start="1805" end="1816" title="Precognition" label="premonition"/>
<link wikidata="Q2975244" start="1822" end="1834" title="clairvoyance" label="clairvoyance"/>
<link wikidata="Q21403410" start="1909" end="1923" title="Dick Hallorann" label="Dick Hallorann"/>
<link wikidata="Q1437791" start="2539" end="2546" title="topiary" label="topiary"/>
<link wikidata="Q489412" start="2872" end="2883" title="cabin fever" label="cabin fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q17240" start="2963" end="2973" title="snowmobile" label="snowmobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q56139" start="3091" end="3097" title="liquor" label="liquor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143202" start="3650" end="3655" title="roque" label="roque"/>
<link wikidata="Q812" start="3988" end="3995" title="Florida" label="Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771692" start="4874" end="4882" title="epilogue" label="epilogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q724" start="4972" end="4977" title="Maine" label="Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q623394" start="5120" end="5126" title="Carrie (novel)" label="Carrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q753290" start="5143" end="5165" title="&amp;#x27;Salem&amp;#x27;s Lot" label="&amp;#x27;Salem&amp;#x27;s Lot"/>
<link wikidata="Q192517" start="5533" end="5550" title="Boulder, Colorado" label="Boulder, Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q284287" start="5592" end="5599" title="Tabitha King" label="Tabitha"/>
<link wikidata="Q7766239" start="5613" end="5630" title="The Stanley Hotel" label="The Stanley Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010533" start="5641" end="5661" title="Estes Park, Colorado" label="Estes Park, Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q40640" start="5927" end="5939" title="Ray Bradbury" label="Ray Bradbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q7772135" start="5970" end="5979" title="The Veldt (short story)" label="The Veldt"/>
<link wikidata="Q239910" start="7510" end="7525" title="Shirley Jackson" label="Shirley Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3819311" start="7550" end="7576" title="The Haunting of Hill House" label="The Haunting of Hill House"/>
<link wikidata="Q16867" start="7584" end="7599" title="Edgar Allan Poe" label="Edgar Allan Poe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197735" start="7627" end="7657" title="The Fall of the House of Usher" label="The Fall of the House of Usher"/>
<link wikidata="Q766086" start="7681" end="7708" title="The Masque of the Red Death" label="The Masque of the Red Death"/>
<link wikidata="Q7347337" start="7727" end="7741" title="Robert Marasco" label="Robert Marasco"/>
<link wikidata="Q48741274" start="7766" end="7781" title="Burnt Offerings (Marasco novel)" label="Burnt Offerings"/>
<link wikidata="Q9327" start="7826" end="7843" title="Guy de Maupassant" label="Guy de Maupassant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072334" start="7952" end="7960" title="Roadwork (novel)" label="Roadwork"/>
<link wikidata="Q149537" start="7975" end="7982" title="novella" label="novella"/>
<link wikidata="Q1214391" start="7989" end="7997" title="The Body (novella)" label="The Body"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203" start="8171" end="8182" title="John Lennon" label="John Lennon"/>
<link wikidata="Q545718" start="8194" end="8208" title="Instant Karma!" label="Instant Karma!"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251563" start="8307" end="8327" title="Doubleday Publishing" label="Doubleday Publishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7993984" start="8883" end="8912" title="Whispers (magazine/anthologies)" label="&amp;quot;Whispers&amp;quot; magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7672340" start="9005" end="9013" title="TV Guide" label="TV Guide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811161" start="9069" end="9080" title="The Shining (miniseries)" label="The Shining"/>
<link wikidata="Q5058698" start="9361" end="9388" title="Cemetery Dance Publications" label="Cemetery Dance Publications"/>
<link wikidata="Q5335183" start="9458" end="9471" title="Canon Theatre" label="Canon Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="9475" end="9482" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q759" start="9724" end="9737" title="New Hampshire" label="New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q608152" start="9773" end="9780" title="hospice" label="hospice"/>
<link wikidata="Q3657739" start="9991" end="10003" title="Doctor Sleep (novel)" label="Doctor Sleep"/>
<link wikidata="" start="10013" end="10050" title="the Dark Tower: The Wind Through the Keyhole" label="the next &amp;quot;Dark Tower&amp;quot; novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q186341" start="10401" end="10435" title="The Shining (film)" label="1980 feature film of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001" start="10448" end="10463" title="Stanley Kubrick" label="Stanley Kubrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q533343" start="10484" end="10497" title="Diane Johnson" label="Diane Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10780" end="10822" title="List of films considered the best#Horror/monster/thriller" label="one of the greatest horror films ever made"/>
<link wikidata="Q48816660" start="10910" end="10934" title="The Outsider (King novel)" label="&amp;quot;The Outsider&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q56881169" start="11028" end="11071" title="Doctor Sleep (2019 film)" label="film adaptation of &amp;quot;Doctor Sleep&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q19668417" start="11119" end="11132" title="Mike Flanagan (filmmaker)" label="Mike Flanagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811161" start="11552" end="11573" title="The Shining (miniseries)" label="television miniseries"/>
<link wikidata="Q169889" start="11602" end="11605" title="American Broadcasting Company" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q25218646" start="11898" end="11920" title="The Shining (opera)" label="opera of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q2424727" start="11985" end="11997" title="Ivo van Hove" label="Ivo van Hove"/>
<link wikidata="Q363488" start="12013" end="12027" title="Simon Stephens" label="Simon Stephens"/>
<link wikidata="Q47100" start="12029" end="12040" title="Ben Stiller" label="Ben Stiller"/>
<link wikidata="Q96251187" start="12140" end="12148" title="Overlook (TV series)" label="Overlook"/>
<link wikidata="Q188137" start="12176" end="12188" title="J. J. Abrams" label="J. J. Abrams"/>
<link wikidata="Q798768" start="12216" end="12225" title="Bad Robot" label="Bad Robot"/>
<link wikidata="Q117078710" start="12244" end="12251" title="HBO Max" label="HBO Max"/>
<link wikidata="Q907311" start="12403" end="12410" title="Netflix" label="Netflix"/>
<link wikidata="Q545599" start="12460" end="12473" title="Haunted house" label="Haunted house"/>
<link wikidata="Q4028807" start="12482" end="12486" title="1408 (short story)" label="1408"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="30000" wikidata="Q47221" url="?curid=30000" title="Taxi Driver">
<text>Taxi Driver is a 1976 American neo-noir psychological drama film directed by Martin Scorsese and written by Paul Schrader. Set in a morally decaying New York City following the Vietnam War, it stars Robert De Niro as veteran Marine and taxi driver Travis Bickle, whose mental state deteriorates as he works nights in the city. The film also stars Jodie Foster, Cybill Shepherd, Harvey Keitel, Peter Boyle, Leonard Harris, and Albert Brooks in his first film role.

With &quot;The Wrong Man&quot; (1956) and &quot;A Bigger Splash&quot; (1973) as inspiration, Scorsese wanted the film to feel like a dream to audiences. Filming began in the summer of 1975 in New York City, with actors taking pay cuts to ensure that the project could be completed on a low budget of $1.9 million. Production concluded that same year. Bernard Herrmann composed for the film what would be his final score; the music was finished just hours before his death, and the film is dedicated to him.

Theatrically released by Columbia Pictures on February 8, 1976, the film was critically and commercially successful despite generating controversy both for its graphic violence in the climactic ending and for the casting of then 12-year-old Foster as a child prostitute. The film received numerous accolades including the at the 1976 Cannes Film Festival and four nominations at the 49th Academy Awards, including Best Picture, Best Actor (for De Niro), and Best Supporting Actress (for Foster).

Although &quot;Taxi Driver&quot; generated further controversy for inspiring John Hinckley Jr.&#x27;s attempted assassination of President Ronald Reagan in 1981, the film has remained popular. It is considered one of the greatest films ever made and one of the most culturally significant and inspirational of its time, garnering cult status. In 2022, &quot;Sight &amp; Sound&quot; named it the 29th-best film ever in its decennial critics&#x27; poll, and the 12th-greatest film of all time on its directors&#x27; poll, tied with &quot;Barry Lyndon&quot;. In 1994, the film was considered &quot;culturally, historically, or aesthetically&quot; significant by the U.S. Library of Congress and was selected for preservation in the National Film Registry.

==Plot==

In New York City, Vietnam veteran Travis Bickle takes a job as a night shift taxi driver to cope with his chronic insomnia and loneliness, frequenting adult movie theaters and keeping a diary in which he consciously attempts to include aphorisms such as &quot;you&#x27;re only as healthy as you feel.&quot; He becomes disgusted with the crime and urban decay that he witnesses in the city and dreams about getting &quot;the scum off the streets.&quot;

Travis becomes infatuated with Betsy, a campaign volunteer for Senator and presidential candidate Charles Palantine. Travis enters the campaign office where she works and asks her out for coffee, to which she agrees. Betsy agrees to go on another date with him. During their date, Travis takes Betsy to a porn theater, which she leaves. He attempts to reconcile with her, but fails. Enraged, he storms into the campaign office where she works and proceeds to berate her before being kicked out of the office.

Experiencing an existential crisis and seeing various acts of prostitution throughout the city, Travis confides in a fellow taxi driver nicknamed Wizard about his violent thoughts. However, Wizard dismisses them and assures him that he will be fine. To find an outlet for his rage, Travis follows an intense physical training regimen. He gets in contact with black market gun dealer Easy Andy, and buys four handguns. At home, Travis practices drawing his weapons, even creating a quick-draw rig hidden in his sleeve. He begins attending Palantine&#x27;s rallies to scope out his security. One night, Travis shoots and kills a man attempting to rob a convenience store run by a friend of his.

On his trips around the city, Travis regularly encounters Iris, a 12-year-old child prostitute. Tricking her pimp and abusive lover, Sport, into thinking he wants to solicit her, Travis meets with her in private and tries to persuade her to stop prostituting herself. Soon after, Travis shaves his hair into a mohawk and attends a public rally where he plans to assassinate Palantine. However, Secret Service agents see Travis putting his hand inside his jacket and approach him, escalating into a chase. Travis escapes pursuit and makes it home undetected.

That evening, Travis drives to the brothel where Iris works to kill Sport. He enters the building and shoots Sport and one of Iris&#x27;s clients, a mafioso. Travis is shot several times, but manages to kill the two men. He then fights with the bouncer, who he manages to stab through the hand with his knife and kill with a gunshot to the head. Travis attempts to commit suicide, but is out of bullets. Severely injured, he slumps on a couch next to a sobbing Iris. As police respond to the scene, Travis imitates shooting himself in the head using his finger.

Travis goes into a coma due to his injuries. He is heralded by the press as a heroic vigilante and not prosecuted for the murders. He receives a letter from Iris&#x27;s parents in Pittsburgh, who thank him and reveal that she is safe and attending school back home. 

After recovering, Travis grows his hair out and returns to work, where he encounters Betsy as a fare; they interact, with Betsy saying she followed his story in the newspapers. Travis drops her at home, and declines to take her money, driving off with a smile. He suddenly becomes agitated after noticing something in his rear-view mirror, but continues driving into the night.

== Cast ==


==Production==
===Development===
Martin Scorsese has stated that it was Brian De Palma who introduced him to Paul Schrader, and &quot;Taxi Driver&quot; arose from Scorsese&#x27;s feeling that movies are like dreams or drug-induced reveries. He attempted to evoke within the viewer the feeling of being in a limbo state between sleeping and waking. Scorsese cites Alfred Hitchcock&#x27;s &quot;The Wrong Man&quot; (1956) and Jack Hazan&#x27;s &quot;A Bigger Splash&quot; (1973) as inspirations for his camerawork in the movie. Before Scorsese was hired, John Milius and Irvin Kershner were considered to helm the project. In writing the script, Schrader drew inspiration from the diaries of Arthur Bremer, who shot presidential candidate George Wallace in 1972, as well as from the Harry Chapin song &quot;Taxi&quot;, which is about an old girlfriend getting into a cab. For the ending of the story, in which Bickle becomes a media hero, Schrader was inspired by Sara Jane Moore&#x27;s attempted assassination of President Gerald Ford, which resulted in her being on the cover of &quot;Newsweek&quot;.

Schrader also used himself as inspiration. In a 1981 interview with Tom Snyder on &quot;The Tomorrow Show&quot;, he related his experience of living in New York City while battling chronic insomnia, which led him to frequent pornographic bookstores and theaters because they remained open all night. Following a divorce and a breakup with a live-in girlfriend, he spent a few weeks living in his car. After visiting a hospital for a stomach ulcer, Schrader wrote the screenplay for &quot;Taxi Driver&quot; in &quot;under a fortnight.&quot; He states, &quot;The first draft was maybe 60 pages, and I started the next draft immediately, and it took less than two weeks.&quot; Schrader recalls, &quot;I realized I hadn&#x27;t spoken to anyone in weeks [...] that was when the metaphor of the taxi occurred to me. That is what I was: this person in an iron box, a coffin, floating around the city, but seemingly alone.&quot; Schrader decided to make Bickle a Vietnam vet because the national trauma of the war seemed to blend perfectly with Bickle&#x27;s paranoid psychosis, making his experiences after the war more intense and threatening. Two drafts were written in ten days. &quot;Pickpocket&quot;, a film by the French director Robert Bresson, was also cited as an influence.

In &quot;Scorsese on Scorsese&quot;, Scorsese mentions the religious symbolism in the story, comparing Bickle to a saint who wants to cleanse or purge both his mind and his body of weakness. Bickle attempts to kill himself near the end of the movie as a tribute to the samurai&#x27;s &quot;death with honor&quot; principle. Dustin Hoffman was offered the role of Travis Bickle but turned it down because he thought that Scorsese was &quot;crazy&quot;. Al Pacino and Jeff Bridges were also considered for Travis Bickle.

=== Pre-production ===
While preparing for his role as Bickle, De Niro was filming Bernardo Bertolucci&#x27;s &quot;1900&quot; in Italy. According to Boyle, he would &quot;finish shooting on a Friday in Rome ... get on a plane ... [and] fly to New York.&quot; De Niro obtained a taxi driver&#x27;s license, and when on break, would pick up a taxi and drive around New York for a couple of weeks before returning to Rome to resume filming &quot;1900&quot;. Although Robert DeNiro had already starred in &quot;Godfather II&quot; (1974), he was only recognized one time while driving a cab in New York City. De Niro apparently lost and listened repeatedly to a taped reading of the diaries of criminal Arthur Bremer. When he had time off from shooting &quot;1900&quot;, De Niro visited an army base in Northern Italy and tape-recorded soldiers from the Midwestern United States, whose accents he thought might be appropriate for Travis&#x27;s character.

Scorsese brought in the film title designer Dan Perri to design the title sequence for &quot;Taxi Driver&quot;. Perri had been Scorsese&#x27;s original choice to design the titles for &quot;Alice Doesn&#x27;t Live Here Anymore&quot; in 1974, but Warner Bros would not allow him to hire an unknown designer. By the time &quot;Taxi Driver&quot; was going into production, Perri had established his reputation with his work on &quot;The Exorcist&quot;, and Scorsese was now able to hire him. Perri created the opening titles for &quot;Taxi Driver&quot; using second unit footage which he color-treated through a process of film copying and slit-scan, resulting in a highly stylised graphic sequence that evoked the &quot;underbelly&quot; of New York City through lurid colors, glowing neon signs, distorted nocturnal images, and deep black levels. Perri went on to design opening titles for a number of major films after this, including &quot;Star Wars&quot; (1977) and &quot;Raging Bull&quot; (1980).

===Filming===
Columbia Pictures gave Scorsese a budget of $1.3 million in April 1974. On a budget of only $1.9 million, various actors took pay cuts to bring the project to life. De Niro and Cybill Shepherd received only $35,000 to make the film, while Scorsese was given $65,000. Overall, $200,000 of the budget was allocated to performers in the movie.

&quot;Taxi Driver&quot; was shot during a New York City summer heat wave and sanitation strike in 1975. The film ran into conflict with the Motion Picture Association of America (MPAA) due to its violence. Scorsese de-saturated the colors in the final shootout, which allowed the film to get an R rating. To capture the atmospheric scenes in Bickle&#x27;s taxi, the sound technicians would get in the trunk while Scorsese and his cinematographer, Michael Chapman, would ensconce themselves on the back seat floor and use available light to shoot. Chapman later admitted the filming style was heavily influenced by New Wave filmmaker Jean-Luc Godard and his cinematographer Raoul Coutard, as the crew did not have the time or money to do &quot;traditional things&quot;. When Bickle decides to assassinate Senator Palantine, he cuts his hair into a mohawk. This detail was suggested by actor Victor Magnotta, a friend of Scorsese&#x27;s who had a small role as a Secret Service agent and had served in Vietnam. Scorsese later noted that Magnotta told them that, &quot;in Saigon, if you saw a guy with his head shaved—like a little Mohawk—that usually meant that those people were ready to go into a certain Special Forces situation. You didn&#x27;t even go near them. They were ready to kill.&quot;

Filming took place on New York City&#x27;s West Side, at a time when the city was on the brink of bankruptcy. According to producer Michael Phillips, &quot;the whole West Side was bombed out. There really were row after row of condemned buildings and that&#x27;s what we used to build our sets [...] we didn&#x27;t know we were documenting what looked like the dying gasp of New York.&quot; The tracking shot over the shootout scene, filmed in an actual apartment, took three months of preparation; the production team had to cut through the ceiling to shoot it.

==Music==


Bernard Herrmann previously scored De Palma&#x27;s &quot;Obsession&quot; and De Palma introduced Herrmann to Scorsese. The music by Herrmann was his final score before his death on December 24, 1975, several hours after Herrmann completed the recording for the soundtrack, and the film is dedicated to his memory. Scorsese, a long-time admirer of Herrmann, had particularly wanted him to compose the score; Herrmann was his &quot;first and only choice&quot;. Scorsese considered Herrmann&#x27;s score of great importance to the success of the film: &quot;It supplied the psychological basis throughout.&quot; The album &quot;The Silver Tongued Devil and I&quot; from Kris Kristofferson was used in the film, following &quot;Alice Doesn&#x27;t Live Here Anymore&quot; (1974) where Kristofferson played a supporting role. Jackson Browne&#x27;s &quot;Late for the Sky&quot; is also featured.

== Controversies ==
=== Casting of Jodie Foster ===
Some critics showed concern over 12-year-old Foster&#x27;s presence during the climactic shoot-out. Foster said that she was present during the setup and staging of the special effects used during the scene; the entire process was explained and demonstrated for her, step by step. Moreover, Foster said, she was fascinated and entertained by the behind-the-scenes preparation that went into the scene. In addition, before being given the part, Foster was subjected to psychological testing, attending sessions with a UCLA psychiatrist, to ensure that she would not be emotionally scarred by her role, in accordance with California Labor Board requirements monitoring children&#x27;s welfare on film sets.

Additional concerns surrounding Foster&#x27;s age focus on the role she played as Iris, a prostitute. Years later, she confessed how uncomfortable the treatment of her character was on set. Scorsese did not know how to approach different scenes with the actress. The director relied on Robert De Niro to deliver his directions to the young actress. Foster often expressed how De Niro, in that moment, became a mentor to her, stating that her acting career was highly influenced by the actor&#x27;s advice during the filming of &quot;Taxi Driver&quot;.

=== John Hinckley Jr. ===
&quot;Taxi Driver&quot; formed part of the delusional fantasy of John Hinckley Jr. that triggered his attempted assassination of President Ronald Reagan in 1981, an act for which he was found not guilty by reason of insanity. Hinckley stated that his actions were an attempt to impress Foster, on whom Hinckley was fixated, by mimicking Travis&#x27;s mohawked appearance at the Palantine rally. His attorney concluded his defense by playing the movie for the jury. When Scorsese heard about Hinckley&#x27;s motivation behind his assassination attempt, he briefly thought about quitting film-making as the association brought a negative perception of the film.

=== MPAA rating ===
The climactic shoot-out was considered intensely graphic by some critics, who even considered giving the film an X rating. The film was booed at the Cannes Film Festival for its graphic violence. To obtain an R rating, Scorsese had the colors desaturated, making the brightly colored blood less prominent. In later interviews, Scorsese commented that he was pleased by the color change and considered it an improvement over the original scene. However, in the special-edition DVD, Michael Chapman, the film&#x27;s cinematographer, expresses regret about the decision and the fact that no print with the unmuted colors exists anymore, as the originals had long since deteriorated.

== Themes and interpretations ==
Roger Ebert has written of the film&#x27;s ending:

James Berardinelli, in his review of the film, argues against the dream or fantasy interpretation, stating:
In the 1990 LaserDisc audio commentary (included on the [DVD] and Blu-ray), Scorsese acknowledged several critics&#x27; interpretation of the film&#x27;s ending as Bickle&#x27;s dying dream. He admits that the last scene of Bickle glancing at an unseen object implies that Bickle will fall into rage and recklessness in the future and that he is like &quot;a ticking time bomb&quot;. Writer Paul Schrader confirms this in his commentary on the 30th-anniversary DVD, stating that Travis &quot;is not cured by the movie&#x27;s end,&quot; and that &quot;he&#x27;s not going to be a hero next time.&quot; When asked on the website Reddit about the film&#x27;s ending, Schrader said that it was not to be taken as a dream sequence but that he envisioned it as returning to the beginning of the film, as if the last frame &quot;could be spliced to the first frame, and the movie started all over again.&quot;

The film has also been associated with the 1970s wave of vigilante films, but it has also been set apart from them as a more reputable New Hollywood film. While it shares similarities with those films, it is not explicitly a vigilante film and does not belong to that particular wave of cinema.

The film can be seen as a spiritual successor to &quot;The Searchers&quot;, according to Roger Ebert. Both films focus on a solitary war veteran who tries to save a young girl who is resistant to his efforts. The main characters in both movies are portrayed as being disconnected from society and incapable of forming normal relationships with others. Although it is unclear whether Paul Schrader sought inspiration from &quot;The Searchers&quot; specifically, the similarities between the two films are evident.

The film has been labeled as &quot;neo-noir&quot; by some critics, while others have referred to it as an antihero film. When shown on television, the ending credits featured a black screen with a disclaimer mentioning that &quot;the distinction between hero and villain is sometimes a matter of interpretation or misinterpretation of facts.&quot; This disclaimer was thought to have been added after the attempted assassination of Ronald Reagan in 1981, but in fact, it had been mentioned in a review of the film as early as 1979. &quot;LA Weekly&quot;, Letterboxd, and Yardbarker list this movie as belonging to the vetsploitation subgenre.

== Reception ==

=== Box office ===
The film opened at the Coronet Theater in New York City and grossed a house record of $68,000 in its first week. It went on to gross $28.3 million in the United States, making it the 17th-highest-grossing film of 1976.

=== Critical response ===
&quot;Taxi Driver&quot; received universal critical acclaim. Roger Ebert instantly praised it as one of the greatest films he had ever seen, claiming:
&quot;Taxi Driver&quot; is a hell, from the opening shot of a cab emerging from stygian clouds of steam to the climactic killing scene in which the camera finally looks straight down. Scorsese wanted to look away from Travis&#x27;s rejection; we almost want to look away from his life. But he&#x27;s there, all right, and he&#x27;s suffering.

On the review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes, the film holds an approval rating of 89% based on 158 reviews and an average rating of 9.1/10. The website&#x27;s critical consensus reads, &quot;A must-see film for movie lovers, this Martin Scorsese masterpiece is as hard-hitting as it is compelling, with Robert De Niro at his best.&quot; Metacritic gives the film a score of 94 out of 100, based on reviews from 23 critics, indicating &quot;universal acclaim&quot;.

&quot;Taxi Driver&quot; was ranked by the American Film Institute as the 52nd-greatest American film on its AFI&#x27;s 100 Years...100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition) list, and Bickle was voted the 30th-greatest villain in a poll by the same organization. &quot;The Village Voice&quot; ranked &quot;Taxi Driver&quot; at number 33 in its Top 250 &quot;Best Films of the Century&quot; list in 1999, based on a poll of critics. &quot;Empire&quot; also ranked him 18th in its &quot;The 100 Greatest Movie Characters&quot; poll, and the film ranks at No. 17 on the magazine&#x27;s 2008 list of the 500 greatest movies of all time.

&quot;Time Out&quot; magazine conducted a poll of the 100 greatest movies set in New York City. &quot;Taxi Driver&quot; topped the list, placing at No. 1. Schrader&#x27;s screenplay for the film was ranked the 43rd-greatest ever written by the Writers Guild of America. &quot;Taxi Driver&quot; was also ranked as the 44th best-directed film of all time by the Directors Guild of America. In contrast, Leonard Maltin gave a rating of only 2 stars and called it a &quot;gory, cold-blooded story of a sick man&#x27;s lurid descent into violence&quot; that was &quot;ugly and unredeeming&quot;.

In 2012, in a &quot;Sight &amp; Sound&quot; poll, Iranian filmmaker Asghar Farhadi selected &quot;Taxi Driver&quot; as one of his 10 best films of all time. Quentin Tarantino also listed the movie among his 10 greatest films of all time.

=== Accolades ===

=== American Film Institute ===
*AFI&#x27;s 100 Years...100 Movies (1998) – #47
*AFI&#x27;s 100 Years...100 Thrills (2001) – #22
*AFI&#x27;s 100 Years...100 Heroes &amp; Villains (2003)
** Travis Bickle – #30 Villain
*AFI&#x27;s 100 Years...100 Movie Quotes (2005)
** &quot;You talkin&#x27; to me?&quot; – #10
*AFI&#x27;s 100 Years of Film Scores (2005) – Nominated
*AFI&#x27;s 100 Years...100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition) (2007) – #52

=== Other honors ===
*National Film Registry – Inducted in 1994
*The film was chosen by &quot;Time&quot; as one of the 100 best films of all time.
*In 2015, &quot;Taxi Driver&quot; ranked 19th on BBC&#x27;s &quot;100 Greatest American Films&quot; list, voted on by film critics from around the world.

== Legacy ==
&quot;Taxi Driver&quot;, &quot;American Gigolo&quot;, &quot;Light Sleeper&quot;, and &quot;The Walker&quot; make up a series referred to variously as the &quot;Man in a Room&quot; or &quot;Night Worker&quot; films. Screenwriter Paul Schrader (who directed the latter three films) has said that he considers the central characters of the four films to be one character, who has changed as he has aged. The film also influenced the Charles Winkler film &quot;You Talkin&#x27; to Me?&quot;

Although Meryl Streep had not aspired to become a film actor, De Niro&#x27;s performance in &quot;Taxi Driver&quot; had a profound impact on her; she said to herself, &quot;That&#x27;s the kind of actor I want to be when I grow up.&quot;

The 1994 portrayal of psychopath Albie Kinsella by Robert Carlyle in British television series &quot;Cracker&quot; was in part inspired by Travis Bickle, and Carlyle&#x27;s performance has frequently been compared to De Niro&#x27;s as a result.

In the 2012 film &quot;Seven Psychopaths&quot;, psychotic Los Angeles actor Billy Bickle (Sam Rockwell) believes himself to be the illegitimate son of Travis Bickle.

The vigilante ending inspired Jacques Audiard for his 2015 -winning film &quot;Dheepan&quot;. The French director based the eponymous Tamil Tiger character on the one played by Robert De Niro in order to make him a &quot;real movie hero&quot;. The script of &quot;Joker&quot; by Todd Phillips also draws inspiration from &quot;Taxi Driver&quot;.

=== &quot;You talkin&#x27; to me?&quot; ===
De Niro&#x27;s &quot;You talkin&#x27; to me?&quot; speech has become a pop culture mainstay. In 2005, it was ranked number 10 on the American Film Institute&#x27;s AFI&#x27;s 100 Years...100 Movie Quotes.

In the relevant scene, the deranged Bickle is looking into a mirror at himself, imagining a confrontation that would give him a chance to draw his gun:

You talkin&#x27; to me? You talkin&#x27; to me? You talkin&#x27; to me? Then who the hell else are you talkin&#x27; to? You talkin&#x27; to me? Well I&#x27;m the only one here. Who the fuck do you think you&#x27;re talking to?

While Scorsese said that he drew inspiration from John Huston&#x27;s 1967 movie &quot;Reflections in a Golden Eye&quot; in a scene in which Marlon Brando&#x27;s character is facing the mirror, screenwriter Paul Schrader said De Niro improvised the dialogue and that De Niro&#x27;s performance was inspired by &quot;an underground New York comedian&quot; he had once seen, possibly including his signature line. Roger Ebert said of the latter part of the phrase &quot;I&#x27;m the only one here&quot; that it was &quot;the truest line in the film... Travis Bickle&#x27;s desperate need to make some kind of contact somehow—to share or mimic the effortless social interaction he sees all around him, but does not participate in.&quot; In his 2009 memoir, saxophonist Clarence Clemons said that De Niro explained the line&#x27;s origins during production of &quot;New York, New York&quot; (1977), with the actor seeing Bruce Springsteen say the line onstage at a concert. In the 2000 film &quot;The Adventures of Rocky and Bullwinkle&quot;, De Niro went on to repeat the monologue with some alterations in the role of the character Fearless Leader.

=== &quot;Now back to Gene Krupa&#x27;s syncopated style.&quot; ===
When Travis and Cybill Shepherd&#x27;s character go to the film, they pass by a street drummer who says: &quot;Now back to Gene Krupa&#x27;s syncopated style!&quot; This line was sampled in 1997 in Apollo Four Forty&#x27;s song &quot;Krupa&quot;.

== Home media ==

The first Collector&#x27;s Edition DVD, which was released in 1999, was packaged as a single-disc edition. It contained special features such as behind-the-scenes footage and several trailers, including one for &quot;Taxi Driver&quot;.

In 2006, a 30th-anniversary two-disc &quot;Collector&#x27;s Edition&quot; DVD was released. The first disc contains the film itself, two audio commentaries (one by writer Schrader and the other by Professor Robert Kolker), and trailers. This edition also includes some of the special features from the earlier release on the second disc, as well as some newly produced documentary material.

To commemorate the film&#x27;s 35th anniversary, a Blu-ray was released on April 5, 2011. It includes the special features from the previous two-disc collector&#x27;s edition, plus an audio commentary by Scorsese that was released in 1991 for the Criterion Collection, which was previously released on LaserDisc.

As part of the Blu-ray production, Sony gave the film a full 4K digital restoration, which included scanning and cleaning the original negative (removing emulsion dirt and scratches). Colors were matched to director-approved prints under guidance from Scorsese and director of photography Michael Chapman. An all-new lossless DTS-HD Master Audio 5.1 soundtrack was also created from the original stereo recordings by Scorsese&#x27;s personal sound team. The restored print premiered in February 2011 at the Berlin Film Festival. To promote the Blu-ray, Sony also had the print screened at AMC Theatres across the United States on March 19 and 22.

== Possible sequel and remake ==
In late January 2005, De Niro and Scorsese announced a sequel. At a 25th-anniversary screening of &quot;Raging Bull&quot;, De Niro talked about the development of a story featuring an older Travis Bickle. In 2000, De Niro expressed interest in bringing back the character in a conversation with Actors Studio host James Lipton. In November 2013, he revealed that Schrader had written a first draft, but both he and Scorsese thought it was not good enough to proceed.

Schrader disputed this in a 2024 interview, saying, &quot;Robert is the one who wanted to do that. He asked Marty and I. [...] So he pressed Marty on it and Marty asked me and I said, &#x27;Marty, that’s the worst fucking idea I’ve ever heard.&#x27; He said, &#x27;Yeah, but you tell him. Let’s have dinner.&#x27; So we had dinner at Bob’s restaurant and Bob was talking about it. I said, &#x27;Wow, that’s the worst fucking idea I’ve ever heard. That character dies at the end of that movie or dies shortly thereafter. He’s gone. Oh, but maybe there is a version of him that I could do. Maybe he became Ted Kaczynski and maybe he’s in a cabin somewhere and just sitting there, making letter bombs. Now, that would be cool. That would be a nice Travis. He doesn’t have a cab anymore. He just sits there [Laughs] making letter bombs.&#x27; But Bob didn’t cotton to that idea, either.&quot;

In 2010, &quot;Variety&quot; reported rumors that Lars von Trier, Scorsese, and De Niro planned to work on a remake of the film with the same restrictions used in &quot;The Five Obstructions&quot;. However, in 2014, Paul Schrader said that the remake was not being made. He commented, &quot;It was a terrible idea&quot; and &quot;in Marty&#x27;s mind, it never was something that should be done.&quot;

==See also==
* Martin Scorsese filmography
* 1976 in film
* List of cult films
* List of films set in New York City
* Crime in New York City
* History of the United States (1964–1980)
** History of New York City (1946–1977)

==Notes==
==References==
==Works cited==

==External links==
* 
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2421031" start="31" end="39" title="neo-noir" label="neo-noir"/>
<link wikidata="Q108102008" start="40" end="59" title="psychological drama" label="psychological drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q41148" start="77" end="92" title="Martin Scorsese" label="Martin Scorsese"/>
<link wikidata="Q363989" start="108" end="121" title="Paul Schrader" label="Paul Schrader"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="149" end="162" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="177" end="188" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q36949" start="199" end="213" title="Robert De Niro" label="Robert De Niro"/>
<link wikidata="Q11218" start="225" end="231" title="United States Marine Corps" label="Marine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3498720" start="248" end="261" title="Travis Bickle" label="Travis Bickle"/>
<link wikidata="Q41351" start="347" end="359" title="Jodie Foster" label="Jodie Foster"/>
<link wikidata="Q175142" start="361" end="376" title="Cybill Shepherd" label="Cybill Shepherd"/>
<link wikidata="Q191132" start="378" end="391" title="Harvey Keitel" label="Harvey Keitel"/>
<link wikidata="Q315123" start="393" end="404" title="Peter Boyle" label="Peter Boyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3229673" start="406" end="420" title="Leonard Harris (actor)" label="Leonard Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q356303" start="426" end="439" title="Albert Brooks" label="Albert Brooks"/>
<link wikidata="Q472390" start="476" end="489" title="The Wrong Man" label="The Wrong Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q2819650" start="513" end="528" title="A Bigger Splash (1973 film)" label="A Bigger Splash"/>
<link wikidata="Q296804" start="816" end="832" title="Bernard Herrmann" label="Bernard Herrmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q186941" start="998" end="1015" title="Columbia Pictures" label="Columbia Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029421" start="1226" end="1242" title="child prostitute" label="child prostitute"/>
<link wikidata="Q922048" start="1302" end="1327" title="1976 Cannes Film Festival" label="1976 Cannes Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q611050" start="1356" end="1375" title="49th Academy Awards" label="49th Academy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q102427" start="1387" end="1399" title="Academy Award for Best Picture" label="Best Picture"/>
<link wikidata="Q103916" start="1401" end="1411" title="Academy Award for Best Actor" label="Best Actor"/>
<link wikidata="Q106301" start="1431" end="1454" title="Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress" label="Best Supporting Actress"/>
<link wikidata="Q343960" start="1547" end="1564" title="John Hinckley Jr." label="John Hinckley Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q757979" start="1572" end="1595" title="Attempted assassination of Ronald Reagan" label="attempted assassination"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="1609" end="1622" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898121" start="1691" end="1715" title="greatest films ever made" label="greatest films ever made"/>
<link wikidata="Q219557" start="1800" end="1811" title="Cult film" label="cult status"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546271" start="1828" end="1845" title="Sight and Sound" label="Sight &amp;amp; Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q4835528" start="1902" end="1920" title="BFI The Top 50 Greatest Films of All Time" label="critics&amp;#x27; poll"/>
<link wikidata="Q471716" start="2006" end="2018" title="Barry Lyndon" label="Barry Lyndon"/>
<link wikidata="Q131454" start="2138" end="2157" title="Library of Congress" label="Library of Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q823422" start="2199" end="2221" title="National Film Registry" label="National Film Registry"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="2237" end="2250" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q3498720" start="2268" end="2281" title="Travis Bickle" label="Travis Bickle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1869874" start="2340" end="2356" title="chronic insomnia" label="chronic insomnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q52815" start="2385" end="2404" title="adult movie theater" label="adult movie theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q165740" start="2470" end="2478" title="aphorism" label="aphorism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2039238" start="2581" end="2592" title="urban decay" label="urban decay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2603358" start="3213" end="3231" title="existential crisis" label="existential crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q17030626" start="3360" end="3376" title="Homicidal ideation" label="violent thoughts"/>
<link wikidata="Q50851" start="3556" end="3568" title="black market" label="black market"/>
<link wikidata="Q12655902" start="3641" end="3648" title="Fast draw" label="drawing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029421" start="3969" end="3985" title="Child prostitution" label="child prostitute"/>
<link wikidata="Q43437" start="4000" end="4004" title="Procuring (prostitution)" label="pimp"/>
<link wikidata="Q250209" start="4201" end="4207" title="Mohawk hairstyle" label="mohawk"/>
<link wikidata="Q503224" start="4285" end="4299" title="United States Secret Service" label="Secret Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q131295" start="4485" end="4492" title="brothel" label="brothel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5450228" start="5004" end="5010" title="Finger gun" label="finger"/>
<link wikidata="Q124653834" start="5098" end="5107" title="vigilante" label="vigilante"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342" start="5193" end="5203" title="Pittsburgh" label="Pittsburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q41148" start="5706" end="5721" title="Martin Scorsese" label="Martin Scorsese"/>
<link wikidata="Q189526" start="5745" end="5759" title="Brian De Palma" label="Brian De Palma"/>
<link wikidata="Q363989" start="5782" end="5795" title="Paul Schrader" label="Paul Schrader"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374" start="6036" end="6052" title="Alfred Hitchcock" label="Alfred Hitchcock"/>
<link wikidata="Q472390" start="6066" end="6079" title="The Wrong Man" label="The Wrong Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q2819650" start="6121" end="6136" title="A Bigger Splash (1973 film)" label="A Bigger Splash"/>
<link wikidata="Q83859" start="6226" end="6237" title="John Milius" label="John Milius"/>
<link wikidata="Q119348" start="6242" end="6256" title="Irvin Kershner" label="Irvin Kershner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2865153" start="6363" end="6376" title="Arthur Bremer" label="Arthur Bremer"/>
<link wikidata="Q313776" start="6410" end="6424" title="George Wallace" label="George Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1586454" start="6454" end="6466" title="Harry Chapin" label="Harry Chapin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7689608" start="6478" end="6482" title="Taxi (Harry Chapin song)" label="Taxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q535779" start="6635" end="6650" title="Sara Jane Moore" label="Sara Jane Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q65089977" start="6658" end="6681" title="Attempted assassination of Gerald Ford in San Francisco" label="attempted assassination"/>
<link wikidata="Q9582" start="6695" end="6706" title="Gerald Ford" label="Gerald Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q188413" start="6758" end="6766" title="Newsweek" label="Newsweek"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817641" start="6843" end="6853" title="Tom Snyder" label="Tom Snyder"/>
<link wikidata="Q7820241" start="6863" end="6880" title="The Tomorrow Show" label="The Tomorrow Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q221618" start="7000" end="7023" title="sex shop" label="pornographic bookstores"/>
<link wikidata="Q52815" start="7028" end="7036" title="Adult movie theater" label="theaters"/>
<link wikidata="Q172941" start="7208" end="7221" title="Peptic ulcer disease" label="stomach ulcer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2998653" start="7754" end="7769" title="national trauma" label="national trauma"/>
<link wikidata="Q170082" start="7835" end="7844" title="psychosis" label="psychosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q664726" start="7956" end="7966" title="Pickpocket (film)" label="Pickpocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q55391" start="8004" end="8018" title="Robert Bresson" label="Robert Bresson"/>
<link wikidata="Q208145" start="8122" end="8131" title="Iconography" label="symbolism"/>
<link wikidata="Q38142" start="8322" end="8329" title="samurai" label="samurai"/>
<link wikidata="Q133462" start="8343" end="8359" title="Seppuku" label="death with honor"/>
<link wikidata="Q42930" start="8377" end="8391" title="Dustin Hoffman" label="Dustin Hoffman"/>
<link wikidata="Q41163" start="8505" end="8514" title="Al Pacino" label="Al Pacino"/>
<link wikidata="Q174843" start="8519" end="8531" title="Jeff Bridges" label="Jeff Bridges"/>
<link wikidata="Q53009" start="8656" end="8675" title="Bernardo Bertolucci" label="Bernardo Bertolucci"/>
<link wikidata="Q124697" start="8689" end="8693" title="1900 (film)" label="1900"/>
<link wikidata="Q2865153" start="9272" end="9285" title="Arthur Bremer" label="Arthur Bremer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4345530" start="9372" end="9386" title="Northern Italy" label="Northern Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q186545" start="9423" end="9447" title="Midwestern United States" label="Midwestern United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q5449040" start="9549" end="9566" title="film title design" label="film title design"/>
<link wikidata="Q35964765" start="9569" end="9578" title="Dan Perri" label="Dan Perri"/>
<link wikidata="Q441606" start="9593" end="9607" title="title sequence" label="title sequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q916431" start="9715" end="9751" title="Alice Doesn&amp;#x27;t Live Here Anymore" label="Alice Doesn&amp;#x27;t Live Here Anymore"/>
<link wikidata="Q126399" start="9771" end="9782" title="Warner Bros." label="Warner Bros"/>
<link wikidata="Q274167" start="9955" end="9967" title="The Exorcist (film)" label="The Exorcist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754994" start="10081" end="10092" title="second unit" label="second unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q119725" start="10162" end="10171" title="slit-scan" label="slit-scan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6006" start="10307" end="10316" title="neon sign" label="neon sign"/>
<link wikidata="Q10855169" start="10356" end="10367" title="black level" label="black level"/>
<link wikidata="Q17738" start="10465" end="10474" title="Star Wars (film)" label="Star Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q220780" start="10498" end="10509" title="Raging Bull" label="Raging Bull"/>
<link wikidata="Q186941" start="10539" end="10556" title="Columbia Pictures" label="Columbia Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q175142" start="10716" end="10731" title="Cybill Shepherd" label="Cybill Shepherd"/>
<link wikidata="Q676222" start="11021" end="11058" title="Motion Picture Association" label="Motion Picture Association of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q487094" start="11328" end="11343" title="Michael Chapman (cinematographer)" label="Michael Chapman"/>
<link wikidata="Q193541" start="11495" end="11503" title="French New Wave" label="New Wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q53001" start="11514" end="11529" title="Jean-Luc Godard" label="Jean-Luc Godard"/>
<link wikidata="Q387323" start="11554" end="11567" title="Raoul Coutard" label="Raoul Coutard"/>
<link wikidata="Q250209" start="11728" end="11734" title="Mohawk hairstyle" label="mohawk"/>
<link wikidata="Q503224" start="11842" end="11856" title="United States Secret Service" label="Secret Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q4354599" start="12311" end="12327" title="Michael Phillips (producer)" label="Michael Phillips"/>
<link wikidata="Q296804" start="12755" end="12771" title="Bernard Herrmann" label="Bernard Herrmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002001" start="12812" end="12821" title="Obsession (1976 film)" label="Obsession"/>
<link wikidata="Q976574" start="13380" end="13410" title="The Silver Tongued Devil and I" label="The Silver Tongued Devil and I"/>
<link wikidata="Q208681" start="13422" end="13440" title="Kris Kristofferson" label="Kris Kristofferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q916431" start="13479" end="13515" title="Alice Doesn&amp;#x27;t Live Here Anymore" label="Alice Doesn&amp;#x27;t Live Here Anymore"/>
<link wikidata="Q355009" start="13575" end="13589" title="Jackson Browne" label="Jackson Browne"/>
<link wikidata="Q124255580" start="13603" end="13619" title="Late for the Sky (song)" label="Late for the Sky"/>
<link wikidata="Q873512" start="14165" end="14186" title="psychological testing" label="psychological testing"/>
<link wikidata="Q174710" start="14214" end="14218" title="University of California, Los Angeles" label="UCLA"/>
<link wikidata="Q5020655" start="14317" end="14339" title="California Labor and Workforce Development Agency" label="California Labor Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q343960" start="15047" end="15064" title="John Hinckley Jr." label="John Hinckley Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q757979" start="15084" end="15107" title="Attempted assassination of Ronald Reagan" label="attempted assassination"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="15121" end="15134" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q705920" start="15174" end="15206" title="Insanity defense" label="not guilty by reason of insanity"/>
<link wikidata="Q250209" start="15333" end="15341" title="Mohawk hairstyle" label="mohawked"/>
<link wikidata="Q1389092" start="15776" end="15784" title="X rating" label="X rating"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987792" start="15872" end="15880" title="R rating (Motion Picture Association of America)" label="R rating"/>
<link wikidata="Q941530" start="15899" end="15917" title="Color motion picture film" label="colors desaturated"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063273" start="16139" end="16142" title="DVD-Video" label="DVD"/>
<link wikidata="Q487094" start="16144" end="16159" title="Michael Chapman (cinematographer)" label="Michael Chapman"/>
<link wikidata="Q212173" start="16377" end="16388" title="Roger Ebert" label="Roger Ebert"/>
<link wikidata="Q711909" start="16429" end="16447" title="James Berardinelli" label="James Berardinelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q273309" start="16549" end="16558" title="LaserDisc" label="LaserDisc"/>
<link wikidata="Q440991" start="16559" end="16575" title="audio commentary" label="audio commentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q47770" start="16603" end="16610" title="Blu-ray" label="Blu-ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q4482" start="16643" end="16650" title="Film criticism" label="critics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136" start="17164" end="17170" title="Reddit" label="Reddit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2642760" start="17498" end="17512" title="vigilante film" label="vigilante film"/>
<link wikidata="Q377616" start="17576" end="17589" title="New Hollywood" label="New Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q276769" start="17792" end="17805" title="The Searchers" label="The Searchers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2421031" start="18286" end="18294" title="neo-noir" label="neo-noir"/>
<link wikidata="Q110910" start="18357" end="18365" title="antihero" label="antihero"/>
<link wikidata="Q952554" start="18789" end="18798" title="LA Weekly" label="LA Weekly"/>
<link wikidata="Q18709181" start="18806" end="18816" title="Letterboxd" label="Letterboxd"/>
<link wikidata="Q8049272" start="18822" end="18832" title="Yardbarker" label="Yardbarker"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18869" end="18883" title="Exploitation film#Vetsploitation films" label="vetsploitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q117330" start="19114" end="19148" title="1976 in film" label="17th-highest-grossing film of 1976"/>
<link wikidata="Q212173" start="19238" end="19249" title="Roger Ebert" label="Roger Ebert"/>
<link wikidata="Q150248" start="20006" end="20016" title="Metacritic" label="Metacritic"/>
<link wikidata="Q207460" start="20177" end="20200" title="American Film Institute" label="American Film Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q380675" start="20222" end="20235" title="Cinema of the United States" label="American film"/>
<link wikidata="Q620121" start="20243" end="20303" title="AFI&amp;#x27;s 100 Years...100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition)" label="AFI&amp;#x27;s 100 Years...100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1610957" start="20325" end="20356" title="AFI&amp;#x27;s 100 Years...100 Heroes &amp;amp; Villains" label="voted the 30th-greatest villain"/>
<link wikidata="Q876158" start="20399" end="20416" title="The Village Voice" label="The Village Voice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122760" start="20568" end="20574" title="Empire (film magazine)" label="Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2657609" start="20770" end="20778" title="Time Out (magazine)" label="Time Out"/>
<link wikidata="Q1180240" start="21008" end="21032" title="Writers Guild of America" label="Writers Guild of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227533" start="21124" end="21150" title="Directors Guild of America" label="Directors Guild of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q731195" start="21165" end="21179" title="Leonard Maltin" label="Leonard Maltin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546271" start="21376" end="21393" title="Sight and Sound" label="Sight &amp;amp; Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q334242" start="21424" end="21438" title="Asghar Farhadi" label="Asghar Farhadi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3772" start="21513" end="21530" title="Quentin Tarantino" label="Quentin Tarantino"/>
<link wikidata="Q719345" start="21647" end="21680" title="AFI&amp;#x27;s 100 Years...100 Movies" label="AFI&amp;#x27;s 100 Years...100 Movies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1767231" start="21695" end="21729" title="AFI&amp;#x27;s 100 Years...100 Thrills" label="AFI&amp;#x27;s 100 Years...100 Thrills"/>
<link wikidata="Q1610957" start="21744" end="21792" title="AFI&amp;#x27;s 100 Years...100 Heroes &amp;amp; Villains" label="AFI&amp;#x27;s 100 Years...100 Heroes &amp;amp; Villains"/>
<link wikidata="Q400051" start="21832" end="21871" title="AFI&amp;#x27;s 100 Years...100 Movie Quotes" label="AFI&amp;#x27;s 100 Years...100 Movie Quotes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2454952" start="21925" end="21960" title="AFI&amp;#x27;s 100 Years of Film Scores" label="AFI&amp;#x27;s 100 Years of Film Scores"/>
<link wikidata="Q620121" start="21981" end="22041" title="AFI&amp;#x27;s 100 Years...100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition)" label="AFI&amp;#x27;s 100 Years...100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition)"/>
<link wikidata="Q823422" start="22078" end="22100" title="National Film Registry" label="National Film Registry"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="22150" end="22154" title="Time (magazine)" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q3738538" start="22175" end="22201" title="Time&amp;#x27;s All-Time 100 Movies" label="100 best films of all time"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="22252" end="22255" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q692720" start="22402" end="22417" title="American Gigolo" label="American Gigolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q676928" start="22431" end="22444" title="Light Sleeper" label="Light Sleeper"/>
<link wikidata="Q468173" start="22462" end="22472" title="The Walker" label="The Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q363989" start="22599" end="22612" title="Paul Schrader" label="Paul Schrader"/>
<link wikidata="Q2960460" start="22801" end="22816" title="Charles Winkler" label="Charles Winkler"/>
<link wikidata="Q11837573" start="22828" end="22851" title="You Talkin&amp;#x27; to Me? (film)" label="You Talkin&amp;#x27; to Me?"/>
<link wikidata="Q873" start="22868" end="22880" title="Meryl Streep" label="Meryl Streep"/>
<link wikidata="Q207307" start="23149" end="23163" title="Robert Carlyle" label="Robert Carlyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1482392" start="23199" end="23206" title="Cracker (British TV series)" label="Cracker"/>
<link wikidata="Q59610" start="23367" end="23384" title="Seven Psychopaths" label="Seven Psychopaths"/>
<link wikidata="Q316446" start="23434" end="23446" title="Sam Rockwell" label="Sam Rockwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q382389" start="23541" end="23556" title="Jacques Audiard" label="Jacques Audiard"/>
<link wikidata="Q19816574" start="23590" end="23597" title="Dheepan" label="Dheepan"/>
<link wikidata="Q80312" start="23645" end="23656" title="Tamil Tiger" label="Tamil Tiger"/>
<link wikidata="Q36949" start="23688" end="23702" title="Robert De Niro" label="Robert De Niro"/>
<link wikidata="Q42759035" start="23775" end="23780" title="Joker (2019 film)" label="Joker"/>
<link wikidata="Q362824" start="23790" end="23803" title="Todd Phillips" label="Todd Phillips"/>
<link wikidata="Q131265" start="23973" end="23984" title="Popular culture" label="pop culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q207460" start="24035" end="24058" title="American Film Institute" label="American Film Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q400051" start="24066" end="24105" title="AFI&amp;#x27;s 100 Years...100 Movie Quotes" label="AFI&amp;#x27;s 100 Years...100 Movie Quotes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423551" start="24575" end="24602" title="Reflections in a Golden Eye (film)" label="Reflections in a Golden Eye"/>
<link wikidata="Q34012" start="24629" end="24642" title="Marlon Brando" label="Marlon Brando"/>
<link wikidata="Q212173" start="24900" end="24911" title="Roger Ebert" label="Roger Ebert"/>
<link wikidata="Q68543" start="25254" end="25270" title="Clarence Clemons" label="Clarence Clemons"/>
<link wikidata="Q743367" start="25350" end="25368" title="New York, New York (1977 film)" label="New York, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1225" start="25405" end="25422" title="Bruce Springsteen" label="Bruce Springsteen"/>
<link wikidata="Q705198" start="25481" end="25519" title="The Adventures of Rocky and Bullwinkle (film)" label="The Adventures of Rocky and Bullwinkle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5439483" start="25618" end="25633" title="Fearless Leader" label="Fearless Leader"/>
<link wikidata="Q319980" start="25827" end="25837" title="Gene Krupa" label="Gene Krupa"/>
<link wikidata="Q619067" start="25902" end="25919" title="Apollo Four Forty" label="Apollo Four Forty"/>
<link wikidata="Q12031627" start="25938" end="25943" title="Krupa (song)" label="Krupa"/>
<link wikidata="Q440991" start="26344" end="26362" title="Audio commentary" label="audio commentaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q105489698" start="26414" end="26427" title="Robert P. Kolker" label="Robert Kolker"/>
<link wikidata="Q622550" start="26434" end="26442" title="Trailer (promotion)" label="trailers"/>
<link wikidata="Q47770" start="26650" end="26657" title="Blu-ray" label="Blu-ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204187" start="26842" end="26866" title="the Criterion Collection" label="the Criterion Collection"/>
<link wikidata="Q238162" start="26974" end="26976" title="4K resolution" label="4K"/>
<link wikidata="Q55542" start="27230" end="27238" title="lossless" label="lossless"/>
<link wikidata="Q998420" start="27239" end="27258" title="DTS-HD Master Audio" label="DTS-HD Master Audio"/>
<link wikidata="Q238612" start="27259" end="27262" title="5.1 surround sound" label="5.1"/>
<link wikidata="Q294721" start="27502" end="27514" title="AMC Theatres" label="AMC Theatres"/>
<link wikidata="Q220780" start="27698" end="27709" title="Raging Bull" label="Raging Bull"/>
<link wikidata="Q216458" start="27889" end="27902" title="Actors Studio" label="Actors Studio"/>
<link wikidata="Q937232" start="27908" end="27920" title="James Lipton" label="James Lipton"/>
<link wikidata="Q471728" start="28967" end="28974" title="Variety (magazine)" label="Variety"/>
<link wikidata="Q133730" start="29002" end="29016" title="Lars von Trier" label="Lars von Trier"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632905" start="29121" end="29142" title="The Five Obstructions" label="The Five Obstructions"/>
<link wikidata="Q6776557" start="29370" end="29397" title="Martin Scorsese filmography" label="Martin Scorsese filmography"/>
<link wikidata="Q117330" start="29400" end="29412" title="1976 in film" label="1976 in film"/>
<link wikidata="Q6614871" start="29415" end="29433" title="List of cult films" label="List of cult films"/>
<link wikidata="Q6620067" start="29436" end="29470" title="List of films set in New York City" label="List of films set in New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q5185351" start="29473" end="29495" title="Crime in New York City" label="Crime in New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q2633301" start="29498" end="29538" title="History of the United States (1964–1980)" label="History of the United States (1964–1980)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5865642" start="29542" end="29578" title="History of New York City (1946–1977)" label="History of New York City (1946–1977)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="30001" wikidata="Q43514" url="?curid=30001" title="Theory of relativity">
<text>The theory of relativity usually encompasses two interrelated physics theories by Albert Einstein: special relativity and general relativity, proposed and published in 1905 and 1915, respectively. Special relativity applies to all physical phenomena in the absence of gravity. General relativity explains the law of gravitation and its relation to the forces of nature. It applies to the cosmological and astrophysical realm, including astronomy.

The theory transformed theoretical physics and astronomy during the 20th century, superseding a 200-year-old theory of mechanics created primarily by Isaac Newton. It introduced concepts including 4-dimensional spacetime as a unified entity of space and time, relativity of simultaneity, kinematic and gravitational time dilation, and length contraction. In the field of physics, relativity improved the science of elementary particles and their fundamental interactions, along with ushering in the nuclear age. With relativity, cosmology and astrophysics predicted extraordinary astronomical phenomena such as neutron stars, black holes, and gravitational waves.

== Development and acceptance ==

Albert Einstein published the theory of special relativity in 1905, building on many theoretical results and empirical findings obtained by Albert A. Michelson, Hendrik Lorentz, Henri Poincaré and others. Max Planck, Hermann Minkowski and others did subsequent work.

Einstein developed general relativity between 1907 and 1915, with contributions by many others after 1915. The final form of general relativity was published in 1916.

The term &quot;theory of relativity&quot; was based on the expression &quot;relative theory&quot; () used in 1906 by Planck, who emphasized how the theory uses the principle of relativity. In the discussion section of the same paper, Alfred Bucherer used for the first time the expression &quot;theory of relativity&quot; ().

By the 1920s, the physics community understood and accepted special relativity. It rapidly became a significant and necessary tool for theorists and experimentalists in the new fields of atomic physics, nuclear physics, and quantum mechanics.

By comparison, general relativity did not appear to be as useful, beyond making minor corrections to predictions of Newtonian gravitation theory. It seemed to offer little potential for experimental test, as most of its assertions were on an astronomical scale. Its mathematics seemed difficult and fully understandable only by a small number of people. Around 1960, general relativity became central to physics and astronomy. New mathematical techniques to apply to general relativity streamlined calculations and made its concepts more easily visualized. As astronomical phenomena were discovered, such as quasars (1963), the 3-kelvin microwave background radiation (1965), pulsars (1967), and the first black hole candidates (1981), the theory explained their attributes, and measurement of them further confirmed the theory.

== Special relativity ==
Special relativity is a theory of the structure of spacetime. It was introduced in Einstein&#x27;s 1905 paper &quot;On the Electrodynamics of Moving Bodies&quot; (for the contributions of many other physicists and mathematicians, see History of special relativity). Special relativity is based on two postulates which are contradictory in classical mechanics:
# The laws of physics are the same for all observers in any inertial frame of reference relative to one another (principle of relativity).
# The speed of light in vacuum is the same for all observers, regardless of their relative motion or of the motion of the light source.

The resultant theory copes with experiment better than classical mechanics. For instance, postulate 2 explains the results of the Michelson–Morley experiment. Moreover, the theory has many surprising and counterintuitive consequences. Some of these are:
* Relativity of simultaneity: Two events, simultaneous for one observer, may not be simultaneous for another observer if the observers are in relative motion.
* Time dilation: Moving clocks are measured to tick more slowly than an observer&#x27;s &quot;stationary&quot; clock.
* Length contraction: Objects are measured to be shortened in the direction that they are moving with respect to the observer.
* Maximum speed is finite: No physical object, message or field line can travel faster than the speed of light in vacuum.
** The effect of gravity can only travel through space at the speed of light, not faster or instantaneously.
* Mass–energy equivalence: , energy and mass are equivalent and transmutable.
* Relativistic mass, idea used by some researchers.

The defining feature of special relativity is the replacement of the Galilean transformations of classical mechanics by the Lorentz transformations. (See Maxwell&#x27;s equations of electromagnetism.)

== General relativity ==
General relativity is a theory of gravitation developed by Einstein in the years 1907–1915. The development of general relativity began with the equivalence principle, under which the states of accelerated motion and being at rest in a gravitational field (for example, when standing on the surface of the Earth) are physically identical. The upshot of this is that free fall is inertial motion: an object in free fall is falling because that is how objects move when there is no force being exerted on them, instead of this being due to the force of gravity as is the case in classical mechanics. This is incompatible with classical mechanics and special relativity because in those theories inertially moving objects cannot accelerate with respect to each other, but objects in free fall do so. To resolve this difficulty Einstein first proposed that spacetime is curved. Einstein discussed his idea with mathematician Marcel Grossmann and they concluded that general relativity could be formulated in the context of Riemannian geometry which had been developed in the 1800s.
In 1915, he devised the Einstein field equations which relate the curvature of spacetime with the mass, energy, and any momentum within it.

Some of the consequences of general relativity are:
* Gravitational time dilation: Clocks run slower in deeper gravitational wells.
* Precession: Orbits precess in a way unexpected in Newton&#x27;s theory of gravity. (This has been observed in the orbit of Mercury and in binary pulsars).
* Light deflection: Rays of light bend in the presence of a gravitational field.
* Frame-dragging: Rotating masses &quot;drag along&quot; the spacetime around them.
* Expansion of the universe: The universe is expanding, and certain components within the universe can accelerate the expansion.

Technically, general relativity is a theory of gravitation whose defining feature is its use of the Einstein field equations. The solutions of the field equations are metric tensors which define the topology of the spacetime and how objects move inertially.

== Experimental evidence ==
Einstein stated that the theory of relativity belongs to a class of &quot;principle-theories&quot;. As such, it employs an analytic method, which means that the elements of this theory are not based on hypothesis but on empirical discovery. By observing natural processes, we understand their general characteristics, devise mathematical models to describe what we observed, and by analytical means we deduce the necessary conditions that have to be satisfied. Measurement of separate events must satisfy these conditions and match the theory&#x27;s conclusions.

=== Tests of special relativity ===
Relativity is a falsifiable theory: It makes predictions that can be tested by experiment. In the case of special relativity, these include the principle of relativity, the constancy of the speed of light, and time dilation. The predictions of special relativity have been confirmed in numerous tests since Einstein published his paper in 1905, but three experiments conducted between 1881 and 1938 were critical to its validation. These are the Michelson–Morley experiment, the Kennedy–Thorndike experiment, and the Ives–Stilwell experiment. Einstein derived the Lorentz transformations from first principles in 1905, but these three experiments allow the transformations to be induced from experimental evidence.

Maxwell&#x27;s equations—the foundation of classical electromagnetism—describe light as a wave that moves with a characteristic velocity. The modern view is that light needs no medium of transmission, but Maxwell and his contemporaries were convinced that light waves were propagated in a medium, analogous to sound propagating in air, and ripples propagating on the surface of a pond. This hypothetical medium was called the luminiferous aether, at rest relative to the &quot;fixed stars&quot; and through which the Earth moves. Fresnel&#x27;s partial ether dragging hypothesis ruled out the measurement of first-order (v/c) effects, and although observations of second-order effects (v2/c2) were possible in principle, Maxwell thought they were too small to be detected with then-current technology.

The Michelson–Morley experiment was designed to detect second-order effects of the &quot;aether wind&quot;—the motion of the aether relative to the Earth. Michelson designed an instrument called the Michelson interferometer to accomplish this. The apparatus was sufficiently accurate to detect the expected effects, but he obtained a null result when the first experiment was conducted in 1881, and again in 1887. Although the failure to detect an aether wind was a disappointment, the results were accepted by the scientific community. In an attempt to salvage the aether paradigm, FitzGerald and Lorentz independently created an &quot;ad hoc&quot; hypothesis in which the length of material bodies changes according to their motion through the aether. This was the origin of FitzGerald–Lorentz contraction, and their hypothesis had no theoretical basis. The interpretation of the null result of the Michelson–Morley experiment is that the round-trip travel time for light is isotropic (independent of direction), but the result alone is not enough to discount the theory of the aether or validate the predictions of special relativity.
While the Michelson–Morley experiment showed that the velocity of light is isotropic, it said nothing about how the magnitude of the velocity changed (if at all) in different inertial frames. The Kennedy–Thorndike experiment was designed to do that, and was first performed in 1932 by Roy Kennedy and Edward Thorndike. They obtained a null result, and concluded that &quot;there is no effect ... unless the velocity of the solar system in space is no more than about half that of the earth in its orbit&quot;. That possibility was thought to be too coincidental to provide an acceptable explanation, so from the null result of their experiment it was concluded that the round-trip time for light is the same in all inertial reference frames.

The Ives–Stilwell experiment was carried out by Herbert Ives and G.R. Stilwell first in 1938 and with better accuracy in 1941. It was designed to test the transverse Doppler effect the redshift of light from a moving source in a direction perpendicular to its velocity—which had been predicted by Einstein in 1905. The strategy was to compare observed Doppler shifts with what was predicted by classical theory, and look for a Lorentz factor correction. Such a correction was observed, from which was concluded that the frequency of a moving atomic clock is altered according to special relativity.

Those classic experiments have been repeated many times with increased precision. Other experiments include, for instance, relativistic energy and momentum increase at high velocities, experimental testing of time dilation, and modern searches for Lorentz violations.

=== Tests of general relativity ===

General relativity has also been confirmed many times, the classic experiments being the perihelion precession of Mercury&#x27;s orbit, the deflection of light by the Sun, and the gravitational redshift of light. Other tests confirmed the equivalence principle and frame dragging.

== Modern applications ==
Far from being simply of theoretical interest, relativistic effects are important practical engineering concerns. Satellite-based measurement needs to take into account relativistic effects, as each satellite is in motion relative to an Earth-bound user, and is thus in a different frame of reference under the theory of relativity. Global positioning systems such as GPS, GLONASS, and Galileo, must account for all of the relativistic effects in order to work with precision, such as the consequences of the Earth&#x27;s gravitational field. This is also the case in the high-precision measurement of time. Instruments ranging from electron microscopes to particle accelerators would not work if relativistic considerations were omitted.

== See also ==
* Doubly special relativity
* Galilean invariance
* List of textbooks on relativity

== References ==
== Further reading ==
* 
* 
* The Meaning of Relativity Albert Einstein: Four lectures delivered at Princeton University, May 1921
* How I created the theory of relativity Albert Einstein, 14 December 1922; Physics Today August 1982
* Relativity Sidney Perkowitz Encyclopædia Britannica
== External links ==

* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q43514" start="4" end="24" title="Theory of relativity" label="theory of relativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q413" start="62" end="69" title="physics" label="physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q937" start="82" end="97" title="Albert Einstein" label="Albert Einstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q11455" start="99" end="117" title="special relativity" label="special relativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q11452" start="122" end="140" title="general relativity" label="general relativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q11412" start="268" end="275" title="gravity" label="gravity"/>
<link wikidata="Q338" start="388" end="400" title="cosmological" label="cosmological"/>
<link wikidata="Q18362" start="471" end="490" title="theoretical physics" label="theoretical physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q333" start="495" end="504" title="astronomy" label="astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11397" start="557" end="576" title="Classical mechanics" label="theory of mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q935" start="598" end="610" title="Isaac Newton" label="Isaac Newton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4440864" start="647" end="656" title="dimension" label="dimension"/>
<link wikidata="Q133327" start="659" end="668" title="spacetime" label="spacetime"/>
<link wikidata="Q107" start="692" end="697" title="space" label="space"/>
<link wikidata="Q3517751" start="702" end="706" title="time in physics" label="time"/>
<link wikidata="Q837505" start="708" end="734" title="relativity of simultaneity" label="relativity of simultaneity"/>
<link wikidata="Q11476" start="736" end="745" title="kinematics" label="kinematic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11412" start="750" end="763" title="gravity" label="gravitational"/>
<link wikidata="Q185918" start="764" end="777" title="time dilation" label="time dilation"/>
<link wikidata="Q836595" start="783" end="801" title="length contraction" label="length contraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q43116" start="863" end="883" title="elementary particles" label="elementary particles"/>
<link wikidata="Q757669" start="947" end="958" title="atomic age" label="nuclear age"/>
<link wikidata="Q18346" start="977" end="986" title="Physical cosmology" label="cosmology"/>
<link wikidata="Q37547" start="991" end="1003" title="astrophysics" label="astrophysics"/>
<link wikidata="Q333" start="1028" end="1050" title="astronomy" label="astronomical phenomena"/>
<link wikidata="Q4202" start="1059" end="1072" title="neutron stars" label="neutron stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q589" start="1074" end="1085" title="black holes" label="black holes"/>
<link wikidata="Q190035" start="1091" end="1110" title="gravitational waves" label="gravitational waves"/>
<link wikidata="Q937" start="1147" end="1162" title="Albert Einstein" label="Albert Einstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q11455" start="1187" end="1205" title="special relativity" label="special relativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q127234" start="1287" end="1306" title="Albert A. Michelson" label="Albert A. Michelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q41688" start="1308" end="1323" title="Hendrik Lorentz" label="Hendrik Lorentz"/>
<link wikidata="Q81082" start="1325" end="1339" title="Henri Poincaré" label="Henri Poincaré"/>
<link wikidata="Q9021" start="1352" end="1362" title="Max Planck" label="Max Planck"/>
<link wikidata="Q57246" start="1364" end="1381" title="Hermann Minkowski" label="Hermann Minkowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q11452" start="1434" end="1452" title="general relativity" label="general relativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q945995" start="1747" end="1770" title="principle of relativity" label="principle of relativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q76799" start="1817" end="1832" title="Alfred Bucherer" label="Alfred Bucherer"/>
<link wikidata="Q26383" start="2097" end="2111" title="atomic physics" label="atomic physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q81197" start="2113" end="2128" title="nuclear physics" label="nuclear physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q944" start="2134" end="2151" title="quantum mechanics" label="quantum mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758924" start="2420" end="2431" title="Tensor analysis" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q483247" start="2727" end="2736" title="phenomena" label="phenomena"/>
<link wikidata="Q83373" start="2762" end="2769" title="quasars" label="quasars"/>
<link wikidata="Q15605" start="2791" end="2821" title="microwave background radiation" label="microwave background radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4360" start="2830" end="2836" title="pulsar" label="pulsar"/>
<link wikidata="Q589" start="2860" end="2870" title="black hole" label="black hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q133327" start="3060" end="3069" title="spacetime" label="spacetime"/>
<link wikidata="Q51497" start="3125" end="3164" title="On the Electrodynamics of Moving Bodies" label="On the Electrodynamics of Moving Bodies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1095704" start="3243" end="3272" title="History of special relativity" label="History of special relativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q11397" start="3348" end="3367" title="classical mechanics" label="classical mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q408891" start="3375" end="3390" title="laws of physics" label="laws of physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q192735" start="3429" end="3456" title="inertial frame of reference" label="inertial frame of reference"/>
<link wikidata="Q945995" start="3482" end="3505" title="principle of relativity" label="principle of relativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2111" start="3514" end="3528" title="speed of light" label="speed of light"/>
<link wikidata="Q11475" start="3532" end="3538" title="vacuum" label="vacuum"/>
<link wikidata="Q9128" start="3630" end="3635" title="light" label="light"/>
<link wikidata="Q154844" start="3775" end="3802" title="Michelson–Morley experiment" label="Michelson–Morley experiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q837505" start="3901" end="3927" title="Relativity of simultaneity" label="Relativity of simultaneity"/>
<link wikidata="Q185918" start="4060" end="4073" title="Time dilation" label="Time dilation"/>
<link wikidata="Q376" start="4082" end="4087" title="clock" label="clock"/>
<link wikidata="Q836595" start="4178" end="4196" title="Length contraction" label="Length contraction"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4305" end="4328" title="Speed of light#Upper limit on speeds" label="Maximum speed is finite"/>
<link wikidata="Q35875" start="4536" end="4559" title="Mass–energy equivalence" label="Mass–energy equivalence"/>
<link wikidata="Q719048" start="4614" end="4631" title="Mass in special relativity" label="Relativistic mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q219207" start="4734" end="4757" title="Galilean transformation" label="Galilean transformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q217255" start="4789" end="4811" title="Lorentz transformation" label="Lorentz transformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q51501" start="4819" end="4843" title="Maxwell&amp;#x27;s equations" label="Maxwell&amp;#x27;s equations"/>
<link wikidata="Q11406" start="4847" end="4863" title="electromagnetism" label="electromagnetism"/>
<link wikidata="Q210546" start="5037" end="5058" title="equivalence principle" label="equivalence principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q11376" start="5086" end="5104" title="accelerated motion" label="accelerated motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q11412" start="5128" end="5147" title="gravity" label="gravitational field"/>
<link wikidata="Q140028" start="5258" end="5267" title="free fall" label="free fall"/>
<link wikidata="Q122508" start="5271" end="5286" title="inertia" label="inertial motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q11402" start="5372" end="5377" title="force" label="force"/>
<link wikidata="Q11412" start="5443" end="5450" title="gravity" label="gravity"/>
<link wikidata="Q11397" start="5469" end="5488" title="classical mechanics" label="classical mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q11455" start="5540" end="5558" title="special relativity" label="special relativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q5196078" start="5745" end="5764" title="Curved space" label="spacetime is curved"/>
<link wikidata="Q115769" start="5813" end="5829" title="Marcel Grossmann" label="Marcel Grossmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q761383" start="5911" end="5930" title="Riemannian geometry" label="Riemannian geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q273711" start="5994" end="6018" title="Einstein field equations" label="Einstein field equations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188682" start="6165" end="6192" title="Gravitational time dilation" label="Gravitational time dilation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6245" end="6255" title="precession#Relativistic (Einsteinian)" label="Precession"/>
<link wikidata="Q308" start="6368" end="6375" title="Mercury (planet)" label="Mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q3142966" start="6383" end="6396" title="binary pulsar" label="binary pulsar"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6402" end="6418" title="General relativity#Light deflection and gravitational time delay" label="Light deflection"/>
<link wikidata="Q9128" start="6428" end="6433" title="light" label="light"/>
<link wikidata="Q15149343" start="6483" end="6497" title="Frame-dragging" label="Frame-dragging"/>
<link wikidata="Q133327" start="6542" end="6551" title="spacetime" label="spacetime"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129469" start="6567" end="6592" title="Expansion of the universe" label="Expansion of the universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049613" start="6668" end="6692" title="accelerated expansion" label="accelerate the expansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q11412" start="6742" end="6753" title="gravitation" label="gravitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q273711" start="6795" end="6819" title="Einstein field equations" label="Einstein field equations"/>
<link wikidata="Q2045231" start="6862" end="6876" title="metric tensor (general relativity)" label="metric tensors"/>
<link wikidata="Q42989" start="6894" end="6902" title="topology" label="topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q220888" start="7598" end="7609" title="Falsifiability" label="falsifiable"/>
<link wikidata="Q154844" start="8028" end="8055" title="Michelson–Morley experiment" label="Michelson–Morley experiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229401" start="8061" end="8089" title="Kennedy–Thorndike experiment" label="Kennedy–Thorndike experiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1675733" start="8099" end="8123" title="Ives–Stilwell experiment" label="Ives–Stilwell experiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q217255" start="8146" end="8168" title="Lorentz transformation" label="Lorentz transformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q51501" start="8298" end="8322" title="Maxwell&amp;#x27;s equations" label="Maxwell&amp;#x27;s equations"/>
<link wikidata="Q208702" start="8724" end="8743" title="luminiferous aether" label="luminiferous aether"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8843" end="8876" title="Aether drag hypothesis#Partial aether dragging" label="partial ether dragging hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q733088" start="9300" end="9324" title="Michelson interferometer" label="Michelson interferometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q282072" start="9732" end="9761" title="ad hoc hypothesis" label="&amp;quot;ad hoc&amp;quot; hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q836595" start="9878" end="9908" title="FitzGerald–Lorentz contraction" label="FitzGerald–Lorentz contraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q273163" start="10078" end="10087" title="isotropic" label="isotropic"/>
<link wikidata="Q192735" start="10414" end="10428" title="inertial frame" label="inertial frame"/>
<link wikidata="Q579900" start="11137" end="11162" title="transverse Doppler effect" label="transverse Doppler effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q76250" start="11167" end="11175" title="redshift" label="redshift"/>
<link wikidata="Q599404" start="11409" end="11423" title="Lorentz factor" label="Lorentz factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322357" start="11705" end="11746" title="Tests of relativistic energy and momentum" label="relativistic energy and momentum increase"/>
<link wikidata="Q185897" start="11767" end="11804" title="experimental testing of time dilation" label="experimental testing of time dilation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1942038" start="11810" end="11847" title="modern searches for Lorentz violation" label="modern searches for Lorentz violation"/>
<link wikidata="Q308" start="12002" end="12009" title="Mercury (planet)" label="Mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q185243" start="12028" end="12047" title="gravitational lens" label="deflection of light"/>
<link wikidata="Q525" start="12055" end="12058" title="Sun" label="Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q656181" start="12068" end="12090" title="gravitational redshift" label="gravitational redshift"/>
<link wikidata="Q210546" start="12127" end="12148" title="equivalence principle" label="equivalence principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q15149343" start="12153" end="12167" title="frame dragging" label="frame dragging"/>
<link wikidata="Q18822" start="12564" end="12567" title="GPS" label="GPS"/>
<link wikidata="Q486250" start="12569" end="12576" title="GLONASS" label="GLONASS"/>
<link wikidata="Q193902" start="12582" end="12589" title="Galileo (satellite navigation)" label="Galileo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3424284" start="12953" end="12978" title="Doubly special relativity" label="Doubly special relativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2481895" start="12981" end="13000" title="Galilean invariance" label="Galilean invariance"/>
<link wikidata="Q131007923" start="13003" end="13034" title="List of textbooks on relativity" label="List of textbooks on relativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088523" start="13260" end="13273" title="Physics Today" label="Physics Today"/>
<link wikidata="Q7509274" start="13299" end="13315" title="Sidney Perkowitz" label="Sidney Perkowitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q455" start="13316" end="13339" title="Encyclopædia Britannica" label="Encyclopædia Britannica"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="30003" wikidata="Q11035" url="?curid=30003" title="Telephone">
<text>A telephone, colloquially referred to as a phone, is a telecommunications device that enables two or more users to conduct a conversation when they are too far apart to be easily heard directly. A telephone converts sound, typically and most efficiently the human voice, into electronic signals that are transmitted via cables and other communication channels to another telephone which reproduces the sound to the receiving user. The term is derived from and (, &quot;voice&quot;), together meaning &quot;distant voice&quot;.

In 1876, Alexander Graham Bell was the first to be granted a United States patent for a device that produced clearly intelligible replication of the human voice at a second device. This instrument was further developed by many others, and became rapidly indispensable in business, government, and in households.

The essential elements of a telephone are a microphone (&quot;transmitter&quot;) to speak into and an earphone (&quot;receiver&quot;) which reproduces the voice at a distant location. The receiver and transmitter are usually built into a handset which is held up to the ear and mouth during conversation. The transmitter converts the sound waves to electrical signals which are sent through the telecommunications system to the receiving telephone, which converts the signals into audible sound in the receiver or sometimes a loudspeaker. Telephones permit transmission in both directions simultaneously.

Most telephones also contain an alerting feature, such as a &quot;ringer&quot; or a visual indicator, to announce an incoming telephone call. Telephone calls are initiated most commonly with a keypad or dial, affixed to the telephone, to enter a telephone number, which is the address of the call recipient&#x27;s telephone in the telecommunications system, but other methods existed in the early history of the telephone.

The first telephones were directly connected to each other from one customer&#x27;s office or residence to another customer&#x27;s location. Being impractical beyond just a few customers, these systems were quickly replaced by manually operated centrally located switchboards. These exchanges were soon connected together, eventually forming an automated, worldwide public switched telephone network. For greater mobility, various radio systems were developed in the mid-20th century for transmission between mobile stations on ships and in automobiles. 

Handheld mobile phones were introduced for personal service starting in 1973. In later decades, the analog cellular system evolved into digital networks with greater capability and lower cost. Convergence in communication services has provided a broad spectrum of capabilities in cell phones, including mobile computing, giving rise to the smartphone, the dominant type of telephone in the world today.

Modern telephones exist in various forms and are implemented through different systems, including fixed-line, cellular, satellite, and Internet-based devices, all of which are integrated into the public switched telephone network (PSTN). This interconnected system allows any telephone, regardless of its underlying technology or geographic location, to reach another through a unique telephone number. While mobile and landline services are fully integrated into the global telecommunication network, some Internet-based services, such as VoIP, may not always be directly connected to the PSTN, though they still allow communication across different systems when a connection is made.

== Early history ==


Before the development of the electric telephone, the term &quot;telephone&quot; was applied to other inventions, and not all early researchers of the electrical device used the term. Perhaps the earliest use of the word for a communications system was the &quot;telephon&quot; created by Gottfried Huth in 1796. Huth proposed an alternative to the optical telegraph of Claude Chappe in which the operators in the signaling towers would shout to each other by means of what he called &quot;speaking tubes&quot;, but would now be called giant megaphones. A communication device for sailing vessels, called &quot;telephone&quot;, was invented by Captain John Taylor in 1844. This instrument used four air horns to communicate with vessels in foggy weather.

Johann Philipp Reis used the term in reference to his invention, commonly known as the Reis telephone, in c. 1860. His device appears to be the first device based on the conversion of sound into electrical impulses.

The term &quot;telephone&quot; was adopted into the vocabulary of many languages. It is derived from the , &quot;tēle&quot;, &quot;far&quot; and φωνή, &quot;phōnē&quot;, &quot;voice&quot;, together meaning &quot;distant voice&quot;.

Credit for the invention of the electric telephone is frequently disputed. As with other influential inventions such as radio, television, the light bulb, and the computer, several inventors pioneered experimental work on &quot;voice transmission over a wire&quot; and improved on each other&#x27;s ideas. New controversies over the issue still arise from time to time. Charles Bourseul, Antonio Meucci, Johann Philipp Reis, Alexander Graham Bell, and Elisha Gray, amongst others, have all been credited with the invention of the telephone.

Alexander Graham Bell was the first to be awarded a patent for the electric telephone by the United States Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO) in March 1876. Before Bell&#x27;s patent, the telephone transmitted sound in a way that was similar to the telegraph. This method used vibrations and circuits to send electrical pulses, but was missing key features. Bell found that this method produced a sound through intermittent currents, but in order for the telephone to work a fluctuating current reproduced sounds the best. The fluctuating currents became the basis for the working telephone, creating Bell&#x27;s patent. That first patent by Bell was the &quot;master patent&quot; of the telephone, from which other patents for electric telephone devices and features flowed.

In 1876, shortly after Bell&#x27;s patent application, Hungarian engineer Tivadar Puskás proposed the telephone switch, which allowed for the formation of telephone exchanges, and eventually networks.

In the United Kingdom, &quot;the blower&quot; is used as a slang term for a telephone. The term came from navy slang for a speaking tube. In the U.S., a somewhat dated slang term refers to the telephone as &quot;the horn,&quot; as in &quot;I couldn&#x27;t get him on the horn,&quot; or &quot;I&#x27;ll be off the horn in a moment.&quot;

===Timeline of early development===
 


* 1844: Innocenzo Manzetti first mooted the idea of a &quot;speaking telegraph&quot; or telephone. Use of the &quot;speaking telegraph&quot; and &quot;sound telegraph&quot; monikers would eventually be replaced by the newer, distinct name, &quot;telephone&quot;.
* 26 August 1854: Charles Bourseul published an article in the magazine &quot;L&#x27;Illustration&quot; (Paris): &quot;Transmission électrique de la parole&quot; (electric transmission of speech), describing a &quot;make-and-break&quot; type telephone transmitter later created by Johann Reis.
* 26 October 1861: Johann Philipp Reis (1834–1874) publicly demonstrated the Reis telephone before the Physical Society of Frankfurt. It was the first device to transmit a voice via electronic signals and for that the first modern telephone. Reis also coined the term. He used his telephone to transmit the phrase &quot;Das Pferd frisst keinen Gurkensalat&quot; (&quot;The horse does not eat cucumber salad&quot;).
* 22 August 1865, &quot;La Feuille d&#x27;Aoste&quot; reported &quot;It is rumored that English technicians to whom Manzetti illustrated his method for transmitting spoken words on the telegraph wire intend to apply said invention in England on several private telegraph lines&quot;. However, telephones would not be demonstrated there until 1876, with a set of telephones from Bell.
* 28 December 1871: Antonio Meucci files patent caveat No. 3335 in the U.S. Patent Office, titled &quot;Sound Telegraph&quot;, describing communication of voice between two people by wire. A patent caveat was not an invention patent award, but only an unverified notice filed by an individual that he or she intends to file a patent application in the future.
* 1874: Meucci, after having renewed the caveat for two years does not renew it again, and the caveat lapses.
* 6 April 1875: Bell&#x27;s U.S. Patent 161,739 &quot;Transmitters and Receivers for Electric Telegraphs&quot; is granted. This uses multiple vibrating steel reeds in make-break circuits.
* 11 February 1876: Elisha Gray invents a liquid transmitter for use with the telephone but does not build one.
* 14 February 1876: Gray files a patent caveat for transmitting the human voice through a telegraphic circuit.
* 14 February 1876: Alexander Graham Bell applies for the patent &quot;Improvements in Telegraphy&quot;, for electromagnetic telephones using what is now called amplitude modulation (oscillating current and voltage) but which he referred to as &quot;undulating current&quot;.
* 19 February 1876: Gray is notified by the U.S. Patent Office of an interference between his caveat and Bell&#x27;s patent application. Gray decides to abandon his caveat.
* 7 March 1876: Bell&#x27;s U.S. patent 174,465 &quot;Improvement in Telegraphy&quot; is granted, covering &quot;the method of, and apparatus for, transmitting vocal or other sounds telegraphically…by causing electrical undulations, similar in form to the vibrations of the air accompanying the said vocal or other sound.&quot;
* 10 March 1876: The first successful telephone transmission of clear speech using a liquid transmitter when Bell spoke into his device, &quot;Mr. Watson, come here, I want to see you.&quot; and Watson heard each word distinctly.
* 30 January 1877: Bell&#x27;s U.S. patent 186,787 is granted for an electromagnetic telephone using permanent magnets, iron diaphragms, and a call bell.
* 27 April 1877: Thomas Edison files a patent application for a carbon (graphite) transmitter. It was published as No. 474,230 on 3 May 1892, after a 15-year delay because of litigation. Edison was granted patent 222,390 for a carbon granules transmitter in 1879.

==Early commercial instruments==
Early telephones were technically diverse. Some used a water microphone, some had a metal diaphragm that induced current in an electromagnet wound around a permanent magnet, and some were dynamic – their diaphragm vibrated a coil of wire in the field of a permanent magnet or the coil vibrated the diaphragm. The sound-powered dynamic variants survived in small numbers through the 20th century in military and maritime applications, where its ability to create its own electrical power was crucial. Most, however, used the Edison/Berliner carbon transmitter, which was much louder than the other kinds, even though it required an induction coil which was an impedance matching transformer to make it compatible with the impedance of the line. The Edison patents kept the Bell monopoly viable into the 20th century, by which time the network was more important than the instrument.

Early telephones were locally powered, using either a dynamic transmitter or by the powering of a transmitter with a local battery. One of the jobs of outside plant personnel was to visit each telephone periodically to inspect the battery. During the 20th century, telephones powered from the telephone exchange over the same wires that carried the voice signals became common.

Early telephones used a single wire for the subscriber&#x27;s line, with ground return used to complete the circuit (as used in telegraphs). The earliest dynamic telephones also had only one port opening for sound, with the user alternately listening and speaking (or rather, shouting) into the same hole. Sometimes the instruments were operated in pairs at each end, making conversation more convenient but also more expensive.

At first, the benefits of a telephone exchange were not exploited. Instead, telephones were leased in pairs to a subscriber, who had to arrange for a telegraph contractor to construct a line between them, for example, between a home and a shop. Users who wanted the ability to speak to several different locations would need to obtain and set up three or four pairs of telephones. Western Union, already using telegraph exchanges, quickly extended the principle to its telephones in New York City and San Francisco, and Bell was not slow in appreciating the potential.

Signalling began in an appropriately primitive manner. The user alerted the other end, or the exchange operator, by whistling into the transmitter. Exchange operation soon resulted in telephones being equipped with a bell in a ringer box, first operated over a second wire, and later over the same wire, but with a condenser (capacitor) in series with the bell coil to allow the AC ringer signal through while still blocking DC (keeping the phone &quot;on hook&quot;). Telephones connected to the earliest Strowger switch automatic exchanges had seven wires, one for the knife switch, one for each telegraph key, one for the bell, one for the push-button and two for speaking. Large wall telephones in the early 20th century usually incorporated the bell, and separate bell boxes for desk phones dwindled away in the middle of the century.

Rural and other telephones that were not on a common battery exchange had a magneto hand-cranked generator to produce a high voltage alternating signal to ring the bells of other telephones on the line and to alert the operator. Some local farming communities that were not connected to the main networks set up barbed wire telephone lines that exploited the existing system of field fences to transmit the signal.

In the 1890s a new smaller style of telephone was introduced, packaged in three parts. The transmitter stood on a stand, known as a &quot;candlestick&quot; for its shape. When not in use, the receiver hung on a hook with a switch in it, known as a &quot;switchhook&quot;. Previous telephones required the user to operate a separate switch to connect either the voice or the bell. With the new kind, the user was less likely to leave the phone &quot;off the hook&quot;. In phones connected to magneto exchanges, the bell, induction coil, battery and magneto were in a separate bell box or &quot;ringer box&quot;. In phones connected to common battery exchanges, the ringer box was installed under a desk, or other out-of-the-way place, since it did not need a battery or magneto.

Cradle designs were also used at this time, having a handle with the receiver and transmitter attached, now called a handset, separate from the cradle base that housed the magneto crank and other parts. They were larger than the &quot;candlestick&quot; and more popular.

Disadvantages of single-wire operation such as crosstalk and hum from nearby AC power wires had already led to the use of twisted pairs and, for long-distance telephones, four-wire circuits. Users at the beginning of the 20th century did not place long-distance calls from their own telephones but made an appointment and were connected with the assistance of a telephone operator.

What turned out to be the most popular and longest-lasting physical style of telephone was introduced in the early 20th century, including Bell&#x27;s 202-type desk set. A carbon granule transmitter and electromagnetic receiver were united in a single molded plastic handle, which when not in use was secured in a cradle in the base unit. The circuit diagram of the model 202 shows the direct connection of the transmitter to the line, while the receiver was inductively coupled. In local battery configurations, when the local loop was too long to provide sufficient current from the exchange, the transmitter was powered by a local battery and inductively coupled, while the receiver was included in the local loop. The coupling transformer and the ringer were mounted in a separate enclosure, called the subscriber set. The dial switch in the base interrupted the line current by repeatedly but very briefly disconnecting the line one to ten times for each digit, and the hook switch (in the center of the circuit diagram) disconnected the line and the transmitter battery while the handset was on the cradle.

In the 1930s, telephone sets were developed that combined the bell and induction coil with the desk set, obviating a separate ringer box. The rotary dial becoming commonplace in the 1930s in many areas enabled customer-dialed service, but some magneto systems remained even into the 1960s. After World War II, the telephone networks saw rapid expansion and more efficient telephone sets, such as the model 500 telephone in the United States, were developed that permitted larger local networks centered around central offices. A breakthrough new technology was the introduction of Touch-Tone signaling using push-button telephones by American Telephone &amp; Telegraph Company (AT&amp;T) in 1963.

== Sound-powered telephones == 
A sound-powered telephone is a telephone which transmits voice communication by wire, powered by the energy of the sound waves of the operator speaking. 

=== Principle of operation ===
A moving-coil microphone converts the sound waves into an electrical signal, which is then converted back into sound waves at the receiver&#x27;s end. Similar to early regular landline telephones, operators of sound-powered telephones generally alert the receiver of a call using a hand-cranked generator (magneto), which generates an electrical current which activates a buzzer at the receiver&#x27;s end, sometimes known as a howler or growler. Some telephone systems can use external electrical power to operate ringers or amplifiers, but will revert to sound-powered communications in the event of failure of the external power supply. Stations are usually connected via twisted pair wires to reduce electrical interference, and can be positioned at considerable distances from each other in the order of several kilometers. Using 1mm core diameter twisted-pair wiring, some sound-powered telephone systems can operate a pair of handsets positioned up to 48km (30 miles) apart.

=== Applications ===

Because sound-powered telephones do not require external electrical power, they are used where reliable communications are vital even in event of loss of power. They are often used for communications in airports, railways and public utilities, mining, ski slopes, bridges, sporting arenas and shipyards. Because they operate at low voltages, they are suitable for use in situations where there is a risk of explosions or fire, such as chemical plants, oil and gas works, arsenals, mines and quarries. They are frequently used aboard ships, especially naval vessels, and in land military communications.

Aboard naval vessels, sound-powered telephones generally have auxiliary wiring circuits routed through the ship, to reduce the likelihood that all circuits will be rendered inoperable by battle damage.

== Digital telephones and voice over IP ==


The invention of the transistor in 1947 dramatically changed the technology used in telephone systems and in the long-distance transmission networks, over the next several decades. With the development of stored program control and MOS integrated circuits for electronic switching systems, and new transmission technologies such as pulse-code modulation (PCM), telephony gradually evolved towards digital telephony, which improved the capacity, quality, and cost of the network.

Integrated Services Digital Network (ISDN) was launched in the 1980&#x27;s, providing businesses and consumers with access to digital telephony services such as data, voice, video, and fax services.

The development of digital data communications methods made it possible to digitize voice and transmit it as real-time data across computer networks and the Internet, giving rise to the field of Internet Protocol (IP) telephony, also known as voice over Internet Protocol (VoIP). VoIP has proven to be a disruptive technology that is rapidly replacing traditional telephone network infrastructure.

By January 2005, up to 10% of telephone subscribers in Japan and South Korea had switched to this digital telephone service. A January 2005 Newsweek article suggested that Internet telephony may be &quot;the next big thing.&quot; The technology has spawned a new industry comprising many VoIP companies that offer services to consumers and businesses. The reported global VoIP market in October 2021 was $85.2 billion with a projection of $102.5 billion by 2026.

IP telephony uses high-bandwidth Internet connections and specialized customer premises equipment to transmit telephone calls via the Internet, or any modern private data network. The customer equipment may be an analog telephone adapter (ATA) which translates the signals of a conventional analog telephone; an IP Phone, a dedicated standalone device; or a computer softphone application, utilizing the microphone and headset devices of a personal computer or smartphone.

In recent years, VoIP technology has evolved to integrate with mobile networks, including Voice over LTE (VoLTE) and Voice over 5G (Vo5G), enabling seamless voice communication over mobile data networks. These advancements have made VoIP not only a primary method for Internet-based communication but also a central feature of modern mobile communication infrastructure.

While traditional analog telephones are typically powered from the central office through the telephone line, digital telephones require a local power supply. Internet-based digital service also requires special provisions to provide the service location to the emergency services when an emergency telephone number is called.

==Cordless telephones==
A cordless telephone or portable telephone consists of a base station unit and one or more portable cordless handsets. The base station connects to a telephone line, or provides service by voice over IP (VOIP). The handset communicates with the base station via radio frequency signals. A handset&#x27;s operational range is limited, usually to within the same building or within a short distance from the base station.

===Base station===
Base stations include a radio transceiver which enables full-duplex, outgoing and incoming signals and speech with the handsets. The base station often includes a microphone, audio amplifier, and a loudspeaker to enable hands-free speakerphone conversations, without needing to use a handset. The base station may also have a numeric keypad for dialing, and a display for caller ID. In addition, answering machine function may be built in. 

The cordless handset contains a rechargeable battery, which the base station recharges when the handset rests in its cradle. Muilt-handset systems generally also have additional charging stands. A cordless telephone typically requires a constant electricity supply to power the base station and charger units by means of a DC transformer which plugs into a wall AC power outlet.

==Mobile phones==


A mobile phone or cellphone or hand phone is a handheld telephone which connects via radio transmissions to a cellular telephone network. The cellular network consists of a network of ground based transmitter/receiver stations with antennas – which are usually located on towers or on buildings – and infrastructure connecting to the global telecommunications network. Analog cellular networks first appeared in 1979, followed by the introduction of digital cellular networks in the early 1990s, marking the beginning of the GSM standard. Over time, these networks evolved, with each new generation (2G, 3G, 4G, and beyond) offering improved data transmission capabilities and more advanced features for mobile communication.

Mobile phones require a SIM card to be inserted into the phone. The SIM card is a small PVC card containing a small integrated circuit which stores the user&#x27;s international mobile subscriber identity (IMSI) number and its related key, which are used to identify and authenticate subscribers to the cellular network.

Mobile phones generally incorporate an LCD or OLED display, with some types, such as smartphones, having touch screens. Since the 1990s, mobile phones have gained other features which are not directly related to their primary function as telephones. These include text messaging, calendars, alarm clocks, personal schedulers, cameras, music players, games and later, internet access and smartphone functionality. Nearly all mobile phones have the ability to send text messages to other users via the SMS (Short Message Service) protocol. The multimedia messaging service (MMS) protocol enables users to send and receive multimedia content, such as photos, audio files and video files. As their functionality has increased over the years, many types of mobile phone, notably smartphones, require an operating system to run. Popular mobile phone operating systems in the past have included Symbian, Palm OS, BlackBerry OS and mobile phone versions of Windows. As of 2022, the most used operating systems are Google&#x27;s Android and Apple&#x27;s iOS.

Before the era of smartphones, mobile phones were generally manufactured by companies specializing in telecommunications equipment, such as Nokia, Motorola, and Ericsson. Since the advent of smartphones, mobile phone manufacturers have also included consumer electronics companies, such as Apple, Samsung and Xiaomi.

===Smartphones===
As of 2022, most mobile phones are smartphones, being a combination of a mobile phone and a personal computing device in the same unit. Most smartphones are primarily operated using a graphical user interface and a touch screen. Many phones have a secondary voice user interface, such as Siri on Apple iPhones, which can operate many of the device&#x27;s functions, as well as enabling users to use spoken commands to interact with the internet. Typically alphanumeric text input is accomplished via an on-screen virtual keyboard, although some smartphones have a small physical keyboard. Smartphones offer the ability to access internet data through the cellular network and via wi-fi, and usually allow direct connectivity to other devices via Bluetooth or a wired interface, such as USB or Lightning connectors. 

Smartphones, being able to run apps, have vastly expanded functionality compared to previous mobile phones. Having internet access and built in cameras, smartphones have made video calling readily accessible via IP connections. Smartphones also have access to a large number of web services and web apps, giving them functionality similar to traditional computers, although smartphones are often limited by their relatively small screen size and the size of their keyboards. Typically, smartphones feature such tools as cameras, media players, web browsers, email clients, interactive maps, satellite navigation and a variety of sensors, such as a compass, accelerometers and GPS receivers. In addition to voice calls, smartphone users commonly communicate using a wide variety of messaging formats, including SMS, MMS, email, and various proprietary messaging services, such as iMessage and various social media platforms.

===Mobile phone usage===
In 2002, only 10% of the world&#x27;s population used mobile phones and by 2005 that percentage had risen to 46%. By the end of 2009, there were a total of nearly 6 billion mobile and fixed-line telephone subscribers worldwide. This included 1.26 billion fixed-line subscribers and 4.6 billion mobile subscribers.

== Satellite phones ==
A satellite telephone, or satphone, is a type of mobile phone that connects to other phones or the telephone network by radio link through satellites orbiting the Earth instead of terrestrial cell sites, as cellphones do. Therefore, they can work in most geographic locations on the Earth&#x27;s surface, as long as open sky and the line-of-sight between the phone and the satellite is provided. Depending on the architecture of a particular system, coverage may include the entire Earth or only specific regions. Satellite phones provide similar functionality to terrestrial mobile telephones; voice calling, text messaging, and low-bandwidth Internet access are supported through most systems. The advantage of a satellite phone is that it can be used in such regions where local terrestrial communication infrastructures, such as landline and cellular networks, are not available. 

Satellite phones are popular on expeditions into remote locations, hunting, fishing, maritime sector, humanitarian missions, business trips, and mining in hard-to-reach areas, where there is no reliable cellular service. Satellite telephones rarely get disrupted by natural disasters on Earth or human actions such as war, so they have proven to be dependable communication tools in emergency situations, when the local communications system can be compromised.

== See also ==
* Bell System
* Bell Telephone Memorial
* Cellular network
* Cordless telephone
* Harvard sentences
* Index of telephone-related articles
* Jipp curve
* List of telephone operating companies
* Mobile operating system
* Multimedia messaging service (MMS)
* Party line (telephony)
* Phone hacking
* Radiotelephone
* Satellite phone
* SIM card
* Spamming
* Telephone keypad
* Telephone jack and plug
* Telephone tapping
* Tip and ring
* Videophone
== References ==
== Further reading ==
* Brooks, John (1976). &quot;Telephone: The first hundred years&quot;. HarperCollins.
* Casson, Herbert Newton. (1910) &quot;The history of the telephone&quot; online.
* Coe, Lewis (1995). &quot;The Telephone and Its Several Inventors: A History.&quot; Jefferson, NC: McFarland &amp; Co.
* Evenson, A. Edward (2000). &quot;The Telephone Patent Conspiracy of 1876: The Elisha Gray – Alexander Bell Controversy.&quot; Jefferson, NC: McFarland &amp; Co.
* Fischer, Claude S. (1994) &quot;America calling: A social history of the telephone to 1940&quot; (Univ of California Press, 1994)
* Huurdeman, Anton A. (2003). &quot;The Worldwide History of Telecommunications&quot; Hoboken: NJ: Wiley-IEEE Press.
* John, Richard R. (2010). &quot;Network Nation: Inventing American Telecommunications.&quot; Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
* MacDougall, Robert. &quot;The People&#x27;s Network: The Political Economy of the Telephone in the Gilded Age.&quot; Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.
* Mueller, Milton. (1993) &quot;Universal service in telephone history: A reconstruction.&quot; &quot;Telecommunications Policy&quot; 17.5 (1993): 352–69.
* Todd, Kenneth P. (1998), . American Telephone &amp; Telegraph Company (AT&amp;T).

== External links ==

* Early U.S. Telephone Industry Data
* 
* Virtual museum of early telephones
* 
* 
* 
* —&quot;Telegraphy&quot; (Bell&#x27;s first telephone patent)—Alexander Graham Bell
* —&quot;Electric Telegraphy&quot; (permanent magnet receiver)—Alexander Graham Bell
* —&quot;Speaking Telegraph&quot; (graphite transmitter)—Thomas Edison
* —&quot;Speaking Telephone&quot; (carbon button transmitter)—Thomas Edison
* —&quot;Carbon Telephone&quot; (carbon granules transmitter)—Thomas Edison
* —&quot;Telephone&quot; (solid back carbon transmitter)—Anthony C. White (Bell engineer) This design was used until 1925 and installed phones were used until the 1940s.
* —&quot;Duplex Radio Communication and Signalling Apparatus&quot;—G. H. Sweigert
* —&quot;Cellular Mobile Communication System&quot;—Amos Edward Joel (Bell Labs)
* —&quot;Radio Telephone System&quot; (DynaTAC cell phone)—Martin Cooper et al. (Motorola)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q11035" start="2" end="11" title="Telephone" label="telephone"/>
<link wikidata="Q11035" start="43" end="48" title="Telephone" label="phone"/>
<link wikidata="Q418" start="55" end="73" title="telecommunications" label="telecommunications"/>
<link wikidata="Q52943" start="125" end="137" title="conversation" label="conversation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11461" start="216" end="221" title="sound" label="sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q7390" start="258" end="269" title="human voice" label="human voice"/>
<link wikidata="Q174984" start="287" end="293" title="signal" label="signal"/>
<link wikidata="Q188447" start="320" end="325" title="Electrical cable" label="cable"/>
<link wikidata="Q34286" start="537" end="558" title="Alexander Graham Bell" label="Alexander Graham Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q253623" start="603" end="609" title="patent" label="patent"/>
<link wikidata="Q4830453" start="799" end="807" title="business" label="business"/>
<link wikidata="Q7188" start="809" end="819" title="government" label="government"/>
<link wikidata="Q259059" start="828" end="837" title="household" label="household"/>
<link wikidata="Q46384" start="885" end="895" title="microphone" label="microphone"/>
<link wikidata="Q186819" start="943" end="951" title="earphone" label="earphone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378949" start="1079" end="1086" title="handset" label="handset"/>
<link wikidata="Q11461" start="1175" end="1185" title="sound wave" label="sound wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q174984" start="1190" end="1208" title="Signal (information theory)" label="electrical signals"/>
<link wikidata="Q570" start="1367" end="1378" title="loudspeaker" label="loudspeaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q214995" start="1693" end="1709" title="telephone number" label="telephone number"/>
<link wikidata="Q589666" start="2134" end="2146" title="Telephone switchboard" label="switchboards"/>
<link wikidata="Q243961" start="2237" end="2270" title="public switched telephone network" label="public switched telephone network"/>
<link wikidata="Q17517" start="2436" end="2448" title="mobile phone" label="mobile phone"/>
<link wikidata="Q174948" start="2527" end="2533" title="Analog signal" label="analog"/>
<link wikidata="Q175022" start="2563" end="2570" title="Digital signal" label="digital"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2620" end="2657" title="Technological convergence#Cell phone convergence" label="Convergence in communication services"/>
<link wikidata="Q22645" start="2767" end="2777" title="smartphone" label="smartphone"/>
<link wikidata="Q738621" start="2929" end="2939" title="Landline" label="fixed-line"/>
<link wikidata="Q535695" start="2941" end="2949" title="Cellular network" label="cellular"/>
<link wikidata="Q248903" start="2951" end="2960" title="Satellite phone" label="satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q943687" start="2966" end="2980" title="VoIP phone" label="Internet-based"/>
<link wikidata="Q243961" start="3027" end="3060" title="public switched telephone network" label="public switched telephone network"/>
<link wikidata="Q81945" start="3371" end="3375" title="Voice over IP" label="VoIP"/>
<link wikidata="Q378499" start="3889" end="3906" title="optical telegraph" label="optical telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q361305" start="3910" end="3923" title="Claude Chappe" label="Claude Chappe"/>
<link wikidata="Q216217" start="4082" end="4091" title="megaphone" label="megaphone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003090" start="4239" end="4247" title="air horn" label="air horn"/>
<link wikidata="Q77124" start="4296" end="4315" title="Johann Philipp Reis" label="Johann Philipp Reis"/>
<link wikidata="Q17144492" start="4383" end="4397" title="Reis telephone" label="Reis telephone"/>
<link wikidata="Q14208553" start="4848" end="4857" title="invention" label="invention"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516738" start="4867" end="4872" title="Invention of radio" label="radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517344" start="4874" end="4884" title="History of television" label="television"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4890" end="4900" title="Incandescent light bulb#History" label="light bulb"/>
<link wikidata="Q186148" start="4910" end="4918" title="History of computing hardware" label="computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063776" start="5117" end="5133" title="Charles Bourseul" label="Charles Bourseul"/>
<link wikidata="Q273314" start="5135" end="5149" title="Antonio Meucci" label="Antonio Meucci"/>
<link wikidata="Q77124" start="5151" end="5170" title="Johann Philipp Reis" label="Johann Philipp Reis"/>
<link wikidata="Q34286" start="5172" end="5193" title="Alexander Graham Bell" label="Alexander Graham Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q318449" start="5199" end="5210" title="Elisha Gray" label="Elisha Gray"/>
<link wikidata="Q1459541" start="5382" end="5423" title="United States Patent and Trademark Office" label="United States Patent and Trademark Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q282823" start="6141" end="6155" title="Tivadar Puskás" label="Tivadar Puskás"/>
<link wikidata="Q256132" start="6222" end="6240" title="telephone exchange" label="telephone exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319005" start="6392" end="6405" title="speaking tube" label="speaking tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q607358" start="6655" end="6673" title="Innocenzo Manzetti" label="Innocenzo Manzetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063776" start="6928" end="6944" title="Charles Bourseul" label="Charles Bourseul"/>
<link wikidata="Q1311350" start="6988" end="7007" title="L&amp;#x27;Illustration" label="L&amp;#x27;Illustration"/>
<link wikidata="Q77124" start="7223" end="7242" title="Johann Philipp Reis" label="Johann Philipp Reis"/>
<link wikidata="Q17144492" start="7281" end="7295" title="Reis telephone" label="Reis telephone"/>
<link wikidata="Q273314" start="8023" end="8037" title="Antonio Meucci" label="Antonio Meucci"/>
<link wikidata="Q3663964" start="8044" end="8057" title="patent caveat" label="patent caveat"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8058" end="8066" title="Antonio Meucci#Patent caveat" label="No. 3335"/>
<link wikidata="Q253623" start="8229" end="8235" title="patent" label="patent"/>
<link wikidata="Q3663964" start="8806" end="8819" title="patent caveat" label="patent caveat"/>
<link wikidata="Q34286" start="8904" end="8925" title="Alexander Graham Bell" label="Alexander Graham Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q8743" start="10062" end="10075" title="Thomas Edison" label="Thomas Edison"/>
<link wikidata="Q7973545" start="10398" end="10414" title="water microphone" label="water microphone"/>
<link wikidata="Q46384" start="10531" end="10538" title="Dynamic microphone" label="dynamic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1482299" start="10883" end="10901" title="carbon transmitter" label="carbon transmitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417360" start="10974" end="10988" title="induction coil" label="induction coil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761108" start="11002" end="11020" title="impedance matching" label="impedance matching"/>
<link wikidata="Q1562060" start="11377" end="11390" title="outside plant" label="outside plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2289211" start="11678" end="11691" title="Single wire earth return" label="ground return"/>
<link wikidata="Q721587" start="11733" end="11742" title="telegraph" label="telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q322948" start="12148" end="12158" title="subscriber" label="subscriber"/>
<link wikidata="Q861042" start="12416" end="12429" title="Western Union" label="Western Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="12518" end="12531" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="12536" end="12549" title="San Francisco" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q2501541" start="12605" end="12615" title="Signaling (telecommunications)" label="Signalling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261521" start="12708" end="12716" title="Switchboard operator" label="operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q864184" start="12721" end="12730" title="whistling" label="whistling"/>
<link wikidata="Q7334858" start="12832" end="12842" title="ringer box" label="ringer box"/>
<link wikidata="Q5322" start="12931" end="12940" title="capacitor" label="capacitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q124164" start="12984" end="12986" title="Alternating current" label="AC"/>
<link wikidata="Q159241" start="13030" end="13032" title="Direct current" label="DC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7078890" start="13058" end="13065" title="on hook" label="on hook"/>
<link wikidata="Q354142" start="13111" end="13126" title="Strowger switch" label="Strowger switch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5320" start="13176" end="13188" title="Changeover switch" label="knife switch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156388" start="13203" end="13216" title="telegraph key" label="telegraph key"/>
<link wikidata="Q870870" start="13248" end="13259" title="push-button" label="push-button"/>
<link wikidata="Q4883306" start="13374" end="13382" title="bell box" label="bell box"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696506" start="13522" end="13529" title="telephone magneto" label="magneto"/>
<link wikidata="Q390750" start="13758" end="13785" title="barbed wire telephone lines" label="barbed wire telephone lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q5032000" start="14000" end="14011" title="Candlestick telephone" label="candlestick"/>
<link wikidata="Q7334858" start="14456" end="14466" title="ringer box" label="ringer box"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378949" start="14759" end="14766" title="handset" label="handset"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231632" start="14975" end="15005" title="Mains hum" label="hum from nearby AC power wires"/>
<link wikidata="Q5474968" start="15085" end="15102" title="four-wire circuit" label="four-wire circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2424919" start="15162" end="15180" title="long-distance call" label="long-distance call"/>
<link wikidata="Q115825915" start="15448" end="15456" title="Model 202 telephone" label="202-type"/>
<link wikidata="Q668733" start="16553" end="16564" title="rotary dial" label="rotary dial"/>
<link wikidata="Q6888187" start="16811" end="16830" title="model 500 telephone" label="model 500 telephone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7261720" start="17019" end="17040" title="push-button telephone" label="push-button telephone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2843047" start="17045" end="17087" title="American Telephone &amp;amp; Telegraph Company" label="American Telephone &amp;amp; Telegraph Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q192808" start="18002" end="18014" title="twisted pair" label="twisted pair"/>
<link wikidata="Q5339" start="19205" end="19215" title="transistor" label="transistor"/>
<link wikidata="Q835880" start="19389" end="19411" title="stored program control" label="stored program control"/>
<link wikidata="Q85777977" start="19416" end="19438" title="MOS integrated circuit" label="MOS integrated circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5358316" start="19444" end="19471" title="electronic switching system" label="electronic switching system"/>
<link wikidata="Q13043846" start="19516" end="19537" title="pulse-code modulation" label="pulse-code modulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q944584" start="19545" end="19554" title="telephony" label="telephony"/>
<link wikidata="Q944584" start="19581" end="19598" title="digital telephony" label="digital telephony"/>
<link wikidata="Q170397" start="19664" end="19706" title="Integrated Services Digital Network" label="Integrated Services Digital Network (ISDN)"/>
<link wikidata="Q854954" start="19838" end="19843" title="Videotelephony" label="video"/>
<link wikidata="Q132744" start="19849" end="19852" title="fax" label="fax"/>
<link wikidata="Q1301371" start="19995" end="20011" title="computer network" label="computer network"/>
<link wikidata="Q75" start="20021" end="20029" title="Internet" label="Internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q81945" start="20107" end="20135" title="voice over Internet Protocol" label="voice over Internet Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192297" start="20168" end="20189" title="disruptive technology" label="disruptive technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q884" start="20328" end="20339" title="South Korea" label="South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q188413" start="20403" end="20411" title="Newsweek" label="Newsweek"/>
<link wikidata="Q22855" start="20589" end="20597" title="consumer" label="consumer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4830453" start="20603" end="20611" title="business" label="business"/>
<link wikidata="Q484921" start="20940" end="20964" title="analog telephone adapter" label="analog telephone adapter"/>
<link wikidata="Q943687" start="21039" end="21047" title="IP Phone" label="IP Phone"/>
<link wikidata="Q635540" start="21094" end="21103" title="softphone" label="softphone"/>
<link wikidata="Q535695" start="21264" end="21279" title="Cellular network" label="mobile networks"/>
<link wikidata="Q18136234" start="21307" end="21312" title="VoLTE" label="VoLTE"/>
<link wikidata="Q113875859" start="21333" end="21337" title="Vo5G" label="Vo5G"/>
<link wikidata="Q992968" start="21535" end="21555" title="Mobile telephony" label="mobile communication"/>
<link wikidata="Q694554" start="21862" end="21888" title="emergency telephone number" label="emergency telephone number"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195934" start="21927" end="21945" title="cordless telephone" label="cordless telephone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379116" start="21982" end="21994" title="base station" label="base station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378949" start="22034" end="22041" title="handset" label="handset"/>
<link wikidata="Q3396184" start="22187" end="22202" title="radio frequency" label="radio frequency"/>
<link wikidata="Q758907" start="22540" end="22555" title="audio amplifier" label="audio amplifier"/>
<link wikidata="Q4231780" start="22596" end="22608" title="speakerphone" label="speakerphone"/>
<link wikidata="Q747865" start="22737" end="22746" title="caller ID" label="caller ID"/>
<link wikidata="Q187510" start="22839" end="22859" title="rechargeable battery" label="rechargeable battery"/>
<link wikidata="Q387400" start="23053" end="23071" title="mains electricity" label="electricity supply"/>
<link wikidata="Q17517" start="23209" end="23221" title="mobile phone" label="mobile phone"/>
<link wikidata="Q535695" start="23317" end="23343" title="cellular network" label="cellular telephone network"/>
<link wikidata="Q46904" start="23732" end="23735" title="GSM" label="GSM"/>
<link wikidata="Q845349" start="23807" end="23809" title="2G" label="2G"/>
<link wikidata="Q79692" start="23811" end="23813" title="3G" label="3G"/>
<link wikidata="Q79697" start="23815" end="23817" title="4G" label="4G"/>
<link wikidata="Q992968" start="23911" end="23931" title="Mobile telephony" label="mobile communication"/>
<link wikidata="Q230110" start="23958" end="23966" title="SIM card" label="SIM card"/>
<link wikidata="Q80831" start="24050" end="24068" title="integrated circuit" label="integrated circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2218407" start="24098" end="24138" title="international mobile subscriber identity" label="international mobile subscriber identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q83341" start="24295" end="24298" title="Liquid-crystal display" label="LCD"/>
<link wikidata="Q209593" start="24302" end="24306" title="OLED" label="OLED"/>
<link wikidata="Q22645" start="24643" end="24653" title="smartphone" label="smartphone"/>
<link wikidata="Q43024" start="24756" end="24759" title="SMS" label="SMS"/>
<link wikidata="Q189443" start="24798" end="24826" title="multimedia messaging service" label="multimedia messaging service"/>
<link wikidata="Q9135" start="25054" end="25070" title="operating system" label="operating system"/>
<link wikidata="Q483318" start="25144" end="25151" title="Symbian" label="Symbian"/>
<link wikidata="Q274582" start="25153" end="25160" title="Palm OS" label="Palm OS"/>
<link wikidata="Q880016" start="25162" end="25175" title="BlackBerry OS" label="BlackBerry OS"/>
<link wikidata="Q21207" start="25180" end="25212" title="Windows Mobile" label="mobile phone versions of Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q94" start="25276" end="25283" title="Android (operating system)" label="Android"/>
<link wikidata="Q48493" start="25301" end="25304" title="iOS" label="iOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418" start="25447" end="25452" title="Nokia" label="Nokia"/>
<link wikidata="Q259011" start="25454" end="25462" title="Motorola" label="Motorola"/>
<link wikidata="Q52618" start="25468" end="25476" title="Ericsson" label="Ericsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q312" start="25597" end="25602" title="Apple Inc." label="Apple"/>
<link wikidata="Q20716" start="25604" end="25611" title="Samsung" label="Samsung"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636958" start="25616" end="25622" title="Xiaomi" label="Xiaomi"/>
<link wikidata="Q782543" start="25827" end="25851" title="graphical user interface" label="graphical user interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q582159" start="25931" end="25935" title="Siri" label="Siri"/>
<link wikidata="Q2766" start="25945" end="25952" title="iPhones" label="iPhones"/>
<link wikidata="Q39531" start="26389" end="26398" title="Bluetooth" label="Bluetooth"/>
<link wikidata="Q42378" start="26429" end="26432" title="USB" label="USB"/>
<link wikidata="Q129052" start="26436" end="26445" title="Lightning (connector)" label="Lightning"/>
<link wikidata="Q620615" start="26491" end="26495" title="Mobile app" label="apps"/>
<link wikidata="Q854954" start="26635" end="26648" title="video calling" label="video calling"/>
<link wikidata="Q34735" start="27108" end="27115" title="compass" label="compass"/>
<link wikidata="Q192940" start="27117" end="27131" title="accelerometers" label="accelerometers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1486497" start="27136" end="27149" title="GPS receivers" label="GPS receivers"/>
<link wikidata="Q290267" start="27339" end="27347" title="iMessage" label="iMessage"/>
<link wikidata="Q17517" start="27464" end="27476" title="mobile phone" label="mobile phone"/>
<link wikidata="Q243961" start="27847" end="27864" title="Public switched telephone network" label="telephone network"/>
<link wikidata="Q26540" start="27887" end="27896" title="satellite" label="satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q2" start="27911" end="27916" title="Earth" label="Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332343" start="27940" end="27949" title="cell site" label="cell site"/>
<link wikidata="Q17517" start="27955" end="27964" title="cellphone" label="cellphone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296401" start="28343" end="28356" title="Telephone call" label="voice calling"/>
<link wikidata="Q17166101" start="28358" end="28372" title="text messaging" label="text messaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q75" start="28392" end="28400" title="Internet" label="Internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q738621" start="28581" end="28589" title="landline" label="landline"/>
<link wikidata="Q535695" start="28594" end="28602" title="Cellular network" label="cellular"/>
<link wikidata="Q2689057" start="28983" end="28993" title="Dependability" label="dependable"/>
<link wikidata="Q4883269" start="29114" end="29125" title="Bell System" label="Bell System"/>
<link wikidata="Q4883278" start="29128" end="29151" title="Bell Telephone Memorial" label="Bell Telephone Memorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q535695" start="29154" end="29170" title="Cellular network" label="Cellular network"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195934" start="29173" end="29191" title="Cordless telephone" label="Cordless telephone"/>
<link wikidata="Q5676641" start="29194" end="29211" title="Harvard sentences" label="Harvard sentences"/>
<link wikidata="Q16996835" start="29214" end="29249" title="Index of telephone-related articles" label="Index of telephone-related articles"/>
<link wikidata="Q6202937" start="29252" end="29262" title="Jipp curve" label="Jipp curve"/>
<link wikidata="Q666926" start="29265" end="29302" title="List of telephone operating companies" label="List of telephone operating companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q920890" start="29305" end="29328" title="Mobile operating system" label="Mobile operating system"/>
<link wikidata="Q189443" start="29331" end="29359" title="Multimedia messaging service" label="Multimedia messaging service"/>
<link wikidata="Q390750" start="29368" end="29390" title="Party line (telephony)" label="Party line (telephony)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7187193" start="29393" end="29406" title="Phone hacking" label="Phone hacking"/>
<link wikidata="Q2313348" start="29409" end="29423" title="Radiotelephone" label="Radiotelephone"/>
<link wikidata="Q248903" start="29426" end="29441" title="Satellite phone" label="Satellite phone"/>
<link wikidata="Q230110" start="29444" end="29452" title="SIM card" label="SIM card"/>
<link wikidata="Q83058" start="29455" end="29463" title="Spamming" label="Spamming"/>
<link wikidata="Q444321" start="29466" end="29482" title="Telephone keypad" label="Telephone keypad"/>
<link wikidata="Q956085" start="29485" end="29508" title="Telephone jack and plug" label="Telephone jack and plug"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067529" start="29511" end="29528" title="Telephone tapping" label="Telephone tapping"/>
<link wikidata="Q7808786" start="29531" end="29543" title="Tip and ring" label="Tip and ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q854954" start="29546" end="29556" title="Videophone" label="Videophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7328562" start="30298" end="30314" title="Richard R. John" label="John, Richard R."/>
<link wikidata="Q17517" start="31719" end="31729" title="Mobile phone" label="cell phone"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="30004" wikidata="Q862303" url="?curid=30004" title="Telia Company">
<text>Telia Company AB is a Swedish multinational telecommunications company and mobile network operator present in Sweden, Finland, Norway, Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania.

Telia also owns TV4 Media which includes TV4 in Sweden, MTV Oy in Finland, and C More Entertainment after acquiring them in 2019.

The company is headquartered in Solna and its stock is traded on the Stockholm Stock Exchange and on the Helsinki Stock Exchange.

The company has been linked to corruption scandals in its dealings with the regimes in Uzbekistan and Azerbaijan. Telia&#x27;s bribery scandal in relation to the Ilham Aliyev regime in Azerbaijan has been described as &quot;possibly the largest bribery in Swedish history.&quot;

==History==
Telia Company in its current form was first established as TeliaSonera, as the result of a 2002 merger between the Swedish and Finnish telecommunications companies, Telia and Sonera. This merger followed three years after Telia&#x27;s failed merger attempt with Norwegian telecommunications company Telenor, now its chief competitor in the Nordic countries.

Before privatisation, Telia was a state telephone monopoly. Sonera, on the other hand, had a monopoly only on trunk network calls, while most (c. 75%) of local telecommunication was provided by telephone cooperatives. The separate brands Telia and Sonera continued to be used in the Swedish and Finnish markets respectively until March 2017, when Sonera was rebranded to Telia. Of the stock, 39.5% (31 March 2020) is owned by the Swedish government, and the rest by institutions, companies, and private investors worldwide. The Finnish government (through Solidium) divested from Telia Company in February 2018, when it sold its remaining 3.2% stake.

===Telia===

The Swedish Kungl. Telegrafverket (literally: &quot;Royal Telegraph Agency&quot;) was founded in 1853, when the first electric telegraph line was established between Stockholm and Uppsala. Allmänna Telefon found an equipment supplier in Lars Magnus Ericsson. In this early competition, Telegrafverket with its brand Rikstelefon was a latecomer. However, by securing a national monopoly on long-distance telephone lines, it was able with time to control and take over the local networks of quickly growing private telephone companies.

A de facto telephone monopoly position was reached around 1920, and never needed legal sanction. In 1953 the name was modernised to Televerket. On 1 July 1992, this huge government agency&#x27;s regulating functions was split off into the Swedish Post and Telecom Authority (, PTS), with similar functions as the Federal Communications Commission of the United States. The operation of the state radio and TV broadcast network was spun off into a company named Teracom. On 1 July 1993, the remaining telephone and mobile network operator was transformed into a government-owned shareholding company, named Telia AB. At the height of the dot-com bubble, on 13 June 2000, close to one-third of Telia&#x27;s shares were introduced on the Stockholm Stock Exchange.

In the 1980s, Televerket was a pioneering mobile network operator with the NMT system, followed in the 1990s by GSM. Private competition in analogue mobile phone systems had already broken the telephone monopoly, and the growing internet allowed more opportunities for competitors. The most important of Telia&#x27;s Swedish competitors in these areas has been Tele2. When PTS awarded four licenses for the 3rd generation mobile networks in December 2000, Telia was not among the winners, but later established an agreement to build a 3G network jointly with Tele2 using Tele2&#x27;s licence. SUNAB was founded as the jointly owned company that would in turn build, own and operate the joint 3G network. In December 2018, Telia in cooperation with Ericsson launched Sweden&#x27;s first 5G network at KTH Royal Institute of Technology in Stockholm.

===Sonera===

The history of Sonera dates back to 1917, when Suomen Lennätinlaitos (Finnish Telegraph Agency) was founded. In 1927, the telegraph agency was merged with the Finnish Post to form a new agency, Post and Telegraph Agency. This agency governed all long distance and international calls until 1994, when competitors were allowed to enter the Finnish market. In the same year, the Post and Telegraph Agency was divided to form two companies, Suomen Posti Oy (Finnish Post), and Telecom Finland Oy. Telecom Finland then changed its name to Sonera in 1998.

===After the merger of Telia and Sonera===
During the run-up to the 2006 general election the Swedish liberal-conservative Alliance stated as one of its policy aims to reduce government ownership in commercial entities, and specifically to sell its stake in TeliaSonera. The Alliance went on to win the election and formed a coalition government. After the merger with Sonera, the Swedish State held 46% of the shares and with parliamentary approval the government sold down to 37.3%. Further divestment of TeliaSonera was however presented to the parliament only after the next election in 2010, when the Alliance lost its majority but stayed on as a minority administration.

On 16 March 2011, the Alliance administration lost a parliamentary vote on sale of publicly owned commercial entities, including TeliaSonera, when a coalition of all opposition parties — the Left Party, Social Democratic Party, Green Party and Sweden Democrats — united against the Alliance.

In the beginning of 2008, TeliaSonera announced measures to save nearly 500 million euros which would include 2,900 redundancies: 2,000 from Sweden and 900 from Finland. France Télécom (now Orange S.A.) proposed a 33 billion euro acquisition offer for TeliaSonera on 5 June 2008, which was promptly rejected by the company&#x27;s board.

On 12 April 2016, the company changed its name to Telia Company, dropping the Sonera part, rebranding the company to aid recovery after bribery and money laundering allegations.

On 20 July 2018, Telia Company announced the acquisition proposal of Bonnier Broadcasting Group from Bonnier Group for 9.2 billion SEK (roughly $1 billion), thus owning TV4 AB (commercial television broadcaster in Sweden), MTV Oy (commercial television broadcaster in Finland) and C More Entertainment (pan-Nordic operator of premium television channels). The European Commission approved the deal on 12 November 2019 with certain conditions, and the acquisition was completed on 2 December that year.

Ahead of the completion of Bonnier Broadcasting deal, the Telia Company nomination committee proposed on 20 October 2019, that Marie Ehrling be succeeded by Lars-Johan Jarnheimer, the former CEO of Tele2 until 2008, and then-chair of Egmont Media, as the company&#x27;s board chair. The proposal was approved on 26 November that year, following the extraordinary general meeting. Meanwhile, on 24 October, Telia Company appointed Allison Kirkby, the former CEO of Tele2 from 2015 until 2018 and then went on to become the president and CEO of TDC, as the company&#x27;s new president and CEO. Kirkby assumed office on 4 May 2020.

On 6 October 2020, Telia Company agreed to sell its Internet backbone unit Telia Carrier to Polhem Infra for roughly US$1 billion. The sale was completed on 1 June 2021.

On 25 February 2025, Telia announced that it was selling its media division to in order to focus on its consumer division, the sale is scheduled to be completed by Q3 2025, pending regulatory approval.

==Operations==
Telia Company is the largest Nordic and Baltic fixed-voice, broadband, and mobile operator by revenue and customer base. It also owns a TV-media operation which includes TV4 in Sweden and MTV in Finland as well as C More.

Telia mobile telephone business in Europe:
*Leader company - Sweden, Estonia and Lithuania
*Second company - Finland and Norway

===Estonia===
Telia Company owns 100% of Eesti Telekom. Eesti Telekom is one of the largest telecommunication companies in the Baltic countries and the largest telecommunications company in Estonia. TeliaSonera and the Estonian government reached a deal over the sale of Eesti Telekom in September 2009. On 20 January 2016, Eesti Telekom switched its name to Telia Eesti.

===Finland===

Telia Finland is the second largest mobile operator in Finland and also one of the biggest providers of landline telephone and internet services. 
Before the rebranding on 23 March 2017, Telia was known in Finland under the brands of Sonera and Tele Finland. In September 1999, Sonera became the world&#x27;s first mobile operator to launch mobile Internet services via Wireless Application Protocol (WAP).

Since 2014, Telia Finland and DNA Oyj have jointly deployed a shared 4G LTE network using the 800 MHz (LTE Band 20) &quot;digital dividend&quot; band in remote Northern and Eastern Finland under the &quot;Suomen Yhteisverkko Oy&quot; joint venture. Telia Finland owns 51% of &quot;Suomen Yhteisverkko Oy&quot;.

===Latvia===
Telia Company owns 49% of LMT (24.5% as Telia Company AB and 24.5% as Sonera Holding B.V.) and 49% of Tet, which owns 23% of LMT. Telia Latvija, a business cable operator and data centre operator, was sold to Tet.

===Lithuania===
TeliaSonera owns 88.15% of Telia Lietuva (Teo LT until 2017), the largest landline phone operator in Lithuania, which recently purchased Omnitel, one of largest mobile network operators there. It was previously owned by TeliaSonera group.

In October 2015, TeliaSonera announced the merger of Teo and Omnitel, through the acquisition of Omnitel by Teo.

On 1 February 2017, Omnitel and Teo merged under the name of &quot;Telia Lietuva&quot;.

===Norway===
In Norway, Telia first entered after the de-regulation in 1998 as a virtual supplier of fixed telephone and Internet services. This was sold to Enitel during the merger attempt with Telenor, but Telia re-entered in 2000 with the purchase of one of the two mobile network operators, NetCom. In 2006 it also bought the virtual mobile provider Chess Communication.

On 1 March 2016, NetCom changed its name to Telia Norge.

In July 2018, Telia acquired Get AS and TDC Norway for $2.6 billion.

===Sweden===

In Sweden, Telia Company operates under the consumer brands Telia and its lower-cost flanker brands Halebop and Fello. On the business side, Skanova Access and Cygate are also used. Telia Sverige is currently the largest mobile phone operator in Sweden, both in terms of revenue and customer base. Main competitors include Tele2, Telenor, 3, Allente and Boxer.

==Former operations==
===Afghanistan===
In July 2020, Telia Company announced it has divested its 12.25% share in the Afghan Roshan (telco) cellphone network.

===Azerbaijan===
On 15 May 2010, after Azercell went through rebranding, it joined the network of TeliaSonera. On 5 March 2018, Telia confirmed they have sold their stake in Azercell.

===Cambodia===
TeliaSonera purchased a majority stake in Star-Cell in 2008 which was the number four player in the market at that time. By 2010 it exited Cambodia after a $100 million write down and collapse in subscriber numbers. It was subsequently taken over by a more dominant competitor Smart Mobile.

===Denmark===

In Denmark, Telia Company operated a mobile operator (Telia), a mobile virtual network operator (Call Me), and a broadband supplier (Telia). The company started in 1995, the result of a merger between Telia Stofa and TeliaSonera. In 2014, Telia and Telenor announced their plan to merge and create a 50/50 joint-venture, but this fell through in 2015 after failed negotiations with the EU regulators. The two companies do operate a 50/50 joint-venture for their network infrastructure operations and spectrum holdings called &quot;TT-Netværket (&quot;TT-Network&quot;)&quot;.

Telia Broadband was relaunched in 2008 because of the need for TeliaSonera to offer both mobile and broadband in all of their home markets (Sweden, Norway, Denmark and Finland). Telia Broadband was the first operator to launch digital TV with their broadband at no extra cost. Stofa is mainly a cable TV operator, but also supplies broadband via the cable TV network.

Telia Company sold its operations and network assets in Denmark to Norlys a.m.b.a. (Norlys) at an enterprise value of DKK 6.25 billion, on a cash and debt-free basis on 2 April 2024.

===Georgia===
From 2007 to 2018, Telia Company has owned 58.55% of the Geocell company, while Turkcell owns the remaining 41.45%. Since 2018 Silknet bought full part of Geocell.

===Sri Lanka===
From 1996 to 2010, Telia Company has owned 100% of SUNTEL Ltd. Since 2010 Dialog Axiata bought full part of Suntel.

=== Kazakhstan ===
Telia Company operated in Kazakhstan under the brand Kcell. From 21 December 2018, Kcell sold to Kazakhtelecom.

=== Moldova ===
In February 2020, Telia Company agreed to sell its 100% holding in Moldcell to CG Cell Technologies DAC, for a transaction price of US$31.5 million.

===Nepal===
TeliaSonera owned a majority stake in Ncell, the largest mobile operator in Nepal with US$16.2 billion operating income. On 21 December 2015, TeliaSonera announced its exit from Ncell, selling its 60.4 percent of the shares to Malaysian telecommunications group Axiata. TeliaSonera exited Nepal without settling billions of Capital Gains Tax owed to Nepalese government.

=== Russia ===
Telia Company owned 25.2% of MegaFon, the second largest mobile phone operator in Russia. In October 2017, Telia Company agreed to sell their entire MegaFon stake for US$1 billion.

=== Spain ===
Telia Company owned a 76.6% holding in the Spanish operator Yoigo until 21 June 2016 when it was sold to Masmovil.

===Tajikistan===
Telia Company owned 60% of mobile phone operator Tcell. Tcell is a merger of Somoncom and Indigo Tajikistan; the merger was completed in July 2012. On 27 April 2017, it was confirmed that Tcell has been sold.

===Turkey===
In October 2020, Telia Company&#x27;s divestment of its 47.1 percent stake in Turkcell Holding (which holds 51% in the listed leading mobile operator in Turkey) to the state owned Turkey Wealth Fund for US$530 million, was completed.

=== Uzbekistan===
In five years, Ucell, the Uzbek subsidiary, increased the number of its subscribers from 400,000 to 9 million (2012). Some former TeliaSonera executives were under preliminary investigation by Swedish prosecutors for allegations of bribery and money laundering associated with the acquisition of their 3G license in Uzbekistan from Takilant Limited, registered in Gibraltar. Under these investigations involving four Uzbek nationals, hundreds of millions of francs were frozen in Swiss banks. The former executives were acquitted in the first instance in the Swedish legal proceedings in February 2019, the verdict has been appealed. In September 2017 Telia Company announced that a global settlement had been reached with the U.S. Department of Justice (DOJ), Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) and the Dutch Public Prosecution Service (Openbaar Ministerie, OM) relating to previously disclosed investigations regarding historical transactions in Uzbekistan. The global resolution ended all known corruption related investigations or inquiries into Telia Company.

== Evolution of the Telia brand ==

When Telia and Sonera merged in 2002, TeliaSonera used a simple wordmark as the logo. In 2011, TeliaSonera released its new purple pebble logo to the corporation and its affiliate brands. The pebble was designed by Landor Associates.

In 2016, TeliaSonera changed name to Telia Company and presented an updated pebble brand profile, designed by Wolff Olins, to be used by all Telia brand companies.

== Controversies ==
TeliaSonera has been accused of indirectly supporting dictatorships, allowing them to do man-in-the-middle attacks on their citizens. This was disclosed in the Swedish TV show Uppdrag Granskning in 2012. TeliaSonera responded to these allegations with: &quot;This is happening every day in all countries and applies to all operators. We are obliged to comply with the legislation of each country.&quot;

Further allegations have been presented in Swedish media and elsewhere that TeliaSonera may have illegally, through bribery, acquired licenses in Uzbekistan and Azerbaijan. As a result of internal investigations on these and other potential violations to the company&#x27;s policies, several senior managers were dismissed from the company. Telia admitted to this bribery accusations and had to pay US$965 million in settlement in 2017.

When TeliaSonera exited Nepal there were voices raised in the public debate in Nepal that it had evaded an approximately 36 billion rupee capital gains tax owed to the Nepalese government, when it sold its stake to Axiata, a Malaysian Telecom Group, a claim which has been refuted by Telia Company on several occasions. In that context, Telia was criticized by media (TV) even in Sweden where its headquarters is located. Also, a group of Nepalese people started a movement &#x27;No Tax.. No Ncell&#x27; to boycott the services of Ncell in Nepal.

==See also==

* List of Finnish companies
* List of Swedish companies
* Telia Carrier

==References==
==External links==
* Yahoo! - TeliaSonera AB Company Profile
* TeliaSonera CDN </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q862303" start="0" end="16" title="Telia Company" label="Telia Company AB"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="22" end="29" title="Sweden" label="Swedish"/>
<link wikidata="Q161726" start="30" end="43" title="Multinational corporation" label="multinational"/>
<link wikidata="Q418" start="44" end="62" title="telecommunications" label="telecommunications"/>
<link wikidata="Q1941618" start="75" end="98" title="mobile network operator" label="mobile network operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q33" start="118" end="125" title="Finland" label="Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="127" end="133" title="Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q191" start="135" end="142" title="Estonia" label="Estonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q211" start="144" end="150" title="Latvia" label="Latvia"/>
<link wikidata="Q37" start="155" end="164" title="Lithuania" label="Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q56403325" start="183" end="192" title="TV4 Media" label="TV4 Media"/>
<link wikidata="Q9184391" start="246" end="266" title="C More Entertainment" label="C More Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q109010" start="330" end="335" title="Solna" label="Solna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1019992" start="367" end="391" title="Stockholm Stock Exchange" label="Stockholm Stock Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q581755" start="403" end="426" title="Helsinki Stock Exchange" label="Helsinki Stock Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q57371" start="591" end="603" title="Ilham Aliyev" label="Ilham Aliyev"/>
<link wikidata="Q731112" start="817" end="823" title="merger" label="merger"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="983" end="992" title="Norway" label="Norwegian"/>
<link wikidata="Q845632" start="1020" end="1027" title="Telenor" label="Telenor"/>
<link wikidata="Q161500" start="1087" end="1100" title="privatisation" label="privatisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q43637" start="1130" end="1138" title="monopoly" label="monopoly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020782" start="1190" end="1203" title="Trunking" label="trunk network"/>
<link wikidata="Q7902840" start="1274" end="1295" title="utility cooperative" label="telephone cooperative"/>
<link wikidata="Q11692" start="1465" end="1470" title="share (finance)" label="stock"/>
<link wikidata="Q930729" start="1510" end="1528" title="Government of Sweden" label="Swedish government"/>
<link wikidata="Q2366737" start="1608" end="1626" title="Government of Finland" label="Finnish government"/>
<link wikidata="Q7558031" start="1636" end="1644" title="Solidium" label="Solidium"/>
<link wikidata="Q721587" start="1872" end="1881" title="Telegraphy" label="telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q25286" start="1925" end="1932" title="Uppsala" label="Uppsala"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1934" end="1950" title="Allmänna Telefon" label="Allmänna Telefon"/>
<link wikidata="Q52618" start="1994" end="2002" title="Ericsson" label="Ericsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261521" start="2134" end="2157" title="long-distance operator" label="long-distance telephone"/>
<link wikidata="Q712144" start="2282" end="2290" title="de facto" label="de facto"/>
<link wikidata="Q7654818" start="2519" end="2553" title="Swedish Post and Telecom Authority" label="Swedish Post and Telecom Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q128831" start="2593" end="2626" title="Federal Communications Commission" label="Federal Communications Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q7476318" start="2741" end="2748" title="Teracom" label="Teracom"/>
<link wikidata="Q79721" start="2917" end="2931" title="dot-com bubble" label="dot-com bubble"/>
<link wikidata="Q1019992" start="3015" end="3039" title="Stockholm Stock Exchange" label="Stockholm Stock Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q854862" start="3117" end="3120" title="Nordic Mobile Telephone" label="NMT"/>
<link wikidata="Q46904" start="3154" end="3157" title="GSM" label="GSM"/>
<link wikidata="Q75" start="3271" end="3279" title="internet" label="internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q309865" start="3403" end="3408" title="Tele2" label="Tele2"/>
<link wikidata="Q79692" start="3449" end="3463" title="3G" label="3rd generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7394999" start="3635" end="3640" title="SUNAB" label="SUNAB"/>
<link wikidata="Q52618" start="3790" end="3798" title="Ericsson" label="Ericsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q854280" start="3842" end="3875" title="KTH Royal Institute of Technology" label="KTH Royal Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754" start="3879" end="3888" title="Stockholm" label="Stockholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q862303" start="3920" end="3926" title="Sonera" label="Sonera"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3952" end="3973" title="Suomen Lennätinlaitos" label="Suomen Lennätinlaitos"/>
<link wikidata="Q843453" start="4343" end="4358" title="Suomen Posti Oy" label="Suomen Posti Oy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4379" end="4397" title="Telecom Finland Oy" label="Telecom Finland Oy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324608" start="4525" end="4546" title="2006 Swedish general election" label="2006 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324668" start="4580" end="4588" title="Alliance (Sweden)" label="Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q837416" start="4782" end="4802" title="coalition government" label="coalition government"/>
<link wikidata="Q110837" start="5326" end="5336" title="Left Party (Sweden)" label="Left Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q105112" start="5338" end="5361" title="Swedish Social Democratic Party" label="Social Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q213451" start="5363" end="5374" title="Green Party (Sweden)" label="Green Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q504069" start="5379" end="5395" title="Sweden Democrats" label="Sweden Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916" start="5512" end="5517" title="euros" label="euros"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431486" start="5618" end="5629" title="Orange S.A." label="Orange S.A."/>
<link wikidata="Q16021" start="5645" end="5652" title="1,000,000,000" label="billion"/>
<link wikidata="Q56403325" start="6014" end="6040" title="TV4 Media" label="Bonnier Broadcasting Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q892825" start="6046" end="6059" title="Bonnier Group" label="Bonnier Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q122922" start="6076" end="6079" title="Swedish krona" label="SEK"/>
<link wikidata="Q3500487" start="6114" end="6120" title="TV4 AB" label="TV4 AB"/>
<link wikidata="Q11880282" start="6168" end="6174" title="MTV Oy" label="MTV Oy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9184391" start="6226" end="6246" title="C More Entertainment" label="C More Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q8880" start="6305" end="6324" title="European Commission" label="European Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q530466" start="6575" end="6588" title="Marie Ehrling" label="Marie Ehrling"/>
<link wikidata="Q484876" start="6639" end="6642" title="Chief executive officer" label="CEO"/>
<link wikidata="Q309865" start="6646" end="6651" title="Tele2" label="Tele2"/>
<link wikidata="Q2083868" start="6682" end="6694" title="Egmont Group" label="Egmont Media"/>
<link wikidata="Q5422235" start="6797" end="6826" title="extraordinary general meeting" label="extraordinary general meeting"/>
<link wikidata="Q28914897" start="6878" end="6892" title="Allison Kirkby" label="Allison Kirkby"/>
<link wikidata="Q1238842" start="6991" end="6994" title="TDC A/S" label="TDC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360517" start="7131" end="7148" title="Internet backbone" label="Internet backbone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7697233" start="7154" end="7167" title="Telia Carrier" label="Telia Carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q52062" start="7497" end="7503" title="Nordic countries" label="Nordic"/>
<link wikidata="Q39731" start="7508" end="7514" title="Baltic countries" label="Baltic"/>
<link wikidata="Q194163" start="7528" end="7537" title="broadband" label="broadband"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="7752" end="7758" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q191" start="7760" end="7767" title="Estonia" label="Estonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q37" start="7772" end="7781" title="Lithuania" label="Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q33" start="7800" end="7807" title="Finland" label="Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="7812" end="7818" title="Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1295663" start="7861" end="7874" title="Eesti Telekom" label="Eesti Telekom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1295663" start="8179" end="8190" title="Telia Eesti" label="Telia Eesti"/>
<link wikidata="Q186224" start="8578" end="8607" title="Wireless Application Protocol" label="Wireless Application Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q8061" start="8646" end="8653" title="DNA Oyj" label="DNA Oyj"/>
<link wikidata="Q4426574" start="8678" end="8684" title="Telecom infrastructure sharing" label="shared"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8738" end="8754" title="Digital dividend after digital television transition#Europe" label="digital dividend"/>
<link wikidata="Q489209" start="8850" end="8863" title="joint venture" label="joint venture"/>
<link wikidata="Q4993620" start="8967" end="8970" title="Latvian Mobile Telephone" label="LMT"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9011" end="9025" title="Sonera Holding" label="Sonera Holding"/>
<link wikidata="Q404542" start="9043" end="9046" title="Tet (company)" label="Tet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4993620" start="9066" end="9069" title="LMT (company)" label="LMT"/>
<link wikidata="Q404542" start="9150" end="9153" title="Tet (company)" label="Tet"/>
<link wikidata="Q494274" start="9199" end="9212" title="Telia Lietuva" label="Telia Lietuva"/>
<link wikidata="Q37" start="9273" end="9282" title="Lithuania" label="Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q494274" start="9309" end="9316" title="Omnitel Lietuva" label="Omnitel"/>
<link wikidata="Q494274" start="9593" end="9606" title="Telia Lietuva" label="Telia Lietuva"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9772" end="9778" title="Enitel" label="Enitel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6515085" start="9910" end="9916" title="NetCom (Norway)" label="NetCom"/>
<link wikidata="Q5093296" start="9969" end="9988" title="Chess Communication" label="Chess Communication"/>
<link wikidata="Q6515085" start="10035" end="10046" title="Telia Norge" label="Telia Norge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5553795" start="10078" end="10084" title="Get AS" label="Get AS"/>
<link wikidata="Q5447850" start="10218" end="10232" title="fighter brand" label="flanker brands"/>
<link wikidata="Q309865" start="10456" end="10461" title="Tele2" label="Tele2"/>
<link wikidata="Q10692298" start="10463" end="10470" title="Telenor Sverige" label="Telenor"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10472" end="10473" title="3 (telecommunications)#Denmark and Sweden" label="3"/>
<link wikidata="Q106514513" start="10475" end="10482" title="Allente" label="Allente"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763986" start="10487" end="10492" title="Boxer TV Access" label="Boxer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127519" start="10620" end="10634" title="Roshan (telco)" label="Roshan (telco)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2639931" start="10694" end="10702" title="Azercell" label="Azercell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058891" start="11226" end="11257" title="mobile virtual network operator" label="mobile virtual network operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q3646611" start="12363" end="12370" title="Geocell" label="Geocell"/>
<link wikidata="Q283852" start="12386" end="12394" title="Turkcell" label="Turkcell"/>
<link wikidata="Q12869272" start="12433" end="12440" title="Silknet" label="Silknet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5270580" start="12561" end="12574" title="Dialog Axiata" label="Dialog Axiata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1737636" start="12676" end="12681" title="Kcell" label="Kcell"/>
<link wikidata="Q13179656" start="12952" end="12957" title="Ncell" label="Ncell"/>
<link wikidata="Q837" start="12990" end="12995" title="Nepal" label="Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q792500" start="13176" end="13182" title="Axiata" label="Axiata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1720713" start="13330" end="13337" title="MegaFon" label="MegaFon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630989" start="13557" end="13562" title="Yoigo" label="Yoigo"/>
<link wikidata="" start="13602" end="13610" title=":es:Grupo MásMóvil" label="Masmovil"/>
<link wikidata="Q4050760" start="13679" end="13684" title="Tcell" label="Tcell"/>
<link wikidata="Q283852" start="13931" end="13939" title="Turkcell" label="Turkcell"/>
<link wikidata="Q28745990" start="14033" end="14051" title="Turkey Wealth Fund" label="Turkey Wealth Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q837816" start="15278" end="15286" title="wordmark" label="wordmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431751" start="15429" end="15446" title="Landor Associates" label="Landor Associates"/>
<link wikidata="Q8030011" start="15559" end="15570" title="Wolff Olins" label="Wolff Olins"/>
<link wikidata="Q554830" start="15723" end="15747" title="man-in-the-middle attack" label="man-in-the-middle attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q202895" start="16608" end="16613" title="Nepalese rupee" label="rupee"/>
<link wikidata="Q924266" start="17040" end="17065" title="List of Finnish companies" label="List of Finnish companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427054" start="17068" end="17093" title="List of Swedish companies" label="List of Swedish companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7697233" start="17096" end="17109" title="Telia Carrier" label="Telia Carrier"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="30005" wikidata="Q160229" url="?curid=30005" title="Telefónica">
<text>, S.A. () is a Spanish multinational telecommunications company with registered office and headquarters located in two different places, both in Madrid, Spain. It is one of the largest telephone operators and mobile network providers in the world. It provides fixed and mobile telephony, broadband, and subscription television, operating in Europe and the Americas.

As well as the brand, it also trades as Movistar, O2, and Vivo. The company is a component of the Euro Stoxx 50 stock market index. On 15 April 2012, Telefónica shut down TVA and Ajacto, which unified the brand into Vivo.

== History ==

The company was created in Madrid in 1924 as Compañía Telefónica Nacional de España (CTNE) with ITT as one of its major shareholders. In 1945, the state acquired by law a share of 79.6% of the company. This stake was diluted by a capital increase in 1967.

Until the liberalization of the telecom market in 1997, Telefónica was the only telephone operator in Spain. It still holds a dominant position (over 75% in 2000). Nowadays, Telefónica is present in more than 20 countries around Europe and America.

In 2023, Saudi Arabia&#x27;s STC Group became Telefónica&#x27;s largest shareholder, building a stake worth 2.1 billion euros ($2.23 billion) through shares and convertible financial instruments. In December 2023, the Spanish government announced plans to acquire a stake of up to 10% in Telefónica worth $2.2 billion through the state holding company SEPI.

== Ownership ==
Telefónica is a 100% listed company with more than 1.5 million direct shareholders. Its share capital currently comprises 4,563,996,485 ordinary shares traded on the Spanish Stock Market (Madrid, Barcelona, Bilbao, and Valencia) and on those in London, New York, Lima, and Buenos Aires. Because Telefónica is considered a defense service provider and a strategic company, the Spanish government has a say in acquisitions and holdings between 5% and 10%.

The major stockholders include:

* Government of Spain (SEPI): 10%
* CaixaBank: 5.07%
* STC Group: 4.9%
* Banco Bilbao Vizcaya Argentaria (BBVA): 4.9%

== Current operations ==
=== Europe ===
==== Austria ====
In May 2022, Telefonica announced the acquisition of the European cloud-based services specialist and cloud Microsoft Dynamics partner BE-terna. The deal worth €350 million includes 1,000 staff, AI, extended service capabilities across Europe, and a cybersecurity services division. The deal aimed to see Telefonica increase its geographic scale and aid its digital capabilities.

==== Spain ====

Telefónica is the second largest corporation in Spain, behind the Santander Group. It operates under the &quot;movistar&quot; and &quot;O2&quot; brands with the first being the largest broadband and phone (both mobile and landlines) provider in Spain.

Telefónica&#x27;s FTTH network in Spain is the most extensive fibre-to-home network in Europe, as of April 2016, and the shutdown plan for the legacy copper network is already in progress.

==== Germany ====

Telefónica was the parent of Telefónica Deutschland, which held two alternative IP carriers. The two ISPs, mediaWays and HighwayOne merged in January 2003 after having been purchased by Telefónica in 2001 and February 2002 respectively.

On 26 January 2006, Telefónica completed its £17.7 billion (€25.7 billion) acquisition of the UK-based operator O2 which also provided mobile phone services in Germany under the O2 brand. Following the purchase, Telefónica merged Telefónica Deutschland and O2 Germany to form the current business Telefónica Germany.

Telefónica Germany, purchased competitor E-Plus on 1 October 2014. As part of the purchase, Telefónica reduced its stake in its subsidiary to 62.1%. Integration continues as of August 2015, but the now merged network is Germany&#x27;s largest in customers.

==== United Kingdom ====

On 31 October 2005, O2 agreed to be taken over by Telefónica, with a cash offer of £17.7 billion, or £2 per share. According to the merger announcement, O2, which provided mobile phone services in the UK, Ireland, Germany and the Isle of Man (uniquely to the O2 group Manx Telecom also offered fixed-line services), retained its name and continued to be based in the United Kingdom, keeping both the brand and the management team. The merger became unconditional on 23 January 2006 and O2 became a wholly owned subsidiary of Telefónica. Manx Telecom was sold by Telefónica Europe in June 2010.

In January 2015, Li Ka-shing entered into talks with Telefónica to buy O2 for around £10.25 billion, aiming to merge it with his subsidiary Three. The acquisition was officially blocked by the European Commission on 11 May 2016, which argued that the merger would reduce consumer choice and lead to a higher cost of services Telefónica began to seek a stock market flotation of the business instead.

Announced on 7 May 2020, Liberty Global owner of Virgin Media and Telefónica owner of O2, agreed to merge their U.K. businesses in a deal worth £31bn and form one of the UK&#x27;s largest entertainment and telecommunication companies to rival the BT Group. As of the 1 June 2021, Virgin Media and O2 UK Ltd officially merged to form Virgin Media O2, giving Telefónica a 50% stake in the new company, with the other 50% owned by Liberty Global.

==== France ====

In France, since 2011, Telefónica has a joint venture with the French telecommunications company Bouygues Telecom, part of the Bouygues group, to offer global telecommunication services packages to multinational companies. This cooperation was expanded in June 2015 through the creation of a separate joint venture company named Telefónica Global Solutions France, with its own marketing and sales teams offering Telefónica and Bouygues Telecom services packages to corporations.

=== Americas ===
Telefónica operates the Movistar mobile phone brand throughout Latin America and the Vivo in Brazil. In Mexico it occupies a distant second place and it is the largest in Chile, Venezuela, Brazil, and Peru. Telefónica plans to divest the majority of its Latin American business in order to focus on the core markets UK, Spain, Germany and Brazil and add €2 billion in revenue with this programme.

==== Argentina ====
 owns which is the largest fixed-line operator in the country. It provides broadband, local and long-distance telephone services in southern part of the country as well as the Greater Buenos Aires area. The Group has been in the country since 1990. The mobile business is run by Móviles through Movistar, a local subsidiary.

==== Brazil ====
&#x27;s largest fixed-line operation in South America is in Brazil, where it provides broadband, local and long-distance telephone services in the aforementioned state, which alone represents the highest GDP of South America. It also owns a majority stake in the Brazilian mobile operator Vivo, having agreed on 28 July 2010 to buy Portugal Telecom&#x27;s stake in the firm for €7.5 billion, after increasing its original offer by €1.8 billion over three months of incident-rich negotiations. The group has been in the country since 1996 when it acquired CRT, a fixed-line and mobile operator in the southern part of the country. The landline division is currently part of Oi. In July 1998, acquired Telesp, the telephony operator of the Telebrás system in the state of São Paulo, forming Telefônica Brasil.

In June 2009, after four big &quot;blackouts&quot; on &#x27;s broadband &quot;Speedy&quot;, ANATEL ordered to stop sales of its broadband service until improvements were made on the infrastructure to provide better-quality service. After the release of sales of broadband internet in August 2009, ANATEL expects the company&#x27;s service investments to keep on par with the sales. On 24 July 2010, announced that the number of Speedy subscribers had exceeded three million people.

==== Chile ====
 owns &quot; Chile&quot;, formerly CTC (Compañía de Telecomunicaciones de Chile, formerly known as Compañía de Teléfonos de Chile) which is the biggest fixed-line operator and internet service provider in the country. The Group has been in the country since 1989. The mobile business is run by Móviles through a local subsidiary. On 26 October 2009, Chile changed its name to &quot;Movistar&quot;, including cellphone, landline, satellite TV, and internet.

==== Colombia ====
On 18 April 2006, &#x27;s president Cesar Alierta signed an agreement with the Colombian government to buy 50% and one share of the state-owned communications company, Colombia Telecomunicaciones (TELECOM). With this sale, became the largest Colombian land-line operator, and also gained an important presence in the local, long-distance and broadband market. The mobile business is run by Móviles through the brand movistar. It is unknown what will happen with their previous established subsidiary Empresas, being most probable a merger with TELECOM. The company is now known as - Telecom.

==== Costa Rica ====
 signed a contract for 15 years (extendable for 10 additional years) on 12 May 2011 with the government of Costa Rica. It started operations in 2011 under its Movistar branding.

==== Dominican Republic ====
In 2000, acquired a 26.5% stake in Tricom when it purchased part of the shares Motorola had obtained in 1993.

==== Ecuador ====
After acquiring 100% of OTECEL S.A. (Bellsouth), Móviles Ecuador started its operations on 14 October 2004 as Movistar. It is one of only three mobile operators in Ecuador. in Ecuador has started offering 3G service from the second half of 2009.

==== Panama ====
 started its operations in Panama in 2004 as acquired 100% of Bellsouth Panama. Since then, it has operated using the name Movistar for mobile services. It migrated from CDMA technology used by Bellsouth to GSM 850. It also offers 3G using UMTS 850 and UMTS 1900. In 2015, it launched LTE with coverage expanding in Panama City, Arraijan, Chorrera up to Buenaventura Beach.

==== Peru ====
The Group has been in the country since 1994 and owns the largest fixed-line operator in the country. The local subsidiary offers local, long-distance, and broadband services nationwide. The mobile business is run by Móviles through a local subsidiary. The mobile telephone business goes by the name Movistar and competes with major provider Claro. Their main offices are located in Santa Beatriz on Av. Arequipa 1155.

Since January 2011, has operated in the market under the Movistar brand.

==== Puerto Rico ====
 in the U.S. territory of Puerto Rico has presence through Empresas, Larga Distancia – TLD, International Wholesale Services – TIWS (formerly Emergia) and Atento. Moviles, through its Movistar brand, had presence in Puerto Rico until mid-2007 but they sold the Puerto Rico network to a private equity group who renamed it Open Mobile.

==== Venezuela ====
In late 2004, took over the operations of Telcel Bellsouth in Venezuela, the first and largest mobile operator in the South American country at the time. After re-branding as Movistar, its CDMA2000 EvDO was progressively replaced by a GSM UMTS 3G network. is currently rolling out 4G LTE in the country.

==== United States ====
Based in Miami, Florida, USA, Inc. provides services to U.S.-based multinational companies that have operations in Latin America and Europe. USA also operates the KeyCenter, a data center in Miami built to withstand category 5 hurricanes, from where the company supports Business Continuity and IT services for Enterprise customers in South Florida.

=== Asia ===
==== China ====
In 2009, China Unicom agreed to a $1 billion cross-holding with . In January 2011, the two partners agreed to a further $500 million tie-up in each other. Following completion in late 2011, will hold a 9.7% stake in China Unicom, and China Unicom will own 1.4% of the Spanish firm.

In 2018, China Unicom and establish a new partnership to combine their services and networks in the internet of things, so as to enable their clients to deploy IoT products and services in China, Europe and Latin America with a single global IoT SIM card.

== Former operations ==
=== Czech Republic ===

In 2005, bought &quot;Český Telecom&quot; (Czech Telecom), the former state-owned Czech phone operator which still dominates the Czech fixed-line market. As part of this deal also gained its 100% subsidiary Eurotel, one of three mobile phone operators in the Czech Republic. Starting 1 July 2006, both companies were merged into one legal entity and renamed &quot; O2 Czech Republic&quot;. In 2011, the company was renamed &quot; Czech Republic&quot; and in 2013, it was announced that would sell its stake in the company to PPF. Under the terms of the sale, the company was allowed to continue to trade under the O2 brand for a maximum of four years. In August 2017, the brand license agreement was extended to 2022, with a 5-year extension to 2027 available.

=== Slovakia ===

During 2006, Telefónica won the tender to become the third mobile phone operator in Slovakia, under the O2 brand. It began providing services on 2 February 2007 under the name Telefónica O2 Slovakia, s.r.o. It initially launched providing only a prepaid service but in mid-2007 began to sell contract phones. The company was sold along with Telefónica Czech Republic to PPF.

=== Ireland ===

O2 in Ireland was purchased by Telefónica as part of its acquisition of O2 plc in the UK in 2005. Telefónica Ireland has become the second largest mobile phone operator in Ireland, operating a GSM/EDGE and high-speed HSPA+ wireless broadband network to residential and business customers through its &quot;O2&quot; brand. Telefónica Ireland also provide fixed broadband to business customers.

It was announced on 24 June 2013 that Telefónica had agreed to sell its O2 Ireland mobile business for at least €780 million ($1 billion) in cash to Hutchison Whampoa&#x27;s subsidiary 3. O2 was merged into Hutchison Whampoa&#x27;s subsidiary Three Ireland in March 2015.

=== Italy ===

Telefónica currently owns 46% of Telco, the holding company that controls 22% of Telecom Italia, Italy&#x27;s former government–owned telephone company. In late 2003, Telefónica announced its intention to acquire the entirety of Telco by January 2014, potentially becoming Telecom Italia&#x27;s largest shareholder. The plan, was however challenged by the Brazilian competition authority since Telefónica and Telecom Italia, with Vivo and TIM Brasil respectively, are the two largest telephone companies competing in Brazil. Subsequently, Telefónica confirmed in September 2014 that it intended to sell its shares in Telecom Italia following the purchase of Global Village Telecom (GVT) in Brazil from Vivendi. Telefónica sold its shares in the business to Vivendi as part of the sale of GVT in June 2015.

=== Central and South America ===
After acquiring 100% of Paysandú S.A., Telefónica started its operations in Guatemala 1998 as Telefónica Movistar and just Telefónica for landlines. In 2004, acquired 100% of BellSouth Guatemala, relaunching mobile operations as movistar in 2005, with mobile services based on CDMA technology, in 2004 as Telefónica Movistar launch national service with GSM/GPRS technology, and CDMA 1x EV-DO for data. Telefónica Móviles Guatemala (renamed in 2005) offered services on UMTS/HSPA starting in June 2009, and it was the last operator to launch commercial services on this technology, with coverage in all major cities in Guatemala.

On 24 January 2019, América Móvil announced the that they will acquire both the Guatemalan and El Salvadoran operations of Telefónica for US$333 million and $315 million, respectively. The transaction would also acquire all Pay TV operations. The sale was eventually approved in Guatemala and would later become intergraded into Claro. However, the transaction for the El Salvadoran operations to be sold to América Móvil were scrapped due to regulatory hurdles.

In February 2019, Millicom announced the purchase of the Panamanian, Costa Rican and Nicaraguan operations of Telefónica for US$1,650 Million, with plans to phase out the Movistar brand from those markets within a year after purchase. The transaction was completed in August the same year. Telefónica had purchased the Panamanian, Ecuadorian and Guatemalan operations of BellSouth in 2004 for US$1665 Million, followed by a rebranding to Movistar in 2005. The purchase was intended to help Telefónica focus on its largest markets, alleviating its debt.

== Sponsorship ==
=== Cycling ===
Since 2011, they are a sponsor of the Spanish UCI ProTour cycling team known as Movistar Team.

=== Football ===
In football, Teléfonica is an official sponsor for several national teams such as Spain (Movistar+) in Europe, and Brazil (vivo), Mexico, Colombia, Peru, or Venezuela in the Americas.

=== Rugby ===
O2 are the main sponsors of the England national rugby team.

=== Motor sports ===
Teléfonica, through Movistar, was the title sponsor of Yamaha Motor Racing from 2014 to 2018, a motorcycle racing team in MotoGP. It was also the title sponsor of Suzuki&#x27;s factory team from 2000 to 2002 Sito Pons&#x27; Honda team from 1997 to 1999 and Fausto Gresini&#x27;s Honda team from 2003 to 2005.

Within Formula One, Telefónica sponsored the Minardi F1 Team in 1999 and 2000, including title sponsorship in 2000, as well a major sponsor of the Renault F1 Team from 2004 to 2006 until Fernando Alonso&#x27;s departure to McLaren in 2007, and were title sponsors of the Spanish Grand Prix from 2006 to 2010. Through its acquisition of O2, Telefónica also indirectly sponsored the BMW Sauber F1 Team.

In the World Rally Championship, Telefónica sponsored the SEAT Sport WRC Team between 1998 and 2000, under both Movistar and Telefónica Movistar. Telefónica sponsored the Ford WRC Team in seasons 2000–2002 when Spanish rally driver Carlos Sainz drove for the team, and when Sainz moved to the Citroën WRC Team for 2003, Telefónica followed. The sponsorship was not continued into 2004, despite Sainz staying with the team.

In the 2000 CART season, PPI Motorsports raced the #96 Telefónica Toyota-Reynard, driven by Spanish rookie Oriol Servià. Oriol finished 15th in the standings with a best result of 3rd, and failed to win Rookie of the Year. Teammate da Matta in the #97 Pioneer Toyota-Reynard performed better with 10th and 1 win, however the team retired from open-wheel racing at the end of the season, and the sponsorship ended.

=== Sailing ===
Movistar- and Telefónica-sponsored teams contested the round-the-world Volvo Ocean Race in the 2005–06, 2008–09, and 2011–12 events.

=== eSports ===
Telefónica sponsors, through its Movistar brand, the &quot;Movistar Riders&quot; eSports team.

== Investments and collaborations ==
Telefónica is a supporter of the Hybrid Broadcast Broadband TV (HbbTV) initiative that is promoting and establishing an open European standard for hybrid set-top boxes for the reception of broadcast TV and broadband multimedia applications with a single user interface, and has run pilot HbbTV services in Spain.

Telefónica&#x27;s Wayra subsidiary first launched in Latin America and Spain in 2011 to provide seed investment and mentoring to new companies. Since its inception, Wayra has backed over 300 companies including Trustev, Venddo, Cloudwear and NFWare.

As of 1 December 2014, the Firefox web browser includes the &quot;Firefox Hello&quot; WebRTC feature, that allows real-time voice and video online chats. &quot;Firefox Hello&quot; is powered by Telefónica and was also co-developed by Telefónica.

In September 2017, Nokia and Telefónica signed an agreement in order to evaluate technologies enabling an efficient network evolution to 5G in line with Telefónica&#x27;s business objectives.

On January 29, 2025 Telefonica had hired investment bank JPMorgan to evaluate a possible sale of the Argentina business.

== Chairpersons ==

== Monopoly ==

Telefónica has received several fines due to convictions over unfair competition, abuse of its position as dominant provider, and antitrust violations through the Commission of Telecommunications, European Commission, and Spanish tribunals. These fines include:

* 900,000 euro fine, Spanish tribunals
* 18 million euro fine, Spanish Telecommunication Market commission, 57 million in 2004 for unfair competition
* 151.9 million euro by European Commission for abusing its dominant position

As of 2008, Telefónica had in court two more fines, with a value of 793 million euros.

On 5 July 2007, the European Commission ordered Telefónica to pay a record antitrust fine of almost €152 million for activities in the Spanish broadband market which, according to European Union competition commissioner Neelie Kroes, &quot;harmed Spanish consumers, Spanish businesses and the Spanish economy as a whole, and by extension Europe&#x27;s economy.&quot;

Several consumer groups in Spain have reported unnecessary delays in cancelling Telefónica&#x27;s ADSL service. These consumer groups also claim that services continue to be billed after being cancelled and that service cancellation requests are ignored. This has led Spanish people to organize themselves in consumer groups such as the &quot;Asociación de Internautas&quot; and user communities like &quot;Bandaancha&quot; in order to defend themselves from Telefónica&#x27;s abuses and to give support and help to each other in their various complaints about Telefónica&#x27;s unfair practices.

The practices are claimed to include the complex process involved in cancelling lines. These line cancellation procedures are justified by Telefónica as a way of &quot;defending customers against hoaxes.&quot; Furthermore, in areas where ADSL lines are scarce, there are also reports of customers who claim to have had their service cancelled or inexplicably transferred to another customer although they have paid their bills. This practice is considered by some to be used by Telefónica in certain areas of Spain where there are few broadband connections.

== Positions on network neutrality ==
In February 2010, Telefónica CEO Cesar Alierta expressed in a meeting at Bilbao, Spain that his company intends to charge Google and other search engines for the use of their network. Alierta complained that such search engines were benefiting from the platform without contributing to the company&#x27;s expenses and that such a trend will change in the near future. Additionally, he said that Telefónica will seek to push its own content.

== Innovation ==
In 2017, Telefónica announced the launch of OnLife Networks, intended to infuse innovation into the company.

== See also ==

* Movistar
* List of telecommunications companies
* List of telecommunications regulatory bodies
* List of mobile network operators

== References ==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q160229" start="0" end="6" title="Telefónica" label=", S.A."/>
<link wikidata="Q161726" start="23" end="36" title="Multinational corporation" label="multinational"/>
<link wikidata="Q418" start="37" end="55" title="telecommunications" label="telecommunications"/>
<link wikidata="Q48790452" start="69" end="86" title="registered office" label="registered office"/>
<link wikidata="Q2807" start="145" end="151" title="Madrid" label="Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="153" end="158" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q666926" start="166" end="204" title="List of telephone operating companies" label="one of the largest telephone operators"/>
<link wikidata="Q2447044" start="209" end="233" title="List of mobile network operators" label="mobile network providers"/>
<link wikidata="Q738621" start="260" end="265" title="Landline" label="fixed"/>
<link wikidata="Q992968" start="270" end="286" title="mobile telephony" label="mobile telephony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472399" start="288" end="297" title="Internet access" label="broadband"/>
<link wikidata="Q721830" start="303" end="326" title="Pay television" label="subscription television"/>
<link wikidata="Q967735" start="407" end="415" title="Movistar" label="Movistar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759255" start="417" end="419" title="O2 (brand)" label="O2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428656" start="425" end="429" title="Vivo (telecommunications company)" label="Vivo"/>
<link wikidata="Q981010" start="465" end="478" title="Euro Stoxx 50" label="Euro Stoxx 50"/>
<link wikidata="Q223371" start="479" end="497" title="stock market index" label="stock market index"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428656" start="583" end="587" title="Vivo (telecommunications company)" label="Vivo"/>
<link wikidata="Q582418" start="701" end="704" title="ITT Inc." label="ITT"/>
<link wikidata="Q1535171" start="1141" end="1150" title="Saudi Telecom Company" label="STC Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436777" start="1464" end="1468" title="Sociedad Estatal de Participaciones Industriales" label="SEPI"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="1732" end="1738" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="1740" end="1748" title="New York (state)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1486" start="1760" end="1772" title="Buenos Aires" label="Buenos Aires"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194749" start="1977" end="1996" title="Government of Spain" label="Government of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436777" start="1998" end="2002" title="Sociedad Estatal de Participaciones Industriales" label="SEPI"/>
<link wikidata="Q847225" start="2011" end="2020" title="CaixaBank" label="CaixaBank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1535171" start="2030" end="2039" title="Saudi Telecom Company" label="STC Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q806189" start="2048" end="2079" title="Banco Bilbao Vizcaya Argentaria" label="Banco Bilbao Vizcaya Argentaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q6496310" start="2616" end="2631" title="Santander Group" label="Santander Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q7072245" start="3362" end="3364" title="O2 (United Kingdom)" label="O2"/>
<link wikidata="Q2401561" start="3547" end="3565" title="Telefónica Germany" label="Telefónica Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q675046" start="3609" end="3615" title="E-Plus" label="E-Plus"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="4057" end="4064" title="Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="4066" end="4073" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q9676" start="4082" end="4093" title="Isle of Man" label="Isle of Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q3432658" start="4120" end="4132" title="Manx Telecom" label="Manx Telecom"/>
<link wikidata="Q20151" start="4464" end="4475" title="Li Ka-shing" label="Li Ka-shing"/>
<link wikidata="Q19840922" start="4587" end="4592" title="Three UK" label="Three"/>
<link wikidata="Q833495" start="4718" end="4733" title="consumer choice" label="consumer choice"/>
<link wikidata="Q571779" start="4873" end="4887" title="Liberty Global" label="Liberty Global"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199764" start="4897" end="4909" title="Virgin Media" label="Virgin Media"/>
<link wikidata="Q593786" start="5095" end="5103" title="BT Group" label="BT Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q107059386" start="5181" end="5196" title="Virgin Media O2" label="Virgin Media O2"/>
<link wikidata="Q571779" start="5276" end="5290" title="Liberty Global" label="Liberty Global"/>
<link wikidata="Q581438" start="5408" end="5424" title="Bouygues Telecom" label="Bouygues Telecom"/>
<link wikidata="Q895325" start="5438" end="5446" title="Bouygues" label="Bouygues"/>
<link wikidata="Q967735" start="5833" end="5841" title="Movistar" label="Movistar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428656" start="5894" end="5898" title="Vivo (telecommunications company)" label="Vivo"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="5913" end="5919" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q298" start="5980" end="5985" title="Chile" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q717" start="5987" end="5996" title="Venezuela" label="Venezuela"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="5998" end="6004" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q419" start="6010" end="6014" title="Peru" label="Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q967735" start="6522" end="6530" title="Movistar" label="Movistar"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="6630" end="6636" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q992968" start="6843" end="6849" title="mobile telephony" label="mobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q2105426" start="6902" end="6918" title="Portugal Telecom" label="Portugal Telecom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538731" start="7243" end="7245" title="Oi (telecommunications)" label="Oi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3063918" start="7270" end="7276" title="Telesp" label="Telesp"/>
<link wikidata="Q4381995" start="7308" end="7316" title="Telebrás" label="Telebrás"/>
<link wikidata="Q175" start="7331" end="7349" title="São Paulo (state)" label="state of São Paulo"/>
<link wikidata="Q20059505" start="7359" end="7376" title="Telefônica Brasil" label="Telefônica Brasil"/>
<link wikidata="Q4056893" start="7471" end="7477" title="Brazilian Agency of Telecommunications" label="ANATEL"/>
<link wikidata="Q967735" start="8771" end="8779" title="movistar" label="movistar"/>
<link wikidata="Q800" start="9076" end="9086" title="Costa Rica" label="Costa Rica"/>
<link wikidata="Q7841281" start="9212" end="9218" title="Tricom, S.A" label="Tricom"/>
<link wikidata="Q259011" start="9256" end="9264" title="Motorola" label="Motorola"/>
<link wikidata="Q46904" start="9777" end="9780" title="GSM" label="GSM"/>
<link wikidata="Q79686" start="9810" end="9814" title="UMTS" label="UMTS"/>
<link wikidata="Q79686" start="9823" end="9827" title="UMTS" label="UMTS"/>
<link wikidata="Q6120256" start="10343" end="10356" title="Santa Beatriz" label="Santa Beatriz"/>
<link wikidata="Q5713337" start="10360" end="10372" title="Avenida Arequipa" label="Av. Arequipa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7096141" start="10798" end="10809" title="Open Mobile" label="Open Mobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023122" start="11021" end="11029" title="CDMA2000" label="CDMA2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q46904" start="11067" end="11070" title="GSM" label="GSM"/>
<link wikidata="Q79686" start="11071" end="11075" title="UMTS" label="UMTS"/>
<link wikidata="Q79703" start="11116" end="11119" title="LTE (telecommunication)" label="LTE"/>
<link wikidata="Q8652" start="11170" end="11184" title="Miami, Florida" label="Miami, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068485" start="11550" end="11562" title="China Unicom" label="China Unicom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068485" start="11833" end="11845" title="China Unicom" label="China Unicom"/>
<link wikidata="Q5413853" start="12336" end="12343" title="Eurotel" label="Eurotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1979720" start="12654" end="12657" title="PPF (company)" label="PPF"/>
<link wikidata="Q837379" start="12941" end="12947" title="Call for bids" label="tender"/>
<link wikidata="Q6887204" start="12968" end="12989" title="mobile phone operator" label="mobile phone operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q214" start="12993" end="13001" title="Slovakia" label="Slovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1159252" start="13085" end="13115" title="Telefónica Slovakia" label="Telefónica O2 Slovakia, s.r.o."/>
<link wikidata="Q2858140" start="13155" end="13162" title="Prepaid mobile phone" label="prepaid"/>
<link wikidata="Q15805" start="13845" end="13862" title="Hutchison Whampoa" label="Hutchison Whampoa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13881" end="13882" title="Hutchison 3G#Ireland" label="3"/>
<link wikidata="Q19840921" start="13939" end="13952" title="Three Ireland" label="Three Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q144617" start="14065" end="14079" title="Telecom Italia" label="Telecom Italia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428656" start="14414" end="14418" title="Vivo (telecommunications)" label="Vivo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079243" start="14423" end="14433" title="TIM Brasil" label="TIM Brasil"/>
<link wikidata="Q2713910" start="14642" end="14664" title="Global Village Telecom" label="Global Village Telecom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127887" start="14686" end="14693" title="Vivendi" label="Vivendi"/>
<link wikidata="Q967735" start="15054" end="15062" title="movistar" label="movistar"/>
<link wikidata="Q79686" start="15295" end="15299" title="UMTS" label="UMTS"/>
<link wikidata="Q731991" start="15300" end="15304" title="High Speed Packet Access" label="HSPA"/>
<link wikidata="Q482267" start="15476" end="15489" title="América Móvil" label="América Móvil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770208" start="15785" end="15790" title="Claro (company)" label="Claro"/>
<link wikidata="Q276345" start="15938" end="15946" title="Millicom" label="Millicom"/>
<link wikidata="Q815668" start="16291" end="16300" title="BellSouth" label="BellSouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329578" start="16554" end="16565" title="UCI ProTour" label="UCI ProTour"/>
<link wikidata="Q6175" start="16588" end="16601" title="Movistar Team (men&amp;#x27;s team)" label="Movistar Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q42267" start="16703" end="16708" title="Spain men&amp;#x27;s national football team" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q16928132" start="16710" end="16719" title="Movistar+" label="Movistar+"/>
<link wikidata="Q83459" start="16736" end="16742" title="Brazil national football team" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428656" start="16744" end="16748" title="Vivo (telecommunications)" label="vivo"/>
<link wikidata="Q378628" start="16852" end="16879" title="England national rugby union team" label="England national rugby team"/>
<link wikidata="Q967735" start="16923" end="16931" title="Movistar" label="Movistar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085474" start="16958" end="16977" title="Yamaha Motor Racing" label="Yamaha Motor Racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q850292" start="17025" end="17031" title="MotoGP" label="MotoGP"/>
<link wikidata="Q4349186" start="17111" end="17137" title="Pons Racing" label="Sito Pons&amp;#x27; Honda team"/>
<link wikidata="Q975614" start="17160" end="17192" title="Gresini Racing" label="Fausto Gresini&amp;#x27;s Honda team"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="17220" end="17231" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q142381" start="17258" end="17273" title="Minardi" label="Minardi F1 Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q65954940" start="17360" end="17375" title="Renault in Formula One" label="Renault F1 Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q10514" start="17400" end="17415" title="Fernando Alonso" label="Fernando Alonso"/>
<link wikidata="Q172030" start="17436" end="17443" title="McLaren" label="McLaren"/>
<link wikidata="Q9208" start="17484" end="17502" title="Spanish Grand Prix" label="Spanish Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759255" start="17549" end="17551" title="Telefónica Europe" label="O2"/>
<link wikidata="Q63928692" start="17594" end="17612" title="BMW in Formula One" label="BMW Sauber F1 Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q7852" start="17622" end="17646" title="World Rally Championship" label="World Rally Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1634368" start="17673" end="17692" title="Cupra Racing" label="SEAT Sport WRC Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q1945493" start="17786" end="17799" title="Ford Focus RS WRC" label="Ford WRC Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q211204" start="17847" end="17859" title="Carlos Sainz Sr." label="Carlos Sainz"/>
<link wikidata="Q867698" start="17908" end="17924" title="Citroën World Rally Team" label="Citroën WRC Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022848" start="18046" end="18062" title="2000 CART season" label="2000 CART season"/>
<link wikidata="Q7120123" start="18064" end="18079" title="PPI Motorsports" label="PPI Motorsports"/>
<link wikidata="Q934221" start="18146" end="18158" title="Oriol Servià" label="Oriol Servià"/>
<link wikidata="Q172995" start="18271" end="18279" title="Cristiano da Matta" label="da Matta"/>
<link wikidata="Q156034" start="18291" end="18298" title="Pioneer Corporation" label="Pioneer"/>
<link wikidata="Q763508" start="18541" end="18557" title="Volvo Ocean Race" label="Volvo Ocean Race"/>
<link wikidata="Q2627903" start="18565" end="18572" title="2005–06 Volvo Ocean Race" label="2005–06"/>
<link wikidata="Q1992599" start="18574" end="18581" title="2008–09 Volvo Ocean Race" label="2008–09"/>
<link wikidata="Q132004" start="18587" end="18594" title="2011–12 Volvo Ocean Race" label="2011–12"/>
<link wikidata="Q300920" start="18701" end="18708" title="Esports" label="eSports"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568577" start="18786" end="18815" title="Hybrid Broadcast Broadband TV" label="Hybrid Broadcast Broadband TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q6166603" start="19085" end="19090" title="Wayra" label="Wayra"/>
<link wikidata="Q698" start="19345" end="19352" title="Firefox" label="Firefox"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451859" start="19384" end="19397" title="Firefox Hello" label="Firefox Hello"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089715" start="19404" end="19410" title="WebRTC" label="WebRTC"/>
<link wikidata="Q287198" start="19458" end="19469" title="online chat" label="online chat"/>
<link wikidata="Q192314" start="19815" end="19823" title="JPMorgan Chase" label="JPMorgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3401418" start="19978" end="19996" title="unfair competition" label="unfair competition"/>
<link wikidata="Q326498" start="20046" end="20066" title="Competition law" label="antitrust violations"/>
<link wikidata="Q8880" start="20113" end="20132" title="European Commission" label="European Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q8880" start="20516" end="20535" title="European Commission" label="European Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q234485" start="20716" end="20728" title="Neelie Kroes" label="Neelie Kroes"/>
<link wikidata="Q22855" start="20751" end="20759" title="consumer" label="consumer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4830453" start="20770" end="20778" title="business" label="business"/>
<link wikidata="Q159810" start="20797" end="20804" title="economy" label="economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q484876" start="22088" end="22091" title="Chief executive officer" label="CEO"/>
<link wikidata="Q713364" start="22092" end="22105" title="César Alierta" label="Cesar Alierta"/>
<link wikidata="Q8692" start="22132" end="22138" title="Bilbao" label="Bilbao"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="22140" end="22145" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q95" start="22181" end="22187" title="Google" label="Google"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750631" start="22198" end="22212" title="List of search engines" label="search engines"/>
<link wikidata="Q967735" start="22646" end="22654" title="Movistar" label="Movistar"/>
<link wikidata="Q666926" start="22657" end="22693" title="List of telecommunications companies" label="List of telecommunications companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q6642551" start="22696" end="22740" title="List of telecommunications regulatory bodies" label="List of telecommunications regulatory bodies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2447044" start="22743" end="22775" title="List of mobile network operators" label="List of mobile network operators"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="30006" wikidata="Q133654" url="?curid=30006" title="The Silence of the Lambs (film)">
<text>The Silence of the Lambs is a 1991 American psychological horror thriller film directed by Jonathan Demme and written by Ted Tally, adapted from Thomas Harris&#x27;s 1988 novel. It stars Jodie Foster as Clarice Starling, a young FBI trainee who is hunting a serial killer named &quot;Buffalo Bill&quot; (Ted Levine), who skins his female victims. To catch him, she seeks the advice of the imprisoned Hannibal Lecter (Anthony Hopkins), a brilliant psychiatrist and cannibalistic serial killer. The film also features performances from Scott Glenn, Anthony Heald, and Kasi Lemmons.

&quot;The Silence of the Lambs&quot; was released on February 14, 1991, and grossed $272.7 million worldwide on a $19 million budget, becoming the fifth-highest-grossing film of 1991 worldwide. It premiered at the 41st Berlin International Film Festival, where it competed for the Golden Bear, while Demme received the Silver Bear for Best Director. It became the third and most recent film (the other two being 1934&#x27;s &quot;It Happened One Night&quot; and 1975&#x27;s &quot;One Flew Over the Cuckoo&#x27;s Nest&quot;) to win Academy Awards in the five major categories: Best Picture, Best Director, Best Actor, Best Actress, and Best Adapted Screenplay. It was the first (and to date only) horror film to win Best Picture.

&quot;The Silence of the Lambs&quot; is regularly cited by critics, film directors, and audiences as one of the greatest and most influential films. In 2018, &quot;Empire&quot; ranked it 48th on their list of the 500 greatest movies of all time. The American Film Institute ranked it the sixty-fifth greatest film in American cinema, as well as the fifth-greatest and most influential thriller film, while Starling and Lecter were ranked among the greatest film heroines and villains. The film is considered &quot;culturally, historically, or aesthetically&quot; significant by the U.S. Library of Congress and was selected for preservation in the National Film Registry in 2011. A sequel, &quot;Hannibal&quot;, was released in 2001, followed by two prequel films, &quot;Red Dragon&quot; (2002) and &quot;Hannibal Rising&quot; (2007).

==Plot==
Clarice Starling, a young FBI trainee at the Quantico Academy, is recruited by Behavioral Science Unit chief Jack Crawford to interview Dr. Hannibal Lecter, a brilliant yet cannibalistic serial killer imprisoned at the Baltimore State Hospital for the Criminally Insane. Under the guise of soliciting his participation in a psychological survey, Crawford secretly aims to leverage Lecter&#x27;s insights to apprehend &quot;Buffalo Bill&quot;, a psychopath who murders young women and removes their skin.

At the hospital, Dr. Frederick Chilton, the facility&#x27;s manipulative director, makes unwelcome advances toward Starling before escorting her to Lecter&#x27;s cell. Initially courteous, Lecter grows dismissive upon deducing Crawford&#x27;s ulterior motive. As Starling departs, inmate Miggs flings semen at her, provoking Lecter&#x27;s disgust. He summons her back and offers a clue in the form of an anagram that leads her to a storage unit containing a severed head in a jar. Later, Miggs is found dead in his cell, having swallowed his own tongue—an act implicitly orchestrated by Lecter as retribution for his assault on Starling. Lecter agrees to assist the investigation in exchange for a transfer away from Chilton. Meanwhile, another victim is discovered with a death&#x27;s-head moth lodged in her throat—the same species later found inside the severed head.

When Buffalo Bill abducts Catherine Martin, daughter of U.S. Senator Ruth Martin, Crawford authorizes Starling to offer Lecter a fraudulent deal: a prison transfer in return for actionable intelligence. Lecter instead demands a &quot;quid pro quo&quot;, extracting personal details from Starling. She reveals that her father, a police officer, was murdered when she was ten, leaving her orphaned. In exchange, Lecter reveals that Buffalo Bill is not a genuine transsexual but believes he is, possibly having been rejected from gender-reassignment clinics. Unbeknownst to Starling, Chilton records the conversation and later exposes her deceit, offering Lecter a new arrangement: relocation to Tennessee in exchange for information. Lecter complies and is flown to Memphis, where he provides Senator Martin with accurate details about Buffalo Bill&#x27;s appearance but falsely identifies him as &quot;Louis Friend&quot;, toying with her desperation.

Starling deciphers &quot;Louis Friend&quot; as an anagram for &quot;iron sulfide&quot; (fool&#x27;s gold) and confronts Lecter in his Tennessee cell. Lecter demands deeper revelations, offering a final cryptic clue—&quot;we covet what we see every day&quot;—before Starling, compelled by his probing, recounts a traumatic childhood incident: after her father&#x27;s death, she lived on a relative&#x27;s Montana farm, where she failed to save spring lambs from slaughter, their screams haunting her nightmares. Lecter intuits that saving Catherine might silence this trauma, and, satisfied by Starling&#x27;s candor, he returns the Buffalo Bill case files. That night, Lecter orchestrates a gruesome escape by using a smuggled pen to unlock his restraints and murder his two guards. He later peels the face off one of the guards and wears it as a disguise, fooling paramedics into wheeling him out of the building.

Analyzing Lecter&#x27;s annotations, Starling deduces that Buffalo Bill knew his first victim, Frederika Bimmel, a tailor from Ohio, and independently follows the lead. Visiting Bimmel&#x27;s home, Starling finds unfinished dresses and patterns matching patches of skin removed from the victims, realizing that Bill seeks to construct a &quot;suit&quot; from human flesh. Crawford cross-references Lecter&#x27;s notes with medical records, identifying Jame Gumb—a rejected transsexual applicant deemed too violent—as the prime suspect. While Crawford&#x27;s team raids Gumb&#x27;s vacant Illinois residence, Starling interviews Bimmel&#x27;s acquaintances, arriving at a house where Gumb poses as &quot;Jack Gordon&quot;. His facade crumbles when Starling spots a death&#x27;s-head moth.

Pursuing Gumb into his basement, Starling discovers Catherine trapped in a dry well. Gumb stalks her using night-vision goggles but betrays his position by cocking his revolver. Starling fires blindly, killing him. Catherine is rescued, and Starling graduates from the FBI Academy.

During her celebration, Lecter calls from Bimini, Bahamas, asking Starling if &quot;the lambs have stopped screaming.&quot; He assures her he has no intention of pursuing her, requesting that she return the favor—a vow she declines. He announces he&#x27;s &quot;having an old friend for dinner&quot; before trailing Chilton into a crowd, implying his next victim.

==Cast==
==Analysis==
In the years following its release, &quot;The Silence of the Lambs&quot; was subject to much film criticism regarding its themes of human sexuality and sexual politics. Throughout the film, Clarice Starling&#x27;s gender is emphasized as a distinguishing feature, as she is a minority amongst her numerous male peers, though film scholar Barry Forshaw notes that &quot;any feminist agenda is never bluntly formulated verbally&quot;.

Some gay male critics and feminists felt that the film&#x27;s portrayal of Buffalo Bill negatively associated the LGBT community with deviance, psychopathy, and violence. Despite this, Bill&#x27;s sexual orientation is never explicitly stated in the film, and Hannibal Lecter expressly states Bill is &quot;not really transsexual&quot;.
Director Jonathan Demme argued that this criticism was misguided, telling &quot;The New York Times&quot; that &quot;I got all this unfounded abuse... [Buffalo Bill] wasn&#x27;t a gay character. He was a tormented man who hated himself and wished he was a woman because that would have made him as far away from himself as he possibly could be.&quot; Demme added that he &quot;came to realize that there is a tremendous absence of positive gay characters in movies&quot;. 

In a 1992 interview with &quot;Playboy&quot; magazine, the feminist and women&#x27;s rights advocate Betty Friedan stated: &quot;I thought it was absolutely outrageous that &quot;The Silence of the Lambs&quot; won four Oscars. [...] I&#x27;m not saying that the movie shouldn&#x27;t have been shown. I&#x27;m not denying the movie was an artistic triumph, but it was about the evisceration, the skinning alive of women. That is what I find offensive. Not the &quot;Playboy&quot; centerfold.&quot;

In following years the film (and its claims that Bill is &quot;not really transsexual&quot;) has been criticized for transphobia by transfeminists, who claimed that it is &quot;one of the most significant and impactful examples of pop culture transmisogyny&quot; and it &quot;encourages disbelief of trans people&#x27;s self-identification&quot;.

==Production==
===Development===
&quot;The Silence of the Lambs&quot; is based on the 1988 novel by Thomas Harris. It was the second film to feature the character Hannibal Lecter; the first, &quot;Manhunter&quot; (1986), directed by Michael Mann, was based on the first novel in the Lecter series, &quot;Red Dragon&quot; (1981). Prior to the release of the &quot;Silence of the Lambs&quot; novel, Orion Pictures partnered with Gene Hackman to adapt it for film. With Hackman set to direct and possibly star in as FBI agent Jack Crawford, negotiations were made to split the $500,000 cost of rights between Hackman and the studio. The producers also had to acquire the rights to the Lecter character, which were owned by &quot;Manhunter&quot; producer Dino De Laurentiis. Owing to the financial failure of &quot;Manhunter&quot;, De Laurentiis lent the rights to Orion for free.

In November 1987, Ted Tally was brought on to write the adaptation; Tally had crossed paths with Harris many times, with his interest in adapting &quot;The Silence of the Lambs&quot; originating from receiving an advance copy of the book from Harris. When Tally was about halfway through with the first draft, Hackman withdrew from the project and financing fell through. However, Orion co-founder Mike Medavoy encouraged Tally to keep writing as the studio took care of financing and searched for a replacement director. Orion sought Jonathan Demme to direct. With the screenplay not yet completed, Demme signed on after reading the novel. From there, the project developed quickly; Tally said: &quot;[Demme] read my first draft not long after it was finished, and we met. Then I was just startled by the speed of things. We met in May 1989 and were shooting in November. I don&#x27;t remember any big revisions.&quot;

===Casting===
Jodie Foster was interested in playing FBI agent Clarice Starling immediately after reading the novel. However, despite having just won an Academy Award for Best Actress for her performance in &quot;The Accused&quot; (1988) at the 61st Academy Awards, Demme was not initially convinced that she was right for the role. Having just collaborated on &quot;Married to the Mob&quot; (1988), Demme&#x27;s first choice for the role of Starling was Michelle Pfeiffer, who turned it down, later saying, &quot;It was a difficult decision, but I got nervous about the subject matter.&quot; He then approached Meg Ryan, who also turned it down for its gruesome themes. The studio was skeptical about Laura Dern as a bankable choice, so Foster was ultimately awarded the role due to her passion for the character. Molly Ringwald auditioned but was deemed &quot;too young&quot;.

For the role of Lecter, Demme originally approached Sean Connery. After Connery turned it down, Anthony Hopkins was offered the role based on his performance in &quot;The Elephant Man&quot; (1980). When Hopkins&#x27;s agent told him that a script was on his way titled &quot;The Silence of the Lambs&quot;, Hopkins responded, &quot;Is it a children&#x27;s story?&quot; Hopkins called his agent back after reading the first 10 pages and said, &quot;This is the best part I&#x27;ve ever read.&quot; He accepted the role after having dinner with Demme.

Other actors considered for the role included Al Pacino, Robert De Niro, Dustin Hoffman, Derek Jacobi and Daniel Day-Lewis. Forest Whitaker has stated that he also auditioned for the role. The mask Hopkins wore became an iconic symbol of the film. It was created by Ed Cubberly, of Frenchtown, New Jersey, who had made masks for NHL goalkeepers.

Hopkins developed his portrayal of Lecter by drawing inspiration from the HAL 9000 computer as voiced by Douglas Rain in &quot;2001: A Space Odyssey,&quot; as well as the vocal patterns of writer Truman Capote. In a 2001 interview with &quot;GQ&quot;, Hopkins clarified that he did not base Lecter&#x27;s vocal cadence on Katharine Hepburn, as some people had believed. He also revealed that the decision to play Lecter as still and unblinking was not influenced by Charles Manson, as some had speculated. Hopkins admitted to being intimidated by Foster, who had just won an Academy Award, and initially felt scared to talk to her.

Gene Hackman was cast to play Jack Crawford, the Agent-in-Charge of the Behavioral Science Unit of the FBI in Quantico, Virginia, but he found the script too violent. Scott Glenn was then cast in the role. In preparation for the role, Glenn met with John E. Douglas. Douglas gave Glenn a tour of the Quantico facility and also played for him an audio tape containing various recordings that serial killers Lawrence Bittaker and Roy Norris had made of themselves raping and torturing a 16-year-old girl. According to Douglas, Glenn wept as he listened to the recordings, and even changed his liberal stance on the death penalty.

===Filming===
Principal photography on &quot;The Silence of the Lambs&quot; began on November 15, 1989, and wrapped on March 1, 1990. Filming primarily took place in and around Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, with some scenes shot in nearby northern West Virginia. The Victorian home in Perryopolis, Pennsylvania, used as Buffalo Bill&#x27;s home in the film went up for sale in August 2015 for $300,000. The home sat on the market for nearly a year, before finally selling for $195,000. The exterior of the Western Center near Canonsburg, Pennsylvania, served as the setting for Baltimore State Hospital for the Criminally Insane. A scene set in the FBI Director&#x27;s office was filmed in the office of United States Secretary of Labor Elizabeth Dole in Washington, D.C. In what was a rare act of cooperation at the time, the FBI allowed scenes to be filmed at the FBI Academy in Quantico; some FBI staff members even acted in bit parts.

The design for the basement and pit used by Buffalo Bill was inspired by the real-life kidnappings and murders performed by Gary M. Heidnik.

===Music===
The musical score for &quot;The Silence of the Lambs&quot; was composed by Howard Shore, who would also collaborate with Demme on &quot;Philadelphia&quot;. Recorded in Munich during the latter half of the summer of 1990, the score was performed by the Munich Symphony Orchestra. &quot;I tried to write in a way that goes right into the fabric of the movie&quot;, explained Shore on his approach. &quot;I tried to make the music just fit in. When you watch the movie you are not aware of the music. You get your feelings from all elements simultaneously, lighting, cinematography, costumes, acting, music. Jonathan Demme was very specific about the music.&quot; The music editor was Suzana Peric. A soundtrack album was released by MCA Records on February 5, 1991. Music from the film was later used in the trailers for its 2001 sequel, &quot;Hannibal&quot;.

In addition to Shore&#x27;s score, recordings of popular music are used prominently in the film. This includes British post-punk music, such as the song &quot;Hip Priest&quot; by the Fall which can be heard playing during the climactic scene in which Starling enters Buffalo Bill&#x27;s house. The song &quot;Goodbye Horses&quot; by Q Lazzarus became a cult hit after it was featured in an iconic scene with Buffalo Bill applying makeup and speaking to himself in the mirror.

==Release==
===Box office===
&quot;The Silence of the Lambs&quot; was released on February 14, 1991, grossing almost $14 million from 1,497 theaters over the 4-day Presidents&#x27; Day weekend, placing at number one at the US box office. It remained at number one for five weeks.

The film opened at the Odeon Leicester Square in London in June 1991 and grossed £290,936 in its opening week, which distributor Rank claimed was a world record opening week from one theatre. The following week, it expanded to 281 screens and grossed £4,260,472 for the week, a UK record.

The film grossed $131 million in the United States and Canada with a total worldwide gross of $273 million. It was the fourth-highest grossing film of 1991 in North America and the fifth-highest-grossing film worldwide.

===Critical response===
&quot;The Silence of the Lambs&quot; was a sleeper hit that gradually gained widespread success and critical acclaim. Foster, Hopkins, and Levine garnered much acclaim for their performances. Review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes reports that 95% of 153 film critics have given the film a positive review, with an average rating of 8.80/10. The website&#x27;s critical consensus reads: &quot;Director Jonathan Demme&#x27;s smart, taut thriller teeters on the edge between psychological study and all-out horror, and benefits greatly from stellar performances by Anthony Hopkins and Jodie Foster.&quot; Metacritic, another review aggregator, assigned the film a weighted average score of 86 out of 100, based on 20 reviews from mainstream critics, indicating &quot;universal acclaim&quot;. Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of &quot;A−&quot; on an A+ to F scale.

Roger Ebert of the &quot;Chicago Sun-Times&quot;, specifically mentioned the &quot;terrifying qualities&quot; of Hannibal Lecter. Ebert later added the film to his list of &quot;The Great Movies&quot;, recognizing the film as a &quot;horror masterpiece&quot; alongside such classics as &quot;Nosferatu&quot;, &quot;Psycho&quot;, and &quot;Halloween&quot;. However, the film is also notable for being one of two multi-Academy Award winners (the other being &quot;Unforgiven&quot;) to get a bad review from Ebert&#x27;s colleague, Gene Siskel. Writing for &quot;Chicago Tribune&quot;, Siskel said, &quot;Foster&#x27;s character, who is appealing, is dwarfed by the monsters she is after. I&#x27;d rather see her work on another case.&quot;

===Accolades===

The film won the Big Five Academy Awards: Best Picture, Best Director (Demme), Best Actor (Hopkins), Best Actress (Foster), and Best Adapted Screenplay (Ted Tally) at the 64th Academy Awards, making it only the third film in history to accomplish that feat. It was also nominated for Best Sound (Tom Fleischman and Christopher Newman) and Best Film Editing (Craig McKay), but lost to &quot;Terminator 2: Judgment Day&quot; and &quot;JFK&quot;, respectively.

Other awards include Best Film by the National Board of Review of Motion Pictures as well as at the CHI Awards and PEO Awards. Demme won the Silver Bear for Best Director at the 41st Berlin International Film Festival and was nominated for the Golden Globe Award for Best Director at the 49th Golden Globe Awards. The film was nominated for the Grand Prix of the Belgian Film Critics Association. It was also nominated for the British Academy Film Award for Best Film at the 45th British Academy Film Awards. Screenwriter Ted Tally received an Edgar Award for Best Motion Picture Screenplay. The film was awarded Best Horror Film of the Year during the 2nd Horror Hall of Fame telecast, with Vincent Price presenting the award to the film&#x27;s executive producer Gary Goetzman.

In 1998, the film was listed as one of the 100 greatest films in the past 100 years by the American Film Institute. In 2006, at the Key Art Awards, the original poster for &quot;The Silence of the Lambs&quot; was named best film poster &quot;of the past 35 years&quot;. &quot;The Silence of the Lambs&quot; placed seventh on Bravo&#x27;s &quot;The 100 Scariest Movie Moments&quot; for Lecter&#x27;s escape scene. The American Film Institute named Hannibal Lecter (as portrayed by Hopkins) the number one film villain of all time and Clarice Starling (as portrayed by Foster) the sixth-greatest film hero of all time. In 2011, ABC aired a prime-time special, &quot;Best in Film: The Greatest Movies of Our Time&quot;, that counted down the best films chosen by fans based on results of a poll conducted by ABC and &quot;People&quot; magazine. &quot;The Silence of the Lambs&quot; was selected as the best suspense/thriller and Dr. Hannibal Lecter was selected as the fourth-greatest film character. In 2012, the Motion Picture Editors Guild listed it as the 26th best-edited film of all time based on a survey of its membership.

The film and its characters have appeared in the following AFI &quot;100 Years&quot; lists:
* AFI&#x27;s 100 Years...100 Movies – No. 65
* AFI&#x27;s 100 Years...100 Thrills – No. 5
* AFI&#x27;s 100 Years...100 Heroes &amp; Villains:
** Clarice Starling – No. 6 Hero
** Hannibal Lecter – No. 1 Villain
* AFI&#x27;s 100 Years...100 Movie Quotes:
** &quot;A census taker once tried to test me. I ate his liver with some fava beans and a nice Chianti.&quot; – No. 21
* AFI&#x27;s 100 Years...100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition) – No. 74

In 2015, &quot;Entertainment Weekly&quot;″s 25th anniversary year, it included &quot;The Silence of the Lambs&quot; in its list of the 25 best movies made since the magazine&#x27;s beginning.

===Home media===
The film was released on VHS on October 24, 1991 by Orion Home Video. It was the most rented video in the United States upon release, and ended up as the second most rented video of 1992. It was released on DVD on March 6, 2001 by MGM Home Entertainment in both Widescreen (1.85:1) and Full Screen (1.33:1) versions. The Criterion Collection, which had released the film on LaserDisc in 1994, released a DVD special edition in 1998, and later a Blu-Ray edition in 2018.

== Sequels ==

The sequel &quot;Hannibal&quot; (2001) only saw the return of Hopkins after Foster and director Jonathan Demme declined to return because of the onscreen increase of violence and gore. Hopkins again returned to the role of Hannibal Lecter in the prequel film &quot;Red Dragon&quot; (2002) while another prequel, &quot;Hannibal Rising&quot; (2007), saw Gaspard Ulliel take over the role. The TV series &quot;Clarice&quot; (2021) takes place after the events of the film, with actress Rebecca Breeds portraying Clarice. The series &quot;Hannibal&quot; (2013–2015) is another adaptation of &quot;Red Dragon&quot; and &quot;Hannibal Rising&quot;, taking place before the events of &quot;The Silence of the Lambs.&quot;

== Legacy ==
According to &quot;The Guardian&quot;, before &quot;The Silence of the Lambs&quot;, serial killers in film had been &quot;claw-handed bogeymen with melty faces and rubber masks. By contrast, Lecter was highly intelligent with impeccable manners&quot;, and played by an actor with &quot;impeccable credentials&quot;.

When &quot;The Silence of the Lambs&quot; was re-released in the United Kingdom in 2017, the British Board of Film Classification reclassified it from an 18 to a 15 certificate. The film&#x27;s co-producer Ed Saxon said audiences had become desensitized and that the film had become less shocking. However, the BBFC&#x27;s Craig Lapper felt that audiences had instead become used to procedural crime dramas with serial killers as dramatic tropes, and suggested that &quot;The Silence of the Lambs&quot; had created interest in these themes.

Former United States President Donald Trump repeatedly referred to Hannibal Lecter and &quot;The Silence of the Lambs&quot; during his 2024 presidential campaign, claiming that other countries are &quot;dumping&quot; their &quot;insane asylum&quot; patients and convicted prisoners into the country, while likening immigrants to the fictional cannibal.

==See also==

* Cannibalism in popular culture
* List of Academy Award records
* List of films based on crime books
* &quot;Silence! The Musical&quot;, an unauthorized parody musical adaptation of the film

==References==
==Sources==
*
* 
*
*
*
*
==External links==
* 
* 
* 
* &quot;The Silence of the Lambs&quot; – an essay by Amy Taubin at The Criterion Collection</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q604725" start="44" end="64" title="psychological horror" label="psychological horror"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484376" start="65" end="78" title="thriller film" label="thriller film"/>
<link wikidata="Q48987" start="91" end="105" title="Jonathan Demme" label="Jonathan Demme"/>
<link wikidata="Q721671" start="121" end="130" title="Ted Tally" label="Ted Tally"/>
<link wikidata="Q313377" start="145" end="158" title="Thomas Harris" label="Thomas Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q897685" start="166" end="176" title="The Silence of the Lambs (novel)" label="1988 novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q41351" start="187" end="199" title="Jodie Foster" label="Jodie Foster"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277080" start="203" end="219" title="Clarice Starling" label="Clarice Starling"/>
<link wikidata="Q8333" start="229" end="232" title="Federal Bureau of Investigation" label="FBI"/>
<link wikidata="Q2393619" start="284" end="296" title="Buffalo Bill (The Silence of the Lambs)" label="Buffalo Bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q433520" start="304" end="314" title="Ted Levine" label="Ted Levine"/>
<link wikidata="Q780654" start="321" end="326" title="Skinning" label="skins"/>
<link wikidata="Q211013" start="400" end="415" title="Hannibal Lecter" label="Hannibal Lecter"/>
<link wikidata="Q65932" start="417" end="432" title="Anthony Hopkins" label="Anthony Hopkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867" start="447" end="459" title="Psychiatry" label="psychiatrist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2853058" start="464" end="477" title="Human cannibalism" label="cannibalistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q484188" start="478" end="491" title="serial killer" label="serial killer"/>
<link wikidata="Q114179" start="534" end="545" title="Scott Glenn" label="Scott Glenn"/>
<link wikidata="Q573332" start="547" end="560" title="Anthony Heald" label="Anthony Heald"/>
<link wikidata="Q459933" start="566" end="578" title="Kasi Lemmons" label="Kasi Lemmons"/>
<link wikidata="Q753315" start="728" end="773" title="1991 in film" label="fifth-highest-grossing film of 1991 worldwide"/>
<link wikidata="Q467983" start="795" end="834" title="41st Berlin International Film Festival" label="41st Berlin International Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q154590" start="862" end="873" title="Golden Bear" label="Golden Bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q706031" start="900" end="929" title="Silver Bear for Best Director" label="Silver Bear for Best Director"/>
<link wikidata="Q208632" start="1011" end="1032" title="It Happened One Night" label="It Happened One Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q171669" start="1061" end="1097" title="One Flew Over the Cuckoo&amp;#x27;s Nest (film)" label="One Flew Over the Cuckoo&amp;#x27;s Nest"/>
<link wikidata="Q857047" start="1112" end="1126" title="64th Academy Awards" label="Academy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q102427" start="1157" end="1169" title="Academy Award for Best Picture" label="Best Picture"/>
<link wikidata="Q103360" start="1171" end="1184" title="Academy Award for Best Director" label="Best Director"/>
<link wikidata="Q103916" start="1186" end="1196" title="Academy Award for Best Actor" label="Best Actor"/>
<link wikidata="Q103618" start="1198" end="1210" title="Academy Award for Best Actress" label="Best Actress"/>
<link wikidata="Q107258" start="1216" end="1239" title="Academy Award for Best Adapted Screenplay" label="Best Adapted Screenplay"/>
<link wikidata="Q200092" start="1277" end="1288" title="horror film" label="horror film"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898121" start="1423" end="1458" title="List of films considered the best" label="greatest and most influential films"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122760" start="1475" end="1481" title="Empire (magazine)" label="Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q207460" start="1561" end="1584" title="American Film Institute" label="American Film Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q719345" start="1599" end="1643" title="AFI&amp;#x27;s 100 Years...100 Movies" label="sixty-fifth greatest film in American cinema"/>
<link wikidata="Q1767231" start="1660" end="1709" title="AFI&amp;#x27;s 100 Years...100 Thrills" label="fifth-greatest and most influential thriller film"/>
<link wikidata="Q1610957" start="1759" end="1794" title="AFI&amp;#x27;s 100 Years...100 Heroes &amp;amp; Villains" label="greatest film heroines and villains"/>
<link wikidata="Q131454" start="1898" end="1917" title="Library of Congress" label="Library of Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q823422" start="1959" end="1981" title="National Film Registry" label="National Film Registry"/>
<link wikidata="Q261636" start="1993" end="1999" title="sequel" label="sequel"/>
<link wikidata="Q722682" start="2007" end="2015" title="Hannibal (2001 film)" label="Hannibal"/>
<link wikidata="Q678345" start="2061" end="2068" title="prequel" label="prequel"/>
<link wikidata="Q9125658" start="2082" end="2092" title="Red Dragon (2002 film)" label="Red Dragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3114616" start="2116" end="2131" title="Hannibal Rising (film)" label="Hannibal Rising"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277080" start="2156" end="2172" title="Clarice Starling" label="Clarice Starling"/>
<link wikidata="Q8333" start="2182" end="2185" title="Federal Bureau of Investigation" label="FBI"/>
<link wikidata="Q204315" start="2201" end="2209" title="Quantico, Virginia" label="Quantico"/>
<link wikidata="Q2822407" start="2210" end="2217" title="FBI Academy" label="Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4574639" start="2265" end="2278" title="Jack Crawford (character)" label="Jack Crawford"/>
<link wikidata="Q211013" start="2296" end="2311" title="Hannibal Lecter" label="Hannibal Lecter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2853058" start="2329" end="2342" title="Human cannibalism" label="cannibalistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q484188" start="2343" end="2356" title="serial killer" label="serial killer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092" start="2375" end="2384" title="Baltimore" label="Baltimore"/>
<link wikidata="Q2393619" start="2579" end="2591" title="Buffalo Bill (character)" label="Buffalo Bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2838212" start="2682" end="2699" title="Frederick Chilton" label="Frederick Chilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q9715" start="2962" end="2967" title="semen" label="semen"/>
<link wikidata="Q122981" start="3065" end="3072" title="anagram" label="anagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q312009" start="3434" end="3456" title="Death&amp;#x27;s-head hawkmoth" label="death&amp;#x27;s-head moth"/>
<link wikidata="Q284868" start="3761" end="3785" title="Quid pro quo" label="&amp;quot;quid pro quo&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q25495971" start="3993" end="4004" title="transsexual" label="transsexual"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053501" start="4060" end="4079" title="Gender-affirming surgery" label="gender-reassignment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509" start="4226" end="4235" title="Tennessee" label="Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q16563" start="4297" end="4304" title="Memphis, Tennessee" label="Memphis"/>
<link wikidata="Q50769" start="4552" end="4564" title="Pyrite" label="iron sulfide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1212" start="4888" end="4895" title="Montana" label="Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397" start="5527" end="5531" title="Ohio" label="Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204" start="5988" end="5996" title="Illinois" label="Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q328989" start="6296" end="6316" title="night-vision goggles" label="night-vision goggles"/>
<link wikidata="Q863476" start="6514" end="6520" title="Bimini" label="Bimini"/>
<link wikidata="Q778" start="6522" end="6529" title="The Bahamas" label="Bahamas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277080" start="7049" end="7065" title="Clarice Starling" label="Clarice Starling"/>
<link wikidata="Q4864233" start="7197" end="7210" title="Barry Forshaw" label="Barry Forshaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q104969456" start="7298" end="7306" title="gay men" label="gay male"/>
<link wikidata="Q2393619" start="7368" end="7380" title="Buffalo Bill (The Silence of the Lambs)" label="Buffalo Bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q17884" start="7407" end="7411" title="LGBT" label="LGBT"/>
<link wikidata="Q211013" start="7553" end="7568" title="Hannibal Lecter" label="Hannibal Lecter"/>
<link wikidata="Q25495971" start="7611" end="7622" title="transsexual" label="transsexual"/>
<link wikidata="Q48987" start="7639" end="7653" title="Jonathan Demme" label="Jonathan Demme"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="7710" end="7728" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q150820" start="8134" end="8141" title="Playboy" label="Playboy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7252" start="8162" end="8170" title="feminist" label="feminist"/>
<link wikidata="Q223569" start="8175" end="8194" title="women&amp;#x27;s rights" label="women&amp;#x27;s rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q234604" start="8204" end="8217" title="Betty Friedan" label="Betty Friedan"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="8322" end="8328" title="Academy Awards" label="Oscars"/>
<link wikidata="Q728711" start="8582" end="8592" title="Playboy Playmate" label="centerfold"/>
<link wikidata="Q59677" start="8718" end="8729" title="transphobia" label="transphobia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308597" start="8733" end="8747" title="Transfeminism" label="transfeminists"/>
<link wikidata="Q18211652" start="8844" end="8857" title="transmisogyny" label="transmisogyny"/>
<link wikidata="Q108929112" start="8921" end="8940" title="Gender self-identification" label="self-identification"/>
<link wikidata="Q897685" start="9035" end="9045" title="The Silence of the Lambs (novel)" label="1988 novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q313377" start="9049" end="9062" title="Thomas Harris" label="Thomas Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q886719" start="9146" end="9155" title="Manhunter (film)" label="Manhunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q270097" start="9182" end="9194" title="Michael Mann" label="Michael Mann"/>
<link wikidata="Q9144808" start="9247" end="9269" title="Red Dragon (novel)" label="&amp;quot;Red Dragon&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q891732" start="9346" end="9360" title="Orion Pictures" label="Orion Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q150943" start="9376" end="9388" title="Gene Hackman" label="Gene Hackman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4574639" start="9472" end="9485" title="Jack Crawford (character)" label="Jack Crawford"/>
<link wikidata="Q296796" start="9700" end="9718" title="Dino De Laurentiis" label="Dino De Laurentiis"/>
<link wikidata="Q721671" start="9845" end="9854" title="Ted Tally" label="Ted Tally"/>
<link wikidata="Q726166" start="10225" end="10237" title="Mike Medavoy" label="Mike Medavoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q41351" start="10762" end="10774" title="Jodie Foster" label="Jodie Foster"/>
<link wikidata="Q103618" start="10901" end="10931" title="Academy Award for Best Actress" label="Academy Award for Best Actress"/>
<link wikidata="Q531310" start="10961" end="10972" title="The Accused (1988 film)" label="The Accused"/>
<link wikidata="Q924339" start="10993" end="11012" title="61st Academy Awards" label="61st Academy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q48984" start="11115" end="11133" title="Married to the Mob" label="Married to the Mob"/>
<link wikidata="Q159778" start="11203" end="11220" title="Michelle Pfeiffer" label="Michelle Pfeiffer"/>
<link wikidata="Q167498" start="11360" end="11368" title="Meg Ryan" label="Meg Ryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q220901" start="11450" end="11460" title="Laura Dern" label="Laura Dern"/>
<link wikidata="Q231460" start="11563" end="11577" title="Molly Ringwald" label="Molly Ringwald"/>
<link wikidata="Q4573" start="11680" end="11692" title="Sean Connery" label="Sean Connery"/>
<link wikidata="Q65932" start="11724" end="11739" title="Anthony Hopkins" label="Anthony Hopkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q272860" start="11795" end="11811" title="The Elephant Man (film)" label="The Elephant Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q41163" start="12225" end="12234" title="Al Pacino" label="Al Pacino"/>
<link wikidata="Q36949" start="12236" end="12250" title="Robert De Niro" label="Robert De Niro"/>
<link wikidata="Q42930" start="12252" end="12266" title="Dustin Hoffman" label="Dustin Hoffman"/>
<link wikidata="Q256164" start="12268" end="12280" title="Derek Jacobi" label="Derek Jacobi"/>
<link wikidata="Q166389" start="12285" end="12301" title="Daniel Day-Lewis" label="Daniel Day-Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q182763" start="12303" end="12318" title="Forest Whitaker" label="Forest Whitaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089312" start="12461" end="12483" title="Frenchtown, New Jersey" label="Frenchtown, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215892" start="12508" end="12511" title="NHL" label="NHL"/>
<link wikidata="Q833933" start="12600" end="12608" title="HAL 9000" label="HAL 9000"/>
<link wikidata="Q557268" start="12631" end="12643" title="Douglas Rain" label="Douglas Rain"/>
<link wikidata="" start="12653" end="12674" title="2001: A Space Odyssey (film)" label="2001: A Space Odyssey"/>
<link wikidata="Q134180" start="12722" end="12735" title="Truman Capote" label="Truman Capote"/>
<link wikidata="Q311249" start="12768" end="12770" title="GQ" label="GQ"/>
<link wikidata="Q56016" start="12848" end="12865" title="Katharine Hepburn" label="Katharine Hepburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q485508" start="12992" end="13006" title="Charles Manson" label="Charles Manson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4880712" start="13231" end="13254" title="Behavioral Science Unit" label="Behavioral Science Unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q204315" start="13269" end="13287" title="Quantico, Virginia" label="Quantico, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q114179" start="13326" end="13337" title="Scott Glenn" label="Scott Glenn"/>
<link wikidata="Q724506" start="13409" end="13424" title="John E. Douglas" label="John E. Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q18763305" start="13565" end="13597" title="Lawrence Bittaker and Roy Norris" label="Lawrence Bittaker and Roy Norris"/>
<link wikidata="Q8454" start="13772" end="13785" title="death penalty" label="death penalty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256415" start="13802" end="13823" title="Principal photography" label="Principal photography"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342" start="13965" end="13975" title="Pittsburgh" label="Pittsburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400" start="13977" end="13989" title="Pennsylvania" label="Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371" start="14032" end="14045" title="West Virginia" label="West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183512" start="14069" end="14094" title="Perryopolis, Pennsylvania" label="Perryopolis, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q16903143" start="14290" end="14304" title="Western Center" label="Western Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q509115" start="14310" end="14334" title="Canonsburg, Pennsylvania" label="Canonsburg, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q967750" start="14488" end="14520" title="United States Secretary of Labor" label="United States Secretary of Labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q239571" start="14521" end="14535" title="Elizabeth Dole" label="Elizabeth Dole"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="14539" end="14555" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q2822407" start="14650" end="14661" title="FBI Academy" label="FBI Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q14786283" start="14712" end="14720" title="bit part" label="bit part"/>
<link wikidata="Q93839" start="14848" end="14863" title="Gary M. Heidnik" label="Gary M. Heidnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q492264" start="14882" end="14895" title="film score" label="musical score"/>
<link wikidata="Q207773" start="14953" end="14965" title="Howard Shore" label="Howard Shore"/>
<link wikidata="Q204057" start="15014" end="15026" title="Philadelphia (film)" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1726" start="15046" end="15052" title="Munich" label="Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q543751" start="15130" end="15155" title="Munich Symphony Orchestra" label="Munich Symphony Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2338889" start="15609" end="15620" title="MCA Records" label="MCA Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q622550" start="15684" end="15692" title="Trailer (promotion)" label="trailers"/>
<link wikidata="Q722682" start="15720" end="15728" title="Hannibal (2001 film)" label="Hannibal"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="15848" end="15855" title="United Kingdom" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q598929" start="15856" end="15865" title="post-punk" label="post-punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1943772" start="15896" end="15906" title="Hex Enduction Hour" label="Hip Priest"/>
<link wikidata="Q909916" start="15916" end="15924" title="The Fall (band)" label="the Fall"/>
<link wikidata="Q5583285" start="16046" end="16060" title="Goodbye Horses" label="Goodbye Horses"/>
<link wikidata="Q458884" start="16070" end="16080" title="Q Lazzarus" label="Q Lazzarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q744159" start="16378" end="16398" title="Presidents&amp;#x27; Day" label="Presidents&amp;#x27; Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q3349144" start="16518" end="16540" title="Odeon Leicester Square" label="Odeon Leicester Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q1535788" start="16624" end="16628" title="Rank Film Distributors" label="Rank"/>
<link wikidata="Q753315" start="16904" end="16940" title="1991 in film" label="fourth-highest grossing film of 1991"/>
<link wikidata="Q7539815" start="17073" end="17084" title="sleeper hit" label="sleeper hit"/>
<link wikidata="Q105584" start="17240" end="17255" title="Rotten Tomatoes" label="Rotten Tomatoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q150248" start="17628" end="17638" title="Metacritic" label="Metacritic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2972775" start="17835" end="17846" title="CinemaScore" label="CinemaScore"/>
<link wikidata="Q212173" start="17918" end="17929" title="Roger Ebert" label="Roger Ebert"/>
<link wikidata="Q577417" start="17943" end="17960" title="Chicago Sun-Times" label="Chicago Sun-Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q20001903" start="18096" end="18112" title="The Great Movies" label="The Great Movies"/>
<link wikidata="Q151895" start="18210" end="18219" title="Nosferatu" label="Nosferatu"/>
<link wikidata="Q163038" start="18233" end="18239" title="Psycho (1960 film)" label="Psycho"/>
<link wikidata="Q221103" start="18257" end="18266" title="Halloween (1978 film)" label="Halloween"/>
<link wikidata="Q104137" start="18380" end="18390" title="Unforgiven" label="Unforgiven"/>
<link wikidata="Q969105" start="18447" end="18458" title="Gene Siskel" label="Gene Siskel"/>
<link wikidata="Q47596" start="18478" end="18493" title="Chicago Tribune" label="Chicago Tribune"/>
<link wikidata="Q3756482" start="18691" end="18714" title="List of Big Five Academy Award winners and nominees" label="Big Five Academy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q102427" start="18716" end="18728" title="Academy Award for Best Picture" label="Best Picture"/>
<link wikidata="Q103360" start="18730" end="18743" title="Academy Award for Best Director" label="Best Director"/>
<link wikidata="Q103916" start="18753" end="18763" title="Academy Award for Best Actor" label="Best Actor"/>
<link wikidata="Q103618" start="18775" end="18787" title="Academy Award for Best Actress" label="Best Actress"/>
<link wikidata="Q107258" start="18802" end="18825" title="Academy Award for Best Adapted Screenplay" label="Best Adapted Screenplay"/>
<link wikidata="Q857047" start="18845" end="18864" title="64th Academy Awards" label="64th Academy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q830079" start="18958" end="18968" title="Academy Award for Best Sound Mixing" label="Best Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q7815804" start="18970" end="18984" title="Tom Fleischman" label="Tom Fleischman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086864" start="18989" end="19007" title="Chris Newman (sound engineer)" label="Christopher Newman"/>
<link wikidata="Q281939" start="19013" end="19030" title="Academy Award for Best Film Editing" label="Best Film Editing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138607" start="19032" end="19043" title="Craig McKay (film editor)" label="Craig McKay"/>
<link wikidata="" start="19064" end="19090" title="Terminator 2: Judgment Day" label="Terminator 2: Judgment Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q741823" start="19107" end="19110" title="JFK (film)" label="JFK"/>
<link wikidata="Q1789102" start="19154" end="19163" title="National Board of Review Award for Best Film" label="Best Film"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133614" start="19171" end="19214" title="National Board of Review of Motion Pictures" label="National Board of Review of Motion Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q706031" start="19274" end="19303" title="Silver Bear for Best Director" label="Silver Bear for Best Director"/>
<link wikidata="Q467983" start="19311" end="19350" title="41st Berlin International Film Festival" label="41st Berlin International Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q586356" start="19377" end="19413" title="Golden Globe Award for Best Director" label="Golden Globe Award for Best Director"/>
<link wikidata="Q1534972" start="19421" end="19445" title="49th Golden Globe Awards" label="49th Golden Globe Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q3114772" start="19478" end="19488" title="Grand Prix (Belgian Film Critics Association)" label="Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q3550079" start="19496" end="19528" title="Belgian Film Critics Association" label="Belgian Film Critics Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q139184" start="19560" end="19600" title="BAFTA Award for Best Film" label="British Academy Film Award for Best Film"/>
<link wikidata="Q2579817" start="19608" end="19640" title="45th British Academy Film Awards" label="45th British Academy Film Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q833154" start="19677" end="19688" title="Edgar Award" label="Edgar Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q6569790" start="19693" end="19723" title="Edgar Allan Poe Award for Best Motion Picture Screenplay" label="Best Motion Picture Screenplay"/>
<link wikidata="Q5905172" start="19790" end="19809" title="Horror Hall of Fame" label="Horror Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q219640" start="19825" end="19838" title="Vincent Price" label="Vincent Price"/>
<link wikidata="Q3098559" start="19898" end="19911" title="Gary Goetzman" label="Gary Goetzman"/>
<link wikidata="Q719345" start="19957" end="19997" title="AFI&amp;#x27;s 100 Years...100 Movies" label="100 greatest films in the past 100 years"/>
<link wikidata="Q207460" start="20005" end="20028" title="American Film Institute" label="American Film Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q902771" start="20239" end="20244" title="Bravo (American TV network)" label="Bravo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7711729" start="20258" end="20288" title="The 100 Scariest Movie Moments" label="The 100 Scariest Movie Moments"/>
<link wikidata="Q1610957" start="20403" end="20442" title="AFI&amp;#x27;s 100 Years...100 Heroes &amp;amp; Villains" label="the number one film villain of all time"/>
<link wikidata="Q1610957" start="20493" end="20529" title="AFI&amp;#x27;s 100 Years...100 Heroes &amp;amp; Villains" label="sixth-greatest film hero of all time"/>
<link wikidata="Q169889" start="20540" end="20543" title="American Broadcasting Company" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q33659" start="20733" end="20739" title="People (American magazine)" label="People"/>
<link wikidata="Q6917753" start="20925" end="20953" title="Motion Picture Editors Guild" label="Motion Picture Editors Guild"/>
<link wikidata="Q1984614" start="21102" end="21133" title="AFI 100 Years... series" label="AFI &amp;quot;100 Years&amp;quot; lists"/>
<link wikidata="Q719345" start="21137" end="21170" title="AFI&amp;#x27;s 100 Years...100 Movies" label="AFI&amp;#x27;s 100 Years...100 Movies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1767231" start="21182" end="21216" title="AFI&amp;#x27;s 100 Years...100 Thrills" label="AFI&amp;#x27;s 100 Years...100 Thrills"/>
<link wikidata="Q1610957" start="21227" end="21275" title="AFI&amp;#x27;s 100 Years...100 Heroes &amp;amp; Villains" label="AFI&amp;#x27;s 100 Years...100 Heroes &amp;amp; Villains"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277080" start="21280" end="21296" title="Clarice Starling" label="Clarice Starling"/>
<link wikidata="Q211013" start="21313" end="21328" title="Hannibal Lecter" label="Hannibal Lecter"/>
<link wikidata="Q400051" start="21347" end="21386" title="AFI&amp;#x27;s 100 Years...100 Movie Quotes" label="AFI&amp;#x27;s 100 Years...100 Movie Quotes"/>
<link wikidata="Q131342" start="21461" end="21471" title="fava beans" label="fava beans"/>
<link wikidata="Q750979" start="21483" end="21490" title="Chianti" label="Chianti"/>
<link wikidata="Q620121" start="21509" end="21569" title="AFI&amp;#x27;s 100 Years...100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition)" label="AFI&amp;#x27;s 100 Years...100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition)"/>
<link wikidata="Q275033" start="21595" end="21615" title="Entertainment Weekly" label="Entertainment Weekly"/>
<link wikidata="Q183976" start="21815" end="21818" title="VHS" label="VHS"/>
<link wikidata="Q891732" start="21842" end="21858" title="Orion Home Video" label="Orion Home Video"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063273" start="21997" end="22000" title="DVD-Video" label="DVD"/>
<link wikidata="Q1981249" start="22021" end="22043" title="MGM Home Entertainment" label="MGM Home Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q20970432" start="22076" end="22087" title="Fullscreen (filmmaking)" label="Full Screen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204187" start="22107" end="22131" title="The Criterion Collection" label="The Criterion Collection"/>
<link wikidata="Q261636" start="22280" end="22286" title="sequel" label="sequel"/>
<link wikidata="Q722682" start="22293" end="22301" title="Hannibal (2001 film)" label="Hannibal"/>
<link wikidata="Q678345" start="22522" end="22529" title="prequel" label="prequel"/>
<link wikidata="Q9125658" start="22541" end="22551" title="Red Dragon (2002 film)" label="Red Dragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3114616" start="22594" end="22609" title="Hannibal Rising (film)" label="Hannibal Rising"/>
<link wikidata="Q497770" start="22628" end="22642" title="Gaspard Ulliel" label="Gaspard Ulliel"/>
<link wikidata="Q97187555" start="22677" end="22696" title="Clarice (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Clarice&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q452805" start="22759" end="22773" title="Rebecca Breeds" label="Rebecca Breeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q888841" start="22805" end="22825" title="Hannibal (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Hannibal&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q9144808" start="22863" end="22885" title="Red Dragon (novel)" label="&amp;quot;Red Dragon&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q291087" start="22896" end="22911" title="Hannibal Rising" label="Hannibal Rising"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="23024" end="23036" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q861670" start="23415" end="23451" title="British Board of Film Classification" label="British Board of Film Classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q4557532" start="23476" end="23478" title="18 (British Board of Film Classification)" label="18"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="23895" end="23907" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q115227079" start="23999" end="24025" title="Donald Trump 2024 presidential campaign" label="2024 presidential campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q5032670" start="24234" end="24264" title="Cannibalism in popular culture" label="Cannibalism in popular culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139614" start="24267" end="24296" title="List of Academy Award records" label="List of Academy Award records"/>
<link wikidata="Q6619976" start="24299" end="24333" title="List of films based on crime books" label="List of films based on crime books"/>
<link wikidata="Q7514344" start="24342" end="24362" title="Silence! The Musical" label="Silence! The Musical"/>
<link wikidata="Q4749412" start="24546" end="24556" title="Amy Taubin" label="Amy Taubin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204187" start="24560" end="24584" title="The Criterion Collection" label="The Criterion Collection"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="30007" wikidata="Q83495" url="?curid=30007" title="The Matrix">
<text>The Matrix is a 1999 science fiction action film written and directed by the Wachowskis. It is the first installment in the &quot;Matrix&quot; film series, starring Keanu Reeves, Laurence Fishburne, Carrie-Anne Moss, Hugo Weaving, and Joe Pantoliano. It depicts a dystopian future in which humanity is unknowingly trapped inside the Matrix, a simulated reality created by intelligent machines. Believing computer hacker Neo to be &quot;the One&quot; prophesied to defeat them, Morpheus recruits him into a rebellion against the machines.

Following the success of &quot;Bound&quot; (1996), Warner Bros. gave the go-ahead for &quot;The Matrix&quot; after the Wachowskis sent an edit of the film&#x27;s opening minutes. Action scenes were influenced by anime and martial arts films, (particularly fight choreographers and wire fu techniques from Hong Kong action cinema). Other influences include Plato&#x27;s cave and 1990s Telnet hacker communities. The film popularized terms such as the red pill, and popularised a visual effect known as &quot;bullet time&quot;, in which a character&#x27;s heightened perception is represented by allowing the action within a shot to progress in slow motion while the camera appears to move through the scene at normal speed.

&quot;The Matrix&quot; opened in theaters in the United States on March 31, 1999, to widespread acclaim from critics, who praised its innovative visual effects, action sequences, cinematography and entertainment value. The film was a box office success, grossing over $460 million on a $63 million budget, becoming the highest-grossing Warner Bros. film of 1999 and the fourth-highest-grossing film of that year. The film received nominations at the 72nd Academy Awards for Best Visual Effects, Best Film Editing, Best Sound and Best Sound Editing, winning all four categories. The film was also the recipient of numerous other accolades, including Best Sound and Best Special Visual Effects at the 53rd British Academy Film Awards, and the Wachowskis were awarded Best Director and Best Science Fiction Film at the 26th Saturn Awards. &quot;The Matrix&quot; is considered to be among the greatest science fiction films of all time, and in 2012, the film was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress for being &quot;culturally, historically, and aesthetically significant&quot;.

The film&#x27;s success led to two sequels by the Wachowskis, both released in 2003, &quot;The Matrix Reloaded&quot; and &quot;The Matrix Revolutions&quot;. The &quot;Matrix&quot; franchise was further expanded through the production of comic books, video games and an animated anthology film, &quot;The Animatrix&quot;, with which the Wachowskis were heavily involved. The franchise has also inspired books and theories expanding on some of the religious and philosophical ideas alluded to in the films. A fourth film, titled &quot;The Matrix Resurrections&quot;, directed solely by Lana Wachowski was released in 2021.

== Plot ==
In 1999, in an unnamed city, Thomas Anderson, a computer programmer known as &quot;Neo&quot; in hacking circles, delves into the mystery of the &quot;Matrix&quot;. His search brings him to the attention of hacker Trinity, who discloses that the enigmatic Morpheus can answer Neo&#x27;s questions. At his workplace, Neo is pursued by police and Agents led by Agent Smith. Morpheus guides Neo&#x27;s escape by phone, able to somehow remotely observe their movements, but Neo ultimately surrenders rather than risk a hazardous getaway.

The Agents interrogate Neo about Morpheus but he refuses to cooperate. In response, Neo&#x27;s mouth suddenly seals shut and the Agents implant a robotic device in his abdomen. Neo awakens at home, initially dismissing the encounter as a nightmare until Trinity and her allies arrive, extract the implanted tracker, and bring Neo to Morpheus, their leader. Morpheus offers Neo a choice: a red pill to uncover the truth about the Matrix or a blue pill to forget everything and return to his normal life. Opting for the red pill, Neo&#x27;s reality distorts, and he awakens submerged in a mechanical pod with invasive cables running throughout his body. Neo witnesses countless inert humans similarly encased and tended to by machines before he is ejected from the facility and rescued by Morpheus aboard the hovercraft, the &quot;Nebuchadnezzar&quot;.

Morpheus reveals that the year is approximately 2199. In the 21st century, humanity lost a war with their artificially intelligent creations, leaving the Earth a devastated ruin. As a last resort, humans blackened the sky to eliminate the machines&#x27; access to solar power and, in response, the machines developed farms of artificially grown humans to harness their bioelectric energy. The Matrix is a simulated reality based on human civilization at its peak, designed to keep the subjugated humans oblivious and pacified. The remaining free humans established an underground refuge known as Zion, living a harsh existence on scarce resources. Morpheus and his rebel crew hack into the Matrix to free others and recruit them, manipulating the rules of the simulation to gain superhuman physical abilities. Even so, they are outmatched by the overwhelmingly powerful Agents—sentient programs protecting the Matrix—and dying in the Matrix causes death in the real world. Morpheus liberated Neo because he believes him to be &quot;the One&quot;, a prophesied figure destined to dismantle the Matrix and liberate humanity.

The crew enter the Matrix to seek guidance from the Oracle, the prophetic figure who foretold the existence of the One. She implies that Neo is not the One and warns him of an imminent choice between his life and Morpheus&#x27;s. The crew are ambushed by Agents after being betrayed by Cypher, a resentful crew member who wants to be reinserted into the Matrix to enjoy its comforts. Convinced of Neo&#x27;s importance, Morpheus sacrifices himself to confront Smith, only to be overpowered and captured. Meanwhile, Cypher exits the Matrix and begins forcefully disconnecting the others, killing them. Before Cypher can kill Neo and Trinity, Tank, a subdued crew member, regains consciousness, kills Cypher, and safely extracts the survivors.

Smith interrogates Morpheus to obtain access codes for Zion&#x27;s mainframe, which will allow them to end the human resistance. Determined to rescue Morpheus, Neo re-enters the Matrix with Trinity. They successfully free Morpheus, who escapes the Matrix with Trinity, but Smith intercepts Neo. Gaining confidence in his abilities, Neo fights Smith, demonstrating comparable power and eventually killing him. However, Smith resurrects in a new body and kills Neo.

In the real world, machine forces called Sentinels attack the &quot;Nebuchadnezzar&quot;. By Neo&#x27;s body, Trinity confesses her love for him and that the Oracle prophesied she would fall in love with the One. In the Matrix, Neo revives with newfound abilities to perceive and control the Matrix. He effortlessly destroys Smith and exits the Matrix just as the &quot;Nebuchadnezzar&quot;&#x27;s electromagnetic pulse disables the ship&#x27;s power and the Sentinels. Sometime later, within the Matrix, Neo communicates with the system, promising to show the enslaved humans a world of limitless possibilities, before flying away.

== Cast ==

*Keanu Reeves as Neo: A computer programmer, born Thomas A. Anderson, who secretly operates as a hacker named Neo. Reeves described his character as someone who felt that something was wrong, and was searching for Morpheus and the truth to break free. Will Smith turned down the role of Neo to make &quot;Wild Wild West&quot;, because of skepticism over the film&#x27;s ambitious bullet time special effects. He later stated he was &quot;not mature enough as an actor&quot; at that time, and that if given the role, he &quot;would have messed it up&quot;. Smith praised Reeves for his portrayal. Nicolas Cage also turned down the part because of &quot;family obligations&quot;. Warner Bros. sought Brad Pitt or Val Kilmer for the role. When both declined, Leonardo DiCaprio initially accepted the role, but ultimately turned it down because he did not want to do a visual effects film directly after &quot;Titanic&quot;. The studio pushed for Reeves, who won the role over Johnny Depp, the Wachowskis&#x27; first choice. Lorenzo di Bonaventura stated that the screenplay was also sent to Sandra Bullock, with the suggestion of rewriting Neo as a female.
*Laurence Fishburne as Morpheus: A human freed from the Matrix and captain of the &quot;Nebuchadnezzar&quot;. Fishburne stated that once he read the script, he did not understand why other people found it confusing. However, he doubted if the movie would ever be made, because it was &quot;so smart&quot;. The Wachowskis instructed Fishburne to base his performance on the character Morpheus in Neil Gaiman&#x27;s &quot;Sandman&quot; comics. Gary Oldman, Samuel L. Jackson and Val Kilmer were also considered for the part. 
*Carrie-Anne Moss as Trinity: A human freed by Morpheus, a crewmember of the &quot;Nebuchadnezzar&quot;, and later Neo&#x27;s romantic interest. After reading the script, Moss stated that at first, she did not believe she had to do the extreme acrobatic actions as described in the script. She also doubted how the Wachowskis would get to direct a movie with a budget so large, but after spending an hour with them going through the storyboard, she understood why some people would trust them. Moss mentioned that she underwent a three-hour physical test during casting, so she knew what to expect subsequently. The role made Moss, who later said, &quot;I had no career before. None.&quot; Janet Jackson was initially approached for the role but scheduling conflicts prevented her from accepting it. In an interview, she stated that turning down the role was difficult for her, so she later referenced &quot;The Matrix&quot; in the &#x27;Intro&#x27; and &#x27;Outro&#x27; interludes on her tenth studio album &quot;Discipline&quot;. Sandra Bullock, who was previously approached for the role of Neo, was also offered the role of Trinity, but she turned it down. Rosie Perez, Salma Hayek and Jada Pinkett Smith (who would later play Niobe in the sequels) auditioned for the role.
*Hugo Weaving as Agent Smith: A sentient &quot;Agent&quot; program of the Matrix whose purpose is to destroy Zion and stop humans from getting out of the Matrix. Unlike other Agents, he has ambitions to free himself from his duties. Weaving stated that he found the character amusing and enjoyable to play. He developed a neutral accent but with more specific character for the role. He wanted Smith to sound neither robotic nor human, and also said that the Wachowskis&#x27; voices had influenced his voice in the film. When filming began, Weaving mentioned that he was excited to be a part of something that would extend him. Jean Reno was offered the role, but declined, unwilling to move to Australia for the production.
*Joe Pantoliano as Cypher: Another human freed by Morpheus, and a crewmember of the &quot;Nebuchadnezzar&quot;, but one who regrets taking the red pill and seeks to be returned to the Matrix, later betraying the rebels to Agent Smith. Pantoliano had worked with the Wachowskis prior to appearing in &quot;The Matrix&quot;, starring in their 1996 film &quot;Bound&quot;.
*Marcus Chong as Tank: The &quot;operator&quot; of the &quot;Nebuchadnezzar&quot; and Dozer&#x27;s brother; they are both &quot;natural&quot; (as opposed to bred) humans, born outside of the Matrix.
*Matt Doran as Mouse: A freed human and a programmer on the &quot;Nebuchadnezzar&quot;.
*Rowan Witt as The Spoon Boy, a young prophet who has learnt how to manipulate the world of the Matrix. Seemingly wise beyond his years, he teaches Neo how to develop his powers and provides him with wisdom and motivation across the films and graphic novels.
*Gloria Foster as The Oracle: A prophet who still resides in the Matrix, helping the freed humans with her foresight and wisdom.
*Anthony Ray Parker as Dozer: Pilot of the &quot;Nebuchadnezzar&quot;. He is Tank&#x27;s brother, and like him was born outside of the Matrix.
*Julian Arahanga as Apoc: A freed human and a crew member on the &quot;Nebuchadnezzar&quot;.
*Belinda McClory as Switch: A human freed by Morpheus, and a crew member of the &quot;Nebuchadnezzar&quot;.
*Paul Goddard as Agent Brown: One of two sentient &quot;Agent&quot; programs in the Matrix, who works with Agent Smith to destroy Zion and stop humans from escaping the system.
*Robert Taylor as Agent Jones: One of two sentient &quot;Agent&quot; programs in the Matrix who works with Agent Smith to destroy Zion and stop humans from escaping the system.
*Ada Nicodemou as DuJour: A reference to the White Rabbit in &quot;Alice&#x27;s Adventures in Wonderland&quot;.

== Production ==

=== Development ===
In 1994, the Wachowskis presented the script for the film &quot;Assassins&quot; to Warner Bros. Pictures. After Lorenzo di Bonaventura, the president of production of the company at the time, read the script, he decided to buy rights to it and included two more pictures, &quot;Bound&quot; and &quot;The Matrix&quot;, in the contract. The first movie the Wachowskis directed, &quot;Bound&quot;, then became a critical success. Using this momentum, they later asked to direct &quot;The Matrix&quot;. Reeves said that the Matrix avatar would have been a &quot;different sex than the Zion reality&quot; in the early draft of the script, but the studio was not ready for that version.

In 1996, the Wachowskis pitched the role of Neo to Will Smith. Smith explained on his YouTube channel that the idea was for him to be Neo, while Morpheus was to be played by Val Kilmer. He later explained that he did not quite understand the concept and he turned down the role to instead film &quot;Wild Wild West&quot;.

Producer Joel Silver soon joined the project. Although the project had key supporters, including Silver and Di Bonaventura, to influence the company, &quot;The Matrix&quot; was still a huge investment for Warner Bros., which had to invest $60 million to create a movie with prominent actors and difficult special effects. The Wachowskis therefore hired underground comic book artists Geof Darrow and Steve Skroce to draw a 600-page, shot-by-shot storyboard for the entire film. The storyboard eventually earned the studio&#x27;s approval, and it was decided to film in Australia to make the most of the budget. Soon, &quot;The Matrix&quot; became a co-production of Warner Bros. and Village Roadshow Pictures. According to editor Zach Staenberg on the DVD audio commentary track, the production team sent an edit of the film&#x27;s first minutes (featuring Trinity&#x27;s encounter with police and Agents) to Warner executives, and secured Warner&#x27;s &quot;total support of the movie&quot; from then on.

=== Pre-production ===
The cast were required to be able to understand and explain &quot;The Matrix&quot;. French philosopher Jean Baudrillard&#x27;s &quot;Simulacra and Simulation&quot; was required reading for most of the principal cast and crew. In early 1997, the Wachowskis had Reeves and Moss read &quot;Simulacra and Simulation&quot;, Kevin Kelly&#x27;s &quot;Out of Control: The New Biology of Machines, Social Systems, and the Economic World&quot;, and Dylan Evans&#x27;s ideas on evolutionary psychology even before they opened up the script. Eventually, Reeves was able to explain all the philosophical nuances involved. Moss commented that she had difficulty with this process.

The directors had long been admirers of Hong Kong action cinema, so they decided to hire the Chinese martial arts choreographer and film director Yuen Woo-ping to work on fight scenes. To prepare for the wire fu, the actors had to train hard for several months. The Wachowskis first scheduled four months for training, beginning in October 1997. Yuen was optimistic but then began to worry when he realized how unfit the actors were.

Yuen let their body style develop and then worked with each actor&#x27;s strength. He built on Reeves&#x27;s diligence, Fishburne&#x27;s resilience, Weaving&#x27;s precision and Moss&#x27;s feminine grace. Yuen designed Moss&#x27;s moves to suit her deftness and lightness. Prior to the pre-production, Reeves underwent a two-level fusion of his cervical (neck) spine due to spinal cord compression from a herniated disc (&quot;I was falling over in the shower in the morning&quot;). He was still recovering by the time of pre-production, but he insisted on training, so Yuen let him practice punches and lighter moves. Reeves trained hard and even requested training on days off. However, the surgery still made him unable to kick for two out of four months of training. As a result, Reeves did not kick much in the film. Weaving had to undergo hip surgery after he sustained an injury during the training process.

=== Filming ===
All but a few scenes were filmed at Fox Studios in Sydney, as well as in the city itself, although recognizable landmarks were not included to maintain the impression of a generic American city. The filming helped establish New South Wales as a major film production center. Filming began in March 1998 and wrapped in August 1998; principal photography took 118 days. Some filming also occurred at Culver Studios.

Due to Reeves&#x27;s neck injury (see above), some of the action scenes had to be rescheduled to wait for his full recovery. As a result, the filming began with scenes that did not require much physical exertion, such as the scene in Thomas Anderson&#x27;s office, the interrogation room, or the car ride in which Neo is taken to see the Oracle. Locations for these scenes included Martin Place&#x27;s fountain in Sydney, halfway between it and the adjacent Colonial Building, and the Colonial Building itself. During the scene set on a government building rooftop, the team filmed extra footage of Neo dodging bullets in case the bullet time process did not work. The bullet-time fight scene was filmed on the roof of Symantec Corporation building in Kent Street, opposite Sussex Street.

Moss performed the shots featuring Trinity at the beginning of the film and all the wire stunts herself. The rooftop set that Trinity uses to escape from Agent Brown early in the film was left over from the production of &quot;Dark City&quot;, which has prompted comments due to the thematic similarities of the films. During the rehearsal of the lobby scene, in which Trinity runs on a wall, Moss injured her leg and was ultimately unable to film the shot in one take. She stated that she was under a lot of pressure at the time and was devastated when she realized that she would be unable to do it.

Fishburne later said that while being in Sydney to shoot the film, he experienced a racist vibe and that it felt like America in the 1950s.

The dojo set was built well before the actual filming. During the filming of these action sequences, there was significant physical contact between the actors, earning them bruises. Reeves&#x27;s injury and his insufficient training with wires prior to filming meant he was unable to perform the triple kicks satisfactorily and became frustrated with himself, causing the scene to be postponed. The scene was shot successfully a few days later, with Reeves using only three takes. Yuen altered the choreography and made the actors pull their punches in the last sequence of the scene, creating a training feel.

The filmmakers originally planned to shoot the subway scene in an actual subway station, but the complexity of the fight and related wire work required shooting the scene on a set. The set was built around an existing train storage facility, which had real train tracks. Filming the scene when Neo slammed Smith into the ceiling, Chad Stahelski, Reeves&#x27;s stunt double, sustained several injuries, including broken ribs, knees and a dislocated shoulder. Another stuntman was injured by a hydraulic puller during a shot in which Neo was slammed into a booth. The office building in which Smith interrogated Morpheus was a large set, and the outside view from inside the building was a large, three story high cyclorama. The helicopter was a full-scale, light-weight mock-up suspended by a wire rope operated a tilting mechanism mounted to the studio roofbeams. The helicopter had a real minigun side-mounted to it, which was set to cycle at half its regular (3,000 rounds per minute) firing rate.

To prepare for the scene in which Neo wakes up in a pod, Reeves lost and shaved his whole body to give Neo an emaciated look. The scene in which Neo fell into the sewer system concluded the principal photography. According to &quot;The Art of the Matrix&quot;, at least one filmed scene and a variety of short pieces of action were omitted from the final cut of the film.

=== Sound effects and music ===

Dane A. Davis was responsible for creating the sound effects for the film. The fight scene sound effects, such as the whipping sounds of punches, were created using thin metal rods and recording them, then editing the sounds. The sound of the pod containing a human body closing required almost fifty sounds put together.

The film&#x27;s score, The Matrix: Original Motion Picture Score, was composed by Don Davis. He noted that mirrors appear frequently in the film: reflections of the blue and red pills are seen in Morpheus&#x27;s glasses; Neo&#x27;s capture by Agents is viewed through the rear-view mirror of Trinity&#x27;s motorcycle; Neo observes a broken mirror mending itself; reflections warp as a spoon is bent; the reflection of a helicopter is visible as it approaches a skyscraper. Davis focused on this theme of reflections when creating his score, alternating between sections of the orchestra and attempting to incorporate contrapuntal ideas. Davis&#x27; score combines orchestral, choral and synthesizer elements; the balance between these elements varies depending on whether humans or machines are the dominant subject of a given scene.
In addition to Davis&#x27; score, The Matrix: Music from the Motion Picture also features music from acts such as Rammstein, Rob Dougan, Rage Against the Machine, Propellerheads, Ministry, Lunatic Calm, Deftones, Monster Magnet, The Prodigy, Rob Zombie, Meat Beat Manifesto and Marilyn Manson.

=== Production design ===

In the film, the code that composes the Matrix itself is frequently represented as downward-flowing green characters. This code uses a custom typeface designed by Simon Whiteley, which includes mirror images of half-width kana characters and Western Latin letters and Arabic numerals. In a 2017 interview at CNET, he attributed the design to his wife, who is from Japan, and added, &quot;I like to tell everybody that The Matrix&#x27;s code is made out of Japanese sushi recipes&quot;. &quot;The color green reflects the green tint commonly used on early monochrome computer monitors&quot;. Lynne Cartwright, the Visual Effects Supervisor at Animal Logic, supervised the creation of the film&#x27;s opening title sequence, as well as the general look of the Matrix code throughout the film, in collaboration with Lindsay Fleay and Justen Marshall. The portrayal resembles the opening credits of the 1995 Japanese cyberpunk film, &quot;Ghost in the Shell&quot;, which had a strong influence on the &quot;Matrix&quot; series. It was also used in the subsequent films, on the related website, and in the game &quot;The Matrix: Path of Neo&quot;, and its drop-down effect is reflected in the design of some posters for the &quot;Matrix&quot; series. The code received the Runner-up Award in the 1999 Jesse Garson Award for In-film typography or opening credit sequence.

&quot;The Matrix&quot;″s production designer, Owen Paterson, used methods to distinguish the &quot;real world&quot; and the Matrix in a pervasive way. The production design team generally placed a bias towards the Matrix code&#x27;s distinctive green color in scenes set within the simulation, whereas there is an emphasis on the color blue during scenes set in the &quot;real world&quot;. In addition, the Matrix scenes&#x27; sets were slightly more decayed, monolithic and grid-like, to convey the cold, logical and artificial nature of that environment. For the &quot;real world&quot;, the actors&#x27; hair was less styled, their clothing had more textile content, and the cinematographers used longer lenses to soften the backgrounds and emphasize the actors.

The &quot;Nebuchadnezzar&quot; was designed to have a patched-up look, instead of clean, cold and sterile space ship interior sets as used on productions such as &quot;Star Trek&quot;. The wires were made visible to show the ship&#x27;s working internals, and each composition was carefully designed to convey the ship as &quot;a marriage between Man and Machine&quot;. For the scene when Neo wakes up in the pod connected to the Matrix, the pod was constructed to look dirty, used and sinister. During the testing of a breathing mechanism in the pod, the tester suffered hypothermia in under eight minutes, so the pod had to be heated.

Kym Barrett, costume designer, said that she defined the characters and their environment by their costume. For example, Reeves&#x27;s office costume was designed for Thomas Anderson to look uncomfortable, disheveled and out of place. Barrett sometimes used three types of fabric for each costume, and also had to consider the practicality of the acting. The actors needed to perform martial art actions in their costume, hang upside-down without people seeing up their clothing, and be able to work the wires while strapped into the harnesses. For Trinity, Barrett experimented with how each fabric absorbed and reflected different types of light, and was eventually able to make Trinity&#x27;s costume mercury-like and oil-slick to suit the character. For the Agents, their costume was designed to create a secret service, undercover look, resembling the film &quot;JFK&quot; and classic men in black.

The sunglasses, a staple of the film&#x27;s aesthetics, were commissioned for the film by designer Richard Walker from sunglasses maker Blinde Design.

=== Visual effects ===


The film is known for popularizing a visual effect known as &quot;bullet time&quot;, which allows a shot to progress in slow motion while the camera appears to move through the scene at normal speed. Bullet time has been described as &quot;a visual analogy for privileged moments of consciousness within the Matrix&quot;, and throughout the film, the effect is used to illustrate characters&#x27; exertion of control over time and space. The Wachowskis first imagined an action sequence that slowed time while the camera pivoted rapidly around the subjects, and proposed the effect in their screenplay for the film. When John Gaeta read the script, he pleaded with an effects producer at Mass.Illusion to let him work on the project, and created a prototype that led to him becoming the film&#x27;s visual effects supervisor.

The method used for creating these effects involved a technically expanded version of an old art photography technique known as time-slice photography, in which an array of cameras are placed around an object and triggered simultaneously. Each camera captures a still picture, contributing one frame to the video sequence, which creates the effect of &quot;virtual camera movement&quot;; the illusion of a viewpoint moving around an object that appears frozen in time.

The bullet time effect is similar but slightly more complicated, incorporating temporal motion so that rather than appearing totally frozen, the scene progresses in slow and variable motion. The cameras&#x27; positions and exposures were previsualized using a 3D simulation. Instead of firing the cameras simultaneously, the visual effect team fired the cameras fractions of a second after each other, so that each camera could capture the action as it progressed, creating a super slow-motion effect. When the frames were put together, the resulting slow-motion effects reached a frame frequency of 12,000 per second, as opposed to the normal 24 frames per second of film. Standard movie cameras were placed at the ends of the array to pick up the normal speed action before and after. Because the cameras circle the subject almost completely in most of the sequences, computer technology was used to edit out the cameras that appeared in the background on the other side. To create backgrounds, Gaeta hired George Borshukov, who created 3D models based on the geometry of buildings and used the photographs of the buildings themselves as texture.

The photo-realistic surroundings generated by this method were incorporated into the bullet time scene, and algorithms based on optical flow were used to interpolate between the still images to produce a fluent dynamic motion; the computer-generated &quot;lead in&quot; and &quot;lead out&quot; slides were filled in between frames in sequence to get an illusion of orbiting the scene. Manex Visual Effects used a cluster farm running the Unix-like operating system FreeBSD to render many of the film&#x27;s visual effects.

Manex also handled creature effects, such as Sentinels and machines in real world scenes; Animal Logic created the code hallway and the exploding Agent at the end of the film. DFilm managed scenes that required heavy use of digital compositing, such as Neo&#x27;s jump off a skyscraper and the helicopter crash into a building. The ripple effect in the latter scene was created digitally, but the shot also included practical elements, and months of extensive research were needed to find the correct kind of glass and explosives to use. The scene was shot by colliding a quarter-scale helicopter mock-up into a glass wall wired to concentric rings of explosives; the explosives were then triggered in sequence from the center outward, to create a wave of exploding glass.

The photogrammetric and image-based computer-generated background approaches in &quot;The Matrix&quot;″s bullet time evolved into innovations unveiled in the sequels &quot;The Matrix Reloaded&quot; and &quot;The Matrix Revolutions&quot;. The method of using real photographs of buildings as texture for 3D models eventually led the visual effect team to digitize all data, such as scenes, characters&#x27; motions and expressions. It also led to the development of &quot;Universal Capture&quot;, a process which samples and stores facial details and expressions at high resolution. With these highly detailed collected data, the team were able to create virtual cinematography in which characters, locations and events can all be created digitally and viewed through virtual cameras, eliminating the restrictions of real cameras.

== Release==
=== Home media ===
&quot;The Matrix&quot; was released on DVD and Laserdisc in its original aspect ratio of 2.39:1 on September 21, 1999, in the US from Warner Home Video as well as in 1.33:1 aspect ratio in Hong Kong from ERA Home Entertainment. It was also released on VHS in both full screen and widescreen formats on , 1999. After its DVD release, it was the first DVD to sell more than one million copies in the US. By 2000, the film went on to become the first to sell more than three million copies in the US. At that point, it became the top-selling DVD release of all time, holding this record for a few months before being surpassed by &quot;Gladiator&quot;. By , 2003, one month after &quot;The Matrix Reloaded&quot; DVD was released, the sales of &quot;The Matrix&quot; DVD had exceeded 30 million copies. It then debuted on both VHS and DVD formats in the UK on , 1999. &quot;The Matrix&quot; sold more than 107,000 DVD copies in just two weeks, breaking &quot;Armageddon&quot;″s record for being the country&#x27;s best-selling DVD title. The Ultimate Matrix Collection was released on HD DVD on , 2007, and on Blu-ray on , 2008. The film was also released standalone in a 10th-anniversary edition Blu-ray in the Digibook format on , 2009, ten years to the day after the film was released theatrically. In 2010, the film had another DVD release along with the two sequels as &quot;The Complete Matrix Trilogy&quot;. It was also released on 4K HDR Blu-ray on May 22, 2018. The film as part of &quot;The Matrix Trilogy&quot; was released on 4K Ultra HD Blu-ray on October 30, 2018.

===Other media===
The franchise also contains four video games: &quot;Enter the Matrix&quot; (2003), which contains footage shot specifically for the game and chronicles events taking place before and during &quot;The Matrix Reloaded&quot;; &quot;The Matrix Online&quot; (2004), an MMORPG which continued the story beyond &quot;The Matrix Revolutions&quot;; &quot;The Matrix: Path of Neo&quot; (2005), which focuses on Neo&#x27;s journey through the trilogy of films; and &quot;The Matrix Awakens&quot; (2021), an interactive technology demonstration developed by &quot;Epic Games&quot; using &quot;Unreal Engine 5&quot;.

The franchise also includes &quot;The Matrix Comics&quot;, a series of comics and short stories set in the world of &quot;The Matrix&quot;, written and illustrated by figures from the comics industry. Most of the comics were originally presented for free on the official &quot;Matrix&quot; website; they were later republished, along with some new material, in two printed trade paperback volumes, called &quot;The Matrix Comics, Vol 1 and Vol 2&quot;.

==Reception==
=== Box office ===
&quot;The Matrix&quot; grossed $27.8 million during its opening weekend, as well as earning $37.4 million in its first five days. It surpassed &quot;Lost in Space&quot; and &quot;Indecent Proposal&quot; simultaneously having the biggest April and Easter opening weekends. The film also had the second-highest opening weekend for a spring starter film, trailing behind &quot;Liar Liar&quot;. Three years later in 2002, &quot;The Matrix&quot;″s records for having the largest April and Easter opening weekends would be taken by &quot;The Scorpion King&quot; and &quot;Panic Room&quot; respectively. Upon its opening, it had the highest opening weekend of any 1999 film, easily topping &quot;Payback&quot;. Additionally, this was the biggest opening weekend for a Keanu Reeves film since &quot;Speed&quot; in 1994. It would go on to rank number one at the box office during its first weekend, beating out &quot;Forces of Nature&quot;, &quot;10 Things I Hate About You&quot;, &quot;The Out-of-Towners&quot;, &quot;Analyze This&quot; and &quot;EDtv&quot;. The film would remain at the top of the box office for two weeks until it was overtaken by &quot;Life&quot;. During its fourth weekend, &quot;The Matrix&quot; briefly returned to the number one spot. The following week, the film would be displaced by &quot;Entrapment&quot;.

In the UK, &quot;The Matrix&quot; earned $4.9 million in its first three days, ranking it as the third-highest opening weekend for a Warner Bros. film, behind &quot;Batman Forever&quot; and &quot;Batman &amp; Robin&quot;, while also delivering the third-highest opening weekend of the year, after &quot;A Bug&#x27;s Life&quot; and &quot;Notting Hill&quot;.

In its original run, the film earned $171,479,930 (37.0%) in the United States and Canada and $292,037,453 (63.0%) in other countries, for a worldwide total of $463,517,383. In North America, it went on to become the fifth highest-grossing film of 1999 and the highest-grossing R-rated film of that year. Worldwide, it was the fourth-highest-grossing film of the year, after &quot;Star Wars: Episode I – The Phantom Menace&quot;, &quot;The Sixth Sense&quot; and &quot;Toy Story 2&quot;. &quot;The Matrix&quot; became the second-highest-grossing Warner Bros. film of all time, behind &quot;Twister&quot;. Overall, it was the third-highest-grossing R-rated film at the time, just after &quot;Saving Private Ryan&quot; and &quot;Terminator 2: Judgment Day&quot;. Following re-releases, the worldwide gross of the film is $466,621,824. In 2012, it was placed 122nd on the list of highest-grossing films of all time, and the second-highest-grossing film in the &quot;Matrix&quot; franchise after &quot;The Matrix Reloaded&quot; ($742.1 million).

=== Critical response ===
&quot;The Matrix&quot; was praised by many critics, as well as filmmakers, and authors of science fiction, especially for its &quot;spectacular action&quot; scenes and its &quot;groundbreaking special effects&quot;. Some have described &quot;The Matrix&quot; as one of the best science fiction films of all time; &quot;Entertainment Weekly&quot; called &quot;The Matrix&quot; &quot;the most influential action movie of the generation&quot;. There have also been those, including philosopher William Irwin, who have suggested that the film explores significant philosophical and spiritual themes. On review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes, the film holds an approval rating of 83% based on 210 reviews, with an average score of 7.7/10. The site&#x27;s critical consensus reads, &quot;Thanks to the Wachowskis&#x27; imaginative vision, &quot;The Matrix&quot; is a smartly crafted combination of spectacular action and groundbreaking special effects&quot;. At Metacritic, which assigns a rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics, the film received a score of 73 based on 35 reviews, indicating &quot;generally favorable reviews&quot;. Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of &quot;A−&quot; on an A+ to F scale. It ranked 323rd among critics, and 546th among directors, in the 2012 &quot;Sight &amp; Sound&quot; polls of the greatest films ever made.

Philip Strick commented in &quot;Sight &amp; Sound&quot;, if the Wachowskis &quot;claim no originality of message, they are startling innovators of method,&quot; praising the film&#x27;s details and its &quot;broadside of astonishing images&quot;. Roger Ebert gave the film three stars out of four: he praised the film&#x27;s visuals and premise, but disliked the third act&#x27;s focus on action. Similarly, &quot;Time Out&quot; praised the &quot;entertainingly ingenious&quot; switches between different realities, Hugo Weaving&#x27;s &quot;engagingly odd&quot; performance, and the film&#x27;s cinematography and production design, but concluded, &quot;the promising premise is steadily wasted as the film turns into a fairly routine action pic ... yet another slice of overlong, high-concept hokum.&quot;

Jonathan Rosenbaum of the &quot;Chicago Reader&quot; reviewed the film negatively, criticizing it as &quot;simpleminded fun for roughly the first hour, until the movie becomes overwhelmed by its many sources ... There&#x27;s not much humor to keep it all life-size, and by the final stretch it&#x27;s become bloated, mechanical, and tiresome.&quot;

Ian Nathan of &quot;Empire&quot; described Carrie-Anne Moss as &quot;a major find&quot;, praised the &quot;surreal visual highs&quot; enabled by the bullet time (or &quot;flo-mo&quot;) effect, and described the film as &quot;technically mind-blowing, style merged perfectly with content and just so damn cool&quot;. Nathan remarked that although the film&#x27;s &quot;looney plot&quot; would not stand up to scrutiny, that was not a big flaw because &quot;&quot;The Matrix&quot; is about pure experience&quot;. Maitland McDonagh said in her review for &quot;TV Guide&quot;, the Wachowskis&#x27; &quot;through-the-looking-glass plot... manages to work surprisingly well on a number of levels: as a dystopian sci-fi thriller, as a brilliant excuse for the film&#x27;s lavish and hyperkinetic fight scenes, and as a pretty compelling call to the dead-above-the-eyeballs masses to unite and cast off their chains... This dazzling pop allegory is steeped in a dark, pulpy sensibility that transcends nostalgic pastiche and stands firmly on its own merits.&quot;

&quot;Salon&quot;″s reviewer Andrew O&#x27;Hehir acknowledged that although &quot;The Matrix&quot; is in his view a fundamentally immature and unoriginal film (&quot;It lacks anything like adult emotion... all this pseudo-spiritual hokum, along with the over-ramped onslaught of special effects—some of them quite amazing—will hold 14-year-old boys in rapture, not to mention those of us of all ages and genders who still harbor a 14-year-old boy somewhere inside&quot;), he concluded, &quot;as in &quot;Bound&quot;, there&#x27;s an appealing scope and daring to the Wachowskis&#x27; work, and their eagerness for more plot twists and more crazy images becomes increasingly infectious. In a limited and profoundly geeky sense, this might be an important and generous film. The Wachowskis have little feeling for character or human interaction, but their passion for &quot;movies&quot;—for making them, watching them, inhabiting their world—is pure and deep.&quot;

Filmmakers and science fiction creators alike generally took a complimentary perspective of &quot;The Matrix&quot;. William Gibson, a key figure in cyberpunk fiction, called the film &quot;an innocent delight I hadn&#x27;t felt in a long time&quot;, and stated, &quot;Neo is my favourite-ever science fiction hero, absolutely.&quot; Joss Whedon called the film &quot;my number one&quot; and praised its storytelling, structure and depth, concluding, &quot;It works on whatever level you want to bring to it&quot;. Darren Aronofsky commented, &quot;I walked out of &quot;The Matrix&quot; ... and I was thinking, &#x27;What kind of science fiction movie can people make now?&#x27; The Wachowskis basically took all the great sci-fi ideas of the 20th century and rolled them into a delicious pop culture sandwich that everyone on the planet devoured.&quot; M. Night Shyamalan expressed admiration for the Wachowskis, stating, &quot;Whatever you think of &quot;The Matrix&quot;, every shot is there because of the passion they have! You can see they argued it out!&quot;. Simon Pegg said that &quot;The Matrix&quot; provided &quot;the excitement and satisfaction that &quot;The Phantom Menace&quot; failed to inspire. &quot;The Matrix&quot; seemed fresh and cool and visually breathtaking; making wonderful, intelligent use of CGI to augment the on-screen action, striking a perfect balance of the real and the hyperreal. It was possibly the coolest film I had ever seen.&quot; Quentin Tarantino counted &quot;The Matrix&quot; as one of his twenty favorite movies from 1992 to 2009. James Cameron called it &quot;one of the most profoundly fresh science fiction films ever made&quot;. Christopher Nolan described it as &quot;an incredibly palpable mainstream phenomenon that made people think, Hey, what if this isn&#x27;t real?&quot;

=== Accolades ===
&quot;The Matrix&quot; received Academy Awards for Best Film Editing, Best Sound Editing, Best Visual Effects and Best Sound. The filmmakers were competing against other films with established franchises, like &quot;Star Wars: Episode I – The Phantom Menace&quot;, yet they won all four of their nominations. &quot;The Matrix&quot; also received BAFTA awards for Best Sound and Best Achievement in Special Visual Effects, in addition to nominations in the cinematography, production design and editing categories. In 1999, it won Saturn Awards for Best Science Fiction Film and Best Direction. In February 2022, the film was named one of the five finalists for Oscars Cheer Moment as part of the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences&#x27; &quot;Oscars Fan Favorite&quot; contest, for the &quot;bullet time&quot; scene, finishing in fifth place.

===Awards and nominations===
== Thematic analysis ==


&quot;The Matrix&quot; draws from and alludes to numerous cinematic and literary works, and concepts from mythology, religion and philosophy, including the ideas of Buddhism, Christianity, Gnosticism, Hinduism and Judaism.

=== Film and television ===
The pods in which the machines keep humans have been compared to images in &quot;Metropolis&quot;, and the work of M. C. Escher. A resemblance to the eerie worlds of Swiss artist H.R. Giger was also recognized. The pods can be seen in &quot;Welcome to Paradox&quot; Episode 4 &quot;News from D Street&quot; from a 1986 short story of the same name by Andrew Weiner which aired on September 7, 1998, on the SYFY Channel and has a remarkably similar concept. In this episode the hero is unaware he is living in virtual reality until he is told so by &quot;the code man&quot; who created the simulation and enters it knowingly. The Wachowskis have described Stanley Kubrick&#x27;s &quot;2001: A Space Odyssey&quot; as a formative cinematic influence, and as a major inspiration on the visual style they aimed for when making &quot;The Matrix&quot;. Rainer Werner Fassbinders German TV Miniseries &quot;World on a Wire&quot; from 1973, an adaption of the novel Simulacron-3, served as inspirational source for some details of The Matrix, such as the transfer between the real world and the Matrix-simulation via telephone / phonebooth. Reviewers have also commented on similarities between &quot;The Matrix&quot; and other late-1990s films such as &quot;Strange Days&quot;, &quot;Dark City&quot; and &quot;The Truman Show&quot;. The similarity of the film&#x27;s central concept to a device in the long-running series &quot;Doctor Who&quot; has also been noted. As in the film, the Matrix of that series (introduced in the 1976 serial &quot;The Deadly Assassin&quot;) is a massive computer system which one enters using a device connecting to the head, allowing users to see representations of the real world and change its laws of physics; but if killed there, they will die in reality. The action scenes of &quot;The Matrix&quot; were also strongly influenced by live-action films such as those of director John Woo. The martial arts sequences were inspired by &quot;Fist of Legend&quot;, a critically acclaimed 1995 martial arts film starring Jet Li. The fight scenes in &quot;Fist of Legend&quot; led to the hiring of Yuen as fight choreographer.

The Wachowskis&#x27; approach to action scenes drew upon their admiration for Japanese animation such as &quot;Ninja Scroll&quot; and &quot;Akira&quot;. Director Mamoru Oshii&#x27;s 1995 animated film &quot;Ghost in the Shell&quot; was a particularly strong influence; producer Joel Silver has stated that the Wachowskis first described their intentions for &quot;The Matrix&quot; by showing him that anime and saying, &quot;We wanna do that for real&quot;. Mitsuhisa Ishikawa of Production I.G, which produced &quot;Ghost in the Shell&quot;, noted that the anime&#x27;s high-quality visuals were a strong source of inspiration for the Wachowskis. He also commented, &quot;...cyberpunk films are very difficult to describe to a third person. I&#x27;d imagine that &quot;The Matrix&quot; is the kind of film that was very difficult to draw up a written proposal for to take to film studios&quot;. He stated that since &quot;Ghost in the Shell&quot; had gained recognition in America, the Wachowskis used it as a &quot;promotional tool&quot;.

=== Literary works ===
The film makes several references to Lewis Carroll&#x27;s &quot;Alice&#x27;s Adventures in Wonderland&quot;. Comparisons have also been made to Grant Morrison&#x27;s comic series &quot;The Invisibles&quot;, with Morrison describing it in 2011 as &quot;(it) seemed to me (to be) my own combination of ideas enacted on the screen&quot;. Comparisons have also been made between &quot;The Matrix&quot; and the books of Carlos Castaneda.

&quot;The Matrix&quot; belongs to the cyberpunk genre of science fiction, and draws from earlier works in the genre such as the 1984 novel &quot;Neuromancer&quot; by William Gibson. For example, the film&#x27;s use of the term &quot;Matrix&quot; is adopted from Gibson&#x27;s novel, though L. P. Davies had already used the term &quot;Matrix&quot; fifteen years earlier for a similar concept in his 1969 novel &quot;The White Room&quot; (&quot;It had been tried in the States some years earlier, but their &#x27;matrix&#x27; as they called it hadn&#x27;t been strong enough to hold the fictional character in place&quot;). After watching &quot;The Matrix&quot;, Gibson commented that the way that the film&#x27;s creators had drawn from existing cyberpunk works was &quot;exactly the kind of creative cultural osmosis&quot; he had relied upon in his own writing; however, he noted that the film&#x27;s Gnostic themes distinguished it from &quot;Neuromancer&quot;, and believed that &quot;The Matrix&quot; was thematically closer to the work of science fiction author Philip K. Dick, particularly Dick&#x27;s speculative &quot;Exegesis&quot;. Other writers have also commented on the similarities between &quot;The Matrix&quot; and Dick&#x27;s work; one example of such influence is a Philip K. Dick&#x27;s 1977 conference, in which he stated: &quot;We are living in a computer-programmed reality, and the only clue we have to it is when some variable is changed, and some alteration in our reality occurs&quot;.

=== Philosophy ===
In &quot;The Matrix&quot;, a copy of Jean Baudrillard&#x27;s philosophical work &quot;Simulacra and Simulation&quot;, which was published in French in 1981, is visible on-screen as &quot;the book used to conceal disks&quot;, and Morpheus quotes the phrase &quot;desert of the real&quot; from it. &quot;The book was required reading&quot; for the actors prior to filming. However, Baudrillard himself said that &quot;The Matrix&quot; misunderstands and distorts his work. Some interpreters of &quot;The Matrix&quot; mention Baudrillard&#x27;s philosophy to support their claim &quot;that the [film] is an allegory for contemporary experience in a heavily commercialized, media-driven society, especially in developed countries&quot;. The influence of &quot;The Matrixial Gaze&quot;, the philosophical-psychoanalytical concept of Bracha L. Ettinger on the archaic matrixial space that resists the field of simulacra, &quot;was brought to the public&#x27;s attention through the writings of art historians such as Griselda Pollock and film theorists such as Heinz-Peter Schwerfel&quot;. In addition to Baudrillard and Ettinger, the Wachowskis were also significantly influenced by Kevin Kelly&#x27;s &quot;Out of Control: The New Biology of Machines, Social Systems, and the Economic World&quot;, and Dylan Evans&#x27;s ideas on evolutionary psychology.

Philosopher William Irwin suggests that the idea of the &quot;Matrix&quot; – a generated reality invented by malicious machines – is an allusion to Descartes&#x27; &quot;First Meditation&quot;, and his idea of an evil demon. The Meditation hypothesizes that the perceived world might be a comprehensive illusion created to deceive us. The same premise can be found in Hilary Putnam&#x27;s brain in a vat scenario proposed in the 1980s. A connection between the premise of &quot;The Matrix&quot; and Plato&#x27;s Allegory of the Cave has also been suggested. The allegory is related to Plato&#x27;s theory of Forms, which holds that the true essence of an object is not what we perceive with our senses, but rather its quality, and that most people perceive only the shadow of the object and are thus limited to false perception.

The philosophy of Immanuel Kant has also been claimed as another influence on the film, and in particular how individuals within the Matrix interact with one another and with the system. Kant states in his &quot;Critique of Pure Reason&quot; that people come to know and explore our world through synthetic means (language, etc.), and thus this makes it rather difficult to discern truth from falsely perceived views. This means people are their own agents of deceit, and so in order for them to know truth, they must choose to openly pursue truth. This idea can be examined in Agent Smith&#x27;s monologue about the first version of the Matrix, which was designed as a human utopia, a perfect world without suffering and with total happiness. Agent Smith explains that, &quot;it was a disaster. No one accepted the program. Entire crops [of people] were lost.&quot; The machines had to amend their choice of programming in order to make people subservient to them, and so they conceived the Matrix in the image of the world in 1999. The world in 1999 was far from a utopia, but still humans accepted this over the suffering-less utopia. According to William Irwin this is Kantian, because the machines wished to impose a perfect world on humans in an attempt to keep people content, so that they would remain completely submissive to the machines, both consciously and subconsciously, but humans were not easy to make content.

=== Religion and mythology ===
Andrew Godoski sees allusions to Christ, including Neo&#x27;s &quot;virgin birth&quot;, his doubt in himself, the prophecy of his coming, along with many other Christian references. Amongst these possible allusions, it is suggested that the name of the character Trinity refers to Christianity&#x27;s doctrine of the Trinity. It has also been noted that the character Morpheus paraphrases the Chinese Taoist philosopher Zhuangzi when he asks Neo, &quot;Have you ever had a dream, Neo, that you were so sure was real? What if you were unable to wake from that dream? How would you know the difference from the real world and the dream world?&quot;

Matrixism is a fan-based possibly satirical religion created as &quot;the matrix religion&quot;.

=== Transgender themes ===
Years after the release of &quot;The Matrix&quot;, both of the Wachowskis came out as transgender women. The red pill has been compared with red estrogen pills. Morpheus&#x27;s description of the Matrix creating a sense that something is fundamentally wrong, &quot;like a splinter in your mind&quot;, has been compared to gender dysphoria. In the original script, Switch was a woman in the Matrix and a man in the real world, but this idea was removed.

In a 2016 GLAAD Media Awards speech, Lilly Wachowski said: &quot;There&#x27;s a critical eye being cast back on Lana and I&#x27;s work through the lens of our transness. This is a cool thing because it&#x27;s an excellent reminder that art is never static.&quot; In 2020, Lilly said &quot;The Matrix&quot; was intended as an allegory for gender transition, but that &quot;the corporate world wasn&#x27;t ready&quot;. She said it was &quot;all about the desire for transformation but it was all coming from a closeted point of view&quot;, but that she did not know &quot;how present my transness was in the background of my brain&quot; when the Wachowskis were writing it. In an interview with &quot;Variety&quot; in 2020, Reeves said the idea that the Matrix was an allegory for transgender identity &quot;wasn&#x27;t introduced to me when we started for production on the films.&quot;

== Legacy ==

===Filmmaking===
Following &quot;The Matrix&quot;, films made abundant use of slow motion, spinning cameras, and, often, the bullet time effect of a character freezing or slowing down and the camera dollying around them. The ability to slow down time enough to distinguish the motion of bullets was used as a central gameplay mechanic of several video games, including &quot;Max Payne&quot;, in which the feature was explicitly referred to as &quot;bullet time&quot;. It was also the defining game mechanic of the game &quot;Superhot&quot; and its sequels. &quot;The Matrix&quot;″s signature special effect, and other aspects of the film, have been parodied numerous times, in comedy films such as &quot;Deuce Bigalow: Male Gigolo&quot; (1999), &quot;Scary Movie&quot; (2000), &quot;Shrek&quot; (2001), &quot;Kung Pow! Enter the Fist&quot; (2002), &quot;Lastikman&quot; (2003); &quot;Marx Reloaded&quot; in which the relationship between Neo and Morpheus is represented as an imaginary encounter between Karl Marx and Leon Trotsky; and in video games such as &quot;Conker&#x27;s Bad Fur Day&quot;. It also inspired films featuring a black-clad hero, a sexy yet deadly heroine, and bullets ripping slowly through the air; these included &quot;Charlie&#x27;s Angels&quot; (2000) featuring Cameron Diaz floating through the air while the cameras flo-mo around her; &quot;Equilibrium&quot; (2002), starring Christian Bale, whose character wore long black leather coats like Reeves&#x27; Neo; &quot;Night Watch&quot; (2004), a Russian megahit heavily influenced by &quot;The Matrix&quot; and directed by Timur Bekmambetov, who later made &quot;Wanted&quot; (2008), which also features bullets ripping through air; and &quot;Inception&quot; (2010), which centers on a team of sharply dressed rogues who are able to enter other people&#x27;s dreams by &quot;wiring in&quot;. The original &quot;Tron&quot; (1982) paved the way for &quot;The Matrix&quot;, and &quot;The Matrix&quot;, in turn, inspired Disney to make its own Matrix with a &quot;Tron&quot; sequel, &quot;&quot; (2010). Also, the film&#x27;s lobby shootout sequence was recreated in the 2002 Indian action comedy &quot;Awara Paagal Deewana&quot;.

===Choreographers and actors===
&quot;The Matrix&quot; had a strong effect on action filmmaking in Hollywood. The film&#x27;s incorporation of wire fu techniques, including the involvement of fight choreographer Yuen Woo-ping and other personnel with a background in Hong Kong action cinema, affected the approaches to fight scenes taken by some subsequent Hollywood action films, moving them towards more Eastern approaches. The success of &quot;The Matrix&quot; created high demand for those choreographers and their techniques from other filmmakers, who wanted fights of similar sophistication: for example, wire work was employed in &quot;X-Men&quot; (2000) and &quot;Charlie&#x27;s Angels&quot; (2000), and Yuen Woo-ping&#x27;s brother Yuen Cheung-yan was choreographer on &quot;Daredevil&quot; (2003). &quot;The Matrix&quot;″s Asian approach to action scenes also created an audience for Asian action films such as &quot;Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon&quot; (2000) that they might not otherwise have had.

Chad Stahelski, who had been a stunt double on &quot;The Matrix&quot; prior to directing Reeves in the &quot;John Wick&quot; series, acknowledged the film&#x27;s strong influence on the &quot;Wick&quot; films, and commented, &quot;&quot;The Matrix&quot; literally changed the industry. The influx of martial-arts choreographers and fight coordinators now make more, and are more prevalent and powerful in the industry, than stunt coordinators. &quot;The Matrix&quot; revolutionized that. Today, action movies want their big sequences designed around the fights.&quot;

Carrie-Anne Moss asserted that prior to being cast in &quot;The Matrix&quot;, she had &quot;no career&quot;. It launched Moss into international recognition and transformed her career; in a &quot;New York Daily News&quot; interview, she stated, &quot;&quot;The Matrix&quot; gave me so many opportunities. Everything I&#x27;ve done since then has been because of that experience. It gave me so much&quot;. The film also created one of the most devoted movie fan-followings since &quot;Star Wars&quot;. The combined success of the &quot;Matrix&quot; trilogy, the &quot;Lord of the Rings&quot; films and the &quot;Star Wars&quot; prequels made Hollywood interested in creating trilogies. Stephen Dowling from the BBC noted that &quot;The Matrix&quot;″s success in taking complex philosophical ideas and presenting them in ways palatable for impressionable minds might be its most influential aspect.

===Cultural impact===
&quot;The Matrix&quot; was also influential for its impact on superhero films. John Kenneth Muir in &quot;The Encyclopedia of Superheroes on Film and Television&quot; called the film a &quot;revolutionary&quot; reimagination of movie visuals, paving the way for the visuals of later superhero films, and credits it with helping to &quot;make comic-book superheroes hip&quot; and effectively demonstrating the concept of &quot;faster than a speeding bullet&quot; with its bullet time effect. Adam Sternbergh of &quot;Vulture.com&quot; credits &quot;The Matrix&quot; with reinventing and setting the template for modern superhero blockbusters, and inspiring the superhero renaissance in the early 21st century.

===Modern reception===
In 2001, &quot;The Matrix&quot; placed 66th in the American Film Institute&#x27;s &quot;100 Years...100 Thrills&quot; list. In 2007, &quot;Entertainment Weekly&quot; called &quot;The Matrix&quot; the best science-fiction piece of media for the past 25 years. In 2009, the film was ranked 39th on &quot;Empire&quot;″s reader-, actor- and critic-voted list of &quot;The 500 Greatest Movies of All Time&quot;. &quot;The Matrix&quot; was voted as the fourth best science fiction film in the 2011 list &quot;Best in Film: The Greatest Movies of Our Time&quot;, based on a poll conducted by ABC and &quot;People&quot;. In 2012, the film was selected for preservation in the National Film Registry by the Library of Congress for being &quot;culturally, historically, and aesthetically significant.&quot;

=== Red pill and blue pill ===

The premise of &quot;The Matrix&quot; has been repurposed for multiple conspiracy theories and alt-right fringe groups. For example, some online men&#x27;s rights groups use the term &quot;redpill&quot; to mean men realizing that they are supposedly being subjugated by feminism. The term has been used in discussion forums for right-wing topics such as Gamergate, white supremacy, incel subculture and QAnon. As of 2021, the verb &quot;pill&quot; and suffix &quot;-pilled&quot; had entered more mainstream use and had come to mean developing a sudden interest in something.

===Sequels and adaptations===

The film&#x27;s mainstream success led to the making of two sequels, &quot;The Matrix Reloaded&quot; and &quot;The Matrix Revolutions&quot;, both directed by the Wachowskis. These were filmed back-to-back in one shoot and released on separate dates in 2003. The first film&#x27;s introductory tale is succeeded by the story of the impending attack on the human enclave of Zion by a vast machine army. The sequels also incorporate longer and more ambitious action scenes, as well as improvements in bullet time and other visual effects.

Also released was &quot;The Animatrix&quot;, a collection of nine animated short films, many of which were created in the same Japanese animation style that was a strong influence on the live action trilogy. &quot;The Animatrix&quot; was overseen and approved by the Wachowskis, who only wrote four of the segments themselves but did not direct any of them; much of the project was developed by notable figures from the world of anime.

In March 2017, Warner Bros. was in early stages of developing a relaunch of the franchise with Zak Penn in talks to write a treatment and interest in getting Michael B. Jordan attached to star. According to &quot;The Hollywood Reporter&quot; neither the Wachowskis nor Joel Silver were involved with the endeavor, although the studio would like to get at minimum the blessing of the Wachowskis. On August 20, 2019, Warner Bros. Pictures Group chairman Toby Emmerich officially announced that a fourth Matrix film was in the works, with Keanu Reeves and Carrie-Anne Moss set to reprise their roles as Neo and Trinity, respectively. &quot;The Matrix Resurrections&quot; was released in theaters and on HBO Max on December 22, 2021.

In September 2022, Danny Boyle was announced to be directing and producing a live immersive dance production of the film, entitled &quot;Free Your Mind&quot;, which debuted in October 2023 at the &quot;Aviva Studios&quot; in Manchester, England.

==See also==

* Cyberspace
* Henosis
* Know thyself
* List of films featuring hallucinogens
* Metaverse
* Simulated reality
* Thought experiment
* Virtual reality
* Virtual world

;TV
* &quot;The Deadly Assassin&quot;, 1976 episode of Doctor Who in a virtual reality called the &quot;Matrix&quot;
;Films

* &quot;World on a Wire&quot;, 1973 German science fiction series
* &quot;Tron&quot;, 1982 film
* &quot;Strange Days&quot;, 1995 film
* &quot;Dark City&quot;, 1998 film
* &quot;The Thirteenth Floor&quot;, 1999 film
* &quot;Existenz&quot;, 1999 film
* &quot;Computer Boy&quot;, 2000 parody
* &quot;The Meatrix&quot;, 2003 parody
* &quot;Code Lyoko&quot;, 2003 French animated series
* &quot;Infinity Train&quot;, 2019 American animated series
==Notes==
==References==
==Bibliography==
*
*
*
*

== External links ==
* whatisthematrix.com, the first and original Matrix website
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q471839" start="21" end="36" title="science fiction film" label="science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q188473" start="37" end="48" title="action film" label="action film"/>
<link wikidata="Q195719" start="73" end="87" title="the Wachowskis" label="the Wachowskis"/>
<link wikidata="Q13014087" start="124" end="154" title="The Matrix (franchise)" label="&amp;quot;Matrix&amp;quot; film series"/>
<link wikidata="Q43416" start="165" end="177" title="Keanu Reeves" label="Keanu Reeves"/>
<link wikidata="Q193048" start="179" end="197" title="Laurence Fishburne" label="Laurence Fishburne"/>
<link wikidata="Q206890" start="199" end="215" title="Carrie-Anne Moss" label="Carrie-Anne Moss"/>
<link wikidata="Q42204" start="217" end="229" title="Hugo Weaving" label="Hugo Weaving"/>
<link wikidata="Q296883" start="235" end="249" title="Joe Pantoliano" label="Joe Pantoliano"/>
<link wikidata="Q180774" start="264" end="272" title="dystopia" label="dystopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q125547326" start="343" end="360" title="simulated reality" label="simulated reality"/>
<link wikidata="Q11660" start="372" end="392" title="artificial intelligence" label="intelligent machines"/>
<link wikidata="Q247120" start="420" end="423" title="Neo (The Matrix)" label="Neo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750842" start="477" end="485" title="Morpheus (The Matrix)" label="Morpheus"/>
<link wikidata="Q864930" start="564" end="581" title="Bound (1996 film)" label="&amp;quot;Bound&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q126399" start="590" end="602" title="Warner Bros." label="Warner Bros."/>
<link wikidata="Q1107" start="751" end="756" title="anime" label="anime"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033891" start="761" end="778" title="martial arts film" label="martial arts film"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020604" start="795" end="815" title="Fight choreography" label="fight choreographers"/>
<link wikidata="Q964061" start="820" end="827" title="wire fu" label="wire fu"/>
<link wikidata="Q845641" start="844" end="867" title="Hong Kong action cinema" label="Hong Kong action cinema"/>
<link wikidata="Q22738" start="895" end="912" title="Allegory of the cave" label="Plato&amp;#x27;s cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q160470" start="923" end="929" title="Telnet" label="Telnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7305365" start="989" end="997" title="red pill" label="red pill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1004422" start="1046" end="1057" title="bullet time" label="bullet time"/>
<link wikidata="Q260899" start="1162" end="1166" title="Shot (filmmaking)" label="shot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1899749" start="1182" end="1193" title="slow motion" label="slow motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q754017" start="1633" end="1674" title="1999 in film" label="fourth-highest-grossing film of that year"/>
<link wikidata="Q429319" start="1713" end="1732" title="72nd Academy Awards" label="72nd Academy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q393686" start="1737" end="1756" title="Academy Award for Best Visual Effects" label="Best Visual Effects"/>
<link wikidata="Q281939" start="1758" end="1775" title="Academy Award for Best Film Editing" label="Best Film Editing"/>
<link wikidata="Q830079" start="1777" end="1787" title="Academy Award for Best Sound" label="Best Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q830079" start="1792" end="1810" title="Academy Award for Best Sound" label="Best Sound Editing"/>
<link wikidata="Q739633" start="1912" end="1922" title="BAFTA Award for Best Sound" label="Best Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q787127" start="1927" end="1954" title="BAFTA Award for Best Special Visual Effects" label="Best Special Visual Effects"/>
<link wikidata="Q2609762" start="1962" end="1994" title="53rd British Academy Film Awards" label="53rd British Academy Film Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265702" start="2028" end="2041" title="Saturn Award for Best Director" label="Best Director"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131772" start="2046" end="2071" title="Saturn Award for Best Science Fiction Film" label="Best Science Fiction Film"/>
<link wikidata="Q741000" start="2079" end="2097" title="26th Saturn Awards" label="26th Saturn Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q823422" start="2269" end="2291" title="National Film Registry" label="National Film Registry"/>
<link wikidata="Q131454" start="2299" end="2318" title="Library of Congress" label="Library of Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q189600" start="2490" end="2509" title="The Matrix Reloaded" label="The Matrix Reloaded"/>
<link wikidata="Q207536" start="2526" end="2548" title="The Matrix Revolutions" label="The Matrix Revolutions"/>
<link wikidata="Q336144" start="2677" end="2691" title="anthology film" label="anthology film"/>
<link wikidata="Q335340" start="2699" end="2712" title="The Animatrix" label="The Animatrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q80322391" start="2932" end="2956" title="The Matrix Resurrections" label="The Matrix Resurrections"/>
<link wikidata="Q195719" start="2983" end="2997" title="Lana Wachowski" label="Lana Wachowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q247120" start="3115" end="3118" title="Neo (The Matrix)" label="Neo"/>
<link wikidata="Q246835" start="3245" end="3252" title="Trinity (The Matrix)" label="Trinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750842" start="3287" end="3295" title="Morpheus (The Matrix)" label="Morpheus"/>
<link wikidata="Q246882" start="3376" end="3382" title="Agent (The Matrix)" label="Agents"/>
<link wikidata="Q2085488" start="3390" end="3401" title="Agent Smith" label="Agent Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q246870" start="5590" end="5600" title="The Oracle (The Matrix)" label="the Oracle"/>
<link wikidata="Q43416" start="7397" end="7409" title="Keanu Reeves" label="Keanu Reeves"/>
<link wikidata="Q247120" start="7413" end="7416" title="Neo (The Matrix)" label="Neo"/>
<link wikidata="Q40096" start="7648" end="7658" title="Will Smith" label="Will Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q740528" start="7701" end="7715" title="Wild Wild West" label="Wild Wild West"/>
<link wikidata="Q42869" start="7992" end="8004" title="Nicolas Cage" label="Nicolas Cage"/>
<link wikidata="Q35332" start="8094" end="8103" title="Brad Pitt" label="Brad Pitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q191084" start="8107" end="8117" title="Val Kilmer" label="Val Kilmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q38111" start="8152" end="8169" title="Leonardo DiCaprio" label="Leonardo DiCaprio"/>
<link wikidata="Q44578" start="8302" end="8309" title="Titanic (1997 film)" label="Titanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q37175" start="8369" end="8380" title="Johnny Depp" label="Johnny Depp"/>
<link wikidata="Q636664" start="8417" end="8439" title="Lorenzo di Bonaventura" label="Lorenzo di Bonaventura"/>
<link wikidata="Q40791" start="8484" end="8498" title="Sandra Bullock" label="Sandra Bullock"/>
<link wikidata="Q193048" start="8551" end="8569" title="Laurence Fishburne" label="Laurence Fishburne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750842" start="8573" end="8581" title="Morpheus (The Matrix)" label="Morpheus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2528136" start="8933" end="8941" title="Dream (comics)" label="Morpheus"/>
<link wikidata="Q210059" start="8945" end="8956" title="Neil Gaiman" label="Neil Gaiman"/>
<link wikidata="Q827099" start="8970" end="8977" title="The Sandman (comic book)" label="Sandman"/>
<link wikidata="Q83492" start="8992" end="9003" title="Gary Oldman" label="Gary Oldman"/>
<link wikidata="Q172678" start="9005" end="9022" title="Samuel L. Jackson" label="Samuel L. Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q191084" start="9027" end="9037" title="Val Kilmer" label="Val Kilmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q206890" start="9075" end="9091" title="Carrie-Anne Moss" label="Carrie-Anne Moss"/>
<link wikidata="Q246835" start="9095" end="9102" title="Trinity (The Matrix)" label="Trinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q131324" start="9764" end="9777" title="Janet Jackson" label="Janet Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q906096" start="10089" end="10099" title="Discipline (Janet Jackson album)" label="Discipline"/>
<link wikidata="Q40791" start="10107" end="10121" title="Sandra Bullock" label="Sandra Bullock"/>
<link wikidata="Q234076" start="10236" end="10247" title="Rosie Perez" label="Rosie Perez"/>
<link wikidata="Q125106" start="10249" end="10260" title="Salma Hayek" label="Salma Hayek"/>
<link wikidata="Q228787" start="10265" end="10283" title="Jada Pinkett Smith" label="Jada Pinkett Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294528" start="10306" end="10311" title="Niobe (The Matrix)" label="Niobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q42204" start="10354" end="10366" title="Hugo Weaving" label="Hugo Weaving"/>
<link wikidata="Q2085488" start="10370" end="10381" title="Agent Smith" label="Agent Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q43697" start="10981" end="10990" title="Jean Reno" label="Jean Reno"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="11048" end="11057" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q296883" start="11079" end="11093" title="Joe Pantoliano" label="Joe Pantoliano"/>
<link wikidata="Q864930" start="11435" end="11440" title="Bound (1996 film)" label="Bound"/>
<link wikidata="Q1236595" start="11449" end="11461" title="Marcus Chong" label="Marcus Chong"/>
<link wikidata="Q2424724" start="11648" end="11658" title="Matt Doran" label="Matt Doran"/>
<link wikidata="Q21870719" start="11736" end="11746" title="Rowan Witt" label="Rowan Witt"/>
<link wikidata="Q455234" start="11995" end="12008" title="Gloria Foster" label="Gloria Foster"/>
<link wikidata="Q246870" start="12012" end="12022" title="The Oracle (The Matrix)" label="The Oracle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3324448" start="12124" end="12142" title="Anthony Ray Parker" label="Anthony Ray Parker"/>
<link wikidata="Q6306950" start="12267" end="12282" title="Julian Arahanga" label="Julian Arahanga"/>
<link wikidata="Q4882899" start="12360" end="12375" title="Belinda McClory" label="Belinda McClory"/>
<link wikidata="Q3391203" start="12468" end="12480" title="Paul Goddard (actor)" label="Paul Goddard"/>
<link wikidata="Q944529" start="12645" end="12658" title="Robert Taylor (Australian actor)" label="Robert Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2616690" start="12822" end="12835" title="Ada Nicodemou" label="Ada Nicodemou"/>
<link wikidata="Q178776" start="12866" end="12878" title="White Rabbit" label="White Rabbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q92640" start="12888" end="12925" title="Alice&amp;#x27;s Adventures in Wonderland" label="Alice&amp;#x27;s Adventures in Wonderland"/>
<link wikidata="Q739498" start="13036" end="13045" title="Assassins (1995 film)" label="Assassins"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016302" start="13055" end="13076" title="Warner Bros. Pictures" label="Warner Bros. Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q636664" start="13084" end="13106" title="Lorenzo di Bonaventura" label="Lorenzo di Bonaventura"/>
<link wikidata="Q864930" start="13250" end="13255" title="Bound (1996 film)" label="Bound"/>
<link wikidata="Q40096" start="13705" end="13715" title="Will Smith" label="Will Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q866" start="13740" end="13747" title="YouTube" label="YouTube"/>
<link wikidata="Q191084" start="13828" end="13838" title="Val Kilmer" label="Val Kilmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q740528" start="13954" end="13968" title="Wild Wild West" label="Wild Wild West"/>
<link wikidata="Q539718" start="13986" end="13997" title="Joel Silver" label="Joel Silver"/>
<link wikidata="Q528982" start="14361" end="14372" title="Geof Darrow" label="Geof Darrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q7613947" start="14377" end="14389" title="Steve Skroce" label="Steve Skroce"/>
<link wikidata="Q622668" start="14660" end="14685" title="Village Roadshow Pictures" label="Village Roadshow Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q139384" start="14707" end="14721" title="Zach Staenberg" label="Zach Staenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q182847" start="15111" end="15127" title="Jean Baudrillard" label="Jean Baudrillard"/>
<link wikidata="Q904403" start="15141" end="15165" title="Simulacra and Simulation" label="Simulacra and Simulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2707355" start="15327" end="15338" title="Kevin Kelly (editor)" label="Kevin Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="" start="15352" end="15435" title="Out of Control: The New Biology of Machines, Social Systems, and the Economic World" label="Out of Control: The New Biology of Machines, Social Systems, and the Economic World"/>
<link wikidata="Q5318715" start="15447" end="15458" title="Dylan Evans" label="Dylan Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q219695" start="15475" end="15498" title="evolutionary psychology" label="evolutionary psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q845641" start="15716" end="15739" title="Hong Kong action cinema" label="Hong Kong action cinema"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020604" start="15777" end="15803" title="fight choreography" label="martial arts choreographer"/>
<link wikidata="Q460297" start="15822" end="15835" title="Yuen Woo-ping" label="Yuen Woo-ping"/>
<link wikidata="Q964061" start="15880" end="15887" title="wire fu" label="wire fu"/>
<link wikidata="Q32333487" start="16957" end="16968" title="Hip replacement" label="hip surgery"/>
<link wikidata="Q919514" start="17080" end="17091" title="Fox Studios Australia" label="Fox Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224" start="17268" end="17283" title="New South Wales" label="New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256415" start="17375" end="17396" title="principal photography" label="principal photography"/>
<link wikidata="Q3699365" start="17442" end="17456" title="Culver Studios" label="Culver Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q761633" start="17841" end="17860" title="Martin Place, Sydney" label="Martin Place&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1004422" start="18090" end="18101" title="bullet time" label="bullet time"/>
<link wikidata="Q677085" start="18178" end="18186" title="NortonLifeLock" label="Symantec"/>
<link wikidata="Q7649491" start="18233" end="18246" title="Sussex Street, Sydney" label="Sussex Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127281" start="18476" end="18485" title="Dark City (1998 film)" label="Dark City"/>
<link wikidata="Q203609" start="18997" end="19001" title="Dōjō" label="dojo"/>
<link wikidata="Q928830" start="19678" end="19692" title="Metro station" label="subway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q22277301" start="19935" end="19949" title="Chad Stahelski" label="Chad Stahelski"/>
<link wikidata="Q1974017" start="20017" end="20028" title="Rib fracture" label="broken ribs"/>
<link wikidata="Q475433" start="20042" end="20061" title="dislocated shoulder" label="dislocated shoulder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147753" start="20317" end="20326" title="cyclorama" label="cyclorama"/>
<link wikidata="Q16198174" start="21012" end="21025" title="Dane A. Davis" label="Dane A. Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q492264" start="21351" end="21356" title="film score" label="score"/>
<link wikidata="" start="21358" end="21399" title="The Matrix: Original Motion Picture Score" label="The Matrix: Original Motion Picture Score"/>
<link wikidata="Q207859" start="21417" end="21426" title="Don Davis (composer)" label="Don Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q186393" start="21953" end="21965" title="Counterpoint" label="contrapuntal"/>
<link wikidata="" start="22204" end="22245" title="The Matrix: Music from the Motion Picture" label="The Matrix: Music from the Motion Picture"/>
<link wikidata="Q25177" start="22284" end="22293" title="Rammstein" label="Rammstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q963350" start="22295" end="22305" title="Rob Dougan" label="Rob Dougan"/>
<link wikidata="Q72092" start="22307" end="22331" title="Rage Against the Machine" label="Rage Against the Machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426055" start="22333" end="22347" title="Propellerheads" label="Propellerheads"/>
<link wikidata="Q425772" start="22349" end="22357" title="Ministry (band)" label="Ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1990246" start="22359" end="22371" title="Lunatic Calm" label="Lunatic Calm"/>
<link wikidata="Q485039" start="22373" end="22381" title="Deftones" label="Deftones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430616" start="22383" end="22397" title="Monster Magnet" label="Monster Magnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7256860" start="22399" end="22410" title="The Prodigy" label="The Prodigy"/>
<link wikidata="Q298255" start="22412" end="22422" title="Rob Zombie" label="Rob Zombie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366325" start="22424" end="22443" title="Meat Beat Manifesto" label="Meat Beat Manifesto"/>
<link wikidata="Q485893" start="22448" end="22462" title="Marilyn Manson (band)" label="Marilyn Manson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5641637" start="22703" end="22718" title="half-width kana" label="half-width kana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544247" start="22800" end="22804" title="CNET" label="CNET"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133650" start="23047" end="23075" title="monochrome monitor" label="monochrome computer monitors"/>
<link wikidata="Q547341" start="23134" end="23146" title="Animal Logic" label="Animal Logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4538441" start="23396" end="23414" title="Japanese cyberpunk" label="Japanese cyberpunk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066948" start="23427" end="23445" title="Ghost in the Shell (1995 film)" label="Ghost in the Shell"/>
<link wikidata="" start="23604" end="23627" title="The Matrix: Path of Neo" label="The Matrix: Path of Neo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2962070" start="23884" end="23901" title="production design" label="production design"/>
<link wikidata="Q345827" start="23905" end="23918" title="Owen Paterson (production designer)" label="Owen Paterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1963652" start="24635" end="24649" title="Nebuchadnezzar (The Matrix)" label="Nebuchadnezzar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092" start="24793" end="24802" title="Star Trek" label="Star Trek"/>
<link wikidata="Q3200949" start="25263" end="25274" title="Kym Barrett" label="Kym Barrett"/>
<link wikidata="Q741823" start="26131" end="26134" title="JFK (film)" label="JFK"/>
<link wikidata="Q51410" start="26153" end="26165" title="men in black" label="men in black"/>
<link wikidata="Q8317" start="26382" end="26395" title="visual effect" label="visual effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q1004422" start="26411" end="26422" title="bullet time" label="bullet time"/>
<link wikidata="Q260899" start="26445" end="26449" title="shot (filmmaking)" label="shot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1899749" start="26465" end="26476" title="slow motion" label="slow motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q11305" start="26966" end="26976" title="John Gaeta" label="John Gaeta"/>
<link wikidata="Q6748456" start="27033" end="27046" title="Manex Visual Effects" label="Mass.Illusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7242432" start="27880" end="27893" title="Previsualization" label="previsualized"/>
<link wikidata="Q119565" start="28223" end="28238" title="frame frequency" label="frame frequency"/>
<link wikidata="Q736111" start="28920" end="28932" title="optical flow" label="optical flow"/>
<link wikidata="Q206637" start="29206" end="29213" title="cluster (computing)" label="cluster"/>
<link wikidata="Q14656" start="29231" end="29240" title="Unix-like" label="Unix-like"/>
<link wikidata="Q9135" start="29241" end="29257" title="operating system" label="operating system"/>
<link wikidata="Q34236" start="29258" end="29265" title="FreeBSD" label="FreeBSD"/>
<link wikidata="Q547341" start="29407" end="29419" title="Animal Logic" label="Animal Logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q190149" start="30095" end="30110" title="Photogrammetry" label="photogrammetric"/>
<link wikidata="Q6002306" start="30127" end="30145" title="computer-generated imagery" label="computer-generated"/>
<link wikidata="Q189600" start="30263" end="30282" title="The Matrix Reloaded" label="The Matrix Reloaded"/>
<link wikidata="Q207536" start="30299" end="30321" title="The Matrix Revolutions" label="The Matrix Revolutions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063273" start="30993" end="30996" title="DVD-Video" label="DVD"/>
<link wikidata="Q273309" start="31001" end="31010" title="Laserdisc" label="Laserdisc"/>
<link wikidata="Q3420076" start="31027" end="31039" title="aspect ratio" label="aspect ratio"/>
<link wikidata="" start="31043" end="31049" title="2.39:1" label="2.39:1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188361" start="31088" end="31105" title="Warner Home Video" label="Warner Home Video"/>
<link wikidata="Q1441762" start="31120" end="31126" title="Aspect ratio (image)" label="1.33:1"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="31143" end="31152" title="Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q183976" start="31206" end="31209" title="VHS" label="VHS"/>
<link wikidata="Q20970432" start="31218" end="31229" title="Fullscreen (filmmaking)" label="full screen"/>
<link wikidata="Q752245" start="31234" end="31244" title="widescreen" label="widescreen"/>
<link wikidata="Q128518" start="31587" end="31596" title="Gladiator (2000 film)" label="Gladiator"/>
<link wikidata="Q208344" start="31909" end="31919" title="Armageddon (1998 film)" label="Armageddon"/>
<link wikidata="Q13014087" start="31988" end="32018" title="The Ultimate Matrix Collection" label="The Ultimate Matrix Collection"/>
<link wikidata="Q178990" start="32035" end="32041" title="HD DVD" label="HD DVD"/>
<link wikidata="Q47770" start="32060" end="32067" title="Blu-ray" label="Blu-ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q238162" start="32488" end="32490" title="4K resolution" label="4K"/>
<link wikidata="Q19953724" start="32491" end="32507" title="Ultra HD Blu-ray" label="Ultra HD Blu-ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q736528" start="32600" end="32616" title="Enter the Matrix" label="Enter the Matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q189600" start="32744" end="32763" title="The Matrix Reloaded" label="The Matrix Reloaded"/>
<link wikidata="Q959892" start="32777" end="32794" title="The Matrix Online" label="The Matrix Online"/>
<link wikidata="Q175173" start="32812" end="32818" title="MMORPG" label="MMORPG"/>
<link wikidata="" start="32894" end="32917" title="The Matrix: Path of Neo" label="The Matrix: Path of Neo"/>
<link wikidata="Q109965238" start="33008" end="33026" title="The Matrix Awakens" label="The Matrix Awakens"/>
<link wikidata="Q739711" start="33100" end="33110" title="Epic Games" label="Epic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q94277753" start="33129" end="33144" title="Unreal Engine 5" label="Unreal Engine 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q4284930" start="33187" end="33204" title="The Matrix Comics" label="The Matrix Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760610" start="33224" end="33230" title="comic book" label="comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243552" start="33526" end="33541" title="Trade paperback (comics)" label="trade paperback"/>
<link wikidata="Q502908" start="33789" end="33802" title="Lost in Space (film)" label="Lost in Space"/>
<link wikidata="Q603448" start="33819" end="33836" title="Indecent Proposal" label="Indecent Proposal"/>
<link wikidata="Q21196" start="33887" end="33893" title="Easter" label="Easter"/>
<link wikidata="Q48980" start="34014" end="34023" title="Liar Liar" label="Liar Liar"/>
<link wikidata="Q461682" start="34172" end="34189" title="The Scorpion King" label="The Scorpion King"/>
<link wikidata="Q741042" start="34206" end="34216" title="Panic Room" label="Panic Room"/>
<link wikidata="Q279057" start="34329" end="34336" title="Payback (1999 film)" label="Payback"/>
<link wikidata="Q43416" start="34401" end="34413" title="Keanu Reeves" label="Keanu Reeves"/>
<link wikidata="Q108006" start="34431" end="34436" title="Speed (1994 film)" label="Speed"/>
<link wikidata="Q40182" start="34548" end="34564" title="Forces of Nature (1999 film)" label="Forces of Nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q169082" start="34578" end="34604" title="10 Things I Hate About You" label="10 Things I Hate About You"/>
<link wikidata="Q683129" start="34618" end="34636" title="The Out-of-Towners (1999 film)" label="The Out-of-Towners"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141746" start="34650" end="34662" title="Analyze This" label="Analyze This"/>
<link wikidata="Q386291" start="34679" end="34683" title="EDtv" label="EDtv"/>
<link wikidata="Q1534737" start="34788" end="34792" title="Life (1999 film)" label="Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q578873" start="34948" end="34958" title="Entrapment (film)" label="Entrapment"/>
<link wikidata="Q126399" start="35100" end="35112" title="Warner Bros." label="Warner Bros."/>
<link wikidata="Q221345" start="35132" end="35146" title="Batman Forever" label="Batman Forever"/>
<link wikidata="Q276523" start="35163" end="35181" title="Batman &amp;amp; Robin (film)" label="Batman &amp;amp; Robin"/>
<link wikidata="Q216153" start="35270" end="35287" title="A Bug&amp;#x27;s Life" label="A Bug&amp;#x27;s Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q200672" start="35304" end="35316" title="Notting Hill (film)" label="Notting Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="35502" end="35515" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="" start="35706" end="35747" title="Star Wars: Episode I – The Phantom Menace" label="Star Wars: Episode I – The Phantom Menace"/>
<link wikidata="Q183063" start="35761" end="35776" title="The Sixth Sense" label="The Sixth Sense"/>
<link wikidata="Q187266" start="35793" end="35804" title="Toy Story 2" label="Toy Story 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q683663" start="35914" end="35921" title="Twister (1996 film)" label="Twister"/>
<link wikidata="Q165817" start="36015" end="36034" title="Saving Private Ryan" label="Saving Private Ryan"/>
<link wikidata="" start="36051" end="36077" title="Terminator 2: Judgment Day" label="Terminator 2: Judgment Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q471839" start="36671" end="36691" title="science fiction film" label="science fiction film"/>
<link wikidata="Q275033" start="36712" end="36732" title="Entertainment Weekly" label="Entertainment Weekly"/>
<link wikidata="Q8013109" start="36884" end="36897" title="William Irwin (philosopher)" label="William Irwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3491832" start="36992" end="37009" title="review aggregator" label="review aggregator"/>
<link wikidata="Q105584" start="37010" end="37025" title="Rotten Tomatoes" label="Rotten Tomatoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q150248" start="37345" end="37355" title="Metacritic" label="Metacritic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2972775" start="37552" end="37563" title="CinemaScore" label="CinemaScore"/>
<link wikidata="Q4835528" start="37699" end="37771" title="The Sight &amp;amp; Sound Top 50 Greatest Films of All Time" label="2012 &amp;quot;Sight &amp;amp; Sound&amp;quot; polls of the greatest films ever made"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546271" start="37807" end="37824" title="Sight &amp;amp; Sound" label="Sight &amp;amp; Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q212173" start="38022" end="38033" title="Roger Ebert" label="Roger Ebert"/>
<link wikidata="Q2783382" start="38138" end="38147" title="Three-act structure" label="third act"/>
<link wikidata="Q25039753" start="38189" end="38197" title="Time Out Group" label="Time Out"/>
<link wikidata="Q42204" start="38291" end="38303" title="Hugo Weaving" label="Hugo Weaving"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343526" start="38584" end="38602" title="Jonathan Rosenbaum" label="Jonathan Rosenbaum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2076422" start="38616" end="38630" title="Chicago Reader" label="Chicago Reader"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122760" start="38954" end="38960" title="Empire (magazine)" label="Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6737166" start="39445" end="39462" title="Maitland McDonagh" label="Maitland McDonagh"/>
<link wikidata="Q7672340" start="39492" end="39500" title="TV Guide" label="TV Guide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150423" start="39998" end="40003" title="Salon (website)" label="Salon"/>
<link wikidata="Q864930" start="40496" end="40501" title="Bound (1996 film)" label="Bound"/>
<link wikidata="Q188987" start="41073" end="41087" title="William Gibson" label="William Gibson"/>
<link wikidata="Q298025" start="41290" end="41301" title="Joss Whedon" label="Joss Whedon"/>
<link wikidata="Q192762" start="41471" end="41487" title="Darren Aronofsky" label="Darren Aronofsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q51489" start="41811" end="41829" title="M. Night Shyamalan" label="M. Night Shyamalan"/>
<link wikidata="Q238464" start="42025" end="42035" title="Simon Pegg" label="Simon Pegg"/>
<link wikidata="Q165713" start="42127" end="42145" title="The Phantom Menace" label="The Phantom Menace"/>
<link wikidata="Q3772" start="42431" end="42448" title="Quentin Tarantino" label="Quentin Tarantino"/>
<link wikidata="Q42574" start="42536" end="42549" title="James Cameron" label="James Cameron"/>
<link wikidata="Q25191" start="42638" end="42655" title="Christopher Nolan" label="Christopher Nolan"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="42839" end="42853" title="Academy Awards" label="Academy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q281939" start="42858" end="42875" title="Academy Award for Best Film Editing" label="Best Film Editing"/>
<link wikidata="Q830079" start="42877" end="42895" title="Academy Award for Best Sound" label="Best Sound Editing"/>
<link wikidata="Q393686" start="42897" end="42916" title="Academy Award for Best Visual Effects" label="Best Visual Effects"/>
<link wikidata="Q830079" start="42921" end="42931" title="Academy Award for Best Sound" label="Best Sound"/>
<link wikidata="" start="43023" end="43064" title="Star Wars: Episode I – The Phantom Menace" label="Star Wars: Episode I – The Phantom Menace"/>
<link wikidata="Q159661" start="43153" end="43158" title="BAFTA" label="BAFTA"/>
<link wikidata="Q739633" start="43170" end="43180" title="BAFTA Award for Best Sound" label="Best Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q787127" start="43185" end="43227" title="BAFTA Award for Best Special Visual Effects" label="Best Achievement in Special Visual Effects"/>
<link wikidata="Q778870" start="43263" end="43277" title="BAFTA Award for Best Cinematography" label="cinematography"/>
<link wikidata="Q508166" start="43279" end="43296" title="BAFTA Award for Best Production Design" label="production design"/>
<link wikidata="Q787145" start="43301" end="43308" title="BAFTA Award for Best Editing" label="editing"/>
<link wikidata="Q105447" start="43337" end="43350" title="Saturn Awards" label="Saturn Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131772" start="43355" end="43380" title="Saturn Award for Best Science Fiction Film" label="Best Science Fiction Film"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265702" start="43385" end="43399" title="Saturn Award for Best Director" label="Best Direction"/>
<link wikidata="Q212329" start="43503" end="43546" title="Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences" label="Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q66707597" start="43559" end="43578" title="Oscars Fan Favorite" label="Oscars Fan Favorite"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="43880" end="43888" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="43890" end="43902" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q48420" start="43904" end="43914" title="Gnosticism" label="Gnosticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="43916" end="43924" title="Hinduism" label="Hinduism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268" start="43929" end="43936" title="Judaism" label="Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q151599" start="44048" end="44058" title="Metropolis (1927 film)" label="Metropolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470" start="44082" end="44094" title="M. C. Escher" label="M. C. Escher"/>
<link wikidata="Q312640" start="44146" end="44156" title="H.R. Giger" label="H.R. Giger"/>
<link wikidata="Q3567146" start="44208" end="44226" title="Welcome to Paradox" label="Welcome to Paradox"/>
<link wikidata="Q2846765" start="44318" end="44331" title="Andrew Weiner (writer)" label="Andrew Weiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q276542" start="44373" end="44385" title="Syfy (TV channel)" label="SYFY Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001" start="44622" end="44637" title="Stanley Kubrick" label="Stanley Kubrick"/>
<link wikidata="" start="44651" end="44672" title="2001: A Space Odyssey (film)" label="2001: A Space Odyssey"/>
<link wikidata="Q44426" start="44813" end="44837" title="Rainer Werner Fassbinder" label="Rainer Werner Fassbinder"/>
<link wikidata="Q481467" start="44866" end="44881" title="World on a Wire" label="World on a Wire"/>
<link wikidata="Q286725" start="44924" end="44936" title="Simulacron-3" label="Simulacron-3"/>
<link wikidata="Q550529" start="45217" end="45229" title="Strange Days (film)" label="Strange Days"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127281" start="45243" end="45252" title="Dark City (1998 film)" label="Dark City"/>
<link wikidata="Q214801" start="45269" end="45284" title="The Truman Show" label="The Truman Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q34316" start="45387" end="45397" title="Doctor Who" label="Doctor Who"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156741" start="45445" end="45451" title="Matrix (Doctor Who)" label="Matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q5490992" start="45504" end="45523" title="The Deadly Assassin" label="The Deadly Assassin"/>
<link wikidata="Q55432" start="45872" end="45880" title="John Woo" label="John Woo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001759" start="45932" end="45946" title="Fist of Legend" label="Fist of Legend"/>
<link wikidata="Q159577" start="46009" end="46015" title="Jet Li" label="Jet Li"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107" start="46193" end="46211" title="anime" label="Japanese animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052531" start="46226" end="46238" title="Ninja Scroll" label="Ninja Scroll"/>
<link wikidata="Q1905968" start="46255" end="46260" title="Akira (1988 film)" label="Akira"/>
<link wikidata="Q285084" start="46277" end="46289" title="Mamoru Oshii" label="Mamoru Oshii"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066948" start="46322" end="46340" title="Ghost in the Shell (1995 film)" label="Ghost in the Shell"/>
<link wikidata="Q539718" start="46393" end="46404" title="Joel Silver" label="Joel Silver"/>
<link wikidata="Q6883235" start="46573" end="46591" title="Mitsuhisa Ishikawa" label="Mitsuhisa Ishikawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q735670" start="46595" end="46609" title="Production I.G" label="Production I.G"/>
<link wikidata="Q38082" start="47217" end="47230" title="Lewis Carroll" label="Lewis Carroll"/>
<link wikidata="Q92640" start="47244" end="47281" title="Alice&amp;#x27;s Adventures in Wonderland" label="Alice&amp;#x27;s Adventures in Wonderland"/>
<link wikidata="Q943047" start="47324" end="47338" title="Grant Morrison" label="Grant Morrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q92802" start="47365" end="47379" title="The Invisibles" label="The Invisibles"/>
<link wikidata="Q158878" start="47595" end="47611" title="Carlos Castaneda" label="Carlos Castaneda"/>
<link wikidata="Q174526" start="47652" end="47661" title="cyberpunk" label="cyberpunk"/>
<link wikidata="Q662029" start="47759" end="47770" title="Neuromancer" label="Neuromancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q188987" start="47780" end="47794" title="William Gibson" label="William Gibson"/>
<link wikidata="Q94054" start="47904" end="47916" title="L. P. Davies" label="L. P. Davies"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="48030" end="48044" title="The White Room (novel)" label="The White Room"/>
<link wikidata="Q48420" start="48516" end="48523" title="Gnosticism" label="Gnostic"/>
<link wikidata="Q171091" start="48681" end="48695" title="Philip K. Dick" label="Philip K. Dick"/>
<link wikidata="Q182847" start="49183" end="49199" title="Jean Baudrillard" label="Jean Baudrillard"/>
<link wikidata="Q904403" start="49232" end="49256" title="Simulacra and Simulation" label="Simulacra and Simulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5158286" start="49327" end="49357" title="Concealing objects in a book" label="&amp;quot;the book used to conceal"/>
<link wikidata="Q18535" start="49750" end="49758" title="allegory" label="allegory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7750684" start="49902" end="49920" title="The Matrixial Gaze" label="The Matrixial Gaze"/>
<link wikidata="Q516614" start="49974" end="49992" title="Bracha L. Ettinger" label="Bracha L. Ettinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q3108719" start="50157" end="50173" title="Griselda Pollock" label="Griselda Pollock"/>
<link wikidata="Q2707355" start="50324" end="50335" title="Kevin Kelly (editor)" label="Kevin Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="" start="50349" end="50432" title="Out of Control: The New Biology of Machines, Social Systems, and the Economic World" label="Out of Control: The New Biology of Machines, Social Systems, and the Economic World"/>
<link wikidata="Q5318715" start="50444" end="50455" title="Dylan Evans" label="Dylan Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q219695" start="50472" end="50495" title="evolutionary psychology" label="evolutionary psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q8013109" start="50510" end="50523" title="William Irwin (philosopher)" label="William Irwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q9191" start="50646" end="50655" title="Descartes" label="Descartes"/>
<link wikidata="Q605790" start="50668" end="50684" title="First Meditation" label="First Meditation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502279" start="50711" end="50721" title="evil demon" label="evil demon"/>
<link wikidata="Q221697" start="50866" end="50879" title="Hilary Putnam" label="Hilary Putnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q852947" start="50887" end="50901" title="brain in a vat" label="brain in a vat"/>
<link wikidata="Q859" start="50997" end="51002" title="Plato" label="Plato"/>
<link wikidata="Q22738" start="51010" end="51030" title="Allegory of the Cave" label="Allegory of the Cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068658" start="51096" end="51111" title="theory of Forms" label="theory of Forms"/>
<link wikidata="Q9312" start="51346" end="51359" title="Immanuel Kant" label="Immanuel Kant"/>
<link wikidata="Q220002" start="51540" end="51563" title="Critique of Pure Reason" label="Critique of Pure Reason"/>
<link wikidata="Q131156" start="52004" end="52010" title="utopia" label="utopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="52821" end="52827" title="Christ" label="Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q490846" start="52856" end="52868" title="Miraculous births" label="virgin birth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="52948" end="52957" title="Christianity" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q246835" start="53051" end="53058" title="Trinity (The Matrix)" label="Trinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q37090" start="53105" end="53112" title="Trinity" label="Trinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q9598" start="53189" end="53195" title="Taoist" label="Taoist"/>
<link wikidata="Q47739" start="53208" end="53216" title="Zhuang Zhou" label="Zhuangzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6787897" start="53436" end="53445" title="Matrixism" label="Matrixism"/>
<link wikidata="Q189125" start="53647" end="53658" title="transgender" label="transgender"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052281" start="53659" end="53664" title="trans woman" label="women"/>
<link wikidata="Q277954" start="53706" end="53714" title="estrogen" label="estrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049021" start="53883" end="53899" title="gender dysphoria" label="gender dysphoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266111" start="54025" end="54042" title="GLAAD Media Award" label="GLAAD Media Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q471728" start="54714" end="54721" title="Variety (magazine)" label="Variety"/>
<link wikidata="Q1004422" start="55041" end="55052" title="bullet time" label="bullet time"/>
<link wikidata="Q1175156" start="55291" end="55300" title="Max Payne (video game)" label="Max Payne"/>
<link wikidata="Q16267745" start="55441" end="55449" title="Superhot" label="Superhot"/>
<link wikidata="Q170539" start="55565" end="55573" title="parody" label="parodied"/>
<link wikidata="" start="55620" end="55646" title="Deuce Bigalow: Male Gigolo" label="Deuce Bigalow: Male Gigolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q219424" start="55667" end="55678" title="Scary Movie" label="Scary Movie"/>
<link wikidata="Q483815" start="55699" end="55704" title="Shrek" label="Shrek"/>
<link wikidata="Q770850" start="55725" end="55749" title="Kung Pow! Enter the Fist" label="Kung Pow! Enter the Fist"/>
<link wikidata="Q25564469" start="55770" end="55779" title="Lastikman (2003 film)" label="Lastikman"/>
<link wikidata="Q638343" start="55800" end="55813" title="Marx Reloaded" label="Marx Reloaded"/>
<link wikidata="Q9061" start="55920" end="55929" title="Karl Marx" label="Karl Marx"/>
<link wikidata="Q33391" start="55934" end="55946" title="Leon Trotsky" label="Leon Trotsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q841712" start="55981" end="56006" title="Conker&amp;#x27;s Bad Fur Day" label="Conker&amp;#x27;s Bad Fur Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q229599" start="56158" end="56179" title="Charlie&amp;#x27;s Angels (2000 film)" label="Charlie&amp;#x27;s Angels"/>
<link wikidata="Q44380" start="56203" end="56215" title="Cameron Diaz" label="Cameron Diaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q507461" start="56284" end="56295" title="Equilibrium (film)" label="Equilibrium"/>
<link wikidata="Q45772" start="56319" end="56333" title="Christian Bale" label="Christian Bale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045388" start="56410" end="56421" title="Night Watch (2004 film)" label="Night Watch"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="56438" end="56444" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q344854" start="56515" end="56532" title="Timur Bekmambetov" label="Timur Bekmambetov"/>
<link wikidata="Q4444" start="56555" end="56561" title="Wanted (2008 film)" label="Wanted"/>
<link wikidata="Q25188" start="56635" end="56644" title="Inception" label="Inception"/>
<link wikidata="Q626483" start="56803" end="56807" title="Tron" label="Tron"/>
<link wikidata="Q7414" start="56909" end="56915" title="Disney" label="Disney"/>
<link wikidata="Q4829820" start="57091" end="57111" title="Awara Paagal Deewana" label="Awara Paagal Deewana"/>
<link wikidata="Q964061" start="57263" end="57270" title="wire fu" label="wire fu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020604" start="57312" end="57331" title="fight choreography" label="fight choreographer"/>
<link wikidata="Q460297" start="57332" end="57345" title="Yuen Woo-ping" label="Yuen Woo-ping"/>
<link wikidata="Q845641" start="57387" end="57410" title="Hong Kong action cinema" label="Hong Kong action cinema"/>
<link wikidata="Q106182" start="57763" end="57768" title="X-Men (film)" label="X-Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q229599" start="57792" end="57813" title="Charlie&amp;#x27;s Angels (2000 film)" label="Charlie&amp;#x27;s Angels"/>
<link wikidata="Q8060276" start="57861" end="57876" title="Yuen Cheung-yan" label="Yuen Cheung-yan"/>
<link wikidata="Q751805" start="57904" end="57913" title="Daredevil (film)" label="Daredevil"/>
<link wikidata="Q273978" start="58047" end="58077" title="Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon" label="Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q29554576" start="58235" end="58263" title="John Wick" label="&amp;quot;John Wick&amp;quot; series"/>
<link wikidata="Q206890" start="58701" end="58717" title="Carrie-Anne Moss" label="Carrie-Anne Moss"/>
<link wikidata="Q627827" start="58897" end="58916" title="New York Daily News" label="New York Daily News"/>
<link wikidata="Q462" start="59185" end="59194" title="Star Wars" label="Star Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q190214" start="59262" end="59297" title="The Lord of the Rings (film series)" label="&amp;quot;Lord of the Rings&amp;quot; films"/>
<link wikidata="Q25540924" start="59306" end="59336" title="Prequel trilogy" label="&amp;quot;Star Wars&amp;quot; prequels"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="59411" end="59414" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1535153" start="59683" end="59698" title="superhero films" label="superhero films"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760610" start="59963" end="59973" title="comic-book" label="comic-book"/>
<link wikidata="Q188784" start="59974" end="59985" title="superheroes" label="superheroes"/>
<link wikidata="Q27881700" start="60137" end="60148" title="Vulture.com" label="Vulture.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q207460" start="60405" end="60428" title="American Film Institute" label="American Film Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1767231" start="60442" end="60465" title="AFI&amp;#x27;s 100 Years...100 Thrills" label="100 Years...100 Thrills"/>
<link wikidata="Q275033" start="60493" end="60513" title="Entertainment Weekly" label="Entertainment Weekly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122760" start="60656" end="60662" title="Empire (magazine)" label="Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q169889" start="60939" end="60942" title="American Broadcasting Company" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q33659" start="60953" end="60959" title="People (American magazine)" label="People"/>
<link wikidata="Q823422" start="61022" end="61044" title="National Film Registry" label="National Film Registry"/>
<link wikidata="Q131454" start="61052" end="61071" title="Library of Congress" label="Library of Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q159535" start="61255" end="61274" title="conspiracy theories" label="conspiracy theories"/>
<link wikidata="Q23018230" start="61279" end="61288" title="alt-right" label="alt-right"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292853" start="61329" end="61353" title="Men&amp;#x27;s rights" label="men&amp;#x27;s rights groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q18114445" start="61538" end="61547" title="Gamergate (harassment campaign)" label="Gamergate"/>
<link wikidata="Q698752" start="61549" end="61564" title="white supremacy" label="white supremacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q332395" start="61566" end="61571" title="incel" label="incel"/>
<link wikidata="Q51213808" start="61587" end="61592" title="QAnon" label="QAnon"/>
<link wikidata="Q189600" start="61866" end="61885" title="The Matrix Reloaded" label="The Matrix Reloaded"/>
<link wikidata="Q207536" start="61902" end="61924" title="The Matrix Revolutions" label="The Matrix Revolutions"/>
<link wikidata="Q979925" start="61976" end="61995" title="Back to back film production" label="filmed back-to-back"/>
<link wikidata="Q932586" start="62003" end="62008" title="Production (film)" label="shoot"/>
<link wikidata="Q556040" start="62163" end="62167" title="Zion (The Matrix)" label="Zion"/>
<link wikidata="Q335340" start="62352" end="62365" title="The Animatrix" label="The Animatrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107" start="62455" end="62473" title="anime" label="Japanese animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q19031" start="62860" end="62868" title="Zak Penn" label="Zak Penn"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308007" start="62923" end="62940" title="Michael B. Jordan" label="Michael B. Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q61503" start="62978" end="63000" title="The Hollywood Reporter" label="The Hollywood Reporter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1295611" start="63217" end="63230" title="Toby Emmerich" label="Toby Emmerich"/>
<link wikidata="Q80322391" start="63259" end="63277" title="The Matrix Resurrections" label="fourth Matrix film"/>
<link wikidata="Q43416" start="63301" end="63313" title="Keanu Reeves" label="Keanu Reeves"/>
<link wikidata="Q206890" start="63318" end="63334" title="Carrie-Anne Moss" label="Carrie-Anne Moss"/>
<link wikidata="Q80322391" start="63402" end="63426" title="The Matrix Resurrections" label="The Matrix Resurrections"/>
<link wikidata="Q134867" start="63515" end="63526" title="Danny Boyle" label="Danny Boyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q18125" start="63721" end="63731" title="Manchester" label="Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q204606" start="63759" end="63769" title="Cyberspace" label="Cyberspace"/>
<link wikidata="Q5715209" start="63772" end="63779" title="Henosis" label="Henosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q909937" start="63782" end="63794" title="Know thyself" label="Know thyself"/>
<link wikidata="Q17100516" start="63797" end="63834" title="List of films featuring hallucinogens" label="List of films featuring hallucinogens"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632041" start="63837" end="63846" title="Metaverse" label="Metaverse"/>
<link wikidata="Q125547326" start="63849" end="63866" title="Simulated reality" label="Simulated reality"/>
<link wikidata="Q147027" start="63869" end="63887" title="Thought experiment" label="Thought experiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q170519" start="63890" end="63905" title="Virtual reality" label="Virtual reality"/>
<link wikidata="Q444835" start="63908" end="63921" title="Virtual world" label="Virtual world"/>
<link wikidata="Q5490992" start="63935" end="63954" title="The Deadly Assassin" label="The Deadly Assassin"/>
<link wikidata="Q34316" start="63978" end="63988" title="Doctor Who" label="Doctor Who"/>
<link wikidata="Q481467" start="64056" end="64071" title="World on a Wire" label="World on a Wire"/>
<link wikidata="Q626483" start="64122" end="64126" title="Tron (film)" label="Tron"/>
<link wikidata="Q550529" start="64152" end="64164" title="Strange Days (film)" label="Strange Days"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127281" start="64190" end="64199" title="Dark City (1998 film)" label="Dark City"/>
<link wikidata="Q630289" start="64225" end="64245" title="The Thirteenth Floor" label="The Thirteenth Floor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050838" start="64271" end="64279" title="Existenz" label="Existenz"/>
<link wikidata="Q5157420" start="64305" end="64317" title="Computer Boy" label="Computer Boy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326178" start="64345" end="64356" title="The Meatrix" label="The Meatrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q637190" start="64384" end="64394" title="Code Lyoko" label="Code Lyoko"/>
<link wikidata="Q28456334" start="64438" end="64452" title="Infinity Train" label="Infinity Train"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="30010" wikidata="Q721587" url="?curid=30010" title="Telegraphy">
<text>Telegraphy is the long-distance transmission of messages where the sender uses symbolic codes, known to the recipient, rather than a physical exchange of an object bearing the message. Thus flag semaphore is a method of telegraphy, whereas pigeon post is not. Ancient signalling systems, although sometimes quite extensive and sophisticated as in China, were generally not capable of transmitting arbitrary text messages. Possible messages were fixed and predetermined, so such systems are thus not true telegraphs.

The earliest true telegraph put into widespread use was the Chappe telegraph, an optical telegraph invented by Claude Chappe in the late 18th century. The system was used extensively in France, and European nations occupied by France, during the Napoleonic era. The electric telegraph started to replace the optical telegraph in the mid-19th century. It was first taken up in Britain in the form of the Cooke and Wheatstone telegraph, initially used mostly as an aid to railway signalling. This was quickly followed by a different system developed in the United States by Samuel Morse. The electric telegraph was slower to develop in France due to the established optical telegraph system, but an electrical telegraph was put into use with a code compatible with the Chappe optical telegraph. The Morse system was adopted as the international standard in 1865, using a modified Morse code developed in Germany in 1848.

The heliograph is a telegraph system using reflected sunlight for signalling. It was mainly used in areas where the electrical telegraph had not been established and generally used the same code. The most extensive heliograph network established was in Arizona and New Mexico during the Apache Wars. The heliograph was standard military equipment as late as World War II. Wireless telegraphy developed in the early 20th century became important for maritime use, and was a competitor to electrical telegraphy using submarine telegraph cables in international communications.

Telegrams became a popular means of sending messages once telegraph prices had fallen sufficiently. Traffic became high enough to spur the development of automated systems—teleprinters and punched tape transmission. These systems led to new telegraph codes, starting with the Baudot code. However, telegrams were never able to compete with the letter post on price, and competition from the telephone, which removed their speed advantage, drove the telegraph into decline from 1920 onwards. The few remaining telegraph applications were largely taken over by alternatives on the internet towards the end of the 20th century.

== Terminology ==

The word &quot;telegraph&quot; (from Ancient Greek: () &#x27;at a distance&#x27; and () &#x27;to write&#x27;) was coined by the French inventor of the semaphore telegraph, Claude Chappe, who also coined the word &quot;semaphore&quot;.

A telegraph is a device for transmitting and receiving messages over long distances, i.e., for telegraphy. The word &quot;telegraph&quot; alone generally refers to an electrical telegraph. Wireless telegraphy is transmission of messages over radio with telegraphic codes.

Contrary to the extensive definition used by Chappe, Morse argued that the term &quot;telegraph&quot; can strictly be applied only to systems that transmit &quot;and&quot; record messages at a distance. This is to be distinguished from &quot;semaphore&quot;, which merely transmits messages. Smoke signals, for instance, are to be considered semaphore, not telegraph. According to Morse, telegraph dates only from 1832 when Pavel Schilling invented one of the earliest electrical telegraphs.

A telegraph message sent by an electrical telegraph operator or telegrapher using Morse code (or a printing telegraph operator using plain text) was known as a telegram. A cablegram was a message sent by a submarine telegraph cable, often shortened to &quot;cable&quot; or &quot;wire&quot;. The suffix -gram is derived from ancient Greek: (), meaning something written, i.e. telegram means something written at a distance and cablegram means something written via a cable, whereas telegraph implies the process of writing at a distance.

Later, a Telex was a message sent by a Telex network, a switched network of teleprinters similar to a telephone network.

A wirephoto or wire picture was a newspaper picture that was sent from a remote location by a facsimile telegraph. A diplomatic telegram, also known as a diplomatic cable, is a confidential communication between a diplomatic mission and the foreign ministry of its parent country. These continue to be called telegrams or cables regardless of the method used for transmission.

== History ==

=== Early signalling ===

Passing messages by signalling over distance is an ancient practice. One of the oldest examples is the signal towers of the Great Wall of China. By 400 BC, signals could be sent by beacon fires or drum beats, and by 200 BC complex flag signalling had developed. During the Han dynasty (202 BC220 AD), signallers mainly used flags and wood fires—via the light of the flames swung high into the air at night, and via dark smoke produced by the addition of wolf dung during the day—to send signals. By the Tang dynasty (618–907) a message could be sent in 24 hours. The Ming dynasty (1368–1644) used artillery as another possible signalling method. While the signalling was complex (for instance, flags of different colours could be used to indicate enemy strength), only predetermined messages could be sent. The Chinese signalling system extended well beyond the Great Wall. Signal towers away from the wall were used to give early warning of an attack. Others were built even further out as part of the protection of trade routes, especially the Silk Road.

Signal fires were widely used in Europe and elsewhere for military purposes. The Roman army made frequent use of them, as did their enemies, and the remains of some of the stations still exist. Few details have been recorded of European/Mediterranean signalling systems and the possible messages. One of the few for which details are known is a system invented by Aeneas Tacticus (4th century BC). Tacticus&#x27;s system had water filled pots at the two signal stations which were drained in synchronisation. Annotation on a floating scale indicated which message was being sent or received. Signals sent by means of torches indicated when to start and stop draining to keep the synchronisation.

None of the signalling systems discussed above are true telegraphs in the sense of a system that can transmit arbitrary messages over arbitrary distances. Lines of signalling relay stations can send messages to any required distance, but all these systems are limited to one extent or another in the range of messages that they can send. A system like flag semaphore, with an alphabetic code, can certainly send any given message, but the system is designed for short-range communication between two persons. An engine order telegraph, used to send instructions from the bridge of a ship to the engine room, fails to meet both criteria; it has a limited distance and very simple message set. There was only one ancient signalling system described that &quot;does&quot; meet these criteria. That was a system using the Polybius square to encode an alphabet. Polybius (2nd century BC) suggested using two successive groups of torches to identify the coordinates of the letter of the alphabet being transmitted. The number of said torches held up signalled the grid square that contained the letter. There is no definite record of the system ever being used, but there are several passages in ancient texts that some think are suggestive. Holzmann and Pehrson, for instance, suggest that Livy is describing its use by Philip V of Macedon in 207 BC during the First Macedonian War. Nothing else that could be described as a true telegraph existed until the 17th century. Possibly the first alphabetic telegraph code in the modern era is due to Franz Kessler who published his work in 1616. Kessler used a lamp placed inside a barrel with a moveable shutter operated by the signaller. The signals were observed at a distance with the newly invented telescope.

=== Optical telegraph ===

An optical telegraph is a telegraph consisting of a line of stations in towers or natural high points which signal to each other by means of shutters or paddles. Signalling by means of indicator pointers was called &quot;semaphore&quot;. Early proposals for an optical telegraph system were made to the Royal Society by Robert Hooke in 1684 and were first implemented on an experimental level by Sir Richard Lovell Edgeworth in 1767. The first successful optical telegraph network was invented by Claude Chappe and operated in France from 1793. The two most extensive systems were Chappe&#x27;s in France, with branches into neighbouring countries, and the system of Abraham Niclas Edelcrantz in Sweden.

During 1790–1795, at the height of the French Revolution, France needed a swift and reliable communication system to thwart the war efforts of its enemies. In 1790, the Chappe brothers set about devising a system of communication that would allow the central government to receive intelligence and to transmit orders in the shortest possible time. On 2 March 1791, at 11 am, they sent the message &quot;si vous réussissez, vous serez bientôt couverts de gloire&quot; (If you succeed, you will soon bask in glory) between Brulon and Parce, a distance of . The first means used a combination of black and white panels, clocks, telescopes, and codebooks to send their message.

In 1792, Claude was appointed &quot;Ingénieur-Télégraphiste&quot; and charged with establishing a line of stations between Paris and Lille, a distance of . It was used to carry dispatches for the war between France and Austria. In 1794, it brought news of a French capture of Condé-sur-l&#x27;Escaut from the Austrians less than an hour after it occurred. A decision to replace the system with an electric telegraph was made in 1846, but it took a decade before it was fully taken out of service. The fall of Sevastopol was reported by Chappe telegraph in 1855.

The Prussian system was put into effect in the 1830s. However, they were highly dependent on good weather and daylight to work and even then could accommodate only about two words per minute. The last commercial semaphore link ceased operation in Sweden in 1880. As of 1895, France still operated coastal commercial semaphore telegraph stations, for ship-to-shore communication.
=== Electrical telegraph ===

The early ideas for an electric telegraph included in 1753 using electrostatic deflections of pith balls, proposals for electrochemical bubbles in acid by Campillo in 1804 and von Sömmering in 1809. The first experimental system over a substantial distance was by Ronalds in 1816 using an electrostatic generator. Ronalds offered his invention to the British Admiralty, but it was rejected as unnecessary, the existing optical telegraph connecting the Admiralty in London to their main fleet base in Portsmouth being deemed adequate for their purposes. As late as 1844, after the electrical telegraph had come into use, the Admiralty&#x27;s optical telegraph was still used, although it was accepted that poor weather ruled it out on many days of the year. France had an extensive optical telegraph system dating from Napoleonic times and was even slower to take up electrical systems.

Eventually, electrostatic telegraphs were abandoned in favour of electromagnetic systems. An early experimental system (Schilling, 1832) led to a proposal to establish a telegraph between St Petersburg and Kronstadt, but it was never completed. The first operative electric telegraph (Gauss and Weber, 1833) connected Göttingen Observatory to the Institute of Physics about 1 km away during experimental investigations of the geomagnetic field.

The first commercial telegraph was by Cooke and Wheatstone following their English patent of 10 June 1837. It was demonstrated on the London and Birmingham Railway in July of the same year. In July 1839, a five-needle, five-wire system was installed to provide signalling over a record distance of 21 km on a section of the Great Western Railway between London Paddington station and West Drayton. However, in trying to get railway companies to take up his telegraph more widely for railway signalling, Cooke was rejected several times in favour of the more familiar, but shorter range, steam-powered pneumatic signalling. Even when his telegraph was taken up, it was considered experimental and the company backed out of a plan to finance extending the telegraph line out to Slough. However, this led to a breakthrough for the electric telegraph, as up to this point the Great Western had insisted on exclusive use and refused Cooke permission to open public telegraph offices. Cooke extended the line at his own expense and agreed that the railway could have free use of it in exchange for the right to open it up to the public.

Most of the early electrical systems required multiple wires (Ronalds&#x27; system was an exception), but the system developed in the United States by Morse and Vail was a single-wire system. This was the system that first used the soon-to-become-ubiquitous Morse code. By 1844, the Morse system connected Baltimore to Washington, and by 1861 the west coast of the continent was connected to the east coast. The Cooke and Wheatstone telegraph, in a series of improvements, also ended up with a one-wire system, but still using their own code and needle displays.

The electric telegraph quickly became a means of more general communication. The Morse system was officially adopted as the standard for continental European telegraphy in 1851 with a revised code, which later became the basis of International Morse Code. However, Great Britain and the British Empire continued to use the Cooke and Wheatstone system, in some places as late as the 1930s. Likewise, the United States continued to use American Morse code internally, requiring translation operators skilled in both codes for international messages.
=== Railway telegraphy ===

Railway signal telegraphy was developed in Britain from the 1840s onward. It was used to manage railway traffic and to prevent accidents as part of the railway signalling system. On 12 June 1837 Cooke and Wheatstone were awarded a patent for an electric telegraph. This was demonstrated between Euston railway station—where Wheatstone was located—and the engine house at Camden Town—where Cooke was stationed, together with Robert Stephenson, the London and Birmingham Railway line&#x27;s chief engineer. The messages were for the operation of the rope-haulage system for pulling trains up the 1 in 77 bank. The world&#x27;s first permanent railway telegraph was completed in July 1839 between London Paddington and West Drayton on the Great Western Railway with an electric telegraph using a four-needle system.

The concept of a signalling &quot;block&quot; system was proposed by Cooke in 1842. Railway signal telegraphy did not change in essence from Cooke&#x27;s initial concept for more than a century. In this system each line of railway was divided into sections or blocks of varying length. Entry to and exit from the block was to be authorised by electric telegraph and signalled by the line-side semaphore signals, so that only a single train could occupy the rails. In Cooke&#x27;s original system, a single-needle telegraph was adapted to indicate just two messages: &quot;Line Clear&quot; and &quot;Line Blocked&quot;. The signaller would adjust his line-side signals accordingly. As first implemented in 1844 each station had as many needles as there were stations on the line, giving a complete picture of the traffic. As lines expanded, a sequence of pairs of single-needle instruments were adopted, one pair for each block in each direction.
=== Wigwag ===
Wigwag is a form of flag signalling using a single flag. Unlike most forms of flag signalling, which are used over relatively short distances, wigwag is designed to maximise the distance covered—up to in some cases. Wigwag achieved this by using a large flag—a single flag can be held with both hands unlike flag semaphore which has a flag in each hand—and using motions rather than positions as its symbols since motions are more easily seen. It was invented by US Army surgeon Albert J. Myer in the 1850s who later became the first head of the Signal Corps. Wigwag was used extensively during the American Civil War where it filled a gap left by the electrical telegraph. Although the electrical telegraph had been in use for more than a decade, the network did not yet reach everywhere and portable, ruggedized equipment suitable for military use was not immediately available. Permanent or semi-permanent stations were established during the war, some of them towers of enormous height and the system was extensive enough to be described as a communications network.

=== Heliograph ===

A heliograph is a telegraph that transmits messages by flashing sunlight with a mirror, usually using Morse code. The idea for a telegraph of this type was first proposed as a modification of surveying equipment (Gauss, 1821). Various uses of mirrors were made for communication in the following years, mostly for military purposes, but the first device to become widely used was a heliograph with a moveable mirror (Mance, 1869). The system was used by the French during the 1870–71 siege of Paris, with night-time signalling using kerosene lamps as the source of light. An improved version (Begbie, 1870) was used by British military in many colonial wars, including the Anglo-Zulu War (1879). At some point, a morse key was added to the apparatus to give the operator the same degree of control as in the electric telegraph.

Another type of heliograph was the heliostat or heliotrope fitted with a Colomb shutter. The heliostat was essentially a surveying instrument with a fixed mirror and so could not transmit a code by itself. The term &quot;heliostat&quot; is sometimes used as a synonym for &quot;heliograph&quot; because of this origin. The Colomb shutter (Bolton and Colomb, 1862) was originally invented to enable the transmission of morse code by signal lamp between Royal Navy ships at sea.

The heliograph was heavily used by Nelson A. Miles in Arizona and New Mexico after he took over command (1886) of the fight against Geronimo and other Apache bands in the Apache Wars. Miles had previously set up the first heliograph line in the US between Fort Keogh and Fort Custer in Montana. He used the heliograph to fill in vast, thinly populated areas that were not covered by the electric telegraph. Twenty-six stations covered an area . In a test of the system, a message was relayed in four hours. Miles&#x27; enemies used smoke signals and flashes of sunlight from metal, but lacked a sophisticated telegraph code. The heliograph was ideal for use in the American Southwest due to its clear air and mountainous terrain on which stations could be located. It was found necessary to lengthen the morse dash (which is much shorter in American Morse code than in the modern International Morse code) to aid differentiating from the morse dot.

Use of the heliograph declined from 1915 onwards, but remained in service in Britain and British Commonwealth countries for some time. Australian forces used the heliograph as late as 1942 in the Western Desert Campaign of World War II. Some form of heliograph was used by the mujahideen in the Soviet–Afghan War (1979–1989).
=== Teleprinter ===

A teleprinter is a telegraph machine that can send messages from a typewriter-like keyboard and print incoming messages in readable text with no need for the operators to be trained in the telegraph code used on the line. It developed from various earlier printing telegraphs and resulted in improved transmission speeds. The Morse telegraph (1837) was originally conceived as a system marking indentations on paper tape. A chemical telegraph making blue marks improved the speed of recording (Bain, 1846), but was delayed by a patent challenge from Morse. The first true printing telegraph (that is printing in plain text) used a spinning wheel of types in the manner of a daisy wheel printer (House, 1846, improved by Hughes, 1855). The system was adopted by Western Union.

Early teleprinters used the Baudot code, a five-bit sequential binary code. This was a telegraph code developed for use on the French telegraph using a five-key keyboard (Baudot, 1874). Teleprinters generated the same code from a full alphanumeric keyboard. A feature of the Baudot code, and subsequent telegraph codes, was that, unlike Morse code, every character has a code of the same length making it more machine friendly. The Baudot code was used on the earliest ticker tape machines (Calahan, 1867), a system for mass distributing information on current price of publicly listed companies.
=== Automated punched-tape transmission ===


In a punched-tape system, the message is first typed onto punched tape using the code of the telegraph system—Morse code for instance. It is then, either immediately or at some later time, run through a transmission machine which sends the message to the telegraph network. Multiple messages can be sequentially recorded on the same run of tape. The advantage of doing this is that messages can be sent at a steady, fast rate making maximum use of the available telegraph lines. The economic advantage of doing this is greatest on long, busy routes where the cost of the extra step of preparing the tape is outweighed by the cost of providing more telegraph lines. The first machine to use punched tape was Bain&#x27;s teleprinter (Bain, 1843), but the system saw only limited use. Later versions of Bain&#x27;s system achieved speeds up to 1000 words per minute, far faster than a human operator could achieve.

The first widely used system (Wheatstone, 1858) was first put into service with the British General Post Office in 1867. A novel feature of the Wheatstone system was the use of bipolar encoding. That is, both positive and negative polarity voltages were used. Bipolar encoding has several advantages, one of which is that it permits duplex communication. The Wheatstone tape reader was capable of a speed of 400 words per minute.

=== Oceanic telegraph cables ===

A worldwide communication network meant that telegraph cables would have to be laid across oceans. On land cables could be run uninsulated suspended from poles. Underwater, a good insulator that was both flexible and capable of resisting the ingress of seawater was required. A solution presented itself with gutta-percha, a natural rubber from the &quot;Palaquium gutta&quot; tree, after William Montgomerie sent samples to London from Singapore in 1843. The new material was tested by Michael Faraday and in 1845 Wheatstone suggested that it should be used on the cable planned between Dover and Calais by John Watkins Brett. The idea was proved viable when the South Eastern Railway company successfully tested a gutta-percha insulated cable with telegraph messages to a ship off the coast of Folkestone. The cable to France was laid in 1850 but was almost immediately severed by a French fishing vessel. It was relaid the next year and connections to Ireland and the Low Countries soon followed.

Getting a cable across the Atlantic Ocean proved much more difficult. The Atlantic Telegraph Company, formed in London in 1856, had several failed attempts. A cable laid in 1858 worked poorly for a few days, sometimes taking all day to send a message despite the use of the highly sensitive mirror galvanometer developed by William Thomson (the future Lord Kelvin) before being destroyed by applying too high a voltage. Its failure and slow speed of transmission prompted Thomson and Oliver Heaviside to find better mathematical descriptions of long transmission lines. The company finally succeeded in 1866 with an improved cable laid by SS &quot;Great Eastern&quot;, the largest ship of its day, designed by Isambard Kingdom Brunel.

An overland telegraph from Britain to India was first connected in 1866 but was unreliable so a submarine telegraph cable was connected in 1870. Several telegraph companies were combined to form the &quot;Eastern Telegraph Company&quot; in 1872. Australia was first linked to the rest of the world in October 1872 by a submarine telegraph cable at Darwin.

From the 1850s until well into the 20th century, British submarine cable systems dominated the world system. This was set out as a formal strategic goal, which became known as the All Red Line. In 1896, there were thirty cable-laying ships in the world and twenty-four of them were owned by British companies. In 1892, British companies owned and operated two-thirds of the world&#x27;s cables and by 1923, their share was still 42.7 percent. During World War I, Britain&#x27;s telegraph communications were almost completely uninterrupted while it was able to quickly cut Germany&#x27;s cables worldwide.

=== Facsimile ===

In 1843, Scottish inventor Alexander Bain invented a device that could be considered the first facsimile machine. He called his invention a &quot;recording telegraph&quot;. Bain&#x27;s telegraph was able to transmit images by electrical wires. Frederick Bakewell made several improvements on Bain&#x27;s design and demonstrated a telefax machine. In 1855, an Italian priest, Giovanni Caselli, also created an electric telegraph that could transmit images. Caselli called his invention &quot;Pantelegraph&quot;. Pantelegraph was successfully tested and approved for a telegraph line between Paris and Lyon.

In 1881, English inventor Shelford Bidwell constructed the &quot;scanning phototelegraph&quot; that was the first telefax machine to scan any two-dimensional original, not requiring manual plotting or drawing. Around 1900, German physicist Arthur Korn invented the &quot;Bildtelegraph&quot; widespread in continental Europe especially since a widely noticed transmission of a wanted-person photograph from Paris to London in 1908 used until the wider distribution of the radiofax. Its main competitors were the &quot;Bélinographe&quot; by Édouard Belin first, then since the 1930s, the &quot;Hellschreiber&quot;, invented in 1929 by German inventor Rudolf Hell, a pioneer in mechanical image scanning and transmission.
=== Wireless telegraphy ===

The late 1880s through to the 1890s saw the discovery and then development of a newly understood phenomenon into a form of wireless telegraphy, called &quot;Hertzian wave&quot; wireless telegraphy, radiotelegraphy, or (later) simply &quot;radio&quot;. Between 1886 and 1888, Heinrich Rudolf Hertz published the results of his experiments where he was able to transmit electromagnetic waves (radio waves) through the air, proving James Clerk Maxwell&#x27;s 1873 theory of electromagnetic radiation. Many scientists and inventors experimented with this new phenomenon but the consensus was that these new waves (similar to light) would be just as short range as light, and, therefore, useless for long range communication.

At the end of 1894, the young Italian inventor Guglielmo Marconi began working on the idea of building a commercial wireless telegraphy system based on the use of Hertzian waves (radio waves), a line of inquiry that he noted other inventors did not seem to be pursuing. Building on the ideas of previous scientists and inventors Marconi re-engineered their apparatus by trial and error attempting to build a radio-based wireless telegraphic system that would function the same as wired telegraphy. He would work on the system through 1895 in his lab and then in field tests making improvements to extend its range. After many breakthroughs, including applying the wired telegraphy concept of grounding the transmitter and receiver, Marconi was able, by early 1896, to transmit radio far beyond the short ranges that had been predicted. Having failed to interest the Italian government, the 22-year-old inventor brought his telegraphy system to Britain in 1896 and met William Preece, a Welshman, who was a major figure in the field and Chief Engineer of the General Post Office. A series of demonstrations for the British government followed—by March 1897, Marconi had transmitted Morse code signals over a distance of about across Salisbury Plain.

On 13 May 1897, Marconi, assisted by George Kemp, a Cardiff Post Office engineer, transmitted the first wireless signals over water to Lavernock (near Penarth in Wales) from Flat Holm. His star rising, he was soon sending signals across the English Channel (1899), from shore to ship (1899) and finally across the Atlantic (1901). A study of these demonstrations of radio, with scientists trying to work out how a phenomenon predicted to have a short range could transmit &quot;over the horizon&quot;, led to the discovery of a radio reflecting layer in the Earth&#x27;s atmosphere in 1902, later called the ionosphere.

Radiotelegraphy proved effective for rescue work in sea disasters by enabling effective communication between ships and from ship to shore. In 1904, Marconi began the first commercial service to transmit nightly news summaries to subscribing ships, which could incorporate them into their on-board newspapers. A regular transatlantic radio-telegraph service was finally begun on 17 October 1907. Notably, Marconi&#x27;s apparatus was used to help rescue efforts after the sinking of . Britain&#x27;s postmaster-general summed up, referring to the &quot;Titanic&quot; disaster, &quot;Those who have been saved, have been saved through one man, Mr. Marconi...and his marvellous invention.&quot;

==== Non-radio wireless telegraphy ====
The successful development of radiotelegraphy was preceded by a 50-year history of ingenious but ultimately unsuccessful experiments by inventors to achieve wireless telegraphy by other means.

=====Ground, water, and air conduction=====
Several wireless electrical signaling schemes based on the (sometimes erroneous) idea that electric currents could be conducted long-range through water, ground, and air were investigated for telegraphy before practical radio systems became available.

The original telegraph lines used two wires between the two stations to form a complete electrical circuit or &quot;loop&quot;. In 1837, however, Carl August von Steinheil of Munich, Germany, found that by connecting one leg of the apparatus at each station to metal plates buried in the ground, he could eliminate one wire and use a single wire for telegraphic communication. This led to speculation that it might be possible to eliminate both wires and therefore transmit telegraph signals through the ground without any wires connecting the stations. Other attempts were made to send the electric current through bodies of water, to span rivers, for example. Prominent experimenters along these lines included Samuel F. B. Morse in the United States and James Bowman Lindsay in Great Britain, who in August 1854, was able to demonstrate transmission across a mill dam at a distance of .

US inventors William Henry Ward (1871) and Mahlon Loomis (1872) developed electrical conduction systems based on the erroneous belief that there was an electrified atmospheric stratum accessible at low altitude. They thought atmosphere current, connected with a return path using &quot;Earth currents&quot; would allow for wireless telegraphy as well as supply power for the telegraph, doing away with artificial batteries. A more practical demonstration of wireless transmission via conduction came in Amos Dolbear&#x27;s 1879 magneto electric telephone that used ground conduction to transmit over a distance of a quarter of a mile.

In the 1890s inventor Nikola Tesla worked on an air and ground conduction wireless electric power transmission system, similar to Loomis&#x27;, which he planned to include wireless telegraphy. Tesla&#x27;s experiments had led him to incorrectly conclude that he could use the entire globe of the Earth to conduct electrical energy and his 1901 large scale application of his ideas, a high-voltage wireless power station, now called Wardenclyffe Tower, lost funding and was abandoned after a few years.

Telegraphic communication using earth conductivity was eventually found to be limited to impractically short distances, as was communication conducted through water, or between trenches during World War I.

=====Electrostatic and electromagnetic induction=====

Both electrostatic and electromagnetic induction were used to develop wireless telegraph systems that saw limited commercial application. In the United States, Thomas Edison, in the mid-1880s, patented an electromagnetic induction system he called &quot;grasshopper telegraphy&quot;, which allowed telegraphic signals to jump the short distance between a running train and telegraph wires running parallel to the tracks. This system was successful technically but not economically, as there turned out to be little interest by train travelers in the use of an on-board telegraph service. During the Great Blizzard of 1888, this system was used to send and receive wireless messages from trains buried in snowdrifts. The disabled trains were able to maintain communications via their Edison induction wireless telegraph systems, perhaps the first successful use of wireless telegraphy to send distress calls. Edison would also help to patent a ship-to-shore communication system based on electrostatic induction.

The most successful creator of an electromagnetic induction telegraph system was William Preece, chief engineer of Post Office Telegraphs of the General Post Office (GPO) in the United Kingdom. Preece first noticed the effect in 1884 when overhead telegraph wires in Grays Inn Road were accidentally carrying messages sent on buried cables. Tests in Newcastle succeeded in sending a quarter of a mile using parallel rectangles of wire. In tests across the Bristol Channel in 1892, Preece was able to telegraph across gaps of about . However, his induction system required extensive lengths of antenna wires, many kilometers long, at both the sending and receiving ends. The length of those sending and receiving wires needed to be about the same length as the width of the water or land to be spanned. For example, for Preece&#x27;s station to span the English Channel from Dover, England, to the coast of France would require sending and receiving wires of about along the two coasts. These facts made the system impractical on ships, boats, and ordinary islands, which are much smaller than Great Britain or Greenland. Also, the relatively short distances that a practical Preece system could span meant that it had few advantages over underwater telegraph cables.

=== Telegram services ===


A telegram service is a company or public entity that delivers telegraphed messages directly to the recipient. Telegram services were not inaugurated until electric telegraphy became available. Earlier optical systems were largely limited to official government and military purposes.

Historically, telegrams were sent between a network of interconnected telegraph offices. A person visiting a local telegraph office paid by the word to have a message telegraphed to another office and delivered to the addressee on a paper form. Messages (i.e. telegrams) sent by telegraph could be delivered by telegraph messenger faster than mail, and even in the telephone age, the telegram remained popular for social and business correspondence. At their peak in 1929, an estimated 200 million telegrams were sent.

In 1919, the Central Bureau for Registered Addresses was established in the financial district of New York City. The bureau was created to ease the growing problem of messages being delivered to the wrong recipients. To combat this issue, the bureau offered telegraph customers the option to register unique code names for their telegraph addresses. Customers were charged $2.50 per year per code. By 1934, 28,000 codes had been registered.

Telegram services still operate in much of the world (see worldwide use of telegrams by country), but e-mail and text messaging have rendered telegrams obsolete in many countries, and the number of telegrams sent annually has been declining rapidly since the 1980s. Where telegram services still exist, the transmission method between offices is no longer by telegraph, but by telex or IP link.

==== Telegram length ====

As telegrams have been traditionally charged by the word, messages were often abbreviated to pack information into the smallest possible number of words, in what came to be called &quot;telegram style&quot;.

The average length of a telegram in the 1900s in the US was 11.93 words; more than half of the messages were 10 words or fewer. According to another study, the mean length of the telegrams sent in the UK before 1950 was 14.6 words or 78.8 characters. For German telegrams, the mean length is 11.5 words or 72.4 characters. At the end of the 19th century, the average length of a German telegram was calculated as 14.2 words.

=== Telex ===

Telex (telegraph exchange) was a public switched network of teleprinters. It used rotary-telephone-style pulse dialling for automatic routing through the network. It initially used the Baudot code for messages. Telex development began in Germany in 1926, becoming an operational service in 1933 run by the (the German imperial postal service). It had a speed of 50 baud—approximately 66 words per minute. Up to 25 telex channels could share a single long-distance telephone channel by using voice frequency telegraphy multiplexing, making telex the least expensive method of reliable long-distance communication. Telex was introduced into Canada in July 1957, and the United States in 1958. A new code, ASCII, was introduced in 1963 by the American Standards Association. ASCII was a seven-bit code and could thus support a larger number of characters than Baudot. In particular, ASCII supported upper and lower case whereas Baudot was upper case only.

=== Decline ===

Telegraph use began to permanently decline around 1920. The decline began with the growth of the use of the telephone. Ironically, the invention of the telephone grew out of the development of the harmonic telegraph, a device which was supposed to increase the efficiency of telegraph transmission and improve the profits of telegraph companies. Western Union gave up its patent battle with Alexander Graham Bell because it believed the telephone was not a threat to its telegraph business. The Bell Telephone Company was formed in 1877 and had 230 subscribers which grew to 30,000 by 1880. By 1886 there were a quarter of a million phones worldwide, and nearly 2 million by 1900. The decline was briefly postponed by the rise of special occasion congratulatory telegrams. Traffic continued to grow between 1867 and 1893 despite the introduction of the telephone in this period, but by 1900 the telegraph was definitely in decline.

There was a brief resurgence in telegraphy during World War I but the decline continued as the world entered the Great Depression years of the 1930s. After the Second World War new technology improved communication in the telegraph industry. Telegraph lines continued to be an important means of distributing news feeds from news agencies by teleprinter machine until the rise of the internet in the 1990s. For Western Union, one service remained highly profitable—the wire transfer of money. This service kept Western Union in business long after the telegraph had ceased to be important. In the modern era, the telegraph that began in 1837 has been gradually replaced by digital data transmission based on computer information systems.

== Social implications ==

Optical telegraph lines were installed by governments, often for a military purpose, and reserved for official use only. In many countries, this situation continued after the introduction of the electric telegraph. Starting in Germany and the UK, electric telegraph lines were installed by railway companies. Railway use quickly led to private telegraph companies in the UK and the US offering a telegraph service to the public using telegraph along railway lines. The availability of this new form of communication brought on widespread social and economic changes.

The electric telegraph freed communication from the time constraints of postal mail and revolutionized the global economy and society. By the end of the 19th century, the telegraph was becoming an increasingly common medium of communication for ordinary people. The telegraph isolated the message (information) from the physical movement of objects or the process.

There was some fear of the new technology. According to author Allan J. Kimmel, some people &quot;feared that the telegraph would erode the quality of public discourse through the transmission of irrelevant, context-free information.&quot; Henry David Thoreau thought of the Transatlantic cable &quot;...perchance the first news that will leak through into the broad flapping American ear will be that Princess Adelaide has the whooping cough.&quot; Kimmel says these fears anticipate many of the characteristics of the modern internet age.

Initially, the telegraph was expensive, but it had an enormous effect on three industries: finance, newspapers, and railways. Telegraphy facilitated the growth of organizations &quot;in the railroads, consolidated financial and commodity markets, and reduced information costs within and between firms&quot;. In the US, there were 200 to 300 stock exchanges before the telegraph, but most of these were unnecessary and unprofitable once the telegraph made financial transactions at a distance easy and drove down transaction costs. This immense growth in the business sectors influenced society to embrace the use of telegrams once the cost had fallen.

Worldwide telegraphy changed the gathering of information for news reporting. Journalists were using the telegraph for war reporting as early as 1846 when the Mexican–American War broke out. News agencies were formed, such as the Associated Press, for the purpose of reporting news by telegraph. Messages and information would now travel far and wide, and the telegraph demanded a language &quot;stripped of the local, the regional; and colloquial&quot;, to better facilitate a worldwide media language. Media language had to be standardized, which led to the gradual disappearance of different forms of speech and styles of journalism and storytelling.

The spread of the railways created a need for an accurate standard time to replace local standards based on local noon. The means of achieving this synchronisation was the telegraph. This emphasis on precise time has led to major societal changes such as the concept of the time value of money.

During the telegraph era there was widespread employment of women in telegraphy. The shortage of men to work as telegraph operators in the American Civil War opened up the opportunity for women of a well-paid skilled job. In the UK, there was widespread employment of women as telegraph operators even earlier – from the 1850s by all the major companies. The attraction of women for the telegraph companies was that they could pay them less than men. Nevertheless, the jobs were popular with women for the same reason as in the US; most other work available for women was very poorly paid.

The economic impact of the telegraph was not much studied by economic historians until parallels started to be drawn with the rise of the internet. In fact, the electric telegraph was as important as the invention of printing in this respect. According to economist Ronnie J. Phillips, the reason for this may be that institutional economists paid more attention to advances that required greater capital investment. The investment required to build railways, for instance, is orders of magnitude greater than that for the telegraph.

== In popular culture ==
The optical telegraph was quickly forgotten once it went out of service. While it was in operation, it was very familiar to the public across Europe. Examples appear in many paintings of the period. Poems include &quot;&quot; by Victor Hugo, and the collection by is dedicated to the telegraph. In novels, the telegraph is a major component in &quot;Lucien Leuwen&quot; by Stendhal, and it features in &quot;The Count of Monte Cristo&quot;, by Alexandre Dumas. Joseph Chudy&#x27;s 1796 opera, , was written to publicise Chudy&#x27;s telegraph (a binary code with five lamps) when it became clear that Chappe&#x27;s design was being taken up.

Rudyard Kipling wrote a poem in praise of submarine telegraph cables; &quot;And a new Word runs between: whispering, &#x27;Let us be one! Kipling&#x27;s poem represented a widespread idea in the late nineteenth century that international telegraphy (and new technology in general) would bring peace and mutual understanding to the world. When a submarine telegraph cable first connected America and Britain, the &quot;New York Post&quot; declared:

=== Newspaper names ===
Numerous newspapers and news outlets in various countries, such as &quot;The Daily Telegraph&quot; in Britain, &quot;The Telegraph&quot; in India, in the Netherlands, and the Jewish Telegraphic Agency in the US, were given names which include the word &quot;telegraph&quot; due to their having received news by means of electric telegraphy. Some of these names are retained even though different means of news acquisition are now used.

== See also ==
* Familygram
* First transcontinental telegraph
* Globotype
* Radiogram
* Telecommunications

== References ==
== Further reading ==
* Britton, John A. &quot;Cables, Crises, and the Press: The Geopolitics of the New International Information System in the Americas, 1866–1903&quot;. (University of New Mexico Press, 2013).
* Fari, Simone. &quot;Formative Years of the Telegraph Union&quot; (Cambridge Scholars Publishing, 2015).
* Fari, Simone. &quot;Victorian Telegraphy Before Nationalization&quot; (2014).
* Gorman, Mel. &quot;Sir William O&#x27;Shaughnessy, Lord Dalhousie, and the establishment of the telegraph system in India.&quot; &quot;Technology and Culture&quot; 12.4 (1971): 581–601 online .
*Hindmarch-Watson, Katie. &quot;Embodying Telegraphy in Late Victorian London.&quot; &quot;Information &amp; Culture&quot; 55, no. 1 (2020): 10-29. 
* Hochfelder, David, &quot;The Telegraph in America, 1832–1920&quot; (Johns Hopkins University Press, 2012).
* Huurdeman, Anton A. &quot;The Worldwide History of Telecommunications&quot; (John Wiley &amp; Sons, 2003)
* John, Richard R. &quot;Network Nation: Inventing American Telecommunications&quot; (Harvard University Press; 2010) 520 pages; the evolution of American telegraph and telephone networks.
* Kieve, Jeffrey L. (1973). &quot;The Electric Telegraph: a Social and Economic History&quot;. David and Charles. .
* Lew, B., and Cater, B. &quot;The Telegraph, Co-ordination of Tramp Shipping, and Growth in World Trade, 1870–1910&quot;, &quot;European Review of Economic History&quot; 10 (2006): 147–73.
* Müller, Simone M., and Heidi JS Tworek. &quot;&#x27;The telegraph and the bank&#x27;: on the interdependence of global communications and capitalism, 1866–1914.&quot; &quot;Journal of Global History&quot; 10#2 (2015): 259–283.
* O&#x27;Hara, Glen. &quot;New Histories of British Imperial Communication and the &#x27;Networked World&#x27; of the 19th and Early 20th Centuries&quot; &quot;History Compass&quot; (2010) 8#7pp 609–625, Historiography,
* Richardson, Alan J. &quot;The cost of a telegram: Accounting and the evolution of international regulation of the telegraph.&quot; &quot;Accounting History&quot; 20#4 (2015): 405–429.
* Standage, Tom (1998). &quot;The Victorian Internet&quot;. Berkley Trade. .
* Thompson, Robert Luther. &quot;Wiring a continent: The history of the telegraph industry in the United States, 1832–1866&quot; (Princeton UP, 1947).
* Wenzlhuemer, Roland. &quot;The Development of Telegraphy, 1870–1900: A European Perspective on a World History Challenge.&quot; &quot;History Compass&quot; 5#5 (2007): 1720–1742.
* Wenzlhuemer, Roland. &quot;Connecting the nineteenth-century world: The telegraph and globalization&quot; (Cambridge UP, 2013). online review
* Winseck, Dwayne R., and Robert M. Pike. &quot;Communication &amp; Empire: Media, Markets &amp; Globalization, 1860–1930&quot; (2007), 429pp. 
* &quot;The Victorian Internet: The Remarkable Story of the Telegraph and the Nineteenth Century&#x27;s On-Line Pioneers&quot;, a book about the telegraph

=== Technology ===
* Dargan, J. &quot;The Railway Telegraph&quot;, &quot;Australian Railway Historical Society Bulletin&quot;, March 1985 pp. 49–71
* Pichler, Franz, &quot;Magneto-Electric Dial Telegraphs: Contributions of Wheatstone, Stoehrer and Siemens&quot;, The AWA Review vol. 26, (2013).
* Ross, Nelson E. HOW TO WRITE TELEGRAMS PROPERLY The Telegraph Office (1928)
* Wheen, Andrew;— &quot;DOT-DASH TO DOT.COM: How Modern Telecommunications Evolved from the Telegraph to the Internet&quot; (Springer, 2011) .
* Wilson, Geoffrey, &quot;The Old Telegraphs&quot;, Phillimore &amp; Co Ltd 1976 ; a comprehensive history of the shutter, semaphore and other kinds of visual mechanical telegraphs.
== External links ==
* 
* Telegraph at the &quot;Encyclopædia Britannica&quot;
* The Porthcurno Telegraph Museum ()—The biggest telegraph station in the world, now a museum
* Distant Writing—The History of the Telegraph Companies in Britain between 1838 and 1868
* Western Union Telegraph Company Records, 1820–1995—Archives Center, National Museum of American History, Smithsonian Institution.
* Early telegraphy and fax engineering, still operable in a German computer museum ()
* &quot;Telegram Falls Silent Stop Era Ends Stop&quot;, &quot;The New York Times&quot;, 6 February 2006
* International Facilities of the American Carriers—an overview of the U.S. international cable network in 1950
* Elizabeth Bruton: &quot;Communication Technology&quot;, in the &quot;1914-1918-online. International Encyclopedia of the First World War&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q721587" start="0" end="10" title="Telegraphy" label="Telegraphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q250796" start="190" end="204" title="flag semaphore" label="flag semaphore"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142909" start="240" end="251" title="pigeon post" label="pigeon post"/>
<link wikidata="Q174984" start="268" end="274" title="signal" label="signal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3546615" start="577" end="593" title="Chappe telegraph" label="Chappe telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q378499" start="598" end="615" title="optical telegraph" label="optical telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q361305" start="628" end="641" title="Claude Chappe" label="Claude Chappe"/>
<link wikidata="Q122204616" start="763" end="777" title="Napoleonic era" label="Napoleonic era"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501061" start="783" end="801" title="electric telegraph" label="electric telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q5167034" start="920" end="950" title="Cooke and Wheatstone telegraph" label="Cooke and Wheatstone telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316667" start="987" end="1005" title="railway signalling" label="railway signalling"/>
<link wikidata="Q75698" start="1089" end="1101" title="Samuel Morse" label="Samuel Morse"/>
<link wikidata="Q79897" start="1395" end="1405" title="Morse code" label="Morse code"/>
<link wikidata="Q849453" start="1441" end="1451" title="heliograph" label="heliograph"/>
<link wikidata="Q617827" start="1724" end="1735" title="Apache Wars" label="Apache Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1795" end="1807" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q729856" start="1809" end="1828" title="Wireless telegraphy" label="Wireless telegraphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q506572" start="1952" end="1977" title="submarine telegraph cable" label="submarine telegraph cable"/>
<link wikidata="Q66196" start="2185" end="2196" title="teleprinter" label="teleprinter"/>
<link wikidata="Q66241" start="2202" end="2214" title="punched tape" label="punched tape"/>
<link wikidata="Q17141351" start="2254" end="2268" title="telegraph code" label="telegraph code"/>
<link wikidata="Q753170" start="2289" end="2300" title="Baudot code" label="Baudot code"/>
<link wikidata="Q11035" start="2404" end="2413" title="telephone" label="telephone"/>
<link wikidata="Q75" start="2592" end="2600" title="internet" label="internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="2695" end="2708" title="Ancient Greek" label="Ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q378499" start="2809" end="2828" title="semaphore telegraph" label="semaphore telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q361305" start="2830" end="2843" title="Claude Chappe" label="Claude Chappe"/>
<link wikidata="Q104476225" start="2876" end="2885" title="semaphore" label="semaphore"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501061" start="3061" end="3081" title="electrical telegraph" label="electrical telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q717731" start="3591" end="3606" title="Pavel Schilling" label="Pavel Schilling"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501061" start="3691" end="3711" title="electrical telegraph" label="electrical telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q79897" start="3742" end="3752" title="Morse code" label="Morse code"/>
<link wikidata="Q7245321" start="3759" end="3777" title="printing telegraph" label="printing telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4237" end="4242" title="Teleprinter#Telex" label="Telex"/>
<link wikidata="Q66196" start="4274" end="4285" title="teleprinter" label="teleprinter"/>
<link wikidata="Q117833347" start="4322" end="4331" title="wirephoto" label="wirephoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q132744" start="4414" end="4433" title="Fax" label="facsimile telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q926968" start="4474" end="4490" title="diplomatic cable" label="diplomatic cable"/>
<link wikidata="Q213283" start="4534" end="4552" title="diplomatic mission" label="diplomatic mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q20901295" start="4561" end="4577" title="Foreign minister" label="foreign ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q12501" start="4863" end="4882" title="Great Wall of China" label="Great Wall of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q7321258" start="4920" end="4932" title="beacon" label="beacon fires"/>
<link wikidata="Q6852275" start="4936" end="4946" title="military drum" label="drum beats"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209" start="5012" end="5023" title="Han dynasty" label="Han dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q9683" start="5242" end="5254" title="Tang dynasty" label="Tang dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q9903" start="5306" end="5318" title="Ming dynasty" label="Ming dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q64418" start="5336" end="5345" title="artillery" label="artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q36288" start="5785" end="5794" title="Silk Road" label="Silk Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q405969" start="6161" end="6176" title="Aeneas Tacticus" label="Aeneas Tacticus"/>
<link wikidata="Q327954" start="6414" end="6419" title="torch" label="torch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310896" start="6669" end="6674" title="Relay league" label="relay"/>
<link wikidata="Q250796" start="6846" end="6860" title="flag semaphore" label="flag semaphore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262266" start="7006" end="7028" title="engine order telegraph" label="engine order telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q846324" start="7312" end="7327" title="Polybius square" label="Polybius square"/>
<link wikidata="Q131169" start="7351" end="7359" title="Polybius" label="Polybius"/>
<link wikidata="Q2039" start="7779" end="7783" title="Livy" label="Livy"/>
<link wikidata="Q237248" start="7809" end="7828" title="Philip V of Macedon" label="Philip V of Macedon"/>
<link wikidata="Q75626" start="7850" end="7870" title="First Macedonian War" label="First Macedonian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q17141351" start="7991" end="8005" title="telegraph code" label="telegraph code"/>
<link wikidata="Q1447782" start="8034" end="8047" title="Franz Kessler" label="Franz Kessler"/>
<link wikidata="Q378499" start="8280" end="8297" title="optical telegraph" label="optical telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q123885" start="8580" end="8593" title="Royal Society" label="Royal Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q46830" start="8597" end="8609" title="Robert Hooke" label="Robert Hooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q979865" start="8677" end="8701" title="Richard Lovell Edgeworth" label="Richard Lovell Edgeworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q361305" start="8774" end="8787" title="Claude Chappe" label="Claude Chappe"/>
<link wikidata="Q330454" start="8944" end="8969" title="Abraham Niclas Edelcrantz" label="Abraham Niclas Edelcrantz"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="9021" end="9038" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q648" start="9790" end="9795" title="Lille" label="Lille"/>
<link wikidata="Q494533" start="9933" end="9956" title="Condé-sur-l&amp;#x27;Escaut" label="Condé-sur-l&amp;#x27;Escaut"/>
<link wikidata="Q815216" start="10158" end="10176" title="Siege of Sevastopol (1854–1855)" label="fall of Sevastopol"/>
<link wikidata="Q870831" start="10224" end="10239" title="Prussian semaphore system" label="Prussian system"/>
<link wikidata="Q26336" start="10694" end="10707" title="electrostatic" label="electrostatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q192576" start="10723" end="10727" title="pith" label="pith"/>
<link wikidata="Q7877" start="10749" end="10764" title="electrochemical" label="electrochemical"/>
<link wikidata="Q635277" start="10784" end="10792" title="Francisco Salva Campillo" label="Campillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q132197" start="10805" end="10818" title="Samuel Thomas von Sömmering" label="von Sömmering"/>
<link wikidata="Q5482339" start="10893" end="10900" title="Francis Ronalds" label="Ronalds"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304371" start="10918" end="10941" title="electrostatic generator" label="electrostatic generator"/>
<link wikidata="Q396266" start="10980" end="10997" title="British Admiralty" label="British Admiralty"/>
<link wikidata="Q72259" start="11129" end="11139" title="Portsmouth" label="Portsmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q178032" start="11581" end="11594" title="electromagnet" label="electromagnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q717731" start="11636" end="11645" title="Pavel Schilling" label="Schilling"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="11704" end="11717" title="St Petersburg" label="St Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q155863" start="11722" end="11731" title="Kronstadt" label="Kronstadt"/>
<link wikidata="Q6722" start="11801" end="11806" title="Carl Friedrich Gauss" label="Gauss"/>
<link wikidata="Q76707" start="11811" end="11816" title="Wilhelm Eduard Weber" label="Weber"/>
<link wikidata="Q177848" start="11834" end="11855" title="Göttingen Observatory" label="Göttingen Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1409652" start="12000" end="12005" title="William Fothergill Cooke" label="Cooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q156942" start="12010" end="12020" title="Charles Wheatstone" label="Wheatstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1301181" start="12096" end="12125" title="London and Birmingham Railway" label="London and Birmingham Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q843251" start="12286" end="12307" title="Great Western Railway" label="Great Western Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q214788" start="12316" end="12341" title="London Paddington station" label="London Paddington station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316667" start="12445" end="12463" title="railway signalling" label="railway signalling"/>
<link wikidata="Q211907" start="12738" end="12744" title="Slough" label="Slough"/>
<link wikidata="Q75698" start="13245" end="13250" title="Samuel Morse" label="Morse"/>
<link wikidata="Q454292" start="13255" end="13259" title="Alfred Vail" label="Vail"/>
<link wikidata="Q79897" start="13352" end="13362" title="Morse code" label="Morse code"/>
<link wikidata="Q4852762" start="13400" end="13423" title="Baltimore-Washington telegraph line" label="Baltimore to Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q5167034" start="13506" end="13536" title="Cooke and Wheatstone telegraph" label="Cooke and Wheatstone telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q14551285" start="13640" end="13655" title="needle telegraph" label="needle displays"/>
<link wikidata="Q79897" start="13888" end="13912" title="International Morse Code" label="International Morse Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="13945" end="13959" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q4744459" start="14092" end="14111" title="American Morse code" label="American Morse code"/>
<link wikidata="Q800751" start="14529" end="14551" title="Euston railway station" label="Euston railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q328728" start="14658" end="14675" title="Robert Stephenson" label="Robert Stephenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1301181" start="14681" end="14710" title="London and Birmingham Railway" label="London and Birmingham Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q843251" start="14970" end="14991" title="Great Western Railway" label="Great Western Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q855591" start="15065" end="15100" title="Signalling block system" label="signalling &amp;quot;block&amp;quot; system"/>
<link wikidata="Q109534929" start="15671" end="15680" title="Signalman (rail)" label="signaller"/>
<link wikidata="Q117382904" start="16029" end="16044" title="flag signals" label="flag signalling"/>
<link wikidata="Q573653" start="16488" end="16502" title="Albert J. Myer" label="Albert J. Myer"/>
<link wikidata="Q736213" start="16555" end="16567" title="Signal Corps (United States Army)" label="Signal Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="16608" end="16626" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q849453" start="17103" end="17113" title="heliograph" label="heliograph"/>
<link wikidata="Q6722" start="17314" end="17319" title="Carl Friedrich Gauss" label="Gauss"/>
<link wikidata="Q18911632" start="17518" end="17523" title="Henry Christopher Mance" label="Mance"/>
<link wikidata="Q690489" start="17577" end="17599" title="Siege of Paris (1870–71)" label="1870–71 siege of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q215628" start="17634" end="17647" title="kerosene lamp" label="kerosene lamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q228911" start="17774" end="17788" title="Anglo-Zulu War" label="Anglo-Zulu War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347279" start="17965" end="17974" title="heliostat" label="heliostat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1602577" start="17978" end="17988" title="heliotrope (instrument)" label="heliotrope"/>
<link wikidata="Q16062755" start="18269" end="18275" title="Francis Bolton" label="Bolton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5611071" start="18280" end="18286" title="Philip Howard Colomb" label="Colomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006782" start="18362" end="18373" title="signal lamp" label="signal lamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="18382" end="18392" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q549005" start="18443" end="18458" title="Nelson A. Miles" label="Nelson A. Miles"/>
<link wikidata="Q816" start="18462" end="18469" title="Arizona" label="Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522" start="18474" end="18484" title="New Mexico" label="New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q2791" start="18540" end="18548" title="Geronimo" label="Geronimo"/>
<link wikidata="Q102090" start="18559" end="18565" title="Apache" label="Apache"/>
<link wikidata="Q617827" start="18579" end="18590" title="Apache Wars" label="Apache Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q2326790" start="18664" end="18674" title="Fort Keogh" label="Fort Keogh"/>
<link wikidata="Q5471004" start="18679" end="18690" title="Fort Custer (Montana)" label="Fort Custer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1212" start="18694" end="18701" title="Montana" label="Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q659892" start="18940" end="18952" title="smoke signal" label="smoke signal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="19447" end="19467" title="British Commonwealth" label="British Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q625798" start="19554" end="19577" title="Western Desert Campaign" label="Western Desert Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="19581" end="19593" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q42759" start="19635" end="19645" title="mujahideen" label="mujahideen"/>
<link wikidata="Q83085" start="19653" end="19670" title="Soviet–Afghan War" label="Soviet–Afghan War"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501061" start="20031" end="20046" title="Morse telegraph" label="Morse telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q524036" start="20199" end="20203" title="Alexander Bain (inventor)" label="Bain"/>
<link wikidata="Q8250483" start="20354" end="20359" title="Sort (typesetting)" label="types"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196607" start="20379" end="20398" title="Daisy wheel printing" label="daisy wheel printer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1817120" start="20400" end="20405" title="Royal Earl House" label="House"/>
<link wikidata="Q366078" start="20425" end="20431" title="David Edward Hughes" label="Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q861042" start="20466" end="20479" title="Western Union" label="Western Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q753170" start="20510" end="20521" title="Baudot code" label="Baudot code"/>
<link wikidata="Q550192" start="20653" end="20659" title="Émile Baudot" label="Baudot"/>
<link wikidata="Q2424449" start="20951" end="20962" title="ticker tape" label="ticker tape"/>
<link wikidata="Q1291468" start="20973" end="20980" title="Edward A. Calahan" label="Calahan"/>
<link wikidata="Q66241" start="21130" end="21142" title="Punched tape" label="punched-tape"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325334" start="22130" end="22149" title="General Post Office" label="General Post Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q295161" start="22215" end="22231" title="bipolar encoding" label="bipolar encoding"/>
<link wikidata="Q625306" start="22371" end="22377" title="Duplex (telecommunications)" label="duplex"/>
<link wikidata="Q423261" start="22812" end="22824" title="gutta-percha" label="gutta-percha"/>
<link wikidata="Q160029" start="22858" end="22873" title="Palaquium gutta" label="Palaquium gutta"/>
<link wikidata="Q59656445" start="22892" end="22911" title="William Montgomerie" label="William Montgomerie"/>
<link wikidata="Q8750" start="22990" end="23005" title="Michael Faraday" label="Michael Faraday"/>
<link wikidata="Q179224" start="23091" end="23096" title="Dover" label="Dover"/>
<link wikidata="Q6454" start="23101" end="23107" title="Calais" label="Calais"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376594" start="23111" end="23129" title="John Watkins Brett" label="John Watkins Brett"/>
<link wikidata="Q3826415" start="23167" end="23188" title="South Eastern Railway (UK)" label="South Eastern Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q375314" start="23299" end="23309" title="Folkestone" label="Folkestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q476033" start="23474" end="23487" title="Low Countries" label="Low Countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q2040990" start="23578" end="23604" title="Atlantic Telegraph Company" label="Atlantic Telegraph Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="23616" end="23622" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q6874638" start="23795" end="23814" title="mirror galvanometer" label="mirror galvanometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q122701" start="23856" end="23867" title="Lord Kelvin" label="Lord Kelvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q154345" start="23988" end="24004" title="Oliver Heaviside" label="Oliver Heaviside"/>
<link wikidata="Q693004" start="24054" end="24071" title="transmission line" label="transmission line"/>
<link wikidata="Q733293" start="24143" end="24171" title="SS Great Eastern" label="SS &amp;quot;Great Eastern&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q207380" start="24214" end="24237" title="Isambard Kingdom Brunel" label="Isambard Kingdom Brunel"/>
<link wikidata="Q11568" start="24588" end="24594" title="Darwin, Australia" label="Darwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2837523" start="24777" end="24789" title="All Red Line" label="All Red Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="25047" end="25058" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q524036" start="25250" end="25264" title="Alexander Bain (inventor)" label="Alexander Bain"/>
<link wikidata="Q132744" start="25318" end="25335" title="facsimile machine" label="facsimile machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q326419" start="25467" end="25485" title="Frederick Bakewell" label="Frederick Bakewell"/>
<link wikidata="Q178343" start="25598" end="25614" title="Giovanni Caselli" label="Giovanni Caselli"/>
<link wikidata="Q926908" start="25714" end="25726" title="Pantelegraph" label="Pantelegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="25813" end="25818" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q456" start="25823" end="25827" title="Lyon" label="Lyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2922298" start="25856" end="25872" title="Shelford Bidwell" label="Shelford Bidwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q68533" start="26070" end="26081" title="Arthur Korn" label="Arthur Korn"/>
<link wikidata="" start="26101" end="26114" title=":de:Bildtelegrafie" label="Bildtelegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q18417" start="26369" end="26382" title="Édouard Belin" label="Édouard Belin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349535" start="26422" end="26435" title="Hellschreiber" label="Hellschreiber"/>
<link wikidata="Q76693" start="26479" end="26490" title="Rudolf Hell" label="Rudolf Hell"/>
<link wikidata="Q729856" start="26701" end="26720" title="wireless telegraphy" label="wireless telegraphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q872" start="26817" end="26822" title="radio" label="radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q41257" start="26853" end="26874" title="Heinrich Rudolf Hertz" label="Heinrich Rudolf Hertz"/>
<link wikidata="Q12969754" start="26946" end="26967" title="electromagnetic waves" label="electromagnetic waves"/>
<link wikidata="Q9095" start="27007" end="27026" title="James Clerk Maxwell" label="James Clerk Maxwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q12969754" start="27049" end="27074" title="electromagnetic radiation" label="electromagnetic radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q36488" start="27347" end="27364" title="Guglielmo Marconi" label="Guglielmo Marconi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140313" start="28268" end="28282" title="William Preece" label="William Preece"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325334" start="28358" end="28377" title="General Post Office" label="General Post Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472049" start="28532" end="28547" title="Salisbury Plain" label="Salisbury Plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q10690" start="28602" end="28609" title="Cardiff" label="Cardiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770484" start="28685" end="28694" title="Lavernock" label="Lavernock"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429731" start="28724" end="28733" title="Flat Holm" label="Flat Holm"/>
<link wikidata="Q34640" start="28791" end="28806" title="English Channel" label="English Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q162219" start="29158" end="29168" title="ionosphere" label="ionosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q3839081" start="29227" end="29235" title="disaster" label="disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q132629" start="30484" end="30502" title="Electrical network" label="electrical circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q707106" start="30542" end="30567" title="Carl August von Steinheil" label="Carl August von Steinheil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1726" start="30571" end="30577" title="Munich" label="Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="30579" end="30586" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q75698" start="31109" end="31127" title="Samuel F. B. Morse" label="Samuel F. B. Morse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1583870" start="31153" end="31173" title="James Bowman Lindsay" label="James Bowman Lindsay"/>
<link wikidata="Q8012204" start="31300" end="31318" title="William Henry Ward" label="William Henry Ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q3027761" start="31330" end="31343" title="Mahlon Loomis" label="Mahlon Loomis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3614641" start="31790" end="31802" title="Amos Dolbear" label="Amos Dolbear"/>
<link wikidata="Q9036" start="31945" end="31957" title="Nikola Tesla" label="Nikola Tesla"/>
<link wikidata="Q6856398" start="31997" end="32040" title="Wireless power transfer" label="wireless electric power transmission system"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164598" start="32355" end="32373" title="Wardenclyffe Tower" label="Wardenclyffe Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q8743" start="32848" end="32861" title="Thomas Edison" label="Thomas Edison"/>
<link wikidata="Q170652" start="33287" end="33309" title="Great Blizzard of 1888" label="Great Blizzard of 1888"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565868" start="33375" end="33381" title="railroad" label="trains"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140313" start="33782" end="33796" title="William Preece" label="William Preece"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325334" start="33846" end="33865" title="General Post Office" label="General Post Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="33879" end="33893" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q3115837" start="33968" end="33982" title="Grays Inn Road" label="Grays Inn Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425428" start="34051" end="34060" title="Newcastle upon Tyne" label="Newcastle"/>
<link wikidata="Q188203" start="34157" end="34172" title="Bristol Channel" label="Bristol Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q131214" start="34294" end="34307" title="Antenna (radio)" label="antenna wires"/>
<link wikidata="Q34640" start="34554" end="34569" title="English Channel" label="English Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q179224" start="34575" end="34589" title="Dover, England" label="Dover, England"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="34607" end="34613" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q23666" start="34794" end="34807" title="Great Britain" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q223" start="34811" end="34820" title="Greenland" label="Greenland"/>
<link wikidata="Q506572" start="34939" end="34965" title="underwater telegraph cable" label="underwater telegraph cable"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501061" start="35153" end="35171" title="electric telegraph" label="electric telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696259" start="35594" end="35613" title="telegraph messenger" label="telegraph messenger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050048" start="35879" end="35897" title="Financial District, Manhattan" label="financial district"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="35901" end="35914" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q60761420" start="36303" end="36340" title="worldwide use of telegrams by country" label="worldwide use of telegrams by country"/>
<link wikidata="Q17166101" start="36358" end="36372" title="text messaging" label="text messaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q66175" start="36622" end="36627" title="telex" label="telex"/>
<link wikidata="Q8795" start="36631" end="36633" title="Internet Protocol" label="IP"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696211" start="36854" end="36868" title="telegram style" label="telegram style"/>
<link wikidata="Q66175" start="37318" end="37323" title="Telex" label="Telex"/>
<link wikidata="Q206658" start="37423" end="37437" title="pulse dialling" label="pulse dialling"/>
<link wikidata="Q753170" start="37503" end="37514" title="Baudot code" label="Baudot code"/>
<link wikidata="Q359205" start="37809" end="37835" title="voice frequency telegraphy" label="voice frequency telegraphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5555726" start="37836" end="37848" title="frequency-division multiplexing" label="multiplexing"/>
<link wikidata="Q8815" start="38021" end="38026" title="ASCII" label="ASCII"/>
<link wikidata="Q180003" start="38058" end="38088" title="American Standards Association" label="American Standards Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q11035" start="38397" end="38406" title="telephone" label="telephone"/>
<link wikidata="Q424090" start="38486" end="38504" title="harmonic telegraph" label="harmonic telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q34286" start="38680" end="38701" title="Alexander Graham Bell" label="Alexander Graham Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q4883277" start="38784" end="38806" title="Bell Telephone Company" label="Bell Telephone Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="39272" end="39283" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="39335" end="39351" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="39382" end="39398" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q192283" start="39547" end="39560" title="news agency" label="news agencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q334501" start="39691" end="39704" title="wire transfer" label="wire transfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q173285" start="39895" end="39907" title="digital data" label="digital data"/>
<link wikidata="Q68" start="39930" end="39938" title="computer" label="computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q121182" start="39939" end="39957" title="information system" label="information system"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="40985" end="41000" title="Allan J. Kimmel" label="Allan J. Kimmel"/>
<link wikidata="Q131149" start="41162" end="41181" title="Henry David Thoreau" label="Henry David Thoreau"/>
<link wikidata="Q6683" start="42277" end="42297" title="Mexican–American War" label="Mexican–American War"/>
<link wikidata="Q40469" start="42348" end="42364" title="Associated Press" label="Associated Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q11030" start="42743" end="42753" title="journalism" label="journalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777301" start="42831" end="42844" title="standard time" label="standard time"/>
<link wikidata="Q168182" start="42887" end="42891" title="noon" label="noon"/>
<link wikidata="Q187142" start="43047" end="43066" title="time value of money" label="time value of money"/>
<link wikidata="Q55201" start="43129" end="43148" title="women in telegraphy" label="women in telegraphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="43208" end="43226" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1118654" start="43978" end="44002" title="Institutional economics" label="institutional economists"/>
<link wikidata="Q535" start="44449" end="44460" title="Victor Hugo" label="Victor Hugo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2307875" start="44570" end="44583" title="Lucien Leuwen" label="Lucien Leuwen"/>
<link wikidata="Q502" start="44593" end="44601" title="Stendhal" label="Stendhal"/>
<link wikidata="Q191838" start="44628" end="44653" title="The Count of Monte Cristo" label="The Count of Monte Cristo"/>
<link wikidata="Q38337" start="44664" end="44679" title="Alexandre Dumas" label="Alexandre Dumas"/>
<link wikidata="Q34743" start="44863" end="44878" title="Rudyard Kipling" label="Rudyard Kipling"/>
<link wikidata="Q211374" start="45281" end="45294" title="New York Post" label="New York Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q192621" start="45409" end="45428" title="The Daily Telegraph" label="The Daily Telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q1954990" start="45453" end="45466" title="The Telegraph (Calcutta)" label="The Telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q666186" start="45511" end="45536" title="Jewish Telegraphic Agency" label="Jewish Telegraphic Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q5433415" start="45790" end="45800" title="Familygram" label="Familygram"/>
<link wikidata="Q5453918" start="45803" end="45835" title="First transcontinental telegraph" label="First transcontinental telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q5571083" start="45838" end="45847" title="Globotype" label="Globotype"/>
<link wikidata="Q7281267" start="45850" end="45859" title="Radiogram (message)" label="Radiogram"/>
<link wikidata="Q418" start="45862" end="45880" title="Telecommunications" label="Telecommunications"/>
<link wikidata="Q7328562" start="46861" end="46876" title="Richard R. John" label="John, Richard R"/>
<link wikidata="Q2440127" start="47991" end="48004" title="Tom Standage" label="Standage, Tom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7772549" start="48019" end="48041" title="The Victorian Internet" label="The Victorian Internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7772549" start="48688" end="48812" title="The Victorian Internet" label="&amp;quot;The Victorian Internet: The Remarkable Story of the Telegraph and the Nineteenth Century&amp;#x27;s On-Line Pioneers&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q19870978" start="48909" end="48967" title="Australian Railway History" label="&amp;quot;Australian Railway Historical Society Bulletin&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7712069" start="49105" end="49119" title="The AWA Review" label="The AWA Review"/>
</links>
</doc>
